[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010442)  [Next](1010444.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 415.)

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p3.1"></span>From Augustin to Jerome on James II.
10.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p5"></span>1. My brother Jerome, esteemed worthy
to be honoured in Christ by me, when I wrote to you propounding this
question concerning the human soul,—if a new soul be now created for
each individual at birth, whence do souls contract the bond of guilt
which we assuredly believe to be removed by the sacrament of the grace
of Christ, when administered even to new-born children?—as the letter on
that subject grew to the size of a considerable volume, I was unwilling
to impose the burden of any other question at that time; but there is a
subject which has a much stronger claim on my attention, as it presses
more seriously on my mind. I therefore ask you, and in God’s name
beseech you, to do something which will, I believe, be of great service
to many, namely, to explain to me (or to direct me to any work in which
you or any other commentator has already expounded) the sense in which
we are to understand these words in the Epistle of James, “Whosoever
shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of
all.” <span id="fr_2745"></span>[2746](#fn_2745.md) This subject is of such
importance that I very greatly <span id="page_533">p. 533</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-Page_533"></span>regret that I did not write to you in
regard to it long ago.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p7"></span>2. For whereas in the question which I
thought it necessary to submit to you concerning the soul, our inquiries
were engaged with the investigation of a life wholly past and sunk out
of sight in oblivion, in this question we study this present life, and
how it must be spent if we would attain to eternal life. As an apt
illustration of this remark let me quote an entertaining anecdote. A man
had fallen into a well where the quantity of water was sufficient to
break his fall and save him from death, but not deep enough to cover his
mouth and deprive him of speech. Another man approached, and on seeing
him cries out in surprise: “How did you fall in here?” He answers: “I
beseech you to plan how you can get me out of this, rather than ask how
I fell in.” So, since we admit and hold as an article of the Catholic
faith, that the soul of even a little infant requires to be delivered
out of the guilt of sin, as out of a pit, by the grace of Christ, it is
sufficient for the soul of such a one that we know the way in which it
is saved, even though we should never know the way in which it came into
that wretched condition. But I thought it our duty to inquire into this
subject, lest we should incautiously hold any one of those opinions
concerning the manner of the soul’s becoming united with the body which
might contradict the doctrine that the souls of little children require
to be delivered, by denying that they are subject to the bond of guilt.
This, then, being very firmly held by us, that the soul of every infant
needs to be freed from the guilt of sin, and can be freed in no other
way except by the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord, if we can
ascertain the cause and origin of the evil itself, we are better
prepared and equipped for resisting adversaries whose empty talk I call
not reasoning but quibbling; if, however, we cannot ascertain the cause,
the fact that the origin of this misery is hid from us is no reason for
our being slothful in the work which compassion demands from us. In our
conflict, however, with those who appear to themselves to know what they
do not know, we have an additional strength and safety in not being
ignorant of our ignorance on this subject. For there are some things
which it is evil not to know; there are other things which cannot be
known, or are not necessary to be known, or have no bearing on the life
which we seek to obtain; but the question which I now submit to you from
the writings of the Apostle James is intimately connected with the
course of conduct in which we live, and in which, with a view to life
eternal, we endeavour to please God.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p8"></span>3. How, then, I beseech you, are we to
understand the words: “Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet
offend in one point, he is guilty of all”? Does this affirm that the
person who shall have committed theft, nay, who even shall have said to
the rich man, “Sit thou here” and to the poor man, “Stand thou there,”
is guilty of homicide, and adultery, and sacrilege? And if he is not so,
how can it be said that a person who has offended in one point has
become guilty of all? Or are the things which the apostle said
concerning the rich man and the poor man not to be reckoned among those
things in one of which if any man offend he becomes guilty of all? But
we must remember whence that sentence is taken, and what goes before it,
and in what connection it occurs. “My brethren,” he says, “have not the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of Glory, with respect of
persons. For if there come into your assembly a man with a gold ring, in
goodly apparel, and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; and
ye have respect to him that weareth the gay clothing, and say unto him,
Sit thou here in a good place; and say to the poor, Stand thou there, or
sit here under my footstool; are ye not then partial in yourselves, and
are become judges of evil thoughts? Hearken, my beloved brethren, Hath
not God chosen the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom which He hath promised to them that love Him? But ye have
despised the poor,” <span id="fr_2746"></span>[2747](#fn_2746.md) —inasmuch
as you have said to the poor man, “Stand thou there,” when you would
have said to a man with a gold ring, “Sit thou here in a good place.”
And then there follows a passage explaining and enlarging upon that same
conclusion: “Do not rich men oppress you by their power, and draw you
before the judgment-seats? Do not they blaspheme that worthy name by the
which ye are called? If ye fulfil the royal law according to the
Scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye do well: but if
ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are convinced of the law
as transgressors.” <span id="fr_2747"></span>[2748](#fn_2747.md) See how
the apostle calls those transgressors of the law who say to the rich
man, “Sit here,” and to the poor, “Stand there.” See how, lest they
should think it a trifling sin to transgress the law in this one thing,
he goes on to add: “Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend
in one point, he is guilty of all. For He that said, Do not commit
adultery, said also, Do not kill. Now if thou do not kill, yet, if thou
commit adultery, thou art become a transgressor of the law,” according
to that which he had said: “Ye are convinced of the law as
transgressors.” Since these things are so, it seems to follow, unless it
can be shown that we are to understand it in some other way, <span
id="page_534">p. 534</span> <span id="vii.1.CLXVII-Page_534"></span>that
he who says to the rich man, “Sit here,” and to the poor, “Stand there,”
not treating the one with the same respect as the other, is to be judged
guilty as an idolater, and a blasphemer, and an adulterer, and a
murderer—in short,—not to enumerate all, which would be tedious,—as
guilty of all crimes, since, offending in one, he is guilty of all.”

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p11"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p11.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p12"></span>4. But has he who has one virtue all
virtues? and has he no virtues who lacks one? If this be true, the
sentence of the apostle is thereby confirmed. But what I desire is to
have the sentence explained, not confirmed, since of itself it stands
more sure in our esteem than all the authority of philosophers could
make it. And even if what has just been said concerning virtues and
vices were true, it would not follow that therefore all sins are equal.
For as to the inseparable co-existence of the virtues, this is a
doctrine in regard to which, if I remember rightly, what, indeed, I have
almost forgotten (though perhaps I am mistaken), all philosophers who
affirm that virtues are essential to the right conduct of life are
agreed. The doctrine of the equality of sins, however, the Stoics alone
dared to maintain in opposition to the unanimous sentiments of mankind:
an absurd tenet, which in writing against Jovinianus (a Stoic in this
opinion, but an Epicurean in following after and defending pleasure) you
have most clearly refuted from the Holy Scriptures. <span
id="fr_2748"></span>[2749](#fn_2748.md) In that most delightful and noble
dissertation you have made it abundantly plain that it has not been the
doctrine of our authors, or rather of the Truth Himself, who has spoken
through them, that all sins are equal. I shall now do my utmost in
endeavouring, with the help of God, to show how it can be that, although
the doctrine of philosophers concerning virtues is true, we are
nevertheless not compelled to admit the Stoics’ doctrine that all sins
are equal. If I succeed, I will look for your approbation, and in
whatever respect I come short, I beg you to supply my deficiencies.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p14"></span>5. Those who maintain that he who has
one virtue has all, and that he who lacks one lacks all, reason
correctly from the fact that prudence cannot be cowardly, nor unjust,
nor intemperate; for if it were any of these it would no longer be
prudence. Moreover, if it be prudence only when it is brave, and just,
and temperate, assuredly wherever it exists it must have the other
virtues along with it. In like manner, also, courage cannot be
imprudent, or intemperate, or unjust; temperance must of necessity be
prudent, brave, and just; and justice does not exist unless it be
prudent, brave, and temperate. Thus, wherever any one of these virtues
truly exists, the others likewise exist; and where some are absent, that
which may appear in some measure to resemble virtue is not really
present.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p15"></span>6. There are, as you know, some vices
opposed to virtues by a palpable contrast, as imprudence is the opposite
of prudence. But there are some vices opposed to virtues simply because
they are vices which, nevertheless, by a deceitful appearance resemble
virtues; as, for example, in the relation, not of imprudence, but of
craftiness to the said virtue of prudence. I speak here of that
craftiness <span id="fr_2749"></span>[2750](#fn_2749.md) which is wont to
be understood and spoken of in connection with the evilly disposed, not
in the sense in which the word is usually employed in our Scriptures,
where it is often used in a good sense, as, “Be crafty as
serpents,” <span id="fr_2750"></span>[2751](#fn_2750.md) and again, to give
craftiness to the simple.” <span id="fr_2751"></span>[2752](#fn_2751.md) It
is true that among heathen writers one of the most accomplished of Latin
authors, speaking of Catiline, has said: “Nor was there lacking on his
part craftiness to guard against danger,” <span
id="fr_2752"></span>[2753](#fn_2752) using “craftiness” (astutia.md) in a
good sense; but the use of the word in this sense is among them very
rare, among us very common. So also in regard to the virtues classed
under temperance. Extravagance is most manifestly opposite to the virtue
of frugality; but that which the common people are wont to call
niggardliness is indeed a vice, yet one which, not in its nature, but by
a very deceitful similarity of appearance, usurps the name of frugality.
In the same manner injustice is by a palpable contrast opposed to
justice; but the desire of avenging oneself is wont often to be a
counterfeit of justice, but it is a vice. There is an obvious
contrariety between courage and cowardice; but hardihood, though
differing from courage in nature, deceives us by its resemblance to that
virtue. Firmness is a part of virtue; fickleness is a vice far removed
from and undoubtedly opposed to it; but obstinacy lays claim to the name
of firmness, yet is wholly different, because firmness is a virtue, and
obstinacy is a vice.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p20"></span>7. To avoid the necessity of again
going over the same ground, let us take one case as an example, from
which all others may be understood. Catiline, as those who have written
concerning him had means of knowing, was capable of enduring cold,
thirst, hunger, and patient in fastings, cold, and watchings beyond what
any one could believe, and thus he appeared, both to himself and to his
followers, a man endowed with great courage. <span
id="fr_2753"></span>[2754](#fn_2753.md) But this courage was not prudent,
for he chose the evil instead of the <span id="page_535">p. 535</span>
<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-Page_535"></span>good; was not temperate, for his
life was disgraced by the lowest dissipation; was not just, for he
conspired against his country; and therefore it was not courage, but
hardihood usurping the name of courage to deceive fools; for if it had
been courage, it would not have been a vice but a virtue, and if it had
been a virtue, it would never have been abandoned by the other virtues,
its inseparable companions.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p22"></span>8. On this account, when it is asked
also concerning vices, whether where one exists all in like manner
exist, or where one does not exist none exist, it would be a difficult
matter to show this, because two vices are wont to be opposed to one
virtue, one that is evidently opposed, and another that bears an
apparent likeness. Hence the hardihood of Catiline is the more easily
seen not to have been courage, since it had not along with it other
virtues; but it may be difficult to convince men that his hardihood was
cowardice, since he was in the habit of enduring and patiently
submitting to the severest hardships to a degree almost incredible. But
perhaps, on examining the matter more closely, this hardihood itself is
seen to be cowardice, because he shrunk from the toil of those liberal
studies by which true courage is acquired. Nevertheless, as there are
rash men who are not guilty of cowardice, and there are cowardly men who
are not guilty of rashness, and since in both there is vice, for the
truly brave man neither ventures rashly nor fears without reason, we are
forced to admit that vices are more numerous than virtues.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p23"></span>9. Accordingly, it happens sometimes
that one vice is supplanted by another, as the love of money by the love
of praise. Occasionally, one vice quits the field that more may take its
place, as in the case of the drunkard, who, after becoming temperate in
the use of drink, may come under the power of niggardliness and
ambition. It is possible, therefore, that vices may give place to vices,
not to virtues, as their successors, and thus they are more numerous.
When one virtue, however, has entered, there will infallibly be (since
it brings all the other virtues along with it) a retreat of all vices
whatsoever that were in the man; for all vices were not in him, but at
one time so many, at another a greater or smaller number might occupy
their place.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p24"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p24.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p25"></span>10. We must inquire more carefully
whether these things are so; for the statement that “he who has one
virtue has all, and that all virtues are awanting to him who lacks one,”
is not given by inspiration, but is the view held by many men,
ingenious, indeed, and studious, but still men. But I must avow that, in
the case—I shall not say of one of those from whose name the word virtue
is said to be derived, <span id="fr_2754"></span>[2755](#fn_2754.md) but
even of a woman who is faithful to her husband, and who is so from a
regard to the commandments and promises of God, and, first of all, is
faithful to Him, I do not know how I could say of her that she is
unchaste, or that chastity is no virtue or a trifling one. I should feel
the same in regard to a husband who is faithful to his wife; and yet
there are many such, none of whom I could affirm to be without any sins,
and doubtless the sin which is in them, whatever it be, proceeds from
some vice. Whence it follows that though conjugal fidelity in religious
men and women is undoubtedly a virtue, for it is neither a nonentity nor
a vice, yet it does not bring along with it all virtues, for if all
virtues were there, there would be no vice, and if there were no vice,
there would be no sin; but where is the man who is altogether without
sin? Where, therefore, is the man who is without any vice, that is, fuel
or root, as it were, of sin, when he who reclined on the breast of the
Lord says, “If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us”? <span id="fr_2755"></span>[2756](#fn_2755.md) It is
not necessary for us to urge this at greater length in writing to you,
but I make the statement for the sake of others who perhaps shall read
this. For you, indeed, in that same splendid work against Jovinianus,
have carefully proved this from the Holy Scriptures; in which work also
you have quoted the words, “in many things we all offend,” <span
id="fr_2756"></span>[2757](#fn_2756.md) from this very epistle in which
occur the words whose meaning we are now investigating. For though it is
an apostle of Christ who is speaking, he does not say, “ye offend,” but,
“we offend;” and although in the passage under consideration he says,
“Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is
guilty of all,” <span id="fr_2757"></span>[2758](#fn_2757.md) in the words
just quoted he affirms that we offend not in one thing but in *many*,
and not that some offend but that we *all* offend.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p30"></span>11. Far be it, however, from any
believer to think that so many thousands of the servants of Christ, who,
lest they should deceive themselves, and the truth should not be in
them, sincerely confess themselves to have sin, are altogether without
virtue! For wisdom is a great virtue, and wisdom herself has said to
man, “Behold the fear of the Lord, that is wisdom.” <span
id="fr_2758"></span>[2759](#fn_2758.md) Far be it from us, then, to say
that so many and so great believing and pious men have not the fear of
the Lord, which the Greeks call <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p31.2"></span>εὐσέβεια</span>, or more literally and
fully, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p31.3"></span>θεοσέβεια</span>. And what is the fear of
the Lord but His worship? and whence is He truly worshipped except from
love? Love, then, out of a pure heart, and a <span id="page_536">p.
536</span> <span id="vii.1.CLXVII-Page_536"></span>good conscience, and
faith unfeigned, is the great and true virtue, because it is “the end of
the commandment.” <span id="fr_2759"></span>[2760](#fn_2759.md) Deservedly
is love said to be “strong as death,” <span
id="fr_2760"></span>[2761](#fn_2760.md) because, like death, it is
vanquished by none; or because the measure of love in this life is even
unto death, as the Lord says, “Greater love hath no man than this, that
a man lay down his life for his friends;” <span
id="fr_2761"></span>[2762](#fn_2761.md) or, rather, because, as death
forcibly separates the soul from the senses of the body, so love
separates it from fleshly lusts. Knowledge, when it is of the right
kind, is the handmaid to love, for without love “knowledge puffeth
up,” <span id="fr_2762"></span>[2763](#fn_2762.md) but where love, by
edifying, has filled the heart, there knowledge will find nothing empty
which it can puff up. Moreover, Job has shown, what is that useful
knowledge by defining it where, after saying, “The fear of the Lord,
that is wisdom” he adds “and to depart from evil, that is
understanding.” <span id="fr_2763"></span>[2764](#fn_2763.md) Why do we not
then say that the man who has this virtue has all virtues, since “love
is the fulfilling of the law?” <span
id="fr_2764"></span>[2765](#fn_2764.md) Is it not true that, the more love
exists in a man the more he is endowed with virtue, and the less love he
has the less virtue is in him, for love is itself virtue; and the less
virtue there is in a man so much the more vice will there be in him?
Therefore, where love is full and perfect, no vice will remain.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p38"></span>12. The Stoics, therefore, appear to
me to be mistaken in refusing to admit that a man who is advancing in
wisdom has any wisdom at all, and in affirming that he alone has it who
has become altogether perfect in wisdom. They do not, indeed, deny that
he has made progress, but they say that he is in no degree entitled to
be called wise, unless, by emerging, so to speak, from the depths, he
suddenly springs forth into the free air of wisdom. For, as it matters
not when a man is drowning whether the depth of water above him be many
stadia or only the breadth of a hand or finger, so they say in regard to
the progress of those who are advancing towards wisdom, that they are
like men rising from the bottom of a whirlpool towards the air, but that
unless they by their progress, so escape as to emerge wholly from folly
as from an overwhelming flood, they have not virtue and are not wise;
but that, when they have so escaped, they immediately have wisdom in
perfection, and not a vestige of folly whence any sin could be
originated remains.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p39"></span>13. This simile, in which folly is
compared to water and wisdom to air, so that the mind emerging, as it
were, from the stifling influence of folly breathes suddenly the free
air of wisdom, does not appear to me to harmonize sufficiently with the
authoritative statement of our Scriptures; a better simile, so far, at
least, as illustration of spiritual things can be borrowed from material
things, is that which compares vice or folly to darkness, and virtue or
wisdom to light. The way to wisdom is therefore not like that of a man
rising from the water into the air, in which, in the moment of rising
above the surface of the water, he suddenly breathes freely, but, like
that of a man proceeding from darkness into light, on whom more light
gradually shines as he advances. So long, therefore, as this is not
fully accomplished, we speak of the man as of one going from the dark
recesses of a vast cavern towards its entrance, who is more and more
influenced by the proximity of the light as he comes nearer to the
entrance of the cavern; so that whatever light he has proceeds from the
light to which he is advancing, and whatever darkness still remains in
him proceeds from the darkness out of which he is emerging. Therefore it
is true that in the sight of God “shall no man living be
justified,” <span id="fr_2765"></span>[2766](#fn_2765.md) and yet that “the
just shall live by his faith.” <span
id="fr_2766"></span>[2767](#fn_2766.md) On the one hand, “the saints are
clothed with righteousness,” <span id="fr_2767"></span>[2768](#fn_2767.md)
one more, another less; on the other hand, no one lives here wholly
without sin—one sins more, another less, and the best is the man who
sins least.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p43"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p43.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p44"></span>14. But why have I, as if forgetting
to whom I address myself, assumed the tone of a teacher in stating the
question regarding which I wish to be instructed by you? Nevertheless,
as I had resolved to submit to your examination my opinion regarding the
equality of sins (a subject involving a question closely bearing on the
matter on which I was writing), let me now at last bring my statement to
a conclusion. Even though it were true that he who has one virtue has
all virtues, and that he who lacks one virtue has none, this would not
involve the consequence that all sins are equal; for although it is true
that where there is no virtue there is nothing right, it by no means
follows that among bad actions one cannot be worse than another, or that
divergence from that which is right does not admit of degrees. I think,
however, that it is more agreeable to truth and consistent with the Holy
Scriptures to say, that what is true of the members of the body is true
of the different dispositions of the soul (which, though not seen
occupying different places, are by their distinctive workings perceived
as plainly as the members of the body), namely, that as in the same body
one member is more fully <span id="page_537">p. 537</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-Page_537"></span>shone upon by the light, another is
less shone upon, and a third is altogether without light, and remains in
the dark under some impervious covering, something similar takes place
in regard to the various dispositions of the soul. If this be so, then
according to the manner in which every man is shone upon by the light of
holy love, he may be said to have one virtue and to lack another virtue,
or to have one virtue in larger and another in smaller measure. For in
reference to that love which is the fear of God, we may correctly say
both that it is greater in one man than in another, and that there is
some of it in one man, and none of it in another; we may also correctly
say as to an individual that he has greater chastity than patience, and
that he has either virtue in a higher degree than he had yesterday, if
he is making progress, or that he still lacks self-control, but
possesses, at the same time, a large measure of compassion.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p45"></span>15. To sum up generally and briefly
the view which, so far as relates to holy living, I entertain concerning
virtue,—virtue is the love with which that which ought to be loved is
loved. This is in some greater, in others less, and there are men in
whom it does not exist at all; but in the absolute fulness which admits
of no increase, it exists in no man while living on this earth; so long,
however, as it admits of being increased there can be no doubt that, in
so far as it is less than it ought to be, the shortcoming proceeds from
vice. Because of this vice there is “not a just man upon earth that
doeth good and sinneth not;” <span id="fr_2768"></span>[2769](#fn_2768.md)
because of this vice, “in God’s sight shall no man living be
justified.” <span id="fr_2769"></span>[2770](#fn_2769.md) On account of
this vice, “if we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and the
truth is not in us.” <span id="fr_2770"></span>[2771](#fn_2770.md) On
account of this also, whatever progress we may have made, we must say,
“Forgive us our debts,” <span id="fr_2771"></span>[2772](#fn_2771.md)
although all debts in word, deed, and thought were washed away in
baptism. He, then, who sees aright, sees whence, and when, and where he
must hope for that perfection to which nothing can be added. Moreover,
if there had been no commandments, there would have been no means
whereby a man might certainly examine himself and see from what things
he ought to turn aside, whither he should aspire, and in what things he
should find occasion for thanksgiving or for prayer. Great, therefore,
is the benefit of commandments, if to free will so much liberty be
granted that the grace of God may be more abundantly honoured.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p50"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p50.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p51"></span>16. If these things be so, how shall
a man who shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, be
guilty of all? May it not be, that since the fulfilling of the law is
that love wherewith we love God and our neighbour, on which commandments
of love “hang all the law and the prophets,” <span
id="fr_2772"></span>[2773](#fn_2772.md) he is justly held to be guilty of
all who violates that on which all hang? Now, no one sins without
violating this love; “for this, thou shalt not commit adultery; thou
shall do no murder; thou shall not steal; thou shalt not covet; and if
there be any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this
saying, Thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself. Love worketh no ill to
his neighbour: therefore love is the fulfilling of the law.” <span
id="fr_2773"></span>[2774](#fn_2773.md) No one, however, loves his
neighbour who does not out of his love to God do all in his power to
bring his neighbour also, whom he loves as himself, to love God, whom if
he does not love, he neither loves himself nor his neighbour. Hence it
is true that if a man shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he becomes guilty of all, because he does what is contrary to the
love on which hangs the whole law. A man, therefore, becomes guilty of
all by doing what is contrary to that on which all hang.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p54"></span>17. Why, then, may not all sins be
said to be equal? May not the reason be, that the transgression of the
law of love is greater in him who commits a more grievous sin, and is
less in him who commits a less grievous sin? And in the mere fact of his
committing any sin whatever, he becomes guilty of all; but in committing
a more grievous sin, or in sinning in more respects than one, he becomes
more guilty; committing a less grievous sin, or sinning in fewer
respects, he becomes less guilty,—his guilt being thus so much the
greater the more he has sinned, the less the less he has sinned.
Nevertheless, even though it be only in one point that he offend, he is
guilty of all, because he violates that love on which all hang. If these
things be true, an explanation is by this means found, clearing up that
saying of the man of apostolic grace, “In many things we offend
all.” <span id="fr_2774"></span>[2775](#fn_2774.md) For we all offend, but
one more grievously, another more slightly, according as each may have
committed a more grievous or a less grievous sin; every one being great
in the practice of sin in proportion as he is deficient in loving God
and his neighbour, and, on the other hand, decreasing in the practice of
sin in proportion as he increases in the love of God and of his
neighbour. The more, therefore, that a man is deficient in love, the
more is he full of sin. And perfection in love is reached when nothing
of sinful infirmity remains in us.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p56"></span>18. Nor, indeed, in my opinion, are
we to esteem it a trifling sin “to have the faith of our <span
id="page_538">p. 538</span> <span id="vii.1.CLXVII-Page_538"></span>Lord
Jesus Christ with respect of persons,” if we take the difference between
sitting and standing, of which mention is made in the context, to refer
to ecclesiastical honours; for who can bear to see a rich man chosen to
a place of honour in the Church, while a poor man, of superior
qualifications and of greater holiness, is despised? If, however, the
apostle speaks there of our daily assemblies, who does not offend in the
matter? At the same time, only those really offend here who cherish in
their hearts the opinion that a man’s worth is to be estimated according
to his wealth; for this seems to be the meaning of the expression, “Are
ye not then partial in yourselves, and are become judges of evil
thoughts?”

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p57"></span>19. The law of liberty, therefore,
the law of love, is that of which he says: “If ye fulfil the royal law
according to the Scripture, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself, ye
do well: but if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are
convinced of the law as transgressors. <span
id="fr_2775"></span>[2776](#fn_2775.md) And then (after the difficult
sentence, “Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one
point, he is guilty of all,” concerning which I have with sufficient
fulness stated my opinion), making mention of the same law of liberty,
he says: “So speak ye, and so do, as they that shall be judged by the
law of liberty.” And as he knew by experience what he had said a little
before, “in many things we offend all,” he suggests a sovereign remedy,
to be applied, as it were day by day, to those less serious but real
wounds which the soul suffers day by day, for he says: “He shall have
judgment without mercy that hath showed no mercy.” <span
id="fr_2776"></span>[2777](#fn_2776.md) For with the same purpose the Lord
says: “Forgive, and ye shall be forgiven: give, and it shall be given
unto you.” <span id="fr_2777"></span>[2778](#fn_2777.md) After which the
apostle says: “But mercy rejoiceth over judgment:” it is not said that
mercy prevails over judgment, for it is not an adversary of judgment,
but it “rejoiceth” over judgment, because a greater number are gathered
in by mercy; but they are those who have shown mercy, for, “Blessed are
the merciful, for God shall have mercy on them.” <span
id="fr_2778"></span>[2779](#fn_2778.md)

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p62"></span>20. It is, therefore, by all means
just that they be forgiven, because they have forgiven others, and that
what they need be given to them, because they have given to others. For
God uses mercy when He judgeth, and uses judgment when He showeth mercy.
Hence the Psalmist says: “I will sing of mercy and of judgment unto
Thee, O Lord.” <span id="fr_2779"></span>[2780](#fn_2779.md) For if any
man, thinking himself too righteous to require mercy, presumes, as if he
had no reason for anxiety, to wait for judgment without mercy, he
provokes that most righteous indignation through fear of which the
Psalmist said: “Enter not into judgment with Thy servant.” <span
id="fr_2780"></span>[2781](#fn_2780.md) For this reason the Lord says to a
disobedient people: “Wherefore will ye contend with me in
judgment? <span id="fr_2781"></span>[2782](#fn_2781.md) For when the
righteous King shall sit upon His throne, who shall boast that he has a
pure heart, or who shall boast that he is clean from sin? What hope is
there then unless mercy shall “rejoice over” judgment? But this it will
do only in the case of those who have showed mercy, saying with
sincerity, “Forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors,” and who
have given without murmuring, for “the Lord loveth a cheerful
giver.” <span id="fr_2782"></span>[2783](#fn_2782.md) To conclude, St.
James is led to speak thus concerning works of mercy in this passage, in
order that he may console those whom the statements immediately
foregoing might have greatly alarmed, his purpose being to admonish us
how those daily sins from which our life is never free here below may
also be expiated by daily remedies; lest any man, becoming guilty of all
when he offends in even one point, be brought, by offending in many
points (since “in many things we all offend”), to appear before the bar
of the Supreme Judge under the enormous amount of guilt which has
accumulated by degrees, and find at that tribunal no mercy, because he
showed no mercy to others, instead of rather meriting the forgiveness of
his own sins, and the enjoyment of the gifts promised in Scripture, by
his extending forgiveness and bounty to others.

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p67"></span>21. I have written at great length,
which may perhaps have been tedious to you, as you, although approving
of the statements now made, do not expect to be addressed as if you were
but learning truths which you have been accustomed to teach to others.
If, however, there be anything in these statements—not in the style of
language in which they are expounded, for I am not much concerned as to
mere phrases, but in the substance of the statements—which your erudite
judgment condemns, I beseech you to point this out to me in your reply,
and do not hesitate to correct my error. For I pity the man who, in view
of the unwearied labour and sacred character of your studies, does not
on account of them both render to you the honour which you deserve, and
give thanks unto our Lord God by whose grace you are what you are.
Wherefore, since I ought to be more willing to learn from any teacher
the things of which to my disadvantage I am ignorant, than prompt to
teach any others what I know, with how much greater reason do I claim
the payment of <span id="page_539">p. 539</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-Page_539"></span>this debt of love from you, by whose
learning ecclesiastical literature in the Latin tongue has been, in the
Lord’s name, and by His help, advanced to an extent which had been
previously unattainable. Especially, however, I ask attention to the
sentence: “Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and offend in one point,
is guilty of all.” If you know any better way, my beloved brother, in
which it can be explained, I beseech you by the Lord to favour us by
communicating to us your exposition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2745"></span>[532:2746](1010443.htm#fr_2745.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p6"></span> [Jas.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2746"></span>[533:2747](1010443.htm#fr_2746.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p9"></span> [Jas.
2.1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2747"></span>[533:2748](1010443.htm#fr_2747.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p10"></span> [Jas.
2.6-9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2748"></span>[534:2749](1010443.htm#fr_2748.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p13"></span> Jerome, *Contra Jovinianum*, lib.
ii.

<span id="fn_2749"></span>[534:2750](1010443.htm#fr_2749.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p16"></span> *Astutia.*

<span id="fn_2750"></span>[534:2751](1010443.htm#fr_2750.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p17"></span> [Matt.
10.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2751"></span>[534:2752](1010443.htm#fr_2751.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p18"></span> [Prov.
1.4](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2752"></span>[534:2753](1010443.htm#fr_2752.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p19"></span> Sallust, *De Bello Catilinario.*

<span id="fn_2753"></span>[534:2754](1010443.htm#fr_2753.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p21"></span> *Ibid.*

<span id="fn_2754"></span>[535:2755](1010443.htm#fr_2754.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p26"></span> *Virum a quo denominata dictur
virtus.*

<span id="fn_2755"></span>[535:2756](1010443.htm#fr_2755.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p27"></span> [1 John
1.8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2756"></span>[535:2757](1010443.htm#fr_2756.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p28"></span> [Jas.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2757"></span>[535:2758](1010443.htm#fr_2757.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p29"></span> [Jas.
2.10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2758"></span>[535:2759](1010443.htm#fr_2758.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p31"></span> [Job
28.28](../../../bib/sep/job028.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p31.1"></span>, Sept. ver.

<span id="fn_2759"></span>[536:2760](1010443.htm#fr_2759.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p31.4"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p32"></span> [1 Tim.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2760"></span>[536:2761](1010443.htm#fr_2760.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p33"></span> [Song.
8.6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2761"></span>[536:2762](1010443.htm#fr_2761.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p34"></span> [John
15.13](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2762"></span>[536:2763](1010443.htm#fr_2762.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p35"></span> [1 Cor.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2763"></span>[536:2764](1010443.htm#fr_2763.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p36"></span> [Job
28.28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2764"></span>[536:2765](1010443.htm#fr_2764.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p37"></span> [Rom.
13.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2765"></span>[536:2766](1010443.htm#fr_2765.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p40"></span> [Ps.
143.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2766"></span>[536:2767](1010443.htm#fr_2766.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p41"></span> [Hab.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2767"></span>[536:2768](1010443.htm#fr_2767.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p42"></span> [Job
29.14](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2768"></span>[537:2769](1010443.htm#fr_2768.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p46"></span> [Eccles.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2769"></span>[537:2770](1010443.htm#fr_2769.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p47"></span> [Ps.
143.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2770"></span>[537:2771](1010443.htm#fr_2770.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p48"></span> [1 John
1.8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2771"></span>[537:2772](1010443.htm#fr_2771.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p49"></span> [Matt.
6.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2772"></span>[537:2773](1010443.htm#fr_2772.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p52"></span> [Matt.
22.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2773"></span>[537:2774](1010443.htm#fr_2773.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p53"></span> [Rom.
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2774"></span>[537:2775](1010443.htm#fr_2774.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p54.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p55"></span> [Jas.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2775"></span>[538:2776](1010443.htm#fr_2775.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p58"></span> [Jas.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008.md),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2776"></span>[538:2777](1010443.htm#fr_2776.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p59"></span> [Jas.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2777"></span>[538:2778](1010443.htm#fr_2777.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p60"></span> [Luke
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#037.md),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2778"></span>[538:2779](1010443.htm#fr_2778.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p61"></span> [Matt.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2779"></span>[538:2780](1010443.htm#fr_2779.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p62.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p63"></span> [Ps.
101.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2780"></span>[538:2781](1010443.htm#fr_2780.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p63.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p64"></span> [Ps.
143.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2781"></span>[538:2782](1010443.htm#fr_2781.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p65"></span> [Jer.
2.28](../../../bib/sep/jer002.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p65.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2782"></span>[538:2783](1010443.htm#fr_2782.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXVII-p66"></span> [2 Cor.
9.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXVII-p66.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXIX](1010444.md)
