[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010361)  [Next](1010363.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p1.1"></span>Letter LV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p2"></span>Or Book II. of Replies to Questions of
Januarius.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p3"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 400.)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p4"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p5"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p5.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p6"></span>1. Having read the letter in which you
have put me in mind of my obligation to give answers to the remainder of
those questions which you submitted to me a long time ago, I cannot bear
to defer any longer the gratification of that desire for instruction
which it gives me so much pleasure and comfort to see in you; and
although encompassed by an accumulation of engagements, I have given the
first place to the work of supplying you with the answers desired. I
will make no further comment on the contents of your letter, lest my
doing so should prevent me from paying at length what I owe.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p7"></span>2. You ask, “Wherefore does the
anniversary on which we celebrate the Passion of the Lord not fall, like
the day which tradition has handed down as the day of His birth, on the
same day every year?” and you add, “If the reason of this is connected
with the week and the month, what have we to do with the day of the week
or the state of the moon in this solemnity?” The first thing which you
must know and remember here is, that the observance of the Lord’s natal
day is not sacramental, but only commemorative of His birth, and that
therefore no more was in this case necessary, than that the return of
the day on which the event took place should be marked by an annual
religious festival. The celebration of an event becomes sacramental in
its nature, only when the commemoration of the event is so ordered that
it is understood to be significant of something which is to be received
with reverence as sacred. <span id="fr_1730"></span>[1731](#fn_1730.md)
Therefore we observe Easter <span id="fr_1731"></span>[1732](#fn_1731.md)
in such a manner as not only to recall the facts of the death and
resurrection of Christ to remembrance, but also to find a place for all
the other things which, in connection with these events, give evidence
as to the import of the sacrament. For since, as the apostle wrote, “He
was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our
justification,” <span id="fr_1732"></span>[1733](#fn_1732.md) a certain
transition from death to life has been consecrated in that Passion and
Resurrection of the Lord. For the word Pascha itself is not, as is
commonly thought, a Greek word: those who are acquainted with both
languages affirm it to be a Hebrew word. It is not derived, therefore,
from the Passion, because of the Greek word <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p10.2"></span>πάσχειν</span>, signifying to suffer, but it
takes its name from the transition, of which I have spoken, from death
to life; the meaning of the Hebrew word Pascha being, as those who are
acquainted with <span id="page_304">p. 304</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_304"></span>it assure us, <span
id="fr_1733"></span>[1734](#fn_1733.md) a passing over or transition. To
this the Lord Himself designed to allude, when He said,” He that
believeth in Me is passed from death to life.” <span
id="fr_1734"></span>[1735](#fn_1734.md) And the same evangelist who records
that saying is to be understood as desiring to give emphatic testimony
to this, when, speaking of the Lord as about to celebrate with His
disciples the passover, at which He instituted the sacramental supper,
he says, “When Jesus knew that His hour was come, that He should
depart <span id="fr_1735"></span>[1736](#fn_1735.md) from this world unto
the Father.” <span id="fr_1736"></span>[1737](#fn_1736.md) This passing
over from this mortal life to the other, the immortal life, that is,
from death to life, is set forth in the Passion and Resurrection of the
Lord.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p15"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p15.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p16"></span>3. This passing from death to life is
meanwhile wrought in us by faith, which we have for the pardon of our
sins and the hope of eternal life, when we love God and our neighbour;
“for faith worketh by love,” <span id="fr_1737"></span>[1738](#fn_1737.md)
and “the just shall live by his faith;” <span
id="fr_1738"></span>[1739](#fn_1738.md) “and hope that is seen is not hope:
for what a man seeth, why doth he yet hope for? But if we hope for that
we see not, then do we with patience wait for it.” <span
id="fr_1739"></span>[1740](#fn_1739.md) According to this faith and hope
and love, by which we have begun to be “under grace,” we are already
dead together with Christ, and buried together with Him by baptism into
death; <span id="fr_1740"></span>[1741](#fn_1740.md) as the apostle hath
said, “Our old man is crucified with Him;” <span
id="fr_1741"></span>[1742](#fn_1741.md) and we have risen with Him, for “He
hath raised us up together, and made us sit with Him in heavenly
places.” <span id="fr_1742"></span>[1743](#fn_1742.md) Whence also he gives
this exhortation: “If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your
affection on things above, not on things on the earth.” <span
id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743.md) In the next words, “For ye are
dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God; when Christ, who is our
life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in glory,” <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744.md) he plainly gives us to understand
that our passing in this present time from death to life by faith is
accomplished in the hope of that future final resurrection and glory,
when “this corruptible,” that is, this flesh in which we now groan,
“shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality.” <span id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745.md) For now,
indeed, we have by faith “the first-fruits of the Spirit;” but still we
“groan within ourselves, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the
redemption of the body: for we are saved by hope.” While we are in this
hope, “the body indeed is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life
because of righteousness.” Now mark what follows: “But if the Spirit of
Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up
Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit
that dwelleth in you.” <span id="fr_1746"></span>[1747](#fn_1746.md) The
whole Church, therefore, while here in the conditions of pilgrimage and
mortality, expects that to be accomplished in her at the end of the
world which has been shown first in the body of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who is “the first-begotten from the dead,” seeing that the body of which
He is the Head is none other than the Church. <span
id="fr_1747"></span>[1748](#fn_1747.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p28"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p28.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p29"></span>4. Some, indeed, studying the words so
frequently used by the apostle, about our being dead with Christ and
raised together with Him, and misunderstanding the sense in which they
are used, have thought that the resurrection is already past, and that
no other is to be hoped for at the end of time: “Of whom,” he says, “are
Hymenæus and Philetus; who concerning the truth have erred, saying that
the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith of
some.” <span id="fr_1748"></span>[1749](#fn_1748.md) The same apostle who
thus reproves and testifies against them, teaches nevertheless that we
are risen with Christ. How is the apparent contradiction to be removed,
unless he means that this is accomplished in us by faith and hope and
love, according to the first-fruits of the Spirit? But because “hope
which is seen is not hope,” and therefore “if we hope for that we see
not, we do with patience wait for it,” it is beyond question that there
remains, as still future, the redemption of the body, in longing for
which we “groan within ourselves.” Hence also that saying, “Rejoicing in
hope, patient in tribulation.” <span
id="fr_1749"></span>[1750](#fn_1749.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p32"></span>5. This renewal, therefore, of our life
is a kind of transition from death to life which is made first by faith,
so that we rejoice in hope and are patient in tribulation, while still
“our outward man perisheth, but the inward man is renewed day by
day.” <span id="fr_1750"></span>[1751](#fn_1750.md) It is because of this
beginning of a new life, because of the new man which we are commanded
to put on, putting off the old man, <span
id="fr_1751"></span>[1752](#fn_1751.md) “purging out the old leaven, that
we may be a new lump, because Christ our passover is sacrificed for
us;” <span id="fr_1752"></span>[1753](#fn_1752.md) it is, I say, because of
this newness of life in us, that the first of the months of the year has
been appointed as the season of this solemnity. This very name is given
to <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_305"></span>it, the month Abib, or beginning of
months. <span id="fr_1753"></span>[1754](#fn_1753.md) Again, the
resurrection of the Lord was upon the third day, because with it the
third epoch of the world began. The first Epoch was before the Law, the
second under the Law, the third under Grace, in which there is now the
manifestation of the mystery, <span id="fr_1754"></span>[1755](#fn_1754.md)
which was formerly hidden under dark prophetic sayings. This is
accordingly signified also in the part of the month appointed for the
celebration; for, since the number seven is usually employed in
Scripture as a mystical number, indicating perfection of some kind, the
day of the celebration of Easter is within the third week of the month,
namely, between the fourteenth and the twenty-first day.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p38"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p38.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p39"></span>6. There is in this another
mystery, <span id="fr_1755"></span>[1756](#fn_1755.md) and you are not to
be distressed if perhaps it be not so readily perceived by you, because
of your being less versed in such studies; nor are you to think me any
better than you, because I learned these things in early years: for the
Lord saith, “Let him that glorieth glory in this, that he understandeth
and knoweth Me, that I am the Lord.” <span
id="fr_1756"></span>[1757](#fn_1756.md) Some men who give attention to such
studies, have investigated many things concerning the numbers and
motions of the heavenly bodies. And those who have done this most ably
have found that the waxing and waning of the moon are due to the turning
of its globe, and not to any such actual addition to or diminution of
its substance as is supposed by the foolish Manichæans, who say that as
a ship is filled, so the moon is filled with a fugitive portion of the
Divine Being, which they, with impious heart and lips, do not hesitate
to believe and to declare to have become mingled with the rulers of
darkness, and contaminated with their pollution. And they account for
the waxing of the moon by saying that it takes place when that lost
portion of the Deity, being purified from contamination by great
labours, escaping from the whole world, <span
id="fr_1757"></span>[1758](#fn_1757.md) and from all foul
abominations, <span id="fr_1758"></span>[1759](#fn_1758.md) is restored to
the Deity, who mourns till it returns; that by this the moon is filled
up till the middle of the month, and that in the latter half of the
month this is poured back into the sun as into another ship. Amid these
execrable blasphemies, they have never succeeded in devising any way of
explaining why the moon in the beginning or end of its brightness shines
with its light in the shape of a horn, or why it begins at the middle of
the month to wane, and does not go on full until it pour back its
increase into the sun.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p44"></span>7. Those, however, to whom I refer have
inquired into these things with trustworthy calculations, so that they
can not only state the reason of eclipses, both solar and lunar, but
also predict their occurrence long before they take place, and are able
to determine by mathematical computation the precise intervals at which
these must happen, and to state the results in treatises, by reading and
understanding which any others may foretell as well as they the coming
of these eclipses, and find their prediction verified by the event. Such
men,—and they deserve censure, as Holy Scripture teaches, because
“though they had wisdom enough to measure the periods of this world,
they did not much more easily come,” as by humble piety they might have
done, “to the knowledge of its Lord,” <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759.md) —such men, I say, have inferred
from the horns of the moon, which both in waxing and in waning are
turned from the sun, either that the moon is illuminated by the sun, and
that the farther it recedes from the sun the more fully does it lie
exposed to its rays on the side which is visible from the earth; but
that the more it approaches the sun, after the middle of the month, on
the other half of its orbit, it becomes more fully illuminated on the
upper part, and less and less open to receive the sun’s rays on the side
which is turned to the earth, and seems to us accordingly to decrease:
or, that if the moon has light in itself, it has this light in the
hemisphere on one side only, which side it gradually turns more to the
earth as it recedes from the sun, until it is fully displayed, thereby
exhibiting an apparent increase, not by the addition of what was
deficient, but by disclosing what was already there; and that, in like
manner, going towards the sun, the moon again gradually turns from our
view that which had been disclosed, and so appears to decrease.
Whichever of these two theories be correct, this at least is plain, and
is easily discovered by any careful observer, that the moon does not to
our eyes increase except when it is receding from the sun, nor decrease
except when returning towards the sun.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p46"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p46.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p47"></span>8. Now mark what is said in Proverbs:
“The wise man is fixed like the sun; but the fool changes like the
moon.” <span id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760.md) And who is the wise
that has no changes, but that Sun of Righteousness of whom it is said,
“The Sun of righteousness has risen upon me,” and of which the wicked
shall say, when mourning in the day of judgment that it has not risen
upon them, “The light of righteousness hath not shone upon us, and the
sun hath not risen upon us”? <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761.md)
For that sun which is visible to the eye of sense, God makes to rise
upon the evil and the good alike, as He sendeth rain upon the just and
the unjust; <span id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762.md) but apt
similitudes are often <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_306"></span>borrowed from things visible to explain
things invisible. Again, who is the “fool” who “changes like the moon,”
if not Adam, in whom all have sinned? For the soul of man, receding from
the Sun of righteousness, that is to say, from the internal
contemplation of unchangeable truth, turns all its strength towards
external things, and becomes more and more darkened in its deeper and
nobler powers; but when the soul begins to return to that unchangeable
wisdom, the more it draws near to it with pious desire, the more does
the outward man perish, but the inward man is renewed day by day, and
all that light of the soul which was inclining to things that are
beneath is turned to the things that are above, and is thus withdrawn
from the things of earth; so that it dies more and more to this world,
and its life is hid with Christ in God.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p51"></span>9. It is therefore for the worse that the
soul is changed when it moves in the direction of external things, and
throws aside that which pertains to the inner life; and to the earth,
*i.e.* to those who mind earthly things, the soul looks better in such a
case, for by them the wicked is commended for his heart’s desire, and
the unrighteous is blessed. <span id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763.md)
But it is for the better that the soul is changed, when it gradually
turns away its aims and ambition from earthly things, which appear
important in this world, and directs them to things nobler and unseen;
and to the earth, *i.e.* to men who mind earthly things, the soul in
such a case seems worse. Hence those wicked men who at last shall in
vain repent of their sins, will say this among other things: “These are
the men whom once we derided and reproached; we in our folly esteemed
their way of life to be madness.” <span
id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764.md) Now the Holy Spirit, drawing a
comparison from things visible to things invisible, from things
corporeal to spiritual mysteries, has been pleased to appoint that the
feast symbolical of the passing from the old life to the new, which is
signified by the name Pascha, should be observed between the 14th and
21st days of the month,—after the 14th, in order that a twofold
illustration of spiritual realities might be gained, both with respect
to the third epoch of the world, which is the reason of its occurrence
in the third week, as I have already said, and with respect to the
turning of the soul from external to internal things,—a change
corresponding to the change in the moon when on the wane; not later than
the 21st, because of the number 7 itself, which is often used to
represent the notion of the universe, and is also applied to the Church
on the ground of her likeness to the universe.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p54"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p54.1"></span>Chap. VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p55"></span>10. For this reason the Apostle John
writes in the Apocalypse to *seven* churches. The Church, moreover,
while it remains under the conditions of our mortal life in the flesh,
is, on account of her liability to change, spoken of Scripture by the
name of the moon; *e.g.*, “They have made ready their arrows in the
quiver, that they may, while the moon is obscured, wound those who are
upright in heart.” <span id="fr_1765"></span>[1766](#fn_1765.md) For before
that comes to pass of which the apostle says, “When Christ, who is our
life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with Him in glory,” <span
id="fr_1766"></span>[1767](#fn_1766.md) the Church seems in the time of her
pilgrimage obscured, groaning under many iniquities; and at such a time,
the snares of those who deceive and lead astray are to be feared, and
these are intended by the word “arrows” in this passage. Again, we have
another instance in [Psalm
lxxxix.](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p57.2"></span>, <span id="fr_1767"></span>[1768](#fn_1767.md)
where, because of the faithful witnesses which she everywhere brings
forth on the side of truth, the Church is called “the moon, a faithful
witness in heaven.” And when the Psalmist sang of the Lord’s kingdom, he
said, “In His days shall be righteousness and abundance of peace, until
the moon be destroyed;” <span id="fr_1768"></span>[1769](#fn_1768.md)
*i.e.* abundance of peace shall increase so greatly, until He shall at
length take away all the changeableness incidental to this mortal
condition. Then shall death, the last enemy, be destroyed; and whatever
obstacle to the perfection of our peace is due to the infirmity of our
flesh shall be utterly consumed when this corruptible shall have put on
incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality. <span
id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769.md) We have another instance in this,
that the walls of the town named Jericho—which in the Hebrew tongue is
said to signify “moon”—fell when they had been compassed for the seventh
time by the ark of the covenant borne round the city. For what else is
conveyed by the promise of the coming of the heavenly kingdom, which was
symbolized in the carrying of the ark round Jericho, than that all the
strongholds of this mortal life, *i.e.* every hope pertaining to this
world which resists the hope of the world to come, must be destroyed,
with the soul’s free consent, by the sevenfold gift of the Holy Spirit.
Therefore it was, that when the ark was going round, those walls fell,
not by violent assault, but of themselves. There are, besides these,
other passages in Scripture which, speaking of the moon, impress upon us
under that figure the condition of the Church while here, amid cares and
labours, she is a pilgrim under the lot of mortality, and far from that
Jerusalem of which the holy angels are the citizens.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p61"></span>11. These foolish men who refuse to be
changed for the better have no reason, however, to imagine <span
id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span id="vii.1.LV-Page_307"></span>that
worship is due to those heavenly luminaries because a similitude is
occasionally borrowed from them for the representation of divine
mysteries; for such are borrowed from every created thing. Nor is there
any reason for our incurring the sentence of condemnation which is
pronounced by the apostle on some who worshipped and served the creature
more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. <span
id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770.md) We do not adore sheep or cattle,
although Christ is called both a Lamb, <span
id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771.md) and by the prophet a young
bullock; <span id="fr_1772"></span>[1773](#fn_1772.md) nor any beast of
prey, though He is called the Lion of the tribe of Judah; <span
id="fr_1773"></span>[1774](#fn_1773.md) nor a stone, although Christ is
called a Rock; <span id="fr_1774"></span>[1775](#fn_1774.md) nor Mount
Zion, though in it there was a type of the Church. <span
id="fr_1775"></span>[1776](#fn_1775.md) And, in like manner, we do not
adore the sun or the moon, although, in order to convey instruction in
holy mysteries, figures of sacred things are borrowed from these
celestial works of the Creator, as they are also from many of the things
which He hath made on earth.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p68"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p68.1"></span>Chap. VII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p69"></span>12. We are therefore bound to denounce
with abhorrence and contempt the ravings of the astrologers, who, when
we find fault with the empty inventions by which they cast other men
down into the delusions where into they themselves have fallen, imagine
that they answer well when they say, “Why, then, do you regulate the
time of the observance of Easter by calculation of the positions of the
sun and moon?”—as if that with which we find fault was the arrangements
of the heavenly bodies, or the succession of the seasons, which are
appointed by God in His infinite power and goodness, and not their
perversity in abusing, for the support of the most absurd opinions,
those things which God has ordered in perfect wisdom. If the astrologer
may on this ground forbid us from drawing comparisons from the heavenly
bodies for the mystical representation of sacramental realities, then
the augurs may with equal reason prevent the use of these words of
Scripture, “Be harmless as doves;” and the snake-charmers may forbid
that other exhortation, “Be wise as serpents;” <span
id="fr_1776"></span>[1777](#fn_1776.md) while the play-actors may interfere
with our mentioning the harp in the book of Psalms. Let them therefore
say, if they please, that, because similitudes for the exhibition of the
mysteries of God’s word are taken from the things which I have named, we
are chargeable either with consulting the omens given by the flight of
birds, or with concocting the poisons of the charmer, or with taking
pleasure in the excesses of the theatre,—a statement which would be the
clime of absurdity.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p71"></span>13. We do not forecast the issues of our
enterprises by studying the sun and moon, and the times of the year or
of the month, lest in the most trying emergencies of life, we, being
dashed against the rocks of a wretched bondage, shall make shipwreck of
our freedom of will; but with the most pious devoutness of spirit, we
accept similitudes adapted to the illustration of holy things, which
these heavenly bodies furnish, just as from all other works of creation,
the winds, the sea, the land, birds, fishes, cattle, trees, men, etc.,
we borrow in our discourses manifold figures; and in the celebration of
sacraments, the very few things which the comparative liberty of the
Christian dispensation has prescribed, such as water, bread, wine, and
oil. Under the bondage, however, of the ancient dispensation many rites
were prescribed, which are made known to us only for our instruction as
to their meaning. We do not now observe years, and months, and seasons,
lest the words of the apostle apply to us, “I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed upon you labour in vain.” <span
id="fr_1777"></span>[1778](#fn_1777.md) For he blames those who say, “I
will not set out to-day, because it is an unlucky day, or because the
moon is so and so;” or, “I will go to-day, that things may prosper with
me, because the position of the stars is this or that; I will do no
business this month, because a particular star rules it;” or, “I will do
business, because another star has succeeded in its place; I will not
plant a vineyard this year, because it is leap year.” No man of ordinary
sense would, however, suppose that those men deserve reproof for
studying the seasons, who say, *e.g.*, “I will not set out to-day,
because a storm has begun;” or, “I will not put to sea, because the
winter is not yet past;” or, “It is time to sow my seed, for the earth
has been saturated with the showers of autumn;” and so on, in regard to
any other natural effects of the motion and moisture of the atmosphere
which have been observed in connection with that consummately ordered
revolution of the heavenly bodies concerning which it was said when they
were made, “Let them be for signs, and for seasons, and for days, and
for years.” <span id="fr_1778"></span>[1779](#fn_1778.md) And in like
manner, whensoever illustrative symbols are borrowed, for the
declaration of spiritual mysteries, from created things, not only from
the heaven and its orbs, but also from meaner creatures, this is done to
give to the doctrine of salvation an eloquence adapted to raise the
affections of those who receive it from things seen, corporeal and
temporal, to things unseen, spiritual and eternal.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p74"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p74.1"></span>Chap. VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p75"></span>14. None of us gives any consideration to
the circumstance that, at the time at which we observe Easter, the sun
is in the Ram, <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_308"></span>as they call a certain region of the
heavenly bodies, in which the sun is, in fact, found at the beginning of
the months; but whether they, choose to call that part of the heavens
the Ram or anything else, we have learned this from the Sacred
Scriptures, that God made all the heavenly bodies, and appointed their
places as it pleased Him; and whatever the parts may be into which
astronomers divide the regions set apart and ordained for the different
constellations, and whatever the names by which they distinguish them,
the place occupied by the sun in the first month is that in which the
celebration of this sacrament behoved to find that luminary, because of
the illustration of a holy mystery in the renovation of life, of which I
have already spoken sufficiently. If, however, the name of Ram could be
given to that portion of the heavenly bodies because of some
correspondence between their form and the name, the word of God would
not hesitate to borrow from anything of this kind an illustration of a
holy mystery, as it has done not only from other celestial bodies, but
also from terrestrial things, *e.g.* from Orion and the Pleiades, Mount
Zion, Mount Sinai, and the rivers of which the names are given, Gihon,
Pison, Tigris, Euphrates, and particularly from the river Jordan, which
is so often named in the sacred mysteries.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p76"></span>15. But who can fail to perceive how
great is the difference between useful observations of the heavenly
bodies in connection with the weather, such as farmers or sailors make;
or in order to mark the part of the world in which they are, and the
course which they should follow, such as are made by pilots of ships or
men going through the trackless sandy deserts of southern Africa; or in
order to present some useful doctrine under a figure borrowed from some
facts concerning heavenly bodies;—and the vain hallucinations of men who
observe the heavens not to know the weather, or their course, or to make
scientific calculations, or to find illustrations of spiritual things,
but merely to pry into the future and learn now what fate has decreed?

<span id="vii.1.LV-p77"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p77.1"></span>Chap. IX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p78"></span>16. Let us now direct our minds to
observe the reason why, in the celebration of Easter, care is taken to
appoint the day so that Saturday precedes it: for this is peculiar to
the Christian religion. The Jews keep the Passover from the 14th to the
21st of the first month, on whatever day that week begins. But since at
the Passover at which the Lord suffered, it was the case that the Jewish
Sabbath came in between His death and His resurrection, our fathers have
judged it right to add this specialty to their celebration of Easter,
both that our feast might be distinguished from the Jewish Passover, and
that succeeding generations might retain in their annual commemoration
of His Passion that which we must believe to have been done for some
good reason, by Him who is before the times, by whom also the times have
been made, and who came in the fulness of the times, and who when He
said, Mine hour is not yet come, had the power of laying down His life
and taking it again, and was therefore waiting for an hour not fixed by
blind fate, but suitable to the holy mystery which He had resolved to
commend to our observation.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p79"></span>17. That which we here hold in faith and
hope, and to which by love we labour to come, is, as I have said above,
a certain holy and perpetual rest from the whole burden of every kind of
care; and from this life unto that rest we make a transition which our
Lord Jesus Christ condescended to exemplify and consecrate in His
Passion. This rest, however, is not a slothful inaction, but a certain
ineffable tranquillity caused by work in which there is no painful
effort. For the repose on which one enters at the end of the toils of
this life is of such a nature as consists with lively joy in the active
exercises of the better life. Forasmuch, however, as this activity is
exercised in praising God without bodily toil or mental anxiety, the
transition to that activity is not made through a repose which is to be
followed by labour, *i.e.* a repose which, at the point where activity
begins, ceases to be repose: for in these exercises there is no return
to toil and care; but that which constitutes rest—namely, exemption from
weariness in work and from uncertainty in thought—is always found in
them. Now, since through rest we get back to that original life which
the soul lost by sin, the emblem of this rest is the seventh day of the
week. But that original life itself which is restored to those who
return from their wanderings, and receive in token of welcome the robe
which they had at first, <span id="fr_1779"></span>[1780](#fn_1779.md) is
represented by the first day of the week, which we call the Lord’s day.
If, in reading Genesis, you search the record of the seven days, you
will find that there was no evening of the seventh day, which signified
that the rest of which it was a type was eternal. The life originally
bestowed was not eternal, because man sinned; but the final rest, of
which the seventh day was an emblem, is eternal, and hence the eighth
day also will have eternal blessedness, because that rest, being
eternal, is taken up by the eighth day, not destroyed by it; for if it
were thus destroyed, it would not be eternal. Accordingly the eighth
day, which is the first day of the week, represents to us that original
life, not taken away, but made eternal.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p81"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p81.1"></span>Chap. X.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p82"></span>18. Nevertheless the seventh day was
appointed to the Jewish nation as a day to be observed by rest of the
body, that it might <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_309"></span>be a type of sanctification to which men
attain through rest in the Holy Spirit. We do not read of sanctification
in the history given in Genesis of all the earlier days: of the Sabbath
alone it is said that “God blessed the seventh day, and sanctified
it.” <span id="fr_1780"></span>[1781](#fn_1780.md) Now the souls of men,
whether good or bad, love rest, but how to attain to that which they
love is to the greater part unknown: and that which bodies seek for
their weight, is precisely what souls seek for their love, namely, a
resting-place. For as, according to its specific gravity, a body
descends or rises until it reaches a place where it can rest,—oil, for
example, falling if poured into the air, but rising if poured into
water,—so the soul of man struggles towards the things which it loves,
in order that, by reaching them, it may rest. There are indeed many
things which please the soul through the body, but its rest in these is
not eternal, nor even long continued; and therefore they rather debase
the soul and weigh it down, so as to be a drag upon that pure
imponderability by which it tends towards higher things. When the soul
finds pleasure from itself, it is not yet seeking delight in that which
is unchangeable; and therefore it is still proud, because it is giving
to itself the highest place, whereas God is higher. In such sin the soul
is not left unpunished, for “God resisteth the proud, but giveth grace
to the humble.” <span id="fr_1781"></span>[1782](#fn_1781.md) When,
however, the soul delights in God, there it finds the true, sure, and
eternal rest, which in all other objects was sought in vain. Therefore
the admonition is given in the book of Psalms, “Delight thyself in the
Lord, and He shall give thee the desires of thine heart.” <span
id="fr_1782"></span>[1783](#fn_1782.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p86"></span>19. Because, therefore, “the love of
God <span id="fr_1783"></span>[1784](#fn_1783.md) is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us,” <span
id="fr_1784"></span>[1785](#fn_1784.md) sanctification was associated with
the seventh day, the day in which rest was enjoined. But inasmuch as we
neither are able to do any good work, except as helped by the gift of
God, as the apostle says, “For it is God that worketh in you both to
will and to do of His good pleasure,” <span
id="fr_1785"></span>[1786](#fn_1785.md) nor will be able to rest, after all
the good works which engage us in this life, except as sanctified and
perfected by the same gift to eternity; for this reason it is said of
God Himself, that when He had made all things “very good,” He rested “on
the seventh day from all His works which He had made.” <span
id="fr_1786"></span>[1787](#fn_1786.md) For He, in so doing, presented a
type of that future rest which He purposed to bestow on us men after our
good works are done. For as in our good works He is said to work in us,
by whose gift we are enabled to work what is good, so in our rest He is
said to rest by whose gift we rest.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p91"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p91.1"></span>Chap. XI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p92"></span>20. This, moreover, is the reason why the
law of the Sabbath is placed third among the three commandments of the
Decalogue which declare our duty to God (for the other seven relate to
our neighbour, that is, to man; the whole law hanging on these two
commandments). <span id="fr_1787"></span>[1788](#fn_1787.md) The first
commandment, in which we are forbidden to worship any likeness of God
made by human contrivance, we are to understand as referring to the
Father: this prohibition being made, not because God has no image, but
because no image of Him but that One which is the same with Himself,
ought to be worshipped; and this One not in His stead, but along with
Him. Then, because a creature is mutable, and therefore it is said, “The
whole creation is subject to vanity,” <span
id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788.md) since the nature of the whole is
manifested also in any part of it, lest any one should think that the
Son of God, the Word by whom all things were made, is a creature, the
second commandment is, “Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vain.” <span id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789.md) And because God
sanctified the seventh day, on which He rested, the Holy Spirit—in whom
is given to us that rest which we love everywhere, but find only in
loving God, when “His love is shed abroad in us, by the Holy Ghost given
unto us” <span id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790.md) —is presented to our
minds in the third commandment, which was written concerning the
observance of the Sabbath, not to make us suppose that we attain to rest
in this present life, but that all our labours in what is good may point
towards nothing else than that eternal rest. For I would specially
charge you to remember the passage quoted above: “We are saved by hope;
but hope that is seen is not hope.” <span
id="fr_1791"></span>[1792](#fn_1791.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p98"></span>21. For the feeding and fanning of that
ardent love by which, under a law like that of gravitation, we are borne
upwards or inwards to rest, the presentation of truth by emblems has a
great power: for, thus presented, things move and kindle our affection
much more than if they were set forth in bald statements, not clothed
with sacramental symbols. Why this should be, it is hard to say; but it
is the fact that anything which we are taught by allegory or emblem
affects and pleases us more, and is more highly esteemed by us, than it
would be if most clearly stated in plain terms. I believe that the
emotions are less easily kindled while the soul is wholly involved in
earthly things; but if it be <span id="page_310">p. 310</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_310"></span>brought to those corporeal things which
are emblems of spiritual things, and then taken from these to the
spiritual realities which they represent, it gathers strength by the
mere act of passing from the one to the other, and, like the flame of a
lighted torch, is made by the motion to burn more brightly, and is
carried away to rest by a more intensely glowing love.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p99"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p99.1"></span>Chap. XII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p100"></span>22. It is also for this reason, that of
all the ten commandments, that which related to the Sabbath was the only
one in which the thing commanded was typical; <span
id="fr_1792"></span>[1793](#fn_1792.md) the bodily rest enjoined being a
type which we have received as a means of our instruction, but not as a
duty binding also upon us. For while in the Sabbath a figure is
presented of the spiritual rest, of which it is said in the Psalm, “Be
still, and know that I am God,” <span
id="fr_1793"></span>[1794](#fn_1793.md) and unto which men are invited by
the Lord Himself in the words, “Come unto Me, all ye that labour and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take My yoke upon you, and learn
of Me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: so shall ye find rest unto your
souls;” <span id="fr_1794"></span>[1795](#fn_1794.md) as to all the things
enjoined in the other commandments, we are to yield to them an obedience
in which there is nothing typical. For we have been taught literally not
to worship idols; and the precepts enjoining us not to take God’s name
in vain, to honour our father and mother, not to commit adultery, or
kill, or steal, or bear false witness, or covet our neighbour’s wife, or
covet anything that is our neighbour’s, <span
id="fr_1795"></span>[1796](#fn_1795.md) are all devoid of typical or
mystical meaning, and are to be literally observed. But we are not
commanded to observe the day of the Sabbath literally, in resting from
bodily labour, as it is observed by the Jews; and even their observance
of the rest as prescribed is to be deemed worthy of contempt, except as
signifying another, namely, spiritual rest. From this we may reasonably
conclude, that all those things which are figuratively set forth in
Scripture, are powerful in stimulating that love by which we tend
towards rest; since the only figurative or typical precept in the
Decalogue is the one in which that rest is commended to us, which is
desired everywhere, but is found sure and sacred in God alone.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p105"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p105.1"></span>Chap. XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p106"></span>23. The Lord’s day, however, has been
made known not to the Jews, but to Christians, by the resurrection of
the Lord, and from Him it began to have the festive character which is
proper to it. <span id="fr_1796"></span>[1797](#fn_1796.md) For the souls
of the pious dead are, indeed, in a state of repose before the
resurrection of the body, but they are not engaged in the same active
exercises as shall engage the strength of their bodies when restored.
Now, of this condition of active exercise the eighth day (which is also
the first of the week) is a type, because it does not put an end to that
repose, but glorifies it. For with the reunion of the body no hindrance
of the soul’s rest returns, because in the restored body there is no
corruption: for “this corruptible must put on incorruption, and this
mortal must put on immortality.” <span
id="fr_1797"></span>[1798](#fn_1797.md) Wherefore, although the sacramental
import of the 8th number, as signifying the resurrection, was by no
means concealed from the holy men of old who were filled with the spirit
of prophecy (for in the title of Psalms \[vi. and xii.\] we find the
words “for the eighth,” and infants were circumcised on the eighth day;
and in Ecclesiastes it is said, with allusion to the two covenants,
“Give a portion to seven, and also to eight” <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[1799](#fn_1798) .md); nevertheless before the
resurrection of the Lord, it was reserved and hidden, and the Sabbath
alone was appointed to be observed, because before that event there was
indeed the repose of the dead (of which the Sabbath rest was a type),
but there was not any instance of the resurrection of one who, rising
from the dead, was no more to die, and over whom death should no longer
have dominion; this being done in order that, from the time when such a
resurrection did take place in the Lord’s own body (the Head of the
Church being the first to experience that which His body, the Church,
expects at the end of time), the day upon which He rose, the eighth day
namely (which is the same with the first of the week), should begin to
be observed as the Lord’s day. The same reason enables us to understand
why, in regard to the day of keeping the passover, on which the Jews
were commanded to kill and eat a lamb, which was most clearly a
foreshadowing of the Lord’s Passion, there was no injunction given to
them that they should take the day of the week into account, waiting
until the Sabbath was past, and making the beginning of the third week
of the moon coincide with the beginning of the third week of the first
month; the reason being, that the Lord might rather in His own Passion
declare the significance of that day, as He had come also to declare the
mystery of the day now known as the Lord’s day, the eighth namely, which
is also the first of the week.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p110"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p110.1"></span>Chap. XIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p111"></span>24. Consider now with attention these
three most sacred days, the days signalized by the Lord’s crucifixion,
rest in the grave, and resurrection. Of these three, that of which the
cross is the symbol is the business of our present life: those things
which are symbolized by His rest in the grave and His resurrection we
hold <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_311"></span>by faith and hope. For *now* the command
is given to each man, “Take up thy cross, and follow me.” <span
id="fr_1799"></span>[1800](#fn_1799.md) But the flesh is crucified, when
our members which are upon the earth are mortified, such as fornication,
uncleanness, luxury, avarice, etc., of which the apostle says in another
passage: “If ye live after the flesh, ye shall die; but if ye through
the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live.” <span
id="fr_1800"></span>[1801](#fn_1800.md) Hence also he says of himself: “The
world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world.” <span
id="fr_1801"></span>[1802](#fn_1801.md) And again: “Knowing this, that our
old man is crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be destroyed,
that henceforth we should not serve sin.” <span
id="fr_1802"></span>[1803](#fn_1802.md) The period during which our labours
tend to the weakening and destruction of the body of sin, during which
the outward man is perishing, that the inward man may be renewed day by
day,—that is the period of the cross.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p116"></span>25. These are, it is true, good works,
having rest for their recompense, but they are meanwhile laborious and
painful: therefore we are told to be “rejoicing in hope,” that while we
contemplate the future rest, we may labour with cheerfulness in present
toil. Of this cheerfulness the breadth of the cross in the transverse
beam to which the hands were nailed is an emblem: for the hands we
understand to be symbolical of working, and the breadth to be symbolical
of cheerfulness in him who works, for sadness straitens the spirit. In
the height of the cross, against which the head is placed, we have an
emblem of the expectation of recompense from the sublime justice of God,
“who will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who, by
patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and honour, and
immortality, eternal life.” <span id="fr_1803"></span>[1804](#fn_1803.md)
Therefore the length of the cross, along which the whole body is
extended, is an emblem of that patient continuance in the will of God,
on account of which those who are patient are said to be long-suffering.
The depth also, *i.e.* the part which is fixed in the ground, represents
the occult nature of the holy mystery. For you remember, I suppose, the
words of the apostle, which in this description of the cross I aim at
expounding: “That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to
comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height.” <span id="fr_1804"></span>[1805](#fn_1804.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p119"></span>Those things which we do not yet see or
possess, but hold in faith and hope, are the things represented in the
events by which the second and third of the three memorable days above
mentioned were signalized \[viz. the Lord’s rest in the grave, and His
resurrection\]. But the things which keep us occupied in this present
life, while we are held fast in the fear of God by the commandments, as
by nails driven through the flesh (as it is written, “Make my flesh fast
with nails by fear of Thee” <span id="fr_1805"></span>[1806](#fn_1805.md)
), are to be reckoned among things necessary, not among those which are
for their own sakes to be desired and coveted. Hence Paul says that he
desired, as something far better, to depart and to be with Christ:
“nevertheless,” he adds, “to remain in the flesh is expedient for
you” <span id="fr_1806"></span>[1807](#fn_1806.md) —necessary for your
welfare. This departing and being with Christ is the beginning of the
rest which is not interrupted, but glorified by the resurrection; and
this rest is now enjoyed by faith, “for the just shall live by
faith.” <span id="fr_1807"></span>[1808](#fn_1807.md) “Know ye not,” saith
the same apostle, “that so many of us as were baptized into Jesus
Christ, were baptized into His death? Therefore we are buried with Him
by baptism unto death.” <span id="fr_1808"></span>[1809](#fn_1808.md) How?
By faith. For this is not actually completed in us so long as we are
still “groaning within ourselves, and waiting for the adoption, to wit,
the redemption of our body: for we are saved by hope; but hope that is
seen is not hope: for what a man seeth why doth he yet hope for? But if
we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for
it.” <span id="fr_1809"></span>[1810](#fn_1809.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p125"></span>26. Remember how often I repeat this to
you, that we are not to think that we ought to be made happy and free
from all difficulties in this present life, and are therefore at liberty
to murmur profanely against God when we are straitened in the things of
this world, as if He were not performing what He promised. He hath
indeed promised the things which are necessary for this life, but the
consolations which mitigate the misery of our present lot are very
different from the joys of those who are perfect in blessedness. “In the
multitude of my thoughts within me,” saith the believer, “Thy comforts,
O Lord, delight my soul.” <span id="fr_1810"></span>[1811](#fn_1810.md) Let
us not therefore murmur because of difficulties; let us not lose that
breadth of cheerfulness, of which it is written, “Rejoicing in hope,”
because this follows,—“patient in tribulation.” <span
id="fr_1811"></span>[1812](#fn_1811.md) The new life, therefore, is
meanwhile begun in faith, and maintained by hope: for it shall only then
be perfect when this mortal shall be swallowed up in life, and death
swallowed up in victory; when the last enemy, death, shall be destroyed;
when we shall be changed, and made like the angels: for “we shall all
rise again, but we shall not all be <span id="page_312">p. 312</span>
<span id="vii.1.LV-Page_312"></span>changed.” <span
id="fr_1812"></span>[1813](#fn_1812.md) Again, the Lord saith, “They shall
be equal unto the angels.” <span id="fr_1813"></span>[1814](#fn_1813.md) We
now are apprehended by Him in fear by faith: then we shall apprehend Him
in love by sight. For “whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent
from the Lord: for we walk by faith, not by sight.” <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[1815](#fn_1814.md) Hence the apostle himself, who
says, “I follow after, if that I may apprehend that for which also I am
apprehended of Christ Jesus,” confesses frankly that he has not attained
to it. “Brethren,” he says, “I count not myself to have
apprehended.” <span id="fr_1815"></span>[1816](#fn_1815.md) Since, however,
our hope is sure, because of the truth of the promise, when he said
elsewhere, “Therefore we are buried with Him by baptism into death,” he
adds these words, “that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by
the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of
life.” <span id="fr_1816"></span>[1817](#fn_1816.md) We walk, therefore, in
actual labour, but in hope of rest, in the flesh of the old life, but in
faith of the new. For he says again: “The body is dead because of sin;
but the spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of
Him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, He that raised up
Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by His Spirit
that dwelleth in you.”

<span id="vii.1.LV-p133"></span>27. Both the authority of the Divine
Scriptures and the consent of the whole Church spread throughout the
world have combined to ordain the annual commemoration of these things
at Easter, by observances which are, as you now see, full of spiritual
significance. From the Old Testament Scriptures we are not taught as to
the precise day of holding Easter, beyond the limitation to the period
between the 14th and 21st days of the first month; but because we know
from the Gospel beyond doubt which days of the week were signalized in
succession by the Lord’s crucifixion, His resting in the grave, and His
resurrection, the observance of these days has been enjoined in addition
by Councils of the Fathers, and the whole Christian world has arrived
unanimously at the persuasion that this is the proper mode of observing
Easter.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p134"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p134.1"></span>Chap. XV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p135"></span>28. <span
id="fr_1817"></span>[1818](#fn_1817.md) The Fast of Forty Days has its
warrant both in the Old Testament, from the fasting of Moses <span
id="fr_1818"></span>[1819](#fn_1818.md) and of Elijah, <span
id="fr_1819"></span>[1820](#fn_1819.md) and in the Gospel from the fact
that our Lord fasted the same number of days; <span
id="fr_1820"></span>[1821](#fn_1820.md) proving thereby that the Gospel is
not at variance with the Law and the Prophets. For the Law and the
Prophets are represented in the persons of Moses and Elijah
respectively; between whom also He appeared in glory on the Mount, that
what the apostle says of Him, that He is “witnessed unto both by the Law
and the Prophets,” <span id="fr_1821"></span>[1822](#fn_1821.md) might be
made more clearly manifest. Now, in what part of the year could the
observance of the Fast of Forty Days be more appropriately placed, than
in that which immediately precedes and borders on the time of the Lord’s
Passion? For by it is signified this life of toil, the chief work in
which is to exercise self-control, in abstaining from the world’s
friendship, which never ceases deceitfully caressing us, and scattering
profusely around us its bewitching allurements. As to the reason why
this life of toil and self-control is symbolized by the number 40, it
seems to me that the number ten (in which is the perfection of our
blessedness, as in the number eight, because it returns to the unit) has
a like place in this number \[as the unit has in giving its significance
to eight\]; <span id="fr_1822"></span>[1823](#fn_1822.md) and therefore I
regard the number forty as a fit symbol for this life, because in it the
creature (of which the symbolical number is seven) cleaves to the
Creator, in whom is revealed that unity of the Trinity which is to be
published while time lasts throughout this whole world,—a world swept by
four winds, constituted of four elements, and experiencing the changes
of four seasons in the year. Now four times ten \[seven added to three\]
are forty; but the number forty reckoned in along with \[one of\] its
parts adds the number ten, \[as seven reckoned in along with one of its
parts adds the unit,\] and the total is fifty,—the symbol, as it were,
of the reward of the toil and self-control. <span
id="fr_1823"></span>[1824](#fn_1823.md) For it is not without reason that
the Lord Himself continued for forty days on this earth and in this life
in fellowship with His disciples after His resurrection, and, when He
ascended into heaven, sent the promised Holy Spirit, after an interval
of ten days more, when the day of Pentecost was fully come. This
fiftieth day, moreover, has wrapped up in it another holy mystery: <span
id="fr_1824"></span>[1825](#fn_1824.md) for 7 times 7 days are 49. And when
we return to the beginning of another seven, and add the eighth, which
is also the first day of the week, we have the 50 days complete; which
period of fifty days we celebrate after the Lord’s resurrection, as
<span id="page_313">p. 313</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_313"></span>representing not toil, but rest and
gladness. For this reason we do not fast in them; and in praying we
stand upright, which is an emblem of resurrection. Hence, also, every
Lord’s day during the fifty days, this usage is observed at the altar,
and the Alleluia is sung, which signifies that our future exercise shall
consist wholly in praising God, as it is written: “Blessed are they who
dwell in Thy house, O Lord: they will be still (*i.e.* eternally)
praising Thee.” <span id="fr_1825"></span>[1826](#fn_1825.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p145"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p145.1"></span>Chap. XVI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p146"></span>29. The fiftieth day is also commended
to us in Scripture; and not only in the Gospel, by the fact that on that
day the Holy Spirit descended, but also in the books of the Old
Testament. For in them we learn, that after the Jews observed the first
passover with the slaying of the lamb as appointed, 50 days intervened
between that day and the day on which upon Mount Sinai there was given
to Moses the Law written with the finger of God; <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1827](#fn_1826.md) and this “finger of God” is in the
Gospels most plainly declared to signify the Holy Spirit: for where one
evangelist quotes our Lord’s words thus, “I with the finger of God cast
out devils,” <span id="fr_1827"></span>[1828](#fn_1827.md) another quotes
them thus, “I cast out devils by the Spirit of God.” <span
id="fr_1828"></span>[1829](#fn_1828.md) Who would not prefer the joy which
these divine mysteries impart, when the light of healing truth beams
from them on the soul to all the kingdoms of this world, even though
these were held in perfect prosperity and peace? May we not say, that as
the two seraphim answer each other in singing the praise of the Most
High, “Holy, holy, holy is the Lord God of Hosts,” <span
id="fr_1829"></span>[1830](#fn_1829.md) so the Old Testament and the New,
in perfect harmony, give forth their testimony to sacred truth? The lamb
is slain, the passover is celebrated, and after 50 days the Law is
given, which inspires fear, written by the finger of God. Christ is
slain, being led as a lamb to the slaughter as Isaiah testifies; <span
id="fr_1830"></span>[1831](#fn_1830.md) the true Passover is celebrated;
and after 50 days is given the Holy Spirit, who is the finger of God,
and whose fruit is love, and who is therefore opposed to men who seek
their own, and consequently bear a grievous yoke and heavy burden, and
find no rest for their souls; for love “seeketh not her own.” <span
id="fr_1831"></span>[1832](#fn_1831.md) Therefore there is no rest in the
unloving spirit of heretics, whom the apostle declares guilty of conduct
like that of the magicians of Pharaoh, saying, “Now as Jannes and
Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the truth: men of
corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But they shall proceed no
further: for their folly shall be manifest to all men, as theirs also
was.” <span id="fr_1832"></span>[1833](#fn_1832.md) For because through
this corruptness of mind they were utterly disquieted, they failed at
the third miracle, confessing that the Spirit of God which was in Moses
was opposed to them: for in owning their failure, they said, “This is
the finger of God.” <span id="fr_1833"></span>[1834](#fn_1833.md) The Holy
Spirit, who shows Himself reconciled and gracious to the meek and lowly
in heart, and gives them rest, shows Himself an inexorable adversary to
the proud and haughty, and vexes them with disquiet. Of this disquiet
those despicable insects were a figure, under which Pharaoh’s magicians
owned themselves foiled, saying, “This is the finger of God.”

<span id="vii.1.LV-p155"></span>30. Read the book of Exodus, and observe
the number of days between the first passover and the giving of the Law.
God speaks to Moses in the desert of Sinai on the first day of the third
month. Mark, then, this as one day of the month, and then observe what
(among other things) the Lord said on that day: “Go unto the people, and
sanctify them today and tomorrow, and let them wash their clothes, and
be ready against the third day; for the third day the Lord will come
down in the sight of all the people upon Mount Sinai.” <span
id="fr_1834"></span>[1835](#fn_1834.md) The Law was accordingly given on
the third day of the month. Now reckon the days between the 14th day of
the first month, the day of the passover, and the 3d day of the third
month, and you have 17 days of the first month, 30 of the second, and 3
of the third—50 in all. The Law in the Ark of the Testimony represents
holiness in the Lord’s body, by whose resurrection is promised to us the
future rest; for our receiving of which, love is breathed into us by the
Holy Spirit. But the Spirit had not then been given, for Jesus had not
yet been glorified. <span id="fr_1835"></span>[1836](#fn_1835.md) Hence
that prophetic song, “Arise, O Lord, into Thy rest, Thou and the ark of
Thy strength” \[holiness, LXX.\]. <span
id="fr_1836"></span>[1837](#fn_1836.md) Where there is rest, there is
holiness. Wherefore we have now received a pledge of it, that we may
love and desire it. For to the rest belonging to the other life,
whereunto we are brought by that transition from this life of which the
passover is a symbol, all are now invited in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Spirit.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p159"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p159.1"></span>Chap. XVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p160"></span>31. Hence also, in the number of the
large fishes which our Lord after His resurrection, showing this new
life, commanded to be taken on the right side of the ship, there is
found the number 50 three times multiplied, with the addition of three
more \[the symbol of the Trinity\] to make the holy mystery more
apparent; and the disciples’ nets were not <span id="page_314">p.
314</span> <span id="vii.1.LV-Page_314"></span>broken, <span
id="fr_1837"></span>[1838](#fn_1837.md) because in that new life there
shall be no schism caused by the disquiet of heretics. Then \[in this
new life\] man, made perfect and at rest, purified in body and in soul
by the pure words of God, which are like silver purged from its dross,
seven times refined, <span id="fr_1838"></span>[1839](#fn_1838.md) shall
receive his reward, the denarius; <span
id="fr_1839"></span>[1840](#fn_1839.md) so that with that reward the
numbers 10 and 7 meet in him. For in this number \[17\] there is found,
as in other numbers representing a combination of symbols, a wonderful
mystery. Nor is it without good reason that the seventeenth Psalm <span
id="fr_1840"></span>[1841](#fn_1840.md) is the only one which is given
complete in the book of Kings, <span
id="fr_1841"></span>[1842](#fn_1841.md) because it signifies that kingdom
in which we shall have no enemy. For its title is, “A Psalm of David, in
the day that the Lord delivered him from the hand of all his enemies,
and from the hand of Saul.” For of whom is David the type, but of Him
who, according to the flesh, was born of the seed of David? <span
id="fr_1842"></span>[1843](#fn_1842.md) He in His Church, that is, in His
body, still endures the malice of enemies. Therefore the words which
from heaven fell upon the ear of that persecutor whom Jesus slew by His
voice, and whom He transformed into a part of His body (as the food
which we use becomes a part of ourselves), were these, “Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou Me?” <span id="fr_1843"></span>[1844](#fn_1843.md) And
when shall this His body be finally delivered from enemies? Is it not
when the last enemy, Death, shall be destroyed? It is to that time that
the number of the 153 fishes pertains. For if the number 17 itself be
the side of an arithmetical triangle, <span
id="fr_1844"></span>[1845](#fn_1844.md) formed by placing above each other
rows of units, increasing in number from 1 to 17, the whole sum of these
units is 153: since 1 and 2 make 3; 3 and 3, 6; 6 and 4, 10; 10 and 5,
15; 15 and 6, 21; and so on: continue this up to 17, the total is 153.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p171"></span>32. The celebration of Easter and
Pentecost is therefore most firmly based on Scripture. As to the
observance of the forty days before Easter, this has been confirmed by
the practice of the Church; as also the separation of the eight days of
the neophytes, in such order that the eighth of these coincides with the
first. The custom of singing the Alleluia on those 50 days only in the
Church is not universal; for in other places it is sung also at various
other times, but on these days it is sung everywhere. Whether the custom
of standing at prayer on these days and on all the Lord’s days, is
everywhere observed or not, I do not know; nevertheless, I have told you
what guides the Church in this usage, and it is in my opinion
sufficiently obvious. <span id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p173"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p173.1"></span>Chap. XVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p174"></span>33. As to the feet-washing, since the
Lord recommended this because of its being an example of that humility
which He came to teach, as He Himself afterwards explained, the question
has arisen at what time it is best, by literal performance of this work,
to give public instruction in the important duty which it illustrates,
and this time \[of Lent\] was suggested in order that the lesson taught
by it might make a deeper and more serious impression. Many, however,
have not accepted this as a custom, lest it should be thought to belong
to the ordinance of baptism; and some have not hesitated to deny it any
place among our ceremonies. Some, however, in order to connect its
observance with the more sacred associations of this solemn season, and
at the same time to prevent its being confounded with baptism in any
way, have selected for this ceremony either the eighth day itself, or
that on which the third eighth day occurs, because of the great
significance of the number three in many holy mysteries.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p175"></span>34. I am surprised at your expressing a
desire that I should write anything in regard to those ceremonies which
are found different in different countries, because there is no
necessity for my doing this; and, moreover, one most excellent rule must
be observed in regard to these customs, when they do not in any way
oppose either true doctrine or sound morality, but contain some
incentives to the better life, viz., that wherever we see them observed,
or know them to be established, we should not only refrain from finding
fault with them, but even recommend them by our approval and imitation,
unless restrained by fear of doing greater harm than good by this
course, through the infirmity of others. We are not, however, to be
restrained by this, if more good is to be expected from our consenting
with those who are zealous for the ceremony, than loss to be feared from
our displeasing those who protest against it. In such a case we ought by
all means to adopt it, especially if it be something in defence of which
Scripture can be alleged: as in the singing of hymns and psalms, for
which we have on record both the example and the precepts of the Lord
and of His apostles. In this religious exercise, <span id="page_315">p.
315</span> <span id="vii.1.LV-Page_315"></span>so useful for inducing a
devotional frame of mind and inflaming the strength of love to God,
there is diversity of usage, and in Africa the members of the Church are
rather too indifferent in regard to it; on which account the Donstists
reproach us with our grave chanting of the divine songs of the prophets
in our churches, while they inflame their passions in their revels by
the singing of psalms of human composition, which rouse them like the
stirring notes of the trumpet on the battle-field. But when brethren are
assembled in the church, why should not the time be devoted to singing
of sacred songs, excepting of course while reading or preaching <span
id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846.md) is going on, or while the presiding
minister prays aloud, or the united prayer of the congregation is led by
the deacon’s voice? At the other intervals not thus occupied, I do not
see what could be a more excellent, useful, and holy exercise for a
Christian congregation.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p177"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p177.1"></span>Chap. XIX. <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847.md) </span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p180"></span>35. I cannot, however, sanction with my
approbation those ceremonies which are departures from the custom of the
Church, and are instituted on the pretext of being symbolical of some
holy mystery; although, for the sake of avoiding offence to the piety of
some and the pugnacity of others, I do not venture to condemn severely
many things of this kind. But this I deplore, and have too much occasion
to do so, that comparatively little attention is paid to many of the
most wholesome rites which Scripture has enjoined; and that so many
false notions everywhere prevail, that more severe rebuke would be
administered to a man who should touch the ground with his feet bare
during the octaves (before his baptism), than to one who drowned his
intellect in drunkenness. My opinion therefore is, that wherever it is
possible, all those things should be abolished without hesitation, which
neither have warrant in Holy Scripture, nor are found to have been
appointed by councils of bishops, nor are confirmed by the practice of
the universal Church, but are so infinitely various, according to the
different customs of different places, that it is with difficulty, if at
all, that the reasons which guided men in appointing them can be
discovered. For even although nothing be found, perhaps, in which they
are against the true faith; yet the Christian religion, which God in His
mercy made free, appointing to her sacraments very few in number, and
very easily observed, is by these burdensome ceremonies so oppressed,
that the condition of the Jewish Church itself is preferable: for
although they have not known the time of their freedom, they are
subjected to burdens imposed by the law of God, not by the vain conceits
of men. The Church of God, however, being meanwhile so constituted as to
enclose much chaff and many tares, bears with many things; yet if
anything be contrary to faith or to holy life, she does not approve of
it either by silence or by practice.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p181"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p181.1"></span>Chap. XX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p182"></span>36. Accordingly, that which you wrote as
to certain brethren abstaining from the use of animal food, on the
ground of its being ceremonially unclean, is most clearly contrary to
the faith and to sound doctrine. If I were to enter on anything like a
full discussion of this matter, it might be thought by some that there
was some obscurity in the precepts of the apostle in this matter whereas
he, among many other things which he said on this subject, expressed his
abhorrence of this opinion of the heretics in these words: “Now the
Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some shall depart
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits and doctrines of devils;
speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a hot
iron; forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which
God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which believe
and know the truth. For every creature of God is good, and nothing to be
refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it is sanctified by
the word of God and prayer.” <span id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848.md)
Again, in another place, he says, concerning these things: “Unto the
pure all things are pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving
is nothing pure; but even their mind and conscience is defiled.” <span
id="fr_1849"></span>[1850](#fn_1849.md) Read the rest for yourself, and
read these passages to others—to as many as you can—in order that,
seeing that they have been called to liberty, they may not make void the
grace of God toward them; only let them not use their liberty for an
occasion to serve the flesh: let them not refuse to practise the purpose
of curbing carnal appetite, abstinence from some kinds of food, on the
pretext that it is unlawful to do so under the promptings of
superstition or unbelief.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p185"></span>37. As to those who read futurity by
taking at random a text from the pages of the Gospels, although it is
better that they should do this than go to consult spirits of
divination, nevertheless it is, in my opinion, a censurable practice to
try to turn to secular affairs and the vanity of this life those divine
oracles which were intended to teach us concerning the higher life.

<span id="vii.1.LV-p186"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p186.1"></span>Chap. XXI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p187"></span>38. If you do not consider that I have
now written enough in answer to your questions, you must have little
knowledge of my capacities or of my engagements. For so far am I from
being, as you have thought, ac<span id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="vii.1.LV-Page_316"></span>quainted with everything, that I read
nothing in your letter with more sadness than this statement, both
because it is most manifestly untrue, and because I am surprised that
you should not be aware, that not only are many things unknown to me in
countless other departments, but that even in the Scriptures themselves
the things which I do not know are many more than the things which I
know. But I cherish a hope in the name of Christ, which is not without
its reward, because I have not only believed the testimony of my God
that “on these two commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets;” <span id="fr_1850"></span>[1851](#fn_1850.md) but I have myself
proved it, and daily prove it, by experience. For there is no holy
mystery, and no difficult passage of the word of God, in which, when it
is opened up to me, I do not find these same commandments: for “the end
of the commandment is charity, out of a pure heart, and of a good
conscience, and of faith unfeigned;” <span
id="fr_1851"></span>[1852](#fn_1851.md) and “love is the fulfilling of the
law.” <span id="fr_1852"></span>[1853](#fn_1852.md)

<span id="vii.1.LV-p191"></span>39. I beseech you therefore also, my
dearly beloved, whether studying these or other writings, so to read and
so to learn as to bear in mind what hath been most truly said,
“Knowledge puffeth up, but charity edifieth;” <span
id="fr_1853"></span>[1854](#fn_1853.md) but charity vaunteth not itself, is
not puffed up. Let knowledge therefore be used as a kind of scaffolding
by which may be erected the building of charity, which shall endure for
ever when knowledge faileth. <span id="fr_1854"></span>[1855](#fn_1854.md)
Knowledge, if applied as a means to charity, is most useful; but apart
from this high end, it has been proved not only superfluous, but even
pernicious. I know, however, how holy meditation keeps you safe under
the shadow of the wings of our God. These things I have stated, though
briefly, because I know that this same charity of yours, which “vaunteth
not itself,” will prompt you to lend and read this letter to many.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1730"></span>[303:1731](1010362.htm#fr_1730.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p8"></span> *Sancte accipiendum*.

<span id="fn_1731"></span>[303:1732](1010362.htm#fr_1731.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p9"></span> *Pascha.*

<span id="fn_1732"></span>[303:1733](1010362.htm#fr_1732.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p10"></span> [Rom.
4.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1733"></span>[304:1734](1010362.htm#fr_1733.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p10.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p11"></span> Had Augustin not been obliged to take
his Hebrew at second hand, he might have seen that the word חסַפ does
not bear out his interpretation. [Exod.
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#027.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1734"></span>[304:1735](1010362.htm#fr_1734.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p12"></span> [John
5.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1735"></span>[304:1736](1010362.htm#fr_1735.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p13"></span> *Transiret.*

<span id="fn_1736"></span>[304:1737](1010362.htm#fr_1736.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p14"></span> [John
13.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1737"></span>[304:1738](1010362.htm#fr_1737.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p17"></span> [Gal.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1738"></span>[304:1739](1010362.htm#fr_1738.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p18"></span> [Hab.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1739"></span>[304:1740](1010362.htm#fr_1739.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p19"></span> [Rom.
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1740"></span>[304:1741](1010362.htm#fr_1740.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p20"></span> [Col.
2.12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p20.1"></span>
and [Rom. 6.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p20.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1741"></span>[304:1742](1010362.htm#fr_1741.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p20.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p21"></span> [Rom.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1742"></span>[304:1743](1010362.htm#fr_1742.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p22"></span> [Eph.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[304:1744](1010362.htm#fr_1743.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p23"></span> [Col.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001.md),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[304:1745](1010362.htm#fr_1744.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p24"></span> [Col.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[304:1746](1010362.htm#fr_1745.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p25"></span> [1 Cor.
15.53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1746"></span>[304:1747](1010362.htm#fr_1746.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p26"></span> [Rom.
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1747"></span>[304:1748](1010362.htm#fr_1747.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p27"></span> [Col.
1.18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1748"></span>[304:1749](1010362.htm#fr_1748.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p29.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p30"></span> [2 Tim.
2.17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1749"></span>[304:1750](1010362.htm#fr_1749.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p31"></span> [Rom.
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1750"></span>[304:1751](1010362.htm#fr_1750.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p33"></span> [2 Cor.
4.16](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#016.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1751"></span>[304:1752](1010362.htm#fr_1751.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p34"></span> [Col.
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1752"></span>[304:1753](1010362.htm#fr_1752.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p35"></span> [1 Cor.
5.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1753"></span>[305:1754](1010362.htm#fr_1753.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p36"></span> [Ex.
23.15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1754"></span>[305:1755](1010362.htm#fr_1754.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p37"></span> *Sacramentum.*

<span id="fn_1755"></span>[305:1756](1010362.htm#fr_1755.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p40"></span> *Sacramentum.*

<span id="fn_1756"></span>[305:1757](1010362.htm#fr_1756.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p41"></span> [Jer.
9.24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1757"></span>[305:1758](1010362.htm#fr_1757.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p42"></span> *Mundus.*

<span id="fn_1758"></span>[305:1759](1010362.htm#fr_1758.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p43"></span> *Cloacis.*

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[305:1760](1010362.htm#fr_1759.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p45"></span> [Wisd.
13.9](../../../bib/apo/wis013.htm#009.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[305:1761](1010362.htm#fr_1760.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p48"></span> [Ecclus.
27.12](../../../bib/apo/sir027.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[305:1762](1010362.htm#fr_1761.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p49"></span> [Wisd.
5.6](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[305:1763](1010362.htm#fr_1762.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p50"></span> [Matt.
5.45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[306:1764](1010362.htm#fr_1763.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p52"></span> [Ps.
10.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p52.1"></span>,
as rendered by Aug.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[306:1765](1010362.htm#fr_1764.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p53"></span> [Wis.
5:3](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/apo/wis005.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1765"></span>[306:1766](1010362.htm#fr_1765.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p56"></span> [Ps.
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p56.1"></span>;
in the LXX. version, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p56.2"></span>τοῦ κατατοξεῦσαι ἐν σκοτομήνῃ τοὺς εὐθεῖς τῇ
καρδίᾳ</span>.

<span id="fn_1766"></span>[306:1767](1010362.htm#fr_1766.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p56.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p57"></span> [Col.
3.4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1767"></span>[306:1768](1010362.htm#fr_1767.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p57.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p58"></span> [Ps.
89.39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1768"></span>[306:1769](1010362.htm#fr_1768.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p59"></span> [Ps.
72.7](../../../bib/sep/psa072.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p59.1"></span>,
Septuagint version.

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[306:1770](1010362.htm#fr_1769.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p60"></span> [1 Cor.
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026.md),
[53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md),
[54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[307:1771](1010362.htm#fr_1770.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p61.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p62"></span> [Rom.
1.25](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[307:1772](1010362.htm#fr_1771.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p62.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p63"></span> [John
1.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1772"></span>[307:1773](1010362.htm#fr_1772.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p63.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p64"></span> [Ezek.
43.19](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1773"></span>[307:1774](1010362.htm#fr_1773.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p65"></span> [Rev.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1774"></span>[307:1775](1010362.htm#fr_1774.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p66"></span> [1 Cor.
10.4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1775"></span>[307:1776](1010362.htm#fr_1775.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p67"></span> [1 Pet.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1776"></span>[307:1777](1010362.htm#fr_1776.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p69.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p70"></span> [Matt.
10.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1777"></span>[307:1778](1010362.htm#fr_1777.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p72"></span> [Gal.
4.11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1778"></span>[307:1779](1010362.htm#fr_1778.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p73"></span> [Gen.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1779"></span>[308:1780](1010362.htm#fr_1779.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p79.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p80"></span> *Primam stolam.*

<span id="fn_1780"></span>[309:1781](1010362.htm#fr_1780.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p83"></span> [Gen.
2.3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1781"></span>[309:1782](1010362.htm#fr_1781.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p83.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p84"></span> [Jas.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1782"></span>[309:1783](1010362.htm#fr_1782.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p84.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p85"></span> [Ps.
37.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1783"></span>[309:1784](1010362.htm#fr_1783.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p86.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p87"></span> Augustin interprets the “love of God”
here as meaning our love to Him, and equivalent to delighting in Him.

<span id="fn_1784"></span>[309:1785](1010362.htm#fr_1784.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p88"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1785"></span>[309:1786](1010362.htm#fr_1785.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p88.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p89"></span> [Phil.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1786"></span>[309:1787](1010362.htm#fr_1786.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p89.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p90"></span> [Gen.
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#031.md), [Gen.
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1787"></span>[309:1788](1010362.htm#fr_1787.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p93"></span> [Matt.
22.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[309:1789](1010362.htm#fr_1788.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p93.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p94"></span> [Rom.
8.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#020.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[309:1790](1010362.htm#fr_1789.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p94.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p95"></span> [Ex.
20.7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p95.1"></span>;
[Deut. 5.11](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p95.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[309:1791](1010362.htm#fr_1790.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p95.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p96"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1791"></span>[309:1792](1010362.htm#fr_1791.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p97"></span> [Rom.
8.24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1792"></span>[310:1793](1010362.htm#fr_1792.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p100.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p101"></span> *Figurate observandum præcipitur.*

<span id="fn_1793"></span>[310:1794](1010362.htm#fr_1793.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p101.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p102"></span> [Ps.
46.11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p102.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1794"></span>[310:1795](1010362.htm#fr_1794.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p102.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p103"></span> [Matt.
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028.md),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#029.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1795"></span>[310:1796](1010362.htm#fr_1795.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p103.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p104"></span> [Ex.
20.1-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p104.1"></span>; [Deut.
5.6-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p104.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1796"></span>[310:1797](1010362.htm#fr_1796.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p107"></span> *Ex illo habere cæpit festivitatem
suam.*

<span id="fn_1797"></span>[310:1798](1010362.htm#fr_1797.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p107.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p108"></span> [1 Cor.
15.53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p108.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[310:1799](1010362.htm#fr_1798.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p108.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p109"></span> [Eccles
11.2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p109.1"></span>; which Aug. translates, “Da illis septem,
et illis octo.”

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[311:1800](1010362.htm#fr_1799.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p111.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p112"></span> [Matt.
16.24](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#024.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[311:1801](1010362.htm#fr_1800.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p112.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p113"></span> [Rom.
8.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[311:1802](1010362.htm#fr_1801.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p113.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p114"></span> [Gal.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[311:1803](1010362.htm#fr_1802.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p114.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p115"></span> [Rom.
6.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[311:1804](1010362.htm#fr_1803.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p116.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p117"></span> [Rom.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p117.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[311:1805](1010362.htm#fr_1804.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p117.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p118"></span> [Eph.
3.17-18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p118.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[311:1806](1010362.htm#fr_1805.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p119.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p120"></span> [Ps.
119.120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p120.1"></span>; Septuagint version, <span
class="Greek"><span id="vii.1.LV-p120.2"></span>καθήλωσον ἐκ τοῦ φόβου
σου τὰς σάρκας μου</span>.

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[311:1807](1010362.htm#fr_1806.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p120.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p121"></span> [Phil.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023.md),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[311:1808](1010362.htm#fr_1807.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p121.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p122"></span> [Hab.
2.4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[311:1809](1010362.htm#fr_1808.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p122.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p123"></span> [Rom.
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003.md),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[311:1810](1010362.htm#fr_1809.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p123.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p124"></span> [Rom.
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#023.md),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#025.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[311:1811](1010362.htm#fr_1810.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p125.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p126"></span> [Ps.
94.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[311:1812](1010362.htm#fr_1811.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p126.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p127"></span> [Rom.
12.12](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p127.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[312:1813](1010362.htm#fr_1812.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p127.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p128"></span> [1 Cor.
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054.md),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026.md),
[51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p128.1"></span>—the last of these verses being rendered by
Augustin here, not as in the English version, but as given above.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[312:1814](1010362.htm#fr_1813.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p128.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p129"></span> [Luke
20.36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[312:1815](1010362.htm#fr_1814.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p129.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p130"></span> [2 Cor.
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[312:1816](1010362.htm#fr_1815.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p130.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p131"></span> [Phil.
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#013.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p131.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[312:1817](1010362.htm#fr_1816.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p131.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p132"></span> [Rom.
6.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[312:1818](1010362.htm#fr_1817.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p135.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p136"></span> In translating, we have ventured to
take this title of Chap. xv. out of the place which the Benedictines
have given to it, in the middle of a sentence of the preceding
paragraph. There it almost hopelessly bewildered the reader. Here it
prepares him for a new topic.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[312:1819](1010362.htm#fr_1818.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p136.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p137"></span> [Ex.
34.28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[312:1820](1010362.htm#fr_1819.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p137.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p138"></span> [1 Kings
19.8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[312:1821](1010362.htm#fr_1820.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p138.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p139"></span> [Matt.
4.2](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#002.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[312:1822](1010362.htm#fr_1821.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p139.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p140"></span> [Rom.
3.21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[312:1823](1010362.htm#fr_1822.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p140.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p141"></span> Compare “octavus qui et primus,” and
the remarks on the meaning of the number 8 in § 23.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[312:1824](1010362.htm#fr_1823.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p141.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p142"></span> We give the original of this very
obscure paragraph:—“Numero autem quadragenario vitam istam propter ea
figurari arbitror, quia denarius in quo est perfectio beatitudinis
nostræ, sicut in octonario, quia redit ad primum, ita in hoc mihi
videtur exprimi: quia creatura, quæ septenario figuratur adhæret
Creatori in quo declaratur unitas Trinitatis per universum mundum
temporaliter annuntianda; qui mundus et a quatuor ventis delimatur et
quatuor elementis erigitur, et quatuor anni temporum vicibus variatur.
Decem autem quater in quadraginta consummantur, quadragenarius autem
partibus suis computatus, addit ipsum denarium et fiunt quinquaginta
tanquam merces laboris et continentiæ.”

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[312:1825](1010362.htm#fr_1824.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p142.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p143"></span> *Sacramentum.*

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[313:1826](1010362.htm#fr_1825.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p143.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p144"></span> [Ps.
84.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[313:1827](1010362.htm#fr_1826.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p146.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p147"></span> [Exod.
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#000.md), [Exod.
19:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#000.md), [Exod.
20:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#000.md), [Exod.
31:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[313:1828](1010362.htm#fr_1827.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p147.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p148"></span> [Luke
11.20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[313:1829](1010362.htm#fr_1828.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p148.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p149"></span> [Matt.
12.28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p149.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[313:1830](1010362.htm#fr_1829.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p149.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p150"></span> [Isa.
6.3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[313:1831](1010362.htm#fr_1830.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p150.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p151"></span> [Isa.
53.7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[313:1832](1010362.htm#fr_1831.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p151.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p152"></span> [1 Cor.
13.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[313:1833](1010362.htm#fr_1832.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p152.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p153"></span> [2 Tim.
3.8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[313:1834](1010362.htm#fr_1833.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p153.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p154"></span> [Ex.
8.19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[313:1835](1010362.htm#fr_1834.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p155.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p156"></span> [Exod.
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010.md),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#011.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[313:1836](1010362.htm#fr_1835.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p156.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p157"></span> [John
7.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p157.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1836"></span>[313:1837](1010362.htm#fr_1836.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p157.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p158"></span> [Ps.
132.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p158.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1837"></span>[314:1838](1010362.htm#fr_1837.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p160.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p161"></span> 1 John 21:6, 11<span
id="vii.1.LV-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1838"></span>[314:1839](1010362.htm#fr_1838.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p161.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p162"></span> [Ps.
12.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p162.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1839"></span>[314:1840](1010362.htm#fr_1839.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p162.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p163"></span> [Matt.
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#009.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#010.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p163.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1840"></span>[314:1841](1010362.htm#fr_1840.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p163.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p164"></span> The eighteenth in the English Bible.

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[314:1842](1010362.htm#fr_1841.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p164.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p165"></span> [2 Sam.
22.2-51](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p165.1"></span>. The title of that book is in the LXX. the
2d book of Kings.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[314:1843](1010362.htm#fr_1842.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p165.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p166"></span> [Rom.
1.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p166.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1843"></span>[314:1844](1010362.htm#fr_1843.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p166.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p167"></span> [Acts
9.4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p167.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[314:1845](1010362.htm#fr_1844.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p167.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p168"></span> Such a triangle as this:

<span id="vii.1.LV-p169"></span><span class="c79"><span
id="vii.1.LV-p169.1"></span>. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .</span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p170"></span>

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[314:1846](1010362.htm#fr_1845.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p171.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p172"></span> He refers to the significance of the
standing upright as an emblem of resurrection.

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[315:1847](1010362.htm#fr_1846.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p175.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p176"></span> Preaching. The word in the original is
“disputatur,”—something much more lively and entertaining.

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[315:1848](1010362.htm#fr_1847.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p177.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p178"></span> I have taken the liberty here of
putting the beginning of the

<span id="vii.1.LV-p179"></span>Chapter and paragraph a sentence further
on than in the Benedictine edition, so as to finish in sec. 34 the
remarks on psalm-singing.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[315:1849](1010362.htm#fr_1848.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p182.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p183"></span> [1 Tim.
4.1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p183.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[315:1850](1010362.htm#fr_1849.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p183.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p184"></span> [Tit.
1.15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p184.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[316:1851](1010362.htm#fr_1850.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p187.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p188"></span> [Matt.
22.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#040.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[316:1852](1010362.htm#fr_1851.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p188.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p189"></span> [1 Tim.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[316:1853](1010362.htm#fr_1852.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p189.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p190"></span> [Rom.
13.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.LV-p190.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[316:1854](1010362.htm#fr_1853.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p191.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p192"></span> [1 Cor.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p192.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[316:1855](1010362.htm#fr_1854.md) <span
id="vii.1.LV-p192.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LV-p193"></span> [1 Cor.
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#004.md),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008.md)<span id="vii.1.LV-p193.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letters LVI-LVII](1010363.md)
