[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010096)  [Next](1010098.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.VI"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.VI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.VI-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—On the Source and Cause of True
Joy,—The Example of the Joyous Beggar Being Adduced.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.VI-p2"></span>9. I longed for honours, gains, wedlock;
and Thou mockedst me. In these desires I underwent most bitter
hardships, Thou being the more gracious the less Thou didst suffer
anything which was not Thou to grow sweet to me. Behold my heart, O
Lord, who wouldest that I should recall all this, and confess unto Thee.
Now let my soul cleave to Thee, which Thou hast freed from that
fast-holding bird-lime of death. How wretched was it! And Thou didst
irritate the feeling of its wound, that, forsaking all else, it might be
converted unto Thee,—who art above all, and without whom all things
would be naught,—be converted and be healed. <span id="page_94">p.
94</span> <span id="vi.VI.VI-Page_94"></span>How wretched was I at that
time, and how didst Thou deal with me, to make me sensible of my
wretchedness on that day wherein I was preparing to recite a panegyric
on the Emperor, <span id="fr_452"></span>[453](#fn_452.md) wherein I was to
deliver many a lie, and lying was to be applauded by those who knew I
lied; and my heart panted with these cares, and boiled over with the
feverishness of consuming thoughts. For, while walking along one of the
streets of Milan, I observed a poor mendicant,—then, I imagine, with a
full belly,—joking and joyous; and I sighed, and spake to the friends
around me of the many sorrows resulting from our madness, for that by
all such exertions of ours,—as those wherein I then laboured, dragging
along, under the spur of desires, the burden of my own unhappiness, and
by dragging increasing it, we yet aimed only to attain that very
joyousness which that mendicant had reached before us, who, perchance,
never would attain it! For what he had obtained through a few begged
pence, the same was I scheming for by many a wretched and tortuous
turning,—the joy of a temporary felicity. For he verily possessed not
true joy, but yet I, with these my ambitions, was seeking one much more
untrue. And in truth he was joyous, I anxious; he free from care, I full
of alarms. But should any one inquire of me whether I would rather be
merry or fearful, I would reply, Merry. Again, were I asked whether I
would rather be such as he was, or as I myself then was, I should elect
to be myself, though beset with cares and alarms, but out of perversity;
for was it so in truth? For I ought not to prefer myself to him because
I happened to be more learned than he, seeing that I took no delight
therein, but sought rather to please men by it; and that not to
instruct, but only to please. Wherefore also didst Thou break my bones
with the rod of Thy correction. <span id="fr_453"></span>[454](#fn_453.md)

<span id="vi.VI.VI-p5"></span>10. Away with those, then, from my soul,
who say unto it, “It makes a difference from whence a man’s joy is
derived. That mendicant rejoiced in drunkenness; thou longedst to
rejoice in glory.” What glory, O Lord? That which is not in Thee. For
even as his was no true joy, so was mine no true glory; <span
id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454.md) and it subverted my soul more. He
would digest his drunkenness that same night, but many a night had I
slept with mine, and risen again with it, and was to sleep again and
again to rise with it, I know not how oft. It does indeed “make a
difference whence a man’s joy is derived.” I know it is so, and that the
joy of a faithful hope is incomparably beyond such vanity. Yea, and at
that time was he beyond me, for he truly was the happier man; not only
for that he was thoroughly steeped in mirth, I torn to pieces with
cares, but he, by giving good wishes, had gotten wine, I, by lying, was
following after pride. Much to this effect said I then to my dear
friends, and I often marked in them how it fared with me; and I found
that it went ill with me, and fretted, and doubled that very ill. And if
any prosperity smiled upon me, I loathed to seize it, for almost before
I could grasp it flew away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_452"></span>[94:453](1010097.htm#fr_452.md) <span
id="vi.VI.VI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.VI-p3"></span> In the Benedictine edition it is
suggested that this was probably Valentinian the younger, whose court
was, according to Possidius (c. i.), at Milan when Augustin was
professor of rhetoric there, who writes (*Con. Litt. Petil.* iii. 25)
that he in that city recited a panegyric to Bauto, the consul, on the
first of January, according to the requirements of his profession of
rhetoric.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[94:454](1010097.htm#fr_453.md) <span
id="vi.VI.VI-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.VI-p4"></span> [Prov.
22.15](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.VI.VI-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[94:455](1010097.htm#fr_454.md) <span
id="vi.VI.VI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.VI-p6"></span> Here, as elsewhere, we have the feeling
which finds its expression in i. sec. 1, above: “Thou hast formed us for
Thyself, and our hearts are restless till they find rest in Thee.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](1010098.md)
