[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010387)  [Next](1010389.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 405.)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p3"></span>A Reply to Letters LXXII., LXXV., and
LXXXI.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p4.1"></span>To Jerome, My Lord Beloved and Honoured in
the Bowels of Christ, My Holy Brother and Fellow-Presbyter, Augustin
Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p5"></span>1. Long ago I sent to your Charity a
long letter in reply to the one which you remember sending to me by your
holy son Asterius, who is now not only my brother, but also my
colleague. Whether <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_350"></span>that reply reached you or not I do not
know, unless I am to infer this from the words in your letter brought to
me by our most sincere friend Firmus, that if the one who first
assaulted you with his sword has been driven back by your pen, you rely
upon my good feeling and equity to lay blame on the one who brought, not
on the one who repelled, the accusation. From this one indication,
though very slight, I infer that you have read my letter. In that letter
I expressed indeed my sorrow that so great discord had arisen between
you and Rufinus, over the strength of whose former friendship brotherly
love was wont to rejoice in all parts to which the fame of it had come;
but I did not in this intend to rebuke you, my brother, whom I dare not
say that I have found blameable in that matter. I only lamented the sad
lot of men in this world, in whose friendships, depending as they do on
the continuance of mutual regard, there is no stability, however great
that regard may sometimes be. I would rather, however, have been
informed by your letter whether you have granted me the pardon which I
begged, of which I now desire you to give me more explicit assurance;
although the more genial and cheerful tone of your letter seems to
signify that I have obtained what I asked in mine, if indeed it was
despatched after mine had been read by you, which is, as I have said,
not clearly indicated.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p6"></span>2. You ask, or rather you give a
command with the confiding boldness of charity, that we should amuse
ourselves <span id="fr_2010"></span>[2011](#fn_2010.md) in the field of
Scripture without wounding each other. For my part, I am by all means
disposed to exercise myself in earnest much rather than in mere
amusement on such themes. If, however, you have chosen this word because
of its suggesting easy exercise, let me frankly say that I desire
something more from one who has, as you have, great talents under the
control of a benignant disposition, together with wisdom enlightened by
erudition, and whose application to study, hindered by no other
distractions, is year after year impelled by enthusiasm and guided by
genius: the Holy Spirit not only giving you all these advantages, but
expressly charging you to come with help to those who are engaged in
great and difficult investigations; not as if, in studying Scripture,
they were amusing themselves on a level plain, but as men punting and
toiling up a steep ascent. If, however, perchance, you selected the
expression “ludamus” \[let us amuse ourselves\] because of the genial
kindliness which befits discussion between loving friends, whether the
matter debated be obvious and easy, or intricate and difficult, I
beseech you to teach me how I may succeed in securing this; so that when
I am dissatisfied with anything which, not through want of careful
attention, but perhaps through my slowness of apprehension, has not been
demonstrated to me, if I should, in attempting to make good an opposite
opinion, express myself with a measure of unguarded frankness, I may not
fall under the suspicion of childish conceit and forwardness, as if I
sought to bring my own name into renown by assailing illustrious
men; <span id="fr_2011"></span>[2012](#fn_2011.md) and that if, when
something harsh has been demanded by the exigencies of argument, I
attempt to make it less hard to bear by stating it in mild and courteous
phrases, I may not be pronounced guilty of wielding a “honeyed sword.”
The only way which I can see for avoiding both these faults, or the
suspicion of either of them, is to consent that when I am thus arguing
with a friend more learned than myself, I must approve of everything
which he says, and may not, even for the sake of more accurate
information, hesitate before accepting his decisions.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p9"></span>3. On such terms we might amuse
ourselves without fear of offending each other in the field of
Scripture, but I might well wonder if the amusement was not at my
expense. For I confess to your Charity that I have learned to yield this
respect and honour only to the canonical books of Scripture: of these
alone do I most firmly believe that the authors were completely free
from error. And if in these writings I am perplexed by anything which
appears to me opposed to truth, I do not hesitate to suppose that either
the <span class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p9.1"></span>Ms.</span> is
faulty, or the translator has not caught the meaning of what was said,
or I myself have failed to understand it. As to all other writings, in
reading them, however great the superiority of the authors to myself in
sanctity and learning, I do not accept their teaching as true on the
mere ground of the opinion being held by them; but only because they
have succeeded in convincing my judgment of its truth either by means of
these canonical writings themselves, or by arguments addressed to my
reason. I believe, my brother, that this is your own opinion as well as
mine. I do not need to say that I do not suppose you to wish your books
to be read like those of prophets or of apostles, concerning which it
would be wrong to doubt that they are free from error. Far be such
arrogance from that humble piety and just estimate of yourself which I
know you to have, and without which assuredly you would not have said,
“Would that I could receive your embrace, and that by converse we might
aid each other in learning!” <span id="fr_2012"></span>[2013](#fn_2012.md)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p11"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p11.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p12"></span>4. Now if, knowing as I do your life
and conversation, I do not believe in regard <span id="page_351">p.
351</span> <span id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_351"></span>to you that you have
spoken anything with an intention of dissimulation and deceit, how much
more reasonable is it for me to believe, in regard to the Apostle Paul,
that he did not think one thing and affirm another when he wrote of
Peter and Barnabas: “When I saw that they walked not uprightly,
according to the truth of the gospel, I said unto Peter before them all,
‘If thou, being a Jew, livest after the manner of the Gentiles, and not
as to the Jews, why compellest thou the Gentiles to live as do the
Jews?’” <span id="fr_2013"></span>[2014](#fn_2013.md) For whom can I
confide in, as assuredly not deceiving me by spoken or written
statements, if the apostle deceived his own “children,” for whom he
“travailed in birth again until Christ (who is the Truth) were formed in
them”? <span id="fr_2014"></span>[2015](#fn_2014.md) After having
previously said to them, “The things which I write unto you, behold,
before God, I lie not,” <span id="fr_2015"></span>[2016](#fn_2015.md) could
he in writing to these same persons state what was not true, and deceive
them by a fraud which was in some way sanctioned by expediency, when he
said that he had seen Peter and Barnabas not walking uprightly,
according to the truth of the gospel, and that he had withstood Peter to
the face because of this, that he was compelling the Gentiles to live
after the manner of the Jews?

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p16"></span>5. But you will say it is better to
believe that the Apostle Paul wrote what was not true, than to believe
that the Apostle Peter did what was not right. On this principle, we
must say (which far be it from us to say), that it is better to believe
that the gospel history is false, than to believe that Christ was denied
by Peter; <span id="fr_2016"></span>[2017](#fn_2016.md) and better to
charge the book of Kings \[second book of Samuel\] with false
statements, than believe that so great a prophet, and one so signally
chosen by the Lord God as David was, committed adultery in lusting after
and taking away the wife of another, and committed such detestable
homicide in procuring the death of her husband. <span
id="fr_2017"></span>[2018](#fn_2017.md) Better far that I should read with
certainty and persuasion of its truth the Holy Scripture, placed on the
highest (even the heavenly) pinnacle of authority, and should, without
questioning the trustworthiness of its statements, learn from it that
men have been either commended, or corrected, or condemned, than that,
through fear of believing that by men, who, though of most praiseworthy
excellence, were no more than men, actions deserving rebuke might
sometimes be done, I should admit suspicions affecting the
trustworthiness of the whole “oracles of God.”

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p19"></span>6. The Manichæans maintain that the
greater part of the Divine Scripture, by which their wicked error is in
the most explicit terms confuted, is not worthy of credit, because they
cannot pervert its language so as to support their opinions; yet they
lay the blame of the alleged mistake not upon the apostles who
originally wrote the words, but upon some unknown corrupters of the
manuscripts. Forasmuch, however, as they have never succeeded in proving
this by more numerous and by earlier manuscripts, or by appealing to the
original language from which the Latin translations have been drawn,
they retire from the arena of debate, vanquished and confounded by truth
which is well known to all. Does not your holy prudence discern how
great scope is given to their malice against the truth, if we say not
(as they do) that the apostolic writings have been tampered with by
others, but that the apostles themselves wrote what they knew to be
untrue?

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p20"></span>7. You say that it is incredible that
Paul should have rebuked in Peter that which Paul himself had done. I am
not at present inquiring about what Paul did, but about what he wrote.
This is most pertinent to the matter which I have in hand,—namely, the
confirmation of the universal and unquestionable truth of the Divine
Scriptures, which have been delivered to us for our edification in the
faith, not by unknown men, but by the apostles, and have on this account
been received as the authoritative canonical standard. For if Peter did
on that occasion what he ought to have done, Paul falsely affirmed that
he saw him walking not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel.
For whoever does what he ought to do, walks uprightly. He therefore is
guilty of falsehood who, knowing that another has done what he ought to
have done, says that he has not done uprightly. If, then, Paul wrote
what was true, it is true that Peter was not then walking uprightly,
according to the truth of the gospel. He was therefore doing what he
ought not to have done; and if Paul had himself already done something
of the same kind, I would prefer to believe that, having been himself
corrected, he could not omit the correction of his brother apostle, than
to believe that he put down any false statement in his epistle; and if
in any epistle of Paul this would be strange, how much more in the one
in the preface of which he says, “The things which I write unto you,
behold, before God, I lie not”!

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p21"></span>8. For my part, I believe that Peter
so acted on this occasion as to compel the Gentiles to live as Jews:
because I read that Paul wrote this, and I do not believe that he lied.
And therefore Peter was not acting uprightly. For it was contrary to the
truth of the gospel, that those who believed in Christ should think that
without those ancient ceremonies they could not <span id="page_352">p.
352</span> <span id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_352"></span>be saved. This was
the position maintained at Antioch by those of the circumcision who had
believed; against whom Paul protested constantly and vehemently. As to
Paul’s circumcising of Timothy, <span
id="fr_2018"></span>[2019](#fn_2018.md) performing a vow at Cenchrea, <span
id="fr_2019"></span>[2020](#fn_2019.md) and undertaking on the suggestion
of James at Jerusalem to share the performance of the appointed rites
with some who had made a vow, <span id="fr_2020"></span>[2021](#fn_2020.md)
it is manifest that Paul’s design in these things was not to give to
others the impression that he thought that by these observances
salvation is given under the Christian dispensation, but to prevent men
from believing that he condemned as no better than heathen idolatrous
worship, those rites which God had appointed in the former dispensation
as suitable to it, and as shadows of things to come. For this is what
James said to him, that the report had gone abroad concerning him that
he taught men “to forsake Moses.” <span
id="fr_2021"></span>[2022](#fn_2021.md) This would be by all means wrong
for those who believe in Christ, to forsake him who prophesied of
Christ, as if they detested and condemned the teaching of him of whom
Christ said, “Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed Me; for he
wrote of Me.”

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p26"></span>9. For mark, I beseech you, the words
of James: “Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are
which believe; and they are all zealous of the law: and they are
informed of thee, that thou teachest all the Jews which are among the
Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying that they ought not to circumcise
their children, neither to walk after the customs. What is it therefore?
the multitude must needs come together: for they will hear that thou art
come. Do therefore this that we say to thee: We have four men which have
a vow on them; them take, and purify thyself with them, and be at
charges with them, that they may shave their heads: and all may know
that those things, whereof they were informed concerning thee, are
nothing; but that thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest the
law. As touching the Gentiles which have believed, we have written and
concluded that they observe no such thing, save only that they keep
themselves from things offered to idols, and from blood, and from things
strangled, and from fornication.” <span
id="fr_2022"></span>[2023](#fn_2022.md) It is, in my opinion, very clear
that the reason why James gave this advice was, that the falsity of what
they had heard concerning him might be known to those Jews, who, though
they had believed in Christ, were jealous for the honour of the law, and
would not have it thought that the institutions which had been given by
Moses to their fathers were condemned by the doctrine of Christ as if
they were profane, and had not been originally given by divine
authority. For the men who had brought this reproach against Paul were
not those who understood the right spirit in which observance of these
ceremonies should be practised under the Christian dispensation by
believing Jews,—namely, as a way of declaring the divine authority of
these rites, and their holy use in the prophetic dispensation, and not
as a means of obtaining salvation, which was to them already revealed in
Christ and ministered by baptism. On the contrary, the men who had
spread abroad this report against the apostle were those who would have
these rites observed, as if without their observance there could be no
salvation to those who believed the gospel. For these false teachers had
found him to be a most zealous preacher of free grace, and a most
decided opponent of their views, teaching as he did that men are not
justified by these things, but by the grace of Jesus Christ, which these
ceremonies of the law were appointed to foreshadow. This party,
therefore, endeavouring to raise odium and persecution against him,
charged him with being an enemy of the law and of the divine
institutions; and there was no more fitting way in which he could turn
aside the odium caused by this false accusation, than by himself
celebrating those rites which he was supposed to condemn as profane, and
thus showing that, on the one hand, the Jews were not to be debarred
from them as if they were unlawful, and on the other hand, that the
Gentiles were not to be compelled to observe them as if they were
necessary.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p28"></span>10. For if he did in truth condemn
these things in the way in which he was reported to have done, and
undertook to perform these rites in order that he might, by dissembling,
disguise his real sentiments, James would not have said to him, “and all
shall know,” but, “all shall *think* that those things whereof they were
informed concerning thee are nothing;” <span
id="fr_2023"></span>[2024](#fn_2023.md) especially seeing that in Jerusalem
itself the apostles had already decreed that no one should compel the
Gentiles to adopt Jewish ceremonies, but had not decreed that no one
should then prevent the Jews from living according to their customs,
although upon them also Christian doctrine imposed no such obligation.
Wherefore, if it was after the apostle’s decree that Peter’s
dissimulation at Antioch took place, whereby he was compelling the
Gentiles to live after the manner of the Jews, which he himself was not
compelled to do, although he was not forbidden to use Jewish rites in
order to declare the honour of the oracles of God which were committed
to the Jews;—if this, I say, were <span id="page_353">p. 353</span>
<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_353"></span>the case, was it strange that
Paul should exhort him to declare freely that decree which he remembered
to have framed in conjunction with the other apostles at Jerusalem?

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p30"></span>11. If, however, as I am more
inclined to think, Peter did this before the meeting of that council at
Jerusalem, in that case also it is not strange that Paul wished him not
to conceal timidly, but to declare boldly, a rule of practice in regard
to which he already knew that they were both of the same mind; whether
he was aware of this from having conferred with him as to the gospel
which both preached, or from having heard that, at the calling of the
centurion Cornelius, Peter had been divinely instructed in regard to
this matter, or from having seen him eating with Gentile converts before
those whom he feared to offend had come to Antioch. For we do not deny
that Peter was already of the same opinion in regard to this question as
Paul himself was. Paul, therefore, was not teaching Peter what was the
truth concerning that matter, but was reproving his dissimulation as a
thing by which the Gentiles were compelled to act as Jews did; for no
other reason than this, that the tendency of all such dissembling was to
convey or confirm the impression that they taught the truth who held
that believers could not be saved without circumcision and other
ceremonies, which were shadows of things to come.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p31"></span>12. For this reason also he
circumcised Timothy, lest to the Jews, and especially to his relations
by the mother’s side, it should seem that the Gentiles who had believed
in Christ abhorred circumcision as they abhorred the worship of idols;
whereas the former was appointed by God, and the latter invented by
Satan. Again, he did not circumcise Titus, lest he should give occasion
to those who said that believers could not be saved without
circumcision, and who, in order to deceive the Gentiles, openly declared
that this was the view held by Paul. This is plainly enough intimated by
himself, when he says: “But neither Titus, who was with me, being a
Greek, was compelled to be circumcised: and that because of false
brethren unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out our liberty
which we have in Christ Jesus, that they might bring us into bondage: to
whom we gave place by subjection, no, not for an hour, that the truth of
the gospel might continue with you.” <span
id="fr_2024"></span>[2025](#fn_2024.md) Here we see plainly what he
perceived them to be eagerly watching for, and why it was that he did
not do in the case of Titus as he had done in the case of Timothy, and
as he might otherwise have done in the exercise of that liberty, by
which he had shown that these observances were neither to be demanded as
necessary to salvation, nor denounced as unlawful.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p33"></span>13. You say, however, that in this
discussion we must beware of affirming, with the philosophers, that some
of the actions of men lie in a region between right and wrong, and are
to be reckoned, accordingly, neither among good actions nor among the
opposite; <span id="fr_2025"></span>[2026](#fn_2025.md) and it is urged in
your argument that the observance of legal ceremonies cannot be a thing
indifferent, but either good or bad; so that if I affirm it to be good,
I acknowledge that we also are bound to observe these ceremonies; but if
I affirm it to be bad, I am bound to believe that the apostles observed
them not sincerely, but in a way of dissimulation. I, for my part, would
not be so much afraid of defending the apostles by the authority of
philosophers, since these teach some measure of truth in their
dissertations, as of pleading on their behalf the practice of advocates
at the bar, in sometimes serving their clients’ interests at the expense
of truth. If, as is stated in your exposition of the Epistle to the
Galatians, this practice of barristers may be in your opinion with
propriety quoted as resembling and justifying dissimulation on the part
of Peter and Paul, why should I fear to allege to you the authority of
philosophers whose teaching we account worthless, not because everything
which they say is false, but because they are in most things mistaken,
and wherein they are found affirming truth, are notwithstanding
strangers to the grace of Christ, who is the Truth?

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p35"></span>14. But why may I not say regarding
these institutions of the old economy, that they are neither good nor
bad: not good, since men are not by them justified, they having been
only shadows predicting the grace by which we are justified; and not
bad, since they were divinely appointed as suitable both to the time and
to the people? Why may I not say this, when I am supported by that
saying of the prophet, that God gave unto His people “statutes that were
not good”? <span id="fr_2026"></span>[2027](#fn_2026.md) For we have in
this perhaps the reason of his not calling them “bad,” but calling them
“not good,” *i.e.* not such that either by them men could be made good,
or that without them men could not possibly become good. I would esteem
it a favour to be informed by your Sincerity, whether any saint, coming
from the East to Rome, would be guilty of dissimulation if he fasted on
the seventh day of each week, excepting the Saturday before Easter. For
if we say that it is wrong to fast on the seventh day, we shall condemn
not only the Church of Rome, but also many other churches, both
neighbouring and more remote, in which the same custom continues to be
observed. If, on the other hand, we pronounce it wrong not to fast on
the seventh day, how great is our presumption in <span id="page_354">p.
354</span> <span id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_354"></span>censuring so many
churches in the East, and by far the greater part of the Christian
world! Or do you prefer to say of this practice, that it is a thing
indifferent in itself, but commendable in him who conforms with it, not
as a dissembler, but from a seemly desire for the fellowship and
deference for the feelings of others? No precept, however, concerning
this practice is given to Christians in the canonical books. How much
more, then, may I shrink from pronouncing that to be bad which I cannot
deny to be of divine institution!—this fact being admitted by me in the
exercise of the same faith by which I know that not through these
observances, but by the grace of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, I am
justified.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p37"></span>15. I maintain, therefore, that
circumcision, and other things of this kind, were, by means of what is
called the Old Testament, given to the Jews with divine authority, as
signs of future things which were to be fulfilled in Christ; and that
now, when these things have been fulfilled, the laws concerning these
rights remained only to be read by Christians in order to their
understanding the prophecies which had been given before, but not to be
of necessity practised by them, as if the coming of that revelation of
faith which they prefigured was still future. Although, however, these
rites were not to be imposed upon the Gentiles, the compliance with
them, to which the Jews had been accustomed, was not to be prohibited in
such a way as to give the impression that it was worthy of abhorrence
and condemnation. Therefore slowly, and by degrees, all this observance
of these types was to vanish away through the power of the sound
preaching of the truth of the grace of Christ, to which alone believers
would be taught to ascribe their justification and salvation, and not to
those types and shadows of things which till then had been future, but
which were now newly come and present, as at the time of the calling of
those Jews whom the personal coming of our Lord and the apostolic times
had found accustomed to the observance of these ceremonial institutions.
The toleration, for the time, of their continuing to observe these was
enough to declare their excellence as things which, though they were to
be given up, were not, like the worship of idols, worthy of abhorrence;
but they were not to be imposed upon others, lest they should be thought
necessary, either as means or as conditions of salvation. This was the
opinion of those heretics who, while anxious to be both Jews and
Christians, could not be either the one or the other. Against this
opinion you have most benevolently condescended to warn me, although I
never entertained it. This also was the opinion with which, through
fear, Peter fell into the fault of pretending to yield concurrence,
though in reality he did not agree with it; for which reason Paul wrote
most truly of him, that he saw him not walking uprightly, according to
the truth of the gospel, and most truly said of him that he was
compelling the Gentiles to live as did the Jews. Paul did not impose
this burden on the Gentiles through his sincerely complying, when it was
needful, with these ceremonies, with the design of proving that they
were not to be utterly condemned (as idol-worship ought to be); for he
nevertheless constantly preached that not by these things, but by the
grace revealed to faith, believers obtain salvation, lest he should lead
any one to take up these Jewish observances as necessary to salvation.
Thus, therefore, I believe that the Apostle Paul did all these things
honestly, and without dissimulation; and yet if any one now leave
Judaism and become a Christian, I neither compel nor permit him to
imitate Paul’s example, and go on with the sincere observance of Jewish
rites, any more than you, who think that Paul dissembled when he
practised these rites, would compel or permit such an one to follow the
apostle in that dissimulation.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p38"></span>16. Shall I also sum up “the matter
in debate, or rather your opinion concerning it” <span
id="fr_2027"></span>[2028](#fn_2027) (to quote your own expression.md)? It
seems to me to be this: that after the gospel of Christ has been
published, the Jews who believe do rightly if they offer sacrifices as
Paul did, if they circumcise their children as Paul circumcised Timothy,
and if they observe the “seventh day of the week, as the Jews have
always done, provided only that they do all this as dissemblers and
deceivers.” If this is your doctrine, we are now precipitated, not into
the heresy of Ebion, or of those who are commonly called Nazarenes, or
any other known heresy, but into some new error, which is all the more
pernicious because it originates not in mistake, but in deliberate and
designed endeavour to deceive. If, in order to clear yourself from the
charge of entertaining such sentiments, you answer that the apostles
were to be commended for dissimulation in these instances, their purpose
being to avoid giving offence to the many weak Jewish believers who did
not yet understand that these things were to be rejected, but that now,
when the doctrine of Christ’s grace has been firmly established
throughout so many nations, and when, by the reading of the Law and the
Prophets throughout all the churches of Christ, it is well known that
these are not read for our observance, but for our instruction, any man
who should propose to feign compliance with these rites would be
regarded as a madman. What objection can there be to my affirming that
the Apostle Paul, and <span id="page_355">p. 355</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_355"></span>other sound and faithful Christians,
were bound sincerely to declare the worth of these old observances by
occasionally honouring them, lest it should be thought that these
institutions, originally full of prophetic significance, and cherished
sacredly by their most pious forefathers, were to be abhorred by their
posterity as profane inventions of the devil? For now, when the faith
had come, which, previously foreshadowed by these ceremonies, was
revealed after the death and resurrection of the Lord, they became, so
far as their office was concerned, defunct. But just as it is seemly
that the bodies of the deceased be carried honourably to the grave by
their kindred, so was it fitting that these rites should be removed in a
manner worthy of their origin and history, and this not with pretence of
respect, but as a religious duty, instead of being forsaken at once, or
cast forth to be torn in pieces by the reproaches of their enemies, as
by the teeth of dogs. To carry the illustration further, if now any
Christian (though he may have been converted from Judaism) were
proposing to imitate the apostles in the observance of these ceremonies,
like one who disturbs the ashes of those who rest, he would be not
piously performing his part in the obsequies, but impiously violating
the sepulchre.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p40"></span>17. I acknowledge that in the
statement contained in my letter, to the effect that the reason why Paul
undertook (although he was an apostle of Christ) to perform certain
rites, was that he might show that these ceremonies were not pernicious
to those who desired to continue that which they had received by the Law
from their fathers, I have not explicitly enough qualified the
statement, by adding that this was the case *only in that time in which
the grace of faith was at first revealed*; for at that time this was not
pernicious. These observances were to be given up by all Christians step
by step, as time advanced; not all at once, lest, if this were done, men
should not perceive the difference between what God by Moses appointed
to His ancient people, and the rites which the unclean spirit taught men
to practise in the temples of heathen deities. I grant, therefore, that
in this your censure is justifiable, and my omission deserved rebuke.
Nevertheless, long before the time of my receiving your letter, when I
wrote a treatise against Faustus the Manichæan, I did not omit to insert
the qualifying clause which I have just stated, in a short exposition
which I gave of the same passage, as you may see for yourself if you
kindly condescend to read that treatise; or you may be satisfied in any
other way that you please by the bearer of this letter, that I had long
ago published this restriction of the general affirmation. And I now, as
speaking in the sight of God, beseech you by the law of charity to
believe me when I say with my whole heart, that it never was my opinion
that in our time, Jews who become Christians were either required or at
liberty to observe in any manner, or from any motive whatever, the
ceremonies of the ancient dispensation; although I have always held, in
regard to the Apostle Paul, the opinion which you call in question, from
the time that I became acquainted with his writings. Nor can these two
things appear incompatible to you; for you do not think it is the duty
of any one in our day to feign compliance with these Jewish observances,
although you believe that the apostles did this.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p41"></span>18. Accordingly, as you in opposing
me affirm, and, to quote your own words, “though the world were to
protest against it, boldly declare that the Jewish ceremonies are to
Christians both hurtful and fatal, and that whoever observes them,
whether he was originally Jew or Gentile, is on his way to the pit of
perdition,” <span id="fr_2028"></span>[2029](#fn_2028.md) I entirely
indorse that statement, and add to it, “Whoever observes these
ceremonies, whether he was originally Jew or Gentile, is on his way to
the pit of perdition, not only if he is sincerely observing them, but
also if he is observing them with dissimulation.” What more do you ask?
But as you draw a distinction between the dissimulation which you hold
to have been practised by the apostles, and the rule of conduct
befitting the present time, I do the same between the course which Paul,
as I think, sincerely followed in all these examples then, and the
matter of observing in our day these Jewish ceremonies, although it were
done, as by him, without any dissimulation, since it was then to be
approved, but is now to be abhorred. Thus, although we read that “the
law and the prophets were until John,” <span
id="fr_2029"></span>[2030](#fn_2029.md) and that “therefore the Jews sought
the more to kill Him, because He not only had broken the Sabbath, but
said also that God was His Father, making Himself equal with God,” <span
id="fr_2030"></span>[2031](#fn_2030.md) and that “we have received grace
for grace for the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by
Jesus Christ;” <span id="fr_2031"></span>[2032](#fn_2031.md) and although
it was promised by Jeremiah that God would make a new covenant with the
house of Judah, not according to the covenant which He made with their
fathers; <span id="fr_2032"></span>[2033](#fn_2032.md) nevertheless I do
not think that the Circumcision of our Lord by His parents was an act of
dissimulation. If any one object that He did not forbid this because He
was but an infant, I go on to say that I do not think that it was with
intention to deceive that He said to the leper, “Offer for thy cleansing
those things which Moses commanded for a testimony unto <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_356"></span>them,” <span
id="fr_2033"></span>[2034](#fn_2033.md) —thereby adding His own precept to
the authority of the law of Moses regarding that ceremonial usage. Nor
was there dissimulation in His going up to the feast, <span
id="fr_2034"></span>[2035](#fn_2034.md) as there was also no desire to be
seen of men; for He went up, not openly, but secretly.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p49"></span>19. But the words of the apostle
himself may be quoted against me: “Behold, I Paul say unto you, that if
ye be circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing.” <span
id="fr_2035"></span>[2036](#fn_2035.md) It follows from this that he
deceived Timothy, and made Christ profit him nothing, for he circumcised
Timothy. Do you answer that this circumcision did Timothy no harm,
because it was done with an intention to deceive? I reply that the
apostle has not made any such exception. He does not say, If ye be
circumcised without dissimulation, any more than, If ye be circumcised
with dissimulation. He says unreservedly, “If ye be circumcised, Christ
shall profit you nothing.” As, therefore, you insist upon finding room
for your interpretation, by proposing to supply the words, “unless it be
done as an act of dissimulation,” I make no unreasonable demand in
asking you to permit me to understand the words, “if ye be circumcised,”
to be in that passage addressed to those who demanded circumcision, for
this reason, that they thought it impossible for them to be otherwise
saved by Christ. Whoever was then circumcised because of such persuasion
and desire, and with this design, Christ assuredly profited him nothing,
as the apostle elsewhere expressly affirms, “If righteousness come by
the law, Christ is dead in vain. <span
id="fr_2036"></span>[2037](#fn_2036.md) The same is affirmed in words which
you have quoted: “Christ is become of no effect to you, whosoever of you
is justified by the law; ye are fallen from grace.” <span
id="fr_2037"></span>[2038](#fn_2037.md) His rebuke, therefore, was
addressed to those who believed that they were to be justified by the
law,—not to those who, knowing well the design with which the legal
ceremonies were instituted as foreshadowing truth, and the time for
which they were destined to be in force, observed them in order to
honour Him who appointed them at first. Wherefore also he says
elsewhere, “If ye be led of the Spirit, ye are not under the law,” <span
id="fr_2038"></span>[2039](#fn_2038.md) —a passage from which you infer,
that evidently “he has not the Holy Spirit who submits to the Law, not,
as our fathers affirmed the apostles to have done, feignedly under the
promptings of a wise discretion, but”—as I suppose to have been the
case—“sincerely.” <span id="fr_2039"></span>[2040](#fn_2039.md)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p55"></span>20. It seems to me important to
ascertain precisely what is that submission to the law which the apostle
here condemns; for I do not think that he speaks here of circumcision
merely, or of the sacrifices then offered by our fathers, but now not
offered by Christians, and other observances of the same nature. I
rather hold that he includes also that precept of the law, “Thou shalt
not covet,” <span id="fr_2040"></span>[2041](#fn_2040.md) which we confess
that Christians are unquestionably bound to obey, and which we find most
fully proclaimed by the light which the Gospel has shed upon it. <span
id="fr_2041"></span>[2042](#fn_2041.md) “The law,” he says, “is holy, and
the commandment holy, and just, and good;” and then adds, “Was, then,
that which is good made death unto me? God forbid.” “But sin, that it
might appear sin, wrought death in me by that which is good; that sin,
by the commandment, might become exceeding sinful.” <span
id="fr_2042"></span>[2043](#fn_2042.md) As he says here, “that sin by the
commandment might become exceeding sinful,” so elsewhere, “The law
entered that the offence might abound; but where sin abounded, grace did
much more abound.” <span id="fr_2043"></span>[2044](#fn_2043.md) Again, in
another place, after affirming, when speaking of the dispensation of
grace, that grace alone justifies, he asks, “Wherefore then serveth the
law?” and answers immediately, “It was added because of transgressions,
until the Seed should come to whom the promises were made.” <span
id="fr_2044"></span>[2045](#fn_2044.md) The persons, therefore, whose
submission to the law the apostle here pronounces to be the cause of
their own condemnation, are those whom the law brings in guilty, as not
fulfilling its requirements, and who, not understanding the efficacy of
free grace, rely with self-satisfied presumption on their own strength
to enable them to keep the law of God; for “love is the fulfilling of
the law.” <span id="fr_2045"></span>[2046](#fn_2045.md) Now “the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts,” not by our own power, but “by the
Holy Ghost, which is given unto us.” <span
id="fr_2046"></span>[2047](#fn_2046.md) The satisfactory discussion of
this, however, would require too long a digression, if not a separate
volume. If, then, that precept of the law, “Thou shalt not covet,” holds
under it as guilty the man whose human weakness is not assisted by the
grace of God, and instead of acquitting the sinner, condemns him as a
transgressor, how much more was it impossible for those ordinances which
were merely typical, circumcision and the rest, which were destined to
be abolished when the revelation of grace became more widely known, to
be the means of justifying any man! Nevertheless they were not on this
ground to be immediately shunned with abhorrence, like the diabolical
impieties of heathenism, from the first beginning of the revelation of
the grace which <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_357"></span>had been by these shadows prefigured;
but to be for a little while tolerated, especially among those who
joined the Christian Church from that nation to whom these ordinances
had been given. When, however, they had been, as it were, honourably
buried, they were thenceforward to be finally abandoned by all
Christians.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p63"></span>21. Now, as to the words which you
use, “non dispensative, ut nostri voluere majores,” <span
id="fr_2047"></span>[2048](#fn_2047.md) —“not in a way justifiable by
expediency, the ground on which our fathers were disposed to explain the
conduct of the apostles,”—pray what do these words mean? Surely nothing
else than that which I call “officiosum mendacium,” the liberty granted
by expediency being equivalent to a call of duty to utter a falsehood
with pious intention. I at least can see no other explanation, unless,
of course, the mere addition of the words “permitted by expediency” be
enough to make a lie cease to be a lie; and if this be absurd, why do
you not openly say that a lie spoken in the way of duty <span
id="fr_2048"></span>[2049](#fn_2048.md) is to be defended? Perhaps the name
offends you, because the word “officium” is not common in ecclesiastical
books; but this did not deter our Ambrose from its use, for he has
chosen the title “De Officiis” for some of his books that are full of
useful rules. Do you mean to say, that whoever utters a lie from a sense
of duty is to be blamed, and whoever does the same on the ground of
expediency is to be approved? I beseech you, consider that the man who
thinks this may lie whenever he thinks fit, because this involves the
whole important question whether to say what is false be at any time the
duty of a good man, especially of a Christian man, to whom it has been
said, “Let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, lest ye fall into
condemnation,” <span id="fr_2049"></span>[2050](#fn_2049.md) and who
believes the Psalmist’s word, “Thou wilt destroy all them that speak
lies.” <span id="fr_2050"></span>[2051](#fn_2050.md)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p68"></span>22. This, however, is, as I have
said, another and a weighty question; I leave him who is of this opinion
to judge for himself the circumstances in which he is at liberty to
utter a lie: provided, however, that it be most assuredly believed and
maintained that this way of lying is far removed from the authors who
were employed to write holy writings, especially the canonical
Scriptures; lest those who are the stewards of Christ, of whom it is
said, “It is required in stewards, that a man be found faithful,” <span
id="fr_2051"></span>[2052](#fn_2051.md) should seem to have proved their
fidelity by learning as an important lesson to speak what is false when
this is expedient for the truth’s sake, although the word fidelity
itself, in the Latin tongue, is said to signify originally a real
correspondence between what is said and what is done. <span
id="fr_2052"></span>[2053](#fn_2052.md) Now, where that which is spoken is
actually done, there is assuredly no room for falsehood. Paul therefore,
as a “faithful steward” doubtless is to be regarded as approving his
fidelity in his writings; for he was a steward of truth, not of
falsehood. Therefore he wrote the truth when he wrote that he had seen
Peter walking not uprightly, according to the truth of the gospel, and
that he had withstood him to the face because he was compelling the
Gentiles to live as the Jews did. And Peter himself received, with the
holy and loving humility which became him, the rebuke which Paul, in the
interests of truth, and with the boldness of love, administered. Therein
Peter left to those that came after him an example, that, if at any time
they deviated from the right path, they should not think it beneath them
to accept correction from those who were their juniors,—an example more
rare, and requiring greater piety, than that which Paul’s conduct on the
same occasion left us, that those who are younger should have courage
even to withstand their seniors if the defence of evangelical truth
required it, yet in such a way as to preserve unbroken brotherly love.
For while it is better for one to succeed in perfectly keeping the right
path, it is a thing much more worthy of admiration and praise to receive
admonition meekly, than to admonish a transgressor boldly. On that
occasion, therefore, Paul was to be praised for upright courage, Peter
was to be praised for holy humility; and so far as my judgment enables
me to form an opinion, this ought rather to have been asserted in answer
to the calumnies of Porphyry, than further occasion given to him for
finding fault, by putting it in his power to bring against Christians
this much more damaging accusation, that either in writing their letters
or in complying with the ordinances of God they practised deceit.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p71"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p71.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p72"></span>23. You call upon me to bring forward
the name of even one whose opinion I have followed in this matter, and
at the same time you have quoted the names of many who have held before
you the opinion which you defend. <span
id="fr_2053"></span>[2054](#fn_2053.md) You also say that if I censure you
for an error in this, you beg to be allowed to remain in error in
company with such great men. I have not read their writings; but
although they are only six or seven in all, you have yourself impugned
the authority of four of them. For as to the Laodicean author, <span
id="fr_2054"></span>[2055](#fn_2054.md) whose name you do not give, you say
that he has lately forsaken the Church; Alexander you describe as a
heretic of old standing; and as to Origen and Didymus, I read in some of
your more recent works, <span id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_358"></span>censure passed on their opinions, and
that in no measured terms, nor in regard to insignificant questions,
although formerly you gave Origen marvellous praise. I suppose,
therefore, that you would not even yourself be contented to be in error
with these men; although the language which I refer to is equivalent to
an assertion that in this matter they have not erred. For who is there
that would consent to be knowingly mistaken, with whatever company he
might share his errors? Three of the seven therefore alone remain,
Eusebius of Emesa, Theodorus of Heraclea, and John, whom you afterwards
mention, who formerly presided as pontiff over the Church of
Constantinople.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p75"></span>24. However, if you inquire or recall
to memory the opinion of our Ambrose, <span
id="fr_2055"></span>[2056](#fn_2055.md) and also of our Cyprian, <span
id="fr_2056"></span>[2057](#fn_2056.md) on the point in question, you will
perhaps find that I also have not been without some whose footsteps I
follow in that which I have maintained. At the same time, as I have said
already, it is to the canonical Scriptures alone that I am bound to
yield such implicit subjection as to follow their teaching, without
admitting the slightest suspicion that in them any mistake or any
statement intended to mislead could find a place. Wherefore, when I look
round for a third name that I may oppose three on my side to your three,
I might indeed easily find one, I believe, if my reading had been
extensive; but one occurs to me whose name is as good as all these
others, nay, of greater authority—I mean the Apostle Paul himself. To
him I betake myself; to himself I appeal from the verdict of all those
commentators on his writings who advance an opinion different from mine.
I interrogate him, and demand from himself to know whether he wrote what
was true, or under some plea of expediency wrote what he knew to be
false, when he wrote that he saw Peter not walking uprightly, according
to the truth of the gospel, and withstood him to his face because by
that dissimulation he was compelling the Gentiles to live after the
manner of the Jews. And I hear him in reply proclaiming with a solemn
oath in an earlier part of the epistle, where he began this narration,
“The things that I write unto you, behold, before God, I lie not.” <span
id="fr_2057"></span>[2058](#fn_2057.md)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p79"></span>25. Let those who think otherwise,
however great their names, excuse my differing from them. The testimony
of so great an apostle using, in his own writings, an oath as a
confirmation of their truth, is of more weight with me than the opinion
of any man, however learned, who is discussing the writings of another.
Nor am I afraid lest men should say that, in vindicating Paul from the
charge of pretending to conform to the errors of Jewish prejudice, I
affirm him to have actually so conformed. For as, on the one hand, he
was not guilty of pretending conformity to error when, with the liberty
of an apostle, such as was suitable to that period of transition, he
did, by practising those ancient holy ordinances, when it was necessary
to declare their original excellence as appointed not by the wiles of
Satan to deceive men, but by the wisdom of God for the purpose of
typically foretelling things to come; so, on the other hand, he was not
guilty of real conformity to the errors of Judaism, seeing that he not
only knew, but also preached constantly and vehemently, that those were
in error who thought that these ceremonies were to be imposed upon the
Gentile converts, or were necessary to the justification of any who
believed.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p80"></span>26. Moreover, as to my saying that to
the Jews he became as a Jew, and to the Gentiles as a Gentile, not with
the subtlety of intentional deceit, but with the compassion of pitying
love, <span id="fr_2058"></span>[2059](#fn_2058.md) it seems to me that you
have not sufficiently considered my meaning in the words; or rather,
perhaps, I have not succeeded in making it plain. For I did not mean by
this that I supposed him to have practised in either case a feigned
conformity; but I said it because his conformity was sincere, not less
in the things in which he became to the Jews as a Jew, than in those in
which he became to the Gentiles as a Gentile,—a parallel which you
yourself suggested, and by which I thankfully acknowledge that you have
materially assisted my argument. For when I had in my letter asked you
to explain how it could be supposed that Paul’s becoming to the Jews as
a Jew involved the supposition that he must have acted deceitfully in
conforming to the Jewish observances, seeing that no such deceptive
conformity to heathen customs was involved in his becoming as a Gentile
to the Gentiles; your answer was, that his becoming to the Gentiles as a
Gentile meant no more than his receiving the uncircumcised, and
permitting the free use of those meats which were pronounced unclean by
Jewish law. If, then, when I ask whether in this also he practised
dissimulation, such an idea is repudiated as palpably most absurd and
false: it is an obvious inference, that in his performing those things
in which he became as a Jew to the Jews, he was using a wise liberty,
not yielding to a degrading compulsion, nor doing what would be still
more unworthy of him, viz. stooping from integrity to fraud out of a
regard to expediency.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p82"></span>27. For to believers, and to those
who know the truth, as the apostle testifies (unless here <span
id="page_359">p. 359</span> <span id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_359"></span>too,
perhaps, he is deceiving his readers), “every creature of God is good,
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving.” <span
id="fr_2059"></span>[2060](#fn_2059.md) Therefore to Paul himself, not only
as a man, but as a steward eminently faithful, not only as knowing, but
also as a teacher of the truth, every creature of God which is used for
food was not feignedly but truly good. If, then, to the Gentiles he
became as a Gentile, by holding and teaching the truth concerning meats
and circumcision although he feigned no conformity to the rites and
ceremonies of the Gentiles, why say that it was impossible for him to
become as a Jew to the Jews, unless he practised dissimulation in
performing the rites of their religion? Why did he maintain the true
faithfulness of a steward towards the wild olive branch that was
engrafted, and yet hold up a strange veil of dissimulation, on the plea
of expediency, before those who were the natural and original branches
of the olive tree? Why was it that, in becoming as a Gentile to the
Gentiles, his teaching and his conduct <span
id="fr_2060"></span>[2061](#fn_2060.md) are in harmony with his real
sentiments; but that, in becoming as a Jew to the Jews, he shuts up one
thing in his heart, and declares something wholly different in his
words, deeds, and writings? But far be it from us to entertain such
thoughts of him. To both Jews and Gentiles he owed “charity out of a
pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned;” <span
id="fr_2061"></span>[2062](#fn_2061.md) and therefore he became all things
to all men, that he might gain all, <span
id="fr_2062"></span>[2063](#fn_2062.md) not with the subtlety of a
deceiver, but with the love of one filled with compassion; that is to
say, not by pretending himself to do all the evil things which other men
did, but by using the utmost pains to minister with all compassion the
remedies required by the evils under which other men laboured, as if
their case had been his own.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p87"></span>28. When, therefore, he did not
refuse to practise some of these Old Testament observances, he was not
led by his compassion for Jews to feign this conformity, but
unquestionably was acting sincerely; and by this course of action
declaring his respect for those things which in the former dispensation
had been for a time enjoined by God, he distinguished between them and
the impious rites of heathenism. At that time, moreover, not with the
subtlety of a deceiver, but with the love of one moved by compassion, he
became to the Jews as a Jew, when, seeing them to be in error, which
either made them unwilling to believe in Christ, or made them think that
by these old sacrifices and ceremonial observances they could be
cleansed from sin and made partakers of salvation, he desired so to
deliver them from that error as if he saw not them, but himself,
entangled in it; thus truly loving his neighbour as himself, and doing
to others as he would have others do to him if he required their help,—a
duty to the statement of which our Lord added these words, “This is the
law and the prophets.” <span id="fr_2063"></span>[2064](#fn_2063.md)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p89"></span>29. This compassionate affection Paul
recommends in the same Epistle to the Galatians, saying: “If a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the
spirit of meekness; considering thyself, lest thou also be
tempted.” <span id="fr_2064"></span>[2065](#fn_2064.md) See whether he has
not said, “Make thyself as he is, that thou mayest gain him.” Not,
indeed, that one should commit or pretend to have committed the same
fault as the one who has been overtaken, but that in the fault of that
other he should consider what might happen to himself, and so
compassionately render assistance to that other, as he would wish that
other to do to him if the case were his; that is, not with the subtlety
of a deceiver, but with the love of one filled with compassion. Thus,
whatever the error or fault in which Jew or Gentile or any man was found
by Paul, to all men he became all things,—not by feigning what was not
true, but by feeling, because the case might have been his own, the
compassion of one who put himself in the other’s place,—that he might
gain all.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p91"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p91.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p92"></span>30. I beseech you to look, if you
please, for a little into your own heart,—I mean, into your own heart as
it stands affected towards myself,—and recall, or if you have it in
writing beside you, read again, your own words in that letter (only too
brief) which you sent to me by Cyprian our brother, now my colleague.
Read with what sincere brotherly and loving earnestness you have added
to a serious complaint of what I had done to you these words: “In this
friendship is wounded, and the laws of brotherly union are set at
nought. Let not the world see us quarrelling like children, and giving
material for angry contention between those who may become our
respective supporters or adversaries.” <span
id="fr_2065"></span>[2066](#fn_2065.md) These words I perceive to be spoken
by you from the heart, and from a heart kindly seeking to give me good
advice. Then you add, what would have been obvious to me even without
your stating it: “I write what I have now written, because I desire to
cherish towards you pure and Christian love, and not to hide in my heart
anything which does not agree with the utterance of my lips.” O pious
man, beloved by me, as God who seeth my soul is witness, with a true
heart I believe your statement; and just as I do not question the
sincerity of the profession which you have thus made in a letter to me,
so do I by all <span id="page_360">p. 360</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_360"></span>means believe the Apostle Paul when he
makes the very same profession in his letter, addressed not to any one
individual, but to Jews and Greeks, and all those Gentiles who were his
children in the gospel, for whose spiritual birth he travailed, and
after them to so many thousands of believers in Christ, for whose sake
that letter has been preserved. I believe, I say, that he did not “hide
in his heart anything which did not agree with the utterance of his
lips.”

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p94"></span>31. You have indeed yourself done
towards me this very thing,—becoming to me as I am,—“not with the
subtlety of deception, but with the love of compassion,” when you
thought that it behoved you to take as much pains to prevent me from
being left in a mistake, in which you believed me to be, as you would
have wished another to take for your deliverance if the case had been
your own. Wherefore, gratefully acknowledging this evidence of your
goodwill towards me, I also claim that you also be not displeased with
me, if, when anything in your treatises disquieted me, I acquainted you
with my distress, desiring the same course to be followed by all towards
me as I have followed towards you, that whatever they think worthy of
censure in my writings, they would neither flatter me with deceitful
commendation nor blame me before others for that of which they are
silent towards myself; thereby, as it seems to me, more seriously
“wounding friendship and setting at nought the laws of brotherly union.”
For I would hesitate to give the name of Christian to those friendships
in which the common proverb, “Flattery makes friends, and truth makes
enemies,” <span id="fr_2066"></span>[2067](#fn_2066.md) is of more
authority than the scriptural proverb, “Faithful are the wounds of a
friend, but the kisses of an enemy are deceitful.” <span
id="fr_2067"></span>[2068](#fn_2067.md)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p97"></span>32. Wherefore let us rather do our
utmost to set before our beloved friends, who most cordially wish us
well in our labours, such an example that they may know that it is
possible for the most intimate friends to differ so much in opinion,
that the views of the one may be contradicted by the other without any
diminution of their mutual affection, and without hatred being kindled
by that truth which is due to genuine friendship, whether the
contradiction be in itself in accordance with truth, or at least,
whatever its intrinsic value is, be spoken from a sincere heart by one
who is resolved not “to hide in his heart anything which does not agree
with the utterance of his lips.” Let therefore our brethren, your
friends, of whom you bear testimony that they are vessels of Christ,
believe me when I say that it was wholly against my will that my letter
came into the hands of many others before it reached your own, and that
my heart is filled with no small sorrow for this mistake. How it
happened would take long to tell, and this is now, if I am not mistaken,
unnecessary; since, if my word is to be taken at all in regard to this,
it suffices for me to say that it was not done by me with the sinister
intention which is supposed by some, and that it was not by my wish, or
arrangement, or consent, or design that this has taken place. If they do
not believe this, which I affirm in the sight of God, I can do no more
to satisfy them. Far be it, however, from me to believe that they made
this suggestion to your Holiness with the malicious desire to kindle
enmity between you and me, from which may God in His mercy defend us!
Doubtless, without any intention of doing me wrong, they readily
suspected me, as a man, to be capable of failings common to human
nature. For it is right for me to believe this concerning them, if they
be vessels of Christ appointed not to dishonour, but to honour, and made
meet by God for every good work in His great house. <span
id="fr_2068"></span>[2069](#fn_2068.md) If, however, this my solemn
protestation come to their knowledge, and they still persist in the same
opinion of my conduct, you will yourself see that in this they will do
wrong.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p99"></span>33. As to my having written that I
had never sent to Rome a book against you, I wrote this because, in the
first place, I did not regard the name “book” as applicable to my
letter, and therefore was under the impression that you had heard of
something else entirely different from it; in the second place, I had
not sent the letter in question to Rome, but to you; and in the third
place, I did not consider it to be against you, because I knew that I
had been prompted by the sincerity of friendship, which should give
liberty for the exchange of suggestions and corrections between us.
Leaving out of sight for a little while your friends of whom I have
spoken, I implore yourself, by the grace whereby we have been redeemed,
not to suppose that I have been guilty of artful flattery in anything
which I have said in my letters concerning the good gifts which have
been by the Lord’s goodness bestowed on you. If, however, I have in
anything wronged you, forgive me. As to that incident in the life of
some forgotten bard, which, with perhaps more pedantry than good taste,
I quoted from classic literature, I beg you not to carry the application
of it to yourself further than my words warranted for I immediately
added: “I do not say this in order that you may recover the faculty of
spiritual sight—far be it from me to say that you have lost it!—but
that, having eyes both clear and quick in discernment, you may turn them
to this matter.” <span id="fr_2069"></span>[2070](#fn_2069.md) I thought a
reference to that incident suitable exclusively in connection with the
<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p100.1"></span>παλινῳδία</span>, in which we ought all
to imi<span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-Page_361"></span>tate Stesichorus if we have written
anything which it becomes our duty to correct in a writing of later
date, and not at all in connection with the blindness of Stesichorus,
which I neither ascribed to your mind, nor feared as likely to befall
you. And again, I beseech you to correct boldly whatever you see needful
to censure in my writings. For although, so far as the titles of honour
which prevail in the Church are concerned, a bishop’s rank is above that
of a presbyter, nevertheless in many things Augustin is in inferior to
Jerome; albeit correction is not to be refused nor despised, even when
it comes from one who in all respects may be an inferior.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p101"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p101.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p102"></span>34. As to your translation, you have
now convinced me of the benefits to be secured by your proposal to
translate the Scriptures from the original Hebrew, in order that you may
bring to light those things which have been either omitted or perverted
by the Jews. But I beg you to be so good as state by what Jews this has
been done, whether by those who before the Lord’s advent translated the
Old Testament—and if so, by what one or more of them—or by the Jews of
later times, who may be supposed to have mutilated or corrupted the
Greek <span class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p102.1"></span>
Mss.</span>, in order to prevent themselves from being unable to answer
the evidence given by these concerning the Christian faith. I cannot
find any reason which should have prompted the earlier Jewish
translators to such unfaithfulness. I beg of you, moreover, to send us
your translation of the Septuagint, which I did not know that you had
published. I am also longing to read that book of yours which you named
*De optimo genere interpretandi*, and to know from it how to adjust the
balance between the product of the translator’s acquaintance with the
original language, and the conjectures of those who are able
commentators on the Scripture, who, notwithstanding their common loyalty
to the one true faith, must often bring forward various opinions on
account of the obscurity of many passages; <span
id="fr_2070"></span>[2071](#fn_2070.md) although this difference of
interpretation by no means involves departure from the unity of the
faith; just as one commentator may himself give, in harmony with the
faith which he holds, two different interpretations of the same passage,
because the obscurity of the passage makes both equally admissible.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p104"></span>35. I desire, moreover, your
translation of the Septuagint, in order that we may be delivered, so far
as is possible, from the consequences of the notable incompetency of
those who, whether qualified or not, have attempted a Latin translation;
and in order that those who think that I look with jealousy on your
useful labours, may at length, if it be possible, perceive that my only
reason for objecting to the public reading of your translation from the
Hebrew in our churches was, lest, bringing forward anything which was,
as it were, new and opposed to the authority of the Septuagint version,
we should trouble by serious cause of offence the flocks of Christ,
whose ears and hearts have become accustomed to listen to that version
to which the seal of approbation was given by the apostles themselves.
Wherefore, as to that shrub in the book of Jonah, <span
id="fr_2071"></span>[2072](#fn_2071.md) if in the Hebrew it is neither
“gourd” nor “ivy,” but something else which stands erect, supported by
its own stem without other props, I would prefer to call it “gourd” in
all our Latin versions; for I do not think that the Seventy would have
rendered it thus at random, had they not known that the plant was
something like a gourd.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p106"></span>36. I think I have now given a
sufficient answer (perhaps more than sufficient) to your three letters;
of which I received two by Cyprian, and one by Firmus. In replying, send
whatever you think likely to be of use in instructing me and others. And
I shall take more care, as the Lord may help me, that any letter which I
may write to you shall reach yourself before it falls into the hand of
any other, by whom its contents may be published abroad; for I confess
that I would not like any letter of yours to me to meet with the fate of
which you justly complain as having befallen my letter to you. Let us,
however, resolve to maintain between ourselves the liberty as well as
the love of friends; so that in the letters which we exchange, neither
of us shall be restrained from frankly stating to the other whatever
seems to him open to correction, provided always that this be done in
the spirit which does not, as inconsistent with brotherly love,
displease God. If, however, you do not think that this can be done
between us without endangering that brotherly love, let us not do it:
for the love which I should like to see maintained between us is
assuredly the greater love which would make this mutual freedom
possible; but the smaller measure of it is better than none at
all. <span id="fr_2072"></span>[2073](#fn_2072.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2010"></span>[350:2011](1010388.htm#fr_2010.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p7"></span> *Ludamus.* Letter LXXXI. On this
unfortunate word of Jerome’s Augustin lingers with most provoking
ingenuity.

<span id="fn_2011"></span>[350:2012](1010388.htm#fr_2011.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p8"></span> See Letter LXXII., sec. 2.

<span id="fn_2012"></span>[350:2013](1010388.htm#fr_2012.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p10"></span> Letter LXVIII. sec. 2.

<span id="fn_2013"></span>[351:2014](1010388.htm#fr_2013.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p13"></span> [Gal.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2014"></span>[351:2015](1010388.htm#fr_2014.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p14"></span> [Gal.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2015"></span>[351:2016](1010388.htm#fr_2015.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p15"></span> Ch. i. 21.

<span id="fn_2016"></span>[351:2017](1010388.htm#fr_2016.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p17"></span> [Matt.
26.75](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#075.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2017"></span>[351:2018](1010388.htm#fr_2017.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p18"></span> [2 Sam.
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#004.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2018"></span>[352:2019](1010388.htm#fr_2018.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p22"></span> [Acts
16.3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2019"></span>[352:2020](1010388.htm#fr_2019.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p23"></span> [Acts
18.18](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2020"></span>[352:2021](1010388.htm#fr_2020.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p24"></span> [Acts
21.26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#026.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2021"></span>[352:2022](1010388.htm#fr_2021.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p25"></span> [Acts
21.21](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2022"></span>[352:2023](1010388.htm#fr_2022.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p27"></span> [Acts
21.20-25](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2023"></span>[352:2024](1010388.htm#fr_2023.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p29"></span> [Acts
21.24](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2024"></span>[353:2025](1010388.htm#fr_2024.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p32"></span> [Gal.
2.3-5](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2025"></span>[353:2026](1010388.htm#fr_2025.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p34"></span> See Jerome’s Letter, LXXV. sec. 16,
p. 340.

<span id="fn_2026"></span>[353:2027](1010388.htm#fr_2026.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p36"></span> [Ezek.
20.25](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#025.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2027"></span>[354:2028](1010388.htm#fr_2027.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p39"></span> See Letter LXXV. sec. 13, p. 338.

<span id="fn_2028"></span>[355:2029](1010388.htm#fr_2028.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p42"></span> See Letter LXXV. sec. 14, pp. 338,
339.

<span id="fn_2029"></span>[355:2030](1010388.htm#fr_2029.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p43"></span> [Luke
16.16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2030"></span>[355:2031](1010388.htm#fr_2030.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p44"></span> [John
5.18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2031"></span>[355:2032](1010388.htm#fr_2031.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p44.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p45"></span> [John
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2032"></span>[355:2033](1010388.htm#fr_2032.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p45.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p46"></span> [Jer.
31.31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2033"></span>[356:2034](1010388.htm#fr_2033.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p47"></span> [Mark
1.44](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#044.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2034"></span>[356:2035](1010388.htm#fr_2034.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p48"></span> [John
7.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2035"></span>[356:2036](1010388.htm#fr_2035.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p50"></span> [Gal.
5.2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2036"></span>[356:2037](1010388.htm#fr_2036.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p51"></span> [Gal.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2037"></span>[356:2038](1010388.htm#fr_2037.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p52"></span> [Gal.
5.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2038"></span>[356:2039](1010388.htm#fr_2038.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p53"></span> [Gal.
5.18](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2039"></span>[356:2040](1010388.htm#fr_2039.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p53.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p54"></span> Jerome, Letter LXXV. sec. 14, p.
339.

<span id="fn_2040"></span>[356:2041](1010388.htm#fr_2040.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p55.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p56"></span> [Ex.
20.17](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p56.1"></span> and [Deut.
5.21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p56.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2041"></span>[356:2042](1010388.htm#fr_2041.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p56.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p57"></span> *Evangelica maxime illustratione
prædicari.*

<span id="fn_2042"></span>[356:2043](1010388.htm#fr_2042.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p57.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p58"></span> [Rom.
7.13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2043"></span>[356:2044](1010388.htm#fr_2043.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p58.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p59"></span> [Rom.
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2044"></span>[356:2045](1010388.htm#fr_2044.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p59.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p60"></span> [Gal.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2045"></span>[356:2046](1010388.htm#fr_2045.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p61"></span> [Rom.
13.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2046"></span>[356:2047](1010388.htm#fr_2046.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p61.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p62"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2047"></span>[357:2048](1010388.htm#fr_2047.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p64"></span> Letter LXXV. sec. 14, p. 339.

<span id="fn_2048"></span>[357:2049](1010388.htm#fr_2048.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p64.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p65"></span> *Mendacium offisiosum.*

<span id="fn_2049"></span>[357:2050](1010388.htm#fr_2049.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p65.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p66"></span> [Jas.
5.12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p66.1"></span>; [Matt.
5.37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p66.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2050"></span>[357:2051](1010388.htm#fr_2050.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p66.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p67"></span> [Ps.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2051"></span>[357:2052](1010388.htm#fr_2051.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p68.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p69"></span> [1 Cor.
4.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2052"></span>[357:2053](1010388.htm#fr_2052.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p69.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p70"></span> *Cum ipsa fides in latino sermone ab
eo dicatur appellata quia fit quod dicitur.*

<span id="fn_2053"></span>[357:2054](1010388.htm#fr_2053.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p72.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p73"></span> Jerome’s Letter, LXXV. sec. 6,
p.335.

<span id="fn_2054"></span>[357:2055](1010388.htm#fr_2054.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p73.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p74"></span> *Ibid.* sec. 4, p. 334.

<span id="fn_2055"></span>[358:2056](1010388.htm#fr_2055.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p75.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p76"></span> In his Commentary on Galations.

<span id="fn_2056"></span>[358:2057](1010388.htm#fr_2056.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p77"></span> In his letter, LXX., to Quintus;
*Ante-Nicene Fathers*, Am. ed. vol. v. p. 377.

<span id="fn_2057"></span>[358:2058](1010388.htm#fr_2057.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p77.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p78"></span> [Gal.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#020.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2058"></span>[358:2059](1010388.htm#fr_2058.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p81"></span> Letter XL. sec. 4, p. 273, quoted
also by Jerome, LXXV. sec. 12, p. 338.

<span id="fn_2059"></span>[359:2060](1010388.htm#fr_2059.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p82.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p83"></span> [1 Tim.
4.4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2060"></span>[359:2061](1010388.htm#fr_2060.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p83.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p84"></span> We follow here the reading of
fourteen <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p84.1"></span>Mss</span>., “*agit*” instead of “*ait.*”

<span id="fn_2061"></span>[359:2062](1010388.htm#fr_2061.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p84.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p85"></span> [1 Tim.
1.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p85.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2062"></span>[359:2063](1010388.htm#fr_2062.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p85.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p86"></span> [1 Cor.
9.19-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#019.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2063"></span>[359:2064](1010388.htm#fr_2063.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p88"></span> [Matt.
7.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2064"></span>[359:2065](1010388.htm#fr_2064.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p89.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p90"></span> Gal. 7.2<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2065"></span>[359:2066](1010388.htm#fr_2065.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p92.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p93"></span> Letter LXXII. sec. 4.

<span id="fn_2066"></span>[360:2067](1010388.htm#fr_2066.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p94.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p95"></span> Terence, *Andria,* [Act
i.](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p95.1"></span> Sc. 1.

<span id="fn_2067"></span>[360:2068](1010388.htm#fr_2067.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p95.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p96"></span> [Prov.
27.6](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2068"></span>[360:2069](1010388.htm#fr_2068.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p97.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p98"></span> [2 Tim.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#020.md),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p98.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2069"></span>[360:2070](1010388.htm#fr_2069.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p100"></span> Letter XL. sec 7, p. 274.

<span id="fn_2070"></span>[361:2071](1010388.htm#fr_2070.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p102.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p103"></span> An important sentence, as
indicating the estimation in which Augustin held the “consensus patrum”
as an authority in the interpretation of Scripture.

<span id="fn_2071"></span>[361:2072](1010388.htm#fr_2071.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p104.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p105"></span> Ch. iv. 6.

<span id="fn_2072"></span>[361:2073](1010388.htm#fr_2072.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXII-p106.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXII-p107"></span> It is interesting to know that
Jerome afterwards admitted the soundness of the view so ably and
reasonably defended by Augustin in this letter concerning the rebuke of
Peter at Antioch. In Letter CLXXX., addressed to Oceanus, we have these
words: “This question the venerable Father Jerome and I have discussed
fully in letters which we exchanged; and in the last work which he has
published against Pelagius, under the name of *Critobulus*, he has
maintained the same opinion concerning that event, and the sayings of
the apostles, as I myself had adopted, following the blessed Cyprian.”
See Jerome, book i., against the Pelagians, and Cyprian, Letter LXX., to
Quintus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXXIII](1010389.md)
