[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010398)  [Next](1010400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p1.1"></span>Letter XCIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408.)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p3.1"></span>To Vincentius, My Brother Dearly Beloved,
Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p5"></span>1. I have received a letter which I
believe to be from you to me: at least I have not thought this
incredible, for the person who brought it is one whom I know to be a
Catholic Christian, and who, I think, would not dare to impose upon me.
But even though the letter may perchance not be from you, I have
considered it necessary to write a reply to the author, whoever he may
be. You know me now to be more desirous of rest, and earnest in seeking
it, than when you knew me in my earlier years at Carthage, in the
lifetime of your immediate predecessor Rogatus. But we are precluded
from this rest by the Donatists, the repression and correction of whom,
by the powers which are ordained of God, appears to me to be labour not
in vain. For we already rejoice in the correction of many who hold and
defend the Catholic unity with such sincerity, and are so glad to have
been delivered from their former error, that we admire them with great
thankfulness and pleasure. Yet these same persons, under some
indescribable bondage of custom, would in no way have thought of being
changed to a better condition, had they not, under the shock of this
alarm, directed their minds earnestly to the study of the truth; fearing
lest, if without profit, and in vain, they suffered hard things at the
hands of men, for the sake not of righteousness, but of their own
obstinacy and presumption, they should afterwards receive nothing else
at the hand of God than the punishment due to wicked men who despised
the admonition which He so gently gave and His paternal correction; and
being by such reflection made teachable, they found not in mischievous
or frivolous human fables, but in the promises of the divine books, that
universal Church which they saw extending according to the promise
throughout all nations: just as, on the testimony of prophecy in the
same Scriptures, they believed without hesitation that Christ is exalted
above the heavens, though He is not seen by them in His glory. Was it my
duty to be displeased at the salvation of these men, and to call back my
colleagues from a fatherly diligence of this kind, the result of which
has been, that we see many blaming their former blindness? For they see
that they were blind who believed Christ to have been exalted above the
heavens although they saw Him not, and yet denied that His glory is
spread over all the earth although they saw it; whereas the prophet has
with so great plainness included both in one sentence, “Be Thou exalted,
O God, above the heavens, and Thy glory above all the earth.” <span
id="fr_2140"></span>[2141](#fn_2140)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p7"></span>2. Wherefore, if we were so to overlook
and forbear with those cruel enemies who seriously disturb our peace and
quietness by manifold and grievous forms of violence and treachery, as
that nothing at all should be contrived and done by us with a view to
alarm and correct them, truly we would be rendering evil for evil. For
if any one saw his enemy running headlong to destroy himself when he had
become delirious through a dangerous fever, would he not in that case be
much more truly rendering evil for evil if he permitted him to run on
thus, than if he took measures to have him seized and bound? And yet he
would at that moment appear to the other to be most vexatious, and most
like an enemy, when, in truth, he had proved himself most useful and
most compassionate; although, doubtless, when health was recovered,
would he express to him his gratitude with a warmth proportioned to the
measure in which he had felt his refusal to indulge him in his time of
phrenzy. Oh, if I could but show you how many we have even from the
Circumcelliones, who are now approved Catholics, and condemn their
former life, and the wretched delusion under which they believed that
they were doing in behalf of the Church of God whatever they did under
the promptings of a restless temerity, who nevertheless would not have
been brought to this soundness of judgment had they not been, as persons
beside themselves, bound with the cords of those laws which are
distasteful to you! As to another form of most serious distemper,—that,
namely, of those who had not, indeed, a boldness leading to acts of
violence, but were pressed down by a kind of inveterate sluggishness of
mind, and would say to us: “What you affirm is true, nothing can be said
against it; but it is hard for us to leave off what we have received, by
tradition from our fathers,”—why should not such persons be shaken up in
a beneficial way by a law bringing upon them inconvenience in worldly
things, in order that they might rise from their lethargic sleep, and
<span id="page_383">p. 383</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_383"></span>awake to the salvation which is to be
found in the unity of the Church? How many of them, now rejoicing with
us, speak bitterly of the weight with which their ruinous course
formerly oppressed them, and confess that it was our duty to inflict
annoyance upon them, in order to prevent them from perishing under the
disease of lethargic habit, as under a fatal sleep!

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p8"></span>3. You will say that to some these
remedies are of no service. Is the art of healing, therefore, to be
abandoned, because the malady of some is incurable? You look only to the
case of those who are so obdurate that they refuse even such correction.
Of such it is written, “In vain have I smitten your children: they
received no correction:” <span id="fr_2141"></span>[2142](#fn_2141) and
yet I suppose that those of whom the prophet speaks were smitten in
love, not from hatred. But you ought to consider also the very large
number over whose salvation we rejoice. For if they were only made
afraid, and not instructed, this might appear to be a kind of
inexcusable tyranny. Again, if they were instructed only, and not made
afraid, they would be with more difficulty persuaded to embrace the way
of salvation, having become hardened through the inveteracy of custom:
whereas many whom we know well, when arguments had been brought before
them, and the truth made apparent by testimonies from the word of God,
answered us that they desired to pass into the communion of the Catholic
Church, but were in fear of the violence of worthless men, whose enmity
they would incur; which violence they ought indeed by all means to
despise when it was to be borne for righteousness’ sake, and for the
sake of eternal life. Nevertheless the weakness of such men ought not to
be regarded as hopeless, but to be supported until they gain more
strength. Nor may we forget what the Lord Himself said to Peter when he
was yet weak: “Thou canst not follow Me now, but thou shall follow Me
afterwards.” <span id="fr_2142"></span>[2143](#fn_2142) When, however,
wholesome instruction is added to means of inspiring salutary fear, so
that not only the light of truth may dispel the darkness of error, but
the force of fear may at the same time break the bonds of evil custom,
we are made glad, as I have said, by the salvation of many, who with us
bless God, and render thanks to Him, because by the fulfilment of His
covenant, in which He promised that the kings of the earth should serve
Christ, He has thus cured the diseased and restored health to the weak.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p11"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p11.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p12"></span>4. Not every one who is indulgent is a
friend; nor is every one an enemy who smites. Better are the wounds of a
friend than the proffered kisses of an enemy. <span
id="fr_2143"></span>[2144](#fn_2143) It is better with severity to love,
than with gentleness to deceive. More good is done by taking away food
from one who is hungry, if, through freedom from care as to his food, he
is forgetful of righteousness, than by providing bread for one who is
hungry, in order that, being thereby bribed, he may consent to
unrighteousness. He who binds the man who is in a phrenzy, and he who
stirs up the man who is in a lethargy, are alike vexatious to both, and
are in both cases alike prompted by love for the patient. Who can love
us more than God does? And yet He not only give us sweet instruction,
but also quickens us by salutary fear, and this unceasingly. Often
adding to the soothing remedies by which He comforts men the sharp
medicine of tribulation, He afflicts with famine even the pious and
devout patriarchs, <span id="fr_2144"></span>[2145](#fn_2144) disquiets
a rebellious people by more severe chastisements, and refuses, though
thrice besought, to take away the thorn in the flesh of the apostle,
that He may make His strength perfect in weakness. <span
id="fr_2145"></span>[2146](#fn_2145) Let us by all means love even our
enemies, for this is right, and God commands us so to do, in order that
we may be the children of our Father who is in heaven, “who maketh His
sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just
and on the unjust.” <span id="fr_2146"></span>[2147](#fn_2146) But as we
praise these His gifts, lets us in like manner ponder His correction of
those whom He loves.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p17"></span>5. You are of opinion that no one
should be compelled to follow righteousness; and yet you read that the
householder said to his servants, “Whomsoever ye shall find, compel them
to come in.” <span id="fr_2147"></span>[2148](#fn_2147) You also read
how he who was at first Saul, and afterwards Paul, was compelled, by the
great violence with which Christ coerced him, to know and to embrace the
truth; for you cannot but think that the light which your eyes enjoy is
more precious to men than money or any other possession. This light,
lost suddenly by him when he was cast to the ground by the heavenly
voice, he did not recover until he became a member of the Holy Church.
You are also of opinion that no coercion is to be used with any man in
order to his deliverance from the fatal consequences of error; and yet
you see that, in examples which cannot be disputed, this is done by God,
who loves us with more real regard for our profit than any other can;
and you hear Christ saying, “No man can come to me except the Father
draw him,” <span id="fr_2148"></span>[2149](#fn_2148) which is done in
the hearts of all those who, through fear of the wrath of God, betake
themselves to Him. You know also that sometimes the thief scatters food
before the flock that he may lead them <span id="page_384">p. 384</span>
<span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_384"></span>astray, and sometimes the
shepherd brings wandering sheep back to the flock with his rod.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p20"></span>6. Did not Sarah, when she had the
power, choose rather to afflict the insolent bondwoman? And truly she
did not cruelly hate her whom she had formerly by an act of her own
kindness made a mother; but she put a wholesome restraint upon her
pride. <span id="fr_2149"></span>[2150](#fn_2149) Moreover, as you well
know, these two women, Sarah and Hagar, and their two sons Isaac and
Ishmael, are figures representing spiritual and carnal persons. And
although we read that the bondwoman and her son suffered great hardships
from Sarah, nevertheless the Apostle Paul says that Isaac suffered
persecution from Ishmael: “But as then he that was born after the flesh
persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is now;” <span
id="fr_2150"></span>[2151](#fn_2150) whence those who have understanding
may perceive that it is rather the Catholic Church which suffers
persecution through the pride and impiety of those carnal men whom it
endeavours to correct by afflictions and terrors of a temporal kind.
Whatever therefore the true and rightful Mother does, even when
something severe and bitter is felt by her children at her hands, she is
not rendering evil for evil, but is applying the benefit of discipline
to counteract the evil of sin, not with the hatred which seeks to harm,
but with the love which seeks to heal. When good and bad do the same
actions and suffer the same afflictions, they are to be distinguished
not by what they do or suffer, but by the causes of each: *e.g.* Pharaoh
oppressed the people of God by hard bondage; Moses afflicted the same
people by severe correction when they were guilty of impiety: <span
id="fr_2151"></span>[2152](#fn_2151) their actions were alike; but they
were not alike in the motive of regard to the people’s welfare,—the one
being inflated by the lust of power, the other inflamed by love. Jezebel
slew prophets, Elijah slew false prophets; <span
id="fr_2152"></span>[2153](#fn_2152) I suppose that the desert of the
actors and of the sufferers respectively in the two cases was wholly
diverse.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p25"></span>7. Look also to the New Testament
times, in which the essential gentleness of love was to be not only kept
in the heart, but also manifested openly: in these the sword of Peter is
called back into its sheath by Christ, and we are taught that it ought
not to be taken from its sheath even in Christ’s defence. <span
id="fr_2153"></span>[2154](#fn_2153) We read, however, not only that the
Jews beat the Apostle Paul, but also that the Greeks beat Sosthenes, a
Jew, on account of the Apostle Paul. <span
id="fr_2154"></span>[2155](#fn_2154) Does not the similarity of the
events apparently join both; and, at the same time, does not the
dissimilarity of the causes make a real difference? Again, God spared
not His own Son, but delivered Him up <span
id="fr_2155"></span>[2156](#fn_2155) for us all. <span
id="fr_2156"></span>[2157](#fn_2156) Of the Son also it is said, “who
loved me, and gave Himself <span id="fr_2157"></span>[2158](#fn_2157)
for me;” <span id="fr_2158"></span>[2159](#fn_2158) and it is also said
of Judas that Satan entered into him that he might betray <span
id="fr_2159"></span>[2160](#fn_2159) Christ. <span
id="fr_2160"></span>[2161](#fn_2160) Seeing, therefore, that the Father
delivered up His Son, and Christ delivered up His own body, and Judas
delivered up his Master, wherefore is God holy and man guilty in this
delivering up of Christ, unless that in the one action which both did,
the reason for which they did it was not the same? Three crosses stood
in one place: on one was the thief who was to be saved; on the second,
the thief who was to be condemned; on the third, between them, was
Christ, who was about to save the one thief and condemn the other. What
could be more similar than these crosses? what more unlike than the
persons who were suspended on them? Paul was given up to be imprisoned
and bound, <span id="fr_2161"></span>[2162](#fn_2161) but Satan is
unquestionably worse than any gaoler: yet to him Paul himself gave up
one man for the destruction of the flesh, that the spirit might be saved
in the day of the Lord Jesus. <span id="fr_2162"></span>[2163](#fn_2162)
And what say we to this? Behold, both deliver a man to bondage; but he
that is cruel consigns his prisoner to one less severe, while he that is
compassionate consigns his to one who is more cruel. Let us learn, my
brother, in actions which are similar to distinguish the intentions of
the agents; and let us not, shutting our eyes, deal in groundless
reproaches, and accuse those who seek men’s welfare as if they did them
wrong. In like manner, when the same apostle says that he had delivered
certain persons unto Satan, that they might learn not to
blaspheme, <span id="fr_2163"></span>[2164](#fn_2163) did he render to
these men evil for evil, or did he not rather esteem it a good work to
correct evil men by means of the evil one?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p37"></span>8. If to suffer persecution were in
all cases a praiseworthy thing, it would have sufficed for the Lord to
say, “Blessed are they which are persecuted,” without adding “for
righteousness’ sake.” <span id="fr_2164"></span>[2165](#fn_2164)
Moreover, if to inflict persecution were in all cases blameworthy, it
would not have been written in the sacred books, “Whoso privily
slandereth his neighbour, him will I persecute \[cut off, E.V.\].” <span
id="fr_2165"></span>[2166](#fn_2165) In some cases, therefore, both he
that suffers persecution is in the wrong, and he that inflicts it is in
the right. But the truth is, that always both the bad have per<span
id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_385"></span>secuted the good, and the good have
persecuted the bad: the former doing harm by their unrighteousness, the
latter seeking to do good by the administration of discipline; the
former with cruelty, the latter with moderation; the former impelled by
lust, the latter under the constraint of love. For he whose aim is to
kill is not careful how he wounds, but he whose aim is to cure is
cautious with his lancet; for the one seeks to destroy what is sound,
the other that which is decaying. The wicked put prophets to death;
prophets also put the wicked to death. The Jews scourged Christ; Christ
also scourged the Jews. The apostles were given up by men to the civil
powers; the apostles themselves gave men up to the power of Satan. In
all these cases, what is important to attend to but this: who were on
the side of truth, and who on the side of iniquity; who acted from a
desire to injure, and who from a desire to correct what was amiss?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p40"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p40.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p41"></span>9. You say that no example is found in
the writings of evangelists and apostles, of any petition presented on
behalf of the Church to the kings of the earth against her enemies. Who
denies this? None such is found. But at that time the prophecy, “Be wise
now, therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth: serve
the Lord with fear,” was not yet fulfilled. Up to that time the words
which we find at the beginning of the same Psalm were receiving their
fulfilment, “Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain
thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take
counsel together against the Lord, and against His Anointed.” <span
id="fr_2166"></span>[2167](#fn_2166) Truly, if past events recorded in
the prophetic books were figures of the future, there was given under
King Nebuchadnezzar a figure both of the time which the Church had under
the apostles, and of that which she has now. In the age of the apostles
and martyrs, that was fulfilled which was prefigured when the aforesaid
king compelled pious and just men to bow down to his image, and cast
into the flames all who refused. Now, however, is fulfilled that which
was prefigured soon after in the same king, when, being converted to the
worship of the true God, he made a decree throughout his empire, that
whosoever should speak against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, should suffer the penalty which their crime deserved. The
earlier time of that king represented the former age of emperors who did
not believe in Christ, at whose hands the Christians suffered because of
the wicked; but the later time of that king represented the age of the
successors to the imperial throne, now believing in Christ, at whose
hands the wicked suffer because of the Christians.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p43"></span>10. It is manifest, however, that
moderate severity, or rather clemency, is carefully observed towards
those who, under the Christian name, have been led astray by perverse
men, in the measures used to prevent them who are Christ’s sheep from
wandering, and to bring them back to the flock, when by punishments,
such as exile and fines, they are admonished to consider what they
suffer, and wherefore, and are taught to prefer the Scriptures which
they read to human legends and calumnies. For which of us, yea, which of
you, does not speak well of the laws issued by the emperors against
heathen sacrifices? In these, assuredly, a penalty much more severe has
been appointed, for the punishment of that impiety is death. But in
repressing and restraining you, the thing aimed at has been rather that
you should be admonished to depart from evil, than that you should be
punished for a crime. For perhaps what the apostle said of the Jews may
be said of you: “bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge: for, being ignorant of the righteousness of God,
and going about to establish their own righteousness, they have not
submitted themselves to the righteousness of God.” <span
id="fr_2167"></span>[2168](#fn_2167) For what else than your own
righteousness are you desiring to establish, when you say that none are
justified but those who may have had the opportunity of being baptized
by you? In regard to this statement made by the apostle concerning the
Jews, you differ from those to whom it originally applied in this, that
you have the Christian sacraments, of which they are still destitute.
But in regard to the words, “being ignorant of God’s righteousness, and
going about to establish their own righteousness,” and “they have a zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge,” you are exactly like them,
excepting only those among you who know what is the truth, and who in
the wilfulness of their perversity continue to fight against truth which
is perfectly well known to them. The impiety of these men is perhaps
even a greater sin than idolatry. Since, however, they cannot be easily
convicted of this (for it is a sin which lies concealed in the mind),
you are all alike restrained with a comparatively gentle severity, as
being not so far alienated from us. And this I may say, both concerning
all heretics without distinction, who, while retaining the Christian
sacraments, are dissenters from the truth and unity of Christ, and
concerning all Donatists without exception.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p45"></span>11. But as for you, who are not only,
in common with these last, styled Donatists, from Donatus, but also
specially named Rogatists, from Rogatus, you indeed seem to be more
gentle in <span id="page_386">p. 386</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_386"></span>disposition, because you do not rage up
and down with bands of these savage Circumcelliones: but no wild beast
is said to be gentle if, because of its not having teeth and claws, it
wounds no one. You say that you have no wish to be cruel: I think that
power, not will is wanting to you. For you are in number so few, that
even if you desire it, you dare not move against the multitudes which
are opposed to you. Let us suppose, however, that you do not wish to do
that which you have not strength to do; let us suppose that the gospel
rule, “If any man will sue thee at the law and take away thy coat, let
him have thy cloak also,” <span id="fr_2168"></span>[2169](#fn_2168) is
so understood and obeyed by you that resistance to those who persecute
you is unlawful, whether they have right or wrong on their side.
Rogatus, the founder of your sect, either did not hold this view, or was
guilty of inconsistency; for he fought with the keenest determination in
a lawsuit about certain things which, according to your statement,
belonged to you. If to him it had been said, Which of the apostles ever
defended his property in a matter concerning faith by appeal to the
civil courts? as you have put the question in your letter, “Which of the
apostles ever invaded the property of other men in a matter concerning
faith?” he could not find any example of this in the Divine writings;
but he might perhaps have found some true defence if he had not
separated himself from the true Church, and then audaciously claimed to
hold in the name of the true Church the disputed possession.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p47"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p47.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p48"></span>12. As to the obtaining or putting in
force of edicts of the powers of this world against schismatics and
heretics, those from whom you separated yourselves were very active in
this matter, both against you, so far as we have heard, and against the
followers of Maximianus, as we prove by the indisputable evidence of
their own Records; but you had not yet separated yourselves from them at
the time when in their petition they said to the Emperor Julian that
“nothing but righteousness found a place with him,”—a man whom all the
while they knew to be an apostate, and whom they saw to be so given over
to idolatry, that they must either admit idolatry to be righteousness,
or be unable to deny that they had wickedly lied when they said that
nothing but righteousness had a place with him with whom they saw that
idolatry had so large a place. Grant, however, that that was a mistake
in the use of words, what say you as to the deed itself? If not even
that which is just is to be sought by appeal to an emperor, why was that
which was by you supposed to be just sought from Julian?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p49"></span>13. Do you reply that it is lawful to
petition the Emperor in order to recover what is one’s own, but not
lawful to accuse another in order that he may be coerced by the Emperor?
I may remark, in passing, that in even petitioning for the recovery of
what is one’s own, the ground covered by apostolic example is abandoned,
because no apostle is found to have ever done this. But apart from this,
when your predecessors brought before the Emperor Constantine, by means
of the proconsul Anulinus, their accusations against Cæcilianus, who was
then bishop of Carthage, with whom as a guilty person they refused to
have communion, they were not endeavouring to recover something of their
own which they had lost, but were by calumnies assailing one who was, as
we think, and as the issue of the judicial proceedings showed, an
innocent man; and what more heinous crime could have been perpetrated by
them than this? If, however, as you erroneously suppose, they did in his
case deliver up to the judgment of the civil powers a man who was indeed
guilty, why do you object to our doing that which your own party first
presumed to do, and for doing which we would not find fault with them,
if they had done it not with an envious desire to do harm, but with the
intention of reproving and correcting what was wrong. But we have no
hesitation in finding fault with you, who think that we are criminal in
bringing any complaint before a Christian emperor against the enemies of
our communion, seeing that a document given by your predecessors to
Anulinus the proconsul, to be forwarded by him to the Emperor
Constantine, bore this superscription: “Libellus Ecclesiæ Catholicæ,
criminum Cæciliani, traditus a parte Majorini.” <span
id="fr_2169"></span>[2170](#fn_2169) We find fault, moreover, with them
more particularly, because when they had of their own accord gone to the
Emperor with accusations against Cæcilianus, which they ought by all
means to have in the first place proved before those who were his
colleagues beyond the sea, and when the Emperor, acting in a much more
orderly way than they had done, referred to bishops the decision of this
case pertaining to bishops which had been brought before him, they, even
when defeated by a decision against them, would not come to peace with
their brethren. Instead of this, they next accused at the bar of the
temporal sovereign, not Cæcilianus only, but also the bishops who had
been appointed judges; and finally, from a second episcopal tribunal
they appealed to the Emperor again. Nor did they consider it their duty
to yield either to truth or to peace when he himself inquired into the
case and gave his decision.

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_387"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p51"></span>14. Now what else could Constantine
have decreed against Cæcilianus and his friends, if they had been
defeated when your predecessors accused them, than the things decreed
against the very men who, having of their own accord brought the
accusations, and having failed to prove what they alleged, refused even
when defeated to acquiesce in the truth? The Emperor, as you know, in
that case decreed for the first time that the property of those who were
convicted of schism and obstinately resisted the unity of the Church
should be confiscated. If, however, the issue had been that your
predecessors who brought the accusations had gained their case, and the
Emperor had made some such decree against the communion to which
Cæcilianus belonged, you would have wished the emperors to be called the
friends of the Church’s interests, and the guardians of her peace and
unity. But when such things are decreed by emperors against the parties
who, having of their own accord brought forward accusations, were unable
to substantiate them, and who, when a welcome back to the bosom of peace
was offered to them on condition of their amendment, refused the terms,
an outcry is raised that this is an unworthy wrong, and it is maintained
that no one ought to be coerced to unity, and that evil should not be
requited for evil to any one. What else is this than what one of
yourselves wrote: “What we wish is holy”? <span
id="fr_2170"></span>[2171](#fn_2170) And in view of these things, it was
not a great or difficult thing for you to reflect and discover how the
decree and sentence of Constantine, which was published against you on
the occasion of your predecessors so frequently bringing before the
Emperor charges which they could not make good, should be in force
against you; and how all succeeding emperors, especially those who are
Catholic Christians, necessarily act according to it as often as the
exigencies of your obstinacy make it necessary for them to take any
measures in regard to you.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p53"></span>15. It was an easy thing for you to
have reflected on these things, and perhaps some time to have said to
yourselves: Seeing that Cæcilianus either was innocent, or at least
could not be proved guilty, what sin has the Christian Church spread so
far and wide through the world committed in this matter? On what ground
could it be unlawful for the Christian world to remain ignorant of that
which even those who made it matter of accusation against others could
not prove? Why should those whom Christ has sown in His field, that is,
in this world, and has commanded to grow alongside of the tares until
the harvest, <span id="fr_2171"></span>[2172](#fn_2171) —those many
thousands of believers in all nations, whose multitude the Lord compared
to the stars of heaven and the sand of the sea, to whom He promised of
old, and has now given, the blessing in the seed of Abraham,—why, I ask,
should the name of Christians be denied to all these, because, forsooth,
in regard to this case, in the discussion of which they took no part,
they preferred to believe the judges, who under grave responsibility
gave their decision, rather than the plaintiffs, against whom the
decision was given? Surely no man’s crime can stain with guilt another
who does not know of its commission. How could the faithful, scattered
throughout the world, be cognisant of the crime of surrendering the
sacred books as committed by men, whose guilt their accusers, even if
they knew it, were at least unable to prove? Unquestionably this one
fact of ignorance on their part most easily demonstrates that they had
no share in the guilt of this crime. Why then should the innocent be
charged with crimes which they never committed, because of their being
ignorant of crimes which, justly or unjustly, are laid to the charge of
others? What room is left for innocence, if it is criminal for one to be
ignorant of the crimes of others? Moreover, if the mere fact of their
ignorance proves, as has been said, the innocence of the people in so
many nations, how great is the crime of separation from the communion of
these innocent people! For the deeds of guilty parties which either
cannot be proved to those who are innocent, or cannot be believed by
them, bring no stain upon any one, since, even when known, they are
borne with in order to preserve fellowship with those who are innocent.
For the good are not to be deserted for the sake of the wicked, but the
wicked are to be borne with for the sake of the good; as the prophets
bore with those against whom they delivered such testimonies, and did
not cease to take part in the sacraments of the Jewish people; as also
our Lord bore with guilty Judas, even until he met the end which he
deserved, and permitted him to take part in the sacred supper along with
the innocent disciples; as the apostles bore with those who preached
Christ through envy,—a sin peculiarly satanic; <span
id="fr_2172"></span>[2173](#fn_2172) as Cyprian bore with colleagues
guilty of avarice, which, after the example of the apostle, <span
id="fr_2173"></span>[2174](#fn_2173) he calls idolatry. In fine,
whatever was done at that time among these bishops, although perhaps it
was known by some of them, is, unless there be respect of persons in
judgment, unknown to all: why, then, is not peace loved by all? These
thoughts might easily occur to you; perhaps you already entertain them.
But it would be better for you to be devoted to earthly possessions,
through fear of losing which you might be proved to consent to <span
id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_388"></span>known
truth, than to be devoted to that worthless vainglory which you think
you will by such consent forfeit in the estimation of men.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p57"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p57.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p58"></span>16. You now see therefore, I suppose,
that the thing to be considered when any one is coerced, is not the mere
fact of the coercion, but the nature of that to which he is coerced,
whether it be good or bad: not that any one can be good in spite of his
own will, but that, through fear of suffering what he does not desire,
he either renounces his hostile prejudices, or is compelled to examine
truth of which he had been contentedly ignorant; and under the influence
of this fear repudiates the error which he was wont to defend, or seeks
the truth of which he formerly knew nothing, and now willingly holds
what he formerly rejected. Perhaps it would be utterly useless to assert
this in words, if it were not demonstrated by so many examples. We see
not a few men here and there, but many cities, once Donatist, now
Catholic, vehemently detesting the diabolical schism, and ardently
loving the unity of the Church; and these became Catholic under the
influence of that fear which is to you so offensive by the laws of
emperors, from Constantine, before whom your party of their own accord
impeached Cæcilianus, down to the emperors of our own time, who most
justly decree that the decision of the judge whom your own party chose,
and whom they preferred to a tribunal of bishops, should be maintained
in force against you.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p59"></span>17. I have therefore yielded to the
evidence afforded by these instances which my colleagues have laid
before me. For originally my opinion was, that no one should be coerced
into the unity of Christ, that we must act only by words, fight only by
arguments, and prevail by force of reason, lest we should have those
whom we knew as avowed heretics feigning themselves to be Catholics. But
this opinion of mine was overcome not by the words of those who
controverted it, but by the conclusive instances to which they could
point. For, in the first place, there was set over against my opinion my
own town, which, although it was once wholly on the side of Donatus, was
brought over to the Catholic unity by fear of the imperial edicts, but
which we now see filled with such detestation of your ruinous
perversity, that it would scarcely be believed that it had ever been
involved in your error. There were so many others which were mentioned
to me by name, that, from facts themselves, I was made to own that to
this matter the word of Scripture might be understood as applying: “Give
opportunity to a wise man, and he will be yet wiser.” <span
id="fr_2174"></span>[2175](#fn_2174) For how many were already, as we
assuredly know, willing to be Catholics, being moved by the indisputable
plainness of truth, but daily putting off their avowal of this through
fear of offending their own party! How many were bound, not by truth—for
you never pretended to that as yours—but by the heavy chains of
inveterate custom, so that in them was fulfilled the divine saying: “A
servant (who is hardened) will not be corrected by words; for though he
understand, he will not answer”! <span
id="fr_2175"></span>[2176](#fn_2175) How many supposed the sect of
Donatus to be the true Church, merely because ease had made them too
listless, or conceited, or sluggish, to take pains to examine Catholic
truth! How many would have entered earlier had not the calumnies of
slanderers, who declared that we offered something else than we do upon
the altar of God, shut them out! How many, believing that it mattered
not to which party a Christian might belong, remained in the schism of
Donatus only because they had been born in it, and no one was compelling
them to forsake it and pass over into the Catholic Church!

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p62"></span>18. To all these classes of persons
the dread of those laws in the promulgation of which kings serve the
Lord in fear has been so useful, that now some say we were willing for
this some time ago; but thanks be to God, who has given us occasion for
doing it at once, and has cut off the hesitancy of procrastination!
Others say: We already knew this to be true, but we were held prisoners
by the force of old custom: thanks be to the Lord, who has broken these
bonds asunder, and has brought us into the bond of peace! Others say: We
knew not that the truth was here, and we had no wish to learn it; but
fear made us become earnest to examine it when we became alarmed, lest,
without any gain in things eternal, we should be smitten with loss in
temporal things: thanks be to the Lord, who has by the stimulus of fear
startled us from our negligence, that now being disquieted we might
inquire into those things which, when at ease, we did not care to know!
Others say: We were prevented from entering the Church by false reports,
which we could not know to be false unless we entered it; and we would
not enter unless we were compelled: thanks be to the Lord, who by His
scourge took away our timid hesitation, and taught us to find out for
ourselves how vain and absurd were the lies which rumour had spread
abroad against His Church: by this we are persuaded that there is no
truth in the accusations made by the authors of this heresy, since the
more serious charges which their followers have invented are without
foundation. Others say: We thought, indeed, that it mattered not in what
communion we held the faith of Christ; but thanks to the Lord, who has
gath<span id="page_389">p. 389</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_389"></span>ered us in from a state of schism, and
has taught us that it is fitting that the one God be worshipped in
unity.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p63"></span>19. Could I therefore maintain
opposition to my colleagues, and by resisting them stand in the way of
such conquests of the Lord, and prevent the sheep of Christ which were
wandering on your mountains and hills—that is, on the swellings of your
pride—from being gathered into the fold of peace, in which there is one
flock and one Shepherd? <span id="fr_2176"></span>[2177](#fn_2176) Was
it my duty to obstruct these measures, in order, forsooth, that you
might not lose what you call your own, and might without fear rob Christ
of what is His: that you might frame your testaments according to Roman
law, and might by calumnious accusations break the Testament made with
the sanction of Divine law to the fathers, in which it was written, “In
thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed”: <span
id="fr_2177"></span>[2178](#fn_2177) that you might have freedom in your
transactions in the way of buying and selling, and might be emboldened
to divide and claim as your own that which Christ bought by giving
Himself as its price: that any gift made over by one of you to another
might remain unchallenged, and that the gift which the God of gods has
bestowed upon His children, called from the rising of the sun to the
going down thereof, <span id="fr_2178"></span>[2179](#fn_2178) might
become invalid: that you might not be sent into exile from the land of
your natural birth, and that you might labour to banish Christ from the
kingdom bought with His blood, which extends from sea to sea, and from
the river to the ends of the earth? <span
id="fr_2179"></span>[2180](#fn_2179) Nay verily; let the kings of the
earth serve Christ by making laws for Him and for His cause. Your
predecessors exposed Cæcilianus and his companions to be punished by the
kings of the earth for crimes with which they were falsely charged: let
the lions now be turned to break in pieces the bones of the
calumniators, and let no intercession for them be made by Daniel when he
has been proved innocent, and set free from the den in which they meet
their doom; <span id="fr_2180"></span>[2181](#fn_2180) for he that
prepareth a pit for his neighbour shall himself most justly fall into
it. <span id="fr_2181"></span>[2182](#fn_2181)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p70"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p70.1"></span>Chap. VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p71"></span>20. Save yourself therefore, my
brother, while you have this present life, from the wrath which is to
come on the obstinate and the proud. The formidable power of the
authorities of this world, when it assails the truth, gives glorious
opportunity of probation to the strong, but puts dangerous temptation
before the weak who are righteous; but when it assists the proclamation
of the truth, it is the means of profitable admonition to the wise, and
of unprofitable vexation to the foolish among those who have gone
astray. “For there is no power but of God: whosoever therefore resisteth
the power, resisteth the ordinance of God; for rulers are not a terror
to good works, but to the evil. Wilt thou then not be afraid of the
power? Do that which is good, and thou shalt have praise of the
same.” <span id="fr_2182"></span>[2183](#fn_2182) For if the power be on
the side of the truth, and correct any one who was in error, he that is
put right by the correction has praise from the power. If, on the other
hand, the power be unfriendly to the truth, and cruelly persecute any
one, he who is crowned victor in this contest receives praise from the
power which he resists. But you do not that which is good, so as to
avoid being afraid of the power; unless perchance this is good, to sit
and speak against not one brother, <span
id="fr_2183"></span>[2184](#fn_2183) but against all your brethren that
are found among all nations, to whom the prophets, and Christ, and the
apostles bear witness in the words of Scripture, “In thy seed shall all
the nations of the earth be blessed;” and again, “From the rising of the
sun even unto the going down of the same, a pure offering shall be
offered unto My name; for My name shall be great among the heathen,
saith the Lord.” <span id="fr_2184"></span>[2185](#fn_2184) Mark this:
“saith the Lord;” not saith Donatus, or Rogatus, or Vincentius, or
Ambrose, or Augustin, but “saith the Lord;” and again, “All tribes of
the earth shall be blessed in Him, and all nations shall call Him
blessed. Blessed be the Lord God, the God of Israel, who only doeth
wondrous things; and blessed be His glorious name for ever, and the
whole earth shall be filled with His glory: so let it be, so let it
be.” <span id="fr_2185"></span>[2186](#fn_2185) And you sit at Cartennæ,
and with a remnant of half a score of Rogatists you say, “Let it not be!
Let it not be!”

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p76"></span>21. You hear Christ speaking thus in
the Gospel: “All things must be fulfilled which were written in the law
of Moses, and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning Me. Then
opened He their understanding, that they might understand the
Scriptures, and said unto them, Thus it is written, and thus it behoved
Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day; and that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in His name among
all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.” <span
id="fr_2186"></span>[2187](#fn_2186) You read also in the Acts of the
Apostles how this gospel began at Jerusalem, where the Holy Spirit first
filled those hundred and twenty persons, and went forth thence into
Judæa and Samaria, and to all nations, as He had said unto them when He
was about to ascend into heaven, “Ye shall <span id="page_390">p.
390</span> <span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_390"></span>be witnesses unto Me
both in Jerusalem, and in all Judæa, and in Samaria, and unto the
uttermost parts of the earth;” <span
id="fr_2187"></span>[2188](#fn_2187) for “their sound went into all the
earth, and their words unto the ends of the world.” <span
id="fr_2188"></span>[2189](#fn_2188) And you contradict the Divine
testimonies so firmly established and so clearly revealed, and attempt
to bring about such an absolute confiscation of Christ’s heritage, that
although repentance is preached, as He said, in His name to all nations,
whosoever may be in any part of the earth moved by that preaching, there
is for him no possibility of remission of sins, unless he seek and
discover Vincentius of Cartennæ, or some one of his nine or ten
associates, in their obscurity in the imperial colony of Mauritania.
What will the arrogance of insignificant mortals <span
id="fr_2189"></span>[2190](#fn_2189) not dare to do? To what extremities
will the presumption of flesh and blood not hurry men? Is this your
well-doing, on account of which you are not afraid of the power? You
place this grievous stumbling-block in the way of your own mother’s
son, <span id="fr_2190"></span>[2191](#fn_2190) for whom Christ
died, <span id="fr_2191"></span>[2192](#fn_2191) and who is yet in
feeble infancy, not ready to use strong meat, but requiring to be nursed
on a mother’s milk; <span id="fr_2192"></span>[2193](#fn_2192) and you
quote against me the works of Hilary, in order that you may deny the
fact of the Church’s increase among all nations; even unto the end of
the world, according to the promise which God, in order to subdue your
unbelief, confirmed with an oath! And although you would by all means be
most miserable if you stood against this when it was promised, you even
now contradict it when the promise is fulfilled.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p84"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p84.1"></span>Chap. VII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p85"></span>22. You, however, through your
profound erudition, have discovered something which you think worthy to
be alleged as a great objection against the Divine testimonies. For you
say, “If we consider the parts comprehended in the whole world, it is a
comparatively small portion in which the Christian faith is known:”
either refusing to see, or pretending not to know, to how many barbarous
nations the gospel has already penetrated, within a space of time so
short, that not even Christ’s enemies can doubt that in a little while
that shall be accomplished which our Lord foretold, when, answering the
question of His disciples concerning the end of the world, He said,
“This gospel of the kingdom shall be preached in all the world for a
witness unto all nations, and then shall the end come.” <span
id="fr_2193"></span>[2194](#fn_2193) Meanwhile do all you can to
proclaim and to maintain, that even though the gospel be published in
Persia and India, as indeed it has been for a long time, no one who
hears it can be in any degree cleansed from his sins, unless he come to
Cartennæ, or to the neighbourhood of Cartennæ! If you have not expressly
said this, it is evidently through fear lest men should laugh at you;
and yet when you do say this, do you refuse that men should weep for
you?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p87"></span>23. You think that you make a very
acute remark when you affirm the name Catholic to mean universal, not in
respect to the communion as embracing the whole world, but in respect to
the observance of all Divine precepts and of all the sacraments, as if
we (even accepting the position that the Church is called Catholic
because it honestly holds the whole truth, of which fragments here and
there are found in some heresies) rested upon the testimony of this
word’s signification, and not upon the promises of God, and so many
indisputable testimonies of the truth itself, our demonstration of the
existence of the Church of God in all nations. In fact, however, this is
the whole which you attempt to make us believe, that the Rogatists alone
remain worthy of the name Catholics, on the ground of their observing
all the Divine precepts and all the sacraments; and that you are the
only persons in whom the Son of man when He cometh shall find
faith. <span id="fr_2194"></span>[2195](#fn_2194) You must excuse me for
saying we do not believe a word of this. For although, in order to make
it possible for that faith to be found in you which the Lord said that
He would not find on the earth, you may perhaps presume even to say that
you are to be regarded as in heaven, not on earth, we at least have
profited by the apostle’s warning, wherein he has taught us that even an
angel from heaven must be regarded as accursed if he were to preach to
us any other gospel than that which we have received. <span
id="fr_2195"></span>[2196](#fn_2195) But how can we be sure that we have
indisputable testimony to Christ in the Divine Word, if we do not accept
as indisputable the testimony of the same Word to the Church? For as,
however ingenious the complex subtleties which one may contrive against
the simple truth, and however great the mist of artful fallacies with
which he may obscure it, any one who shall proclaim that Christ has not
suffered, and has not risen from the dead on the third day, must be
accursed—because we have learned in the truth of the gospel, “that it
behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead on the third
day;” <span id="fr_2196"></span>[2197](#fn_2196) —on the very same
grounds must that man be accursed who shall proclaim that the Church is
outside of <span id="fr_2197"></span>[2198](#fn_2197) the communion
which embraces all nations: for in the <span id="page_391">p. 391</span>
<span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_391"></span>next words of the same passage we
learn also that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in
His name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem; <span
id="fr_2198"></span>[2199](#fn_2198) and we are bound to hold firmly
this rule, “If any preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have
received, let him be accursed.” <span
id="fr_2199"></span>[2200](#fn_2199)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p94"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p94.1"></span>Chap. VIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p95"></span>24. If, moreover, we do not listen to
the claims of the entire sect of Donatists when they pretend to be the
Church of Christ, seeing that they do not allege in proof of this
anything from the Divine Books, how much less, I ask, are we called upon
to listen to the Rogatists, who will not attempt to interpret; in the
interest of their party the words of Scripture: “Where Thou feedest,
where Thou dost rest in the south”! <span
id="fr_2200"></span>[2201](#fn_2200) For if by this the southern part of
Africa is to be understood,—the district, namely, which is occupied by
Donatists, because it is under a more burning portion of the
heavens,—the Maximianists must excel all the rest of your party, as the
flame of their schism broke forth in Byzantium <span
id="fr_2201"></span>[2202](#fn_2201) and in Tripoli. Let the Arzuges, if
they please, dispute this point with them, and contest that to them more
properly this text applies; but how shall the imperial province of
Mauritania, lying rather to the west than to the south, since it refuses
to be called Africa,—how shall it, I say, find in the word “the
south” <span id="fr_2202"></span>[2203](#fn_2202) a ground for boasting,
I do not say against the world, but against even that sect of Donatus
from which the sect of Rogatus, a very small fragment of that other and
larger fragment, has been broken off? For what else is it than
superlative impudence for one to interpret in his own favour any
allegorical statements, unless he has also plain testimonies, by the
light of which the obscure meaning of the former may be made manifest.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p99"></span>25. With how much greater force,
moreover, may we say to you what we are accustomed to say to all the
Donatists: If any can have good grounds (which indeed none can have) for
separating themselves from the communion of the whole world, and calling
their communion the Church of Christ, because of their having withdrawn
warrantably from the communion of all nations,—how do you know that in
the Christian society, which is spread so far and wide, there may not
have been some in a very remote place, from which the fame of their
righteousness could not reach you, who had already, before the date of
your separation, separated themselves for some just cause from the
communion of the whole world? How could the Church in that case be found
in your sect, rather than in those who were separated before you? Thus
it comes to pass, that so long as you are ignorant of this, you cannot
make with certainty any claim: which is necessarily the portion of all
who, in defending the cause of their party, appeal to their own
testimony instead of the testimony of God. For you cannot say, If this
had happened, it could not have escaped our knowledge; for, not going
beyond Africa itself, you cannot tell, when the question is put to you,
how many subdivisions of the party of Donatus have occurred: in
connection with which we must especially bear in mind that in your view
the smaller the number of those who separate themselves, the greater is
the justice of their cause, and this paucity of numbers makes them
undoubtedly more likely to remain unnoticed. Hence, also, you are by no
means sure that there may not be some righteous persons, few in number,
and therefore unknown, dwelling in some place far remote from the south
of Africa, who, long before the party of Donatus had withdrawn their
righteousness from fellowship with the unrighteousness of all other men,
had, in their remote northern region, separated themselves in the same
way for some most satisfactory reason, and now are, by a claim superior
to yours, the Church of God, as the spiritual Zion which preceded all
your sects in the matter of warrantable secession, and who interpret in
their favour the words of the Psalm, “Mount Zion, on the sides of the
north, the city of the Great King,” <span
id="fr_2203"></span>[2204](#fn_2203) with much more reason than the
party of Donatus interpret in their favour the words, “Where Thou
feedest, where Thou dost rest in the south.” <span
id="fr_2204"></span>[2205](#fn_2204)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p102"></span>26. You profess, nevertheless, to be
afraid lest, when you are compelled by imperial edicts to consent to
unity, the name of God be for a longer time blasphemed by the Jews and
the heathen: as if the Jews were not aware how their own nation Israel,
in the beginning of its history, wished to exterminate by war the two
tribes and a half which had received possessions beyond Jordan, when
they thought that these had separated themselves from the unity of their
nation. <span id="fr_2205"></span>[2206](#fn_2205) As to the Pagans,
they may indeed with greater reason reproach us for the laws which
Christian emperors have enacted against idolaters; and yet many of these
have thereby been, and are now daily, turned from idols to the living
and true God. In fact, however, both Jews and Pagans, if they thought
the Christians to be as insignificant in number as you are,—who
maintain, forsooth, that you alone are Christians,—would not condescend
to say anything against us, but would never cease to treat us with
ridicule and contempt. Are you not afraid <span id="page_392">p.
392</span> <span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_392"></span>lest the Jews should
say to you, “If your handful of men be the Church of Christ, what
becomes of the statement of your Apostle Paul, that your Church is
described in the words, ‘Rejoice, thou barren that bearest not;
breakforth and cry, thou that travailest not: for the desolate hath many
more children than she which hath an husband;’ <span
id="fr_2206"></span>[2207](#fn_2206) in which he plainly declares the
multitude of Christians to surpass that of the Jewish Church?” Will you
say to them, “We are the more righteous because our number is not
large;” and do you expect them not to reply, “Whoever <span
id="fr_2207"></span>[2208](#fn_2207) you claim to be, you are not those
of whom it is said, ‘She that was desolate hath *many* children,’ if you
are reduced to so small a number”?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p106"></span>27. Perhaps you will quote against
this the example of that righteous man, who along with his family was
alone found worthy of deliverance when the flood came. Do you see then
how far you still are from being righteous? Most assuredly we do not
affirm you to be righteous on the ground of this instance until your
associates be reduced to seven, yourself being the eighth person:
provided always, however, that no other has, as I was saying,
anticipated the party of Donatus in snatching up that righteousness, by
having, in some far distant spot, withdrawn himself along with seven
more, under pressure of some good reason, from communion with the whole
world, and so saved himself from the flood by which it is overwhelmed.
Seeing, therefore, that you do not know whether this may not have been
done, and been as entirely unheard of by you as the name of Donatus is
unheard of by many nations of Christians in remote countries,you are
unable to say with certainty where the Church is to be found. For it
must be in that place in which what you have now done may happen to have
been at an earlier date done by others, if there could possibly be any
just reason for your separating yourselves from the communion of the
whole world.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p107"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p107.1"></span>Chap. IX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p108"></span>28. We, however, are certain that no
one could ever have been warranted in separating himself from the
communion of all nations, because every one of us looks for the marks of
the Church not in his own righteousness, but in the Divine Scriptures,
and beholds it actually in existence, according to the promises. For it
is of the Church that it is said,“As the lily among thorns, so is my
love among the daughters;” <span id="fr_2208"></span>[2209](#fn_2208)
which could be called on the one hand “thorns” only by reason of the
wickedness of their manners, and on the other hand “daughters” by reason
of their participation in the same sacraments. Again, it is the Church
which saith, “From the end of the earth have I cried unto Thee when my
heart was overwhelmed;” <span id="fr_2209"></span>[2210](#fn_2209) and
in another Psalm, “Horror hath kept me back from <span
id="fr_2210"></span>[2211](#fn_2210) the wicked that forsake Thy law;”
and, “I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved.” <span
id="fr_2211"></span>[2212](#fn_2211) It is the same which says to her
Spouse: “Tell me where Thou feedest, where Thou dost rest at noon: for
why should I be as one veiled beside the flocks of Thy
companions?” <span id="fr_2212"></span>[2213](#fn_2212) This is the same
as is said in another place: “Make known to me Thy right hand, and those
who are in heart taught in wisdom;” <span
id="fr_2213"></span>[2214](#fn_2213) in whom, as they shine with light
and glow with love, Thou dost rest as in noontide; lest perchance, like
one veiled, that is, hidden and unknown, I should run, not to Thy flock,
but to the flocks of Thy companions, *i.e.* of heretics, whom the bride
here calls companions, just as He called the thorns <span
id="fr_2214"></span>[2215](#fn_2214) “daughters,” because of common
participation in the sacraments: of which persons it is elsewhere said:
“Thou wast a man, mine equal, my guide, my acquaintance, who didst take
sweet food together with me; we walked unto the house of God in company.
Let death seize upon them, and let them go down quick into hell,” <span
id="fr_2215"></span>[2216](#fn_2215) like Dathan and Abiram, the authors
of an impious schism.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p117"></span>29. It is to the Church also that the
answer is given immediately after in the passage quoted above: “If thou
know not thyself, <span id="fr_2216"></span>[2217](#fn_2216) O thou
fairest among women, go thy way forth by the footsteps of the
flocks, <span id="fr_2217"></span>[2218](#fn_2217) and feed thy kids
beside the shepherds’ tents.” <span id="fr_2218"></span>[2219](#fn_2218)
Oh, matchless sweetness of the Bridegroom, who thus replied to her
question: “If thou knowest not thyself,” He says; as if He said, “Surely
the city which is set upon a mountain cannot be hid; <span
id="fr_2219"></span>[2220](#fn_2219) and therefore, ‘Thou art not as one
veiled, that thou shouldst run to the flocks of my companions.’ For I am
the mountain established upon the top of the mountains, unto which all
nations shall come. <span id="fr_2220"></span>[2221](#fn_2220) ‘If thou
knowest not thyself,’ by the knowledge which thou mayest gain, not in
the words of false witnesses, but in the testimonies of My book; ‘if
thou knowest not thyself,’ from such testimony as this concerning thee:
‘Lengthen thy cords, and strengthen thy stakes: for thou shalt break
forth on the right hand and on the left; and thy seed shall inherit the
Gentiles, and make the desolate cities to be inhabited. <span
id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_393"></span>Fear
not, for thou shall not be ashamed; neither be thou confounded, for thou
shall not be put to shame: for thou shalt forget the shame of thy youth,
and shall not remember the reproach of thy widowhood any more: for thy
Maker is thine husband, the Lord of hosts is His name, and thy Redeemer
the Holy One of Israel; the God of the whole earth shall He be called.’
‘If thou knowest not thyself,’ O thou fairest among women, from this
which hath been said of thee, ‘The King hath greatly desired thy
beauty,’ and ‘instead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom thou
mayest make princes upon the earth:’ <span
id="fr_2221"></span>[2222](#fn_2221) if, therefore, ‘thou know not
thyself,’ go thy way forth: I do not cast thee forth, but ‘go thy way
forth,’ that of thee it may be said, ‘They went out from us, but they
were not of us.’ <span id="fr_2222"></span>[2223](#fn_2222) ‘Go thy way
forth’ by the footsteps of the flocks, not in My footsteps, but in the
footsteps of the flocks; and not of the one flock, but of flocks divided
and going astray. ‘And feed thy kids,’ not as Peter, to whom it is said,
‘Feed My sheep;’ <span id="fr_2223"></span>[2224](#fn_2223) but, ‘Feed
thy kids beside the shepherds’ tents,’ not beside the tent of the
Shepherd, where there is ‘one fold and one Shepherd.’” <span
id="fr_2224"></span>[2225](#fn_2224) But the church knows herself, and
thereby escapes from that lot which has befallen those who did not know
themselves to be in her.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p127"></span>30. The same \[Church\] is spoken of,
when, in regard to the fewness of her numbers as compared with the
multitude of the wicked, it is said: “Strait is the gate and narrow is
the way which leadeth unto life, and few there be that find it.” <span
id="fr_2225"></span>[2226](#fn_2225) And again, it is of the same Church
that it is said with respect to the multitude of her members: “I will
multiply thy seed as the stars of heaven, and as the sand which is upon
the sea-shore.” <span id="fr_2226"></span>[2227](#fn_2226) For the same
Church of holy and good believers is both small if compared with the
number of the wicked, which is greater, and large if considered by
itself; “for the desolate hath more sons than she which hath an
husband,” and “many shall come from the east and from the west, and
shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob, in the kingdom of
God.” <span id="fr_2227"></span>[2228](#fn_2227) God, moreover, presents
unto Himself a “numerous people, zealous of good works.” <span
id="fr_2228"></span>[2229](#fn_2228) And in the Apocalypse, many
thousands “which no man can number,” from every tribe and tongue, are
seen clothed in white robes, and with palms of victory. <span
id="fr_2229"></span>[2230](#fn_2229) It is the same Church which is
occasionally obscured, and, as it were, beclouded by the multitude of
offences, when sinners bend the bow that they may shoot under the
darkened moon <span id="fr_2230"></span>[2231](#fn_2230) at the upright
in heart. <span id="fr_2231"></span>[2232](#fn_2231) But even at such a
time the Church shines in those who are most firm in their attachment to
her. And if, in the Divine promise above quoted, any distinct
application of its two clauses should be made, it is perhaps not without
reason that the seed of Abraham was compared both to the “stars of
heaven,” and to “the sand which is by the sea-shore:” that by “the
stars” may be understood those who, in number fewer, are more fixed and
more brilliant; and that by “the sand on the sea-shore” may be
understood that great multitude of weak and carnal persons within the
Church, who at one time are seen at rest and free while the weather is
calm, but are at another time covered and troubled under the waves of
tribulation and temptation.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p135"></span>31. Now, such a troublous time was
the time at which Hilary wrote in the passage which you have thought fit
artfully to adduce against so many Divine testimonies, as if by it you
could prove that the Church has perished from the earth. <span
id="fr_2232"></span>[2233](#fn_2232) You may just as well say that the
numerous churches of Galatia had no existence at the time when the
apostle wrote to them: “O foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you,”
that, “having begun in the Spirit, ye are now made perfect in the
flesh?” <span id="fr_2233"></span>[2234](#fn_2233) For thus you would
misrepresent that learned man, who (like the apostle) was sternly
rebuking the slow of heart and the timid, for whom he was travailing in
birth a second time, until Christ should be formed in them. <span
id="fr_2234"></span>[2235](#fn_2234) For who does not know that many
persons of weak judgment were at that time deluded by ambiguous phrases,
so that they thought that the Arians believed the same doctrines as they
themselves held; and that others, through fear, had yielded and feigned
consent, not walking uprightly according to the truth of the gospel, to
whom you would have denied that forgiveness which, when they had been
turned from their error, was extended to them? But in refusing such
pardon, you prove yourselves wholly ignorant of the word of God. For
read what Paul has recorded concerning Peter, <span
id="fr_2235"></span>[2236](#fn_2235) and what Cyprian has expressed as
his view on the ground of that statement, and do not blame the
compassion of the Church, which does not scatter the members of Christ
when they are gathered together, but labours to gather His scattered
members into one. It is true that those who then stood most resolute,
and were able to understand the treacherous phrases used by the <span
id="page_394">p. 394</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_394"></span>heretics, were few in number when
compared with the rest; but some of them it is to be remembered were
then bravely enduring sentence of banishment, and others were hiding
themselves for safety in all parts of the world. And thus the Church,
which is increasing throughout all nations, has been preserved as the
Lord’s wheat, and shall be preserved unto the end, yea, until all
nations, even the barbarous tribes, are within its embrace. For it is
the Church which the Son of man has sown as good seed, and of which He
has foretold that it should grow among the tares until the harvest. For
the field is the world, and the harvest is the end of time. <span
id="fr_2236"></span>[2237](#fn_2236)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p141"></span>32. Hilary, therefore, either was
rebuking not the wheat, but the tares, in those ten provinces of Asia,
or was addressing himself to the wheat, because it was endangered
through some unfaithfulness, and spoke as one who thought that the
rebuke would be useful in proportion to the vehemence with which it was
given. For the canonical Scriptures contain examples of the same manner
of rebuke in which what is intended for some is spoken as if it applied
to all. Thus the apostle, when he says to the Corinthians, “How say some
among you, that there is no resurrection of the dead?” <span
id="fr_2237"></span>[2238](#fn_2237) proves clearly that all of them
were not such; but he bears witness that those who were such were not
outside of their communion, but among them. And shortly after, lest
those who were of a different opinion should be led astray by them, he
gave this warning: “Be not deceived: evil communications corrupt good
manners. Awake to righteousness, and sin not; for some have not the
knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame.” <span
id="fr_2238"></span>[2239](#fn_2238) But when he says, “Whereas there is
among you envying, and strife, and divisions, are ye not carnal, and
walk as men?” <span id="fr_2239"></span>[2240](#fn_2239) he speaks as if
it applied to all, and you see how grave a charge he makes. Wherefore,
if it were not that we read in the same epistle, “I thank my God always
on your behalf, for the grace of God which is given you by Jesus Christ;
that in everything ye are enriched by Him, in all utterance, and in all
knowledge; even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you: so that
ye come behind in no gift,” <span id="fr_2240"></span>[2241](#fn_2240)
we would think that all the Corinthians had been carnal and natural, not
perceiving the things of the spirit of God, <span
id="fr_2241"></span>[2242](#fn_2241) fond of strife, and full of envy,
and “walking as men.” In like manner it is said, on the one hand, “the
whole world lieth in wickedness,” <span
id="fr_2242"></span>[2243](#fn_2242) because of the tares which are
throughout the whole world; and, on the other hand, Christ “is the
propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for the sins
of the whole world,” <span id="fr_2243"></span>[2244](#fn_2243) because
of the wheat which is throughout the whole world.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p149"></span>33. The love of many, however, waxes
cold because of offences, which abound increasingly the more that,
within the communion of the sacraments of Christ, there are gathered to
the glory of His name even those who are wicked, and who persist in the
obstinacy of error; whose separation, however, as chaff from the wheat,
is to be effected only in the final purging of the Lord’s
threshing-floor. <span id="fr_2244"></span>[2245](#fn_2244) These do not
destroy those who are the Lord’s wheat—few, indeed, when compared with
the others, but in themselves a great multitude; they do not destroy the
elect of God, who are to be gathered at the end of the world from the
four winds, from the one end of heaven to the other. <span
id="fr_2245"></span>[2246](#fn_2245) For it is from the elect that the
cry comes, “Help, Lord! for the godly man ceaseth, for the faithful fail
from among the children of men;” <span
id="fr_2246"></span>[2247](#fn_2246) and it is of them that the Lord
saith, “He that shall endure to the end (when iniquity shall abound),
the same shall be saved.” <span id="fr_2247"></span>[2248](#fn_2247)
Moreover, that the psalm quoted is the language not of one man, but of
many, is shown by the following context: “Thou shalt keep us, O Lord;
Thou shalt preserve us from this generation for ever.” <span
id="fr_2248"></span>[2249](#fn_2248) On account of this abounding
iniquity which the Lord foretold, it is said in another place: “When the
Son of man cometh, shall He find faith on the earth?” This doubt
expressed by Him who knoweth all things prefigured the doubts which in
Him we entertain, when the Church, being often disappointed in many from
whom much was expected, but who have proved very different from what
they were supposed to be, is so alarmed in regard to her own members,
that she is slow to believe good of any one. Nevertheless it would be
wrong to cherish doubt that those whose faith He shall find on the earth
are growing along with the tares throughout the whole field.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p155"></span>34. Therefore it is the same Church
also which within the Lord’s net is swimming along with the bad fishes,
but is in heart and in life separated from them, and departs from them,
that she may be presented to her Lord a “glorious Church, not having
spot or wrinkle.” <span id="fr_2249"></span>[2250](#fn_2249) But the
actual visible separation she looks for only on the sea-shore, *i.e.* at
the end of the world,—meanwhile correcting as many as she can, and
bearing with those whom she cannot correct; but she does not abandon the
unity of the good because of the wickedness of those whom she finds
incorrigible.

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_395"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p157"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p157.1"></span>Chap. X.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p158"></span>35. Wherefore, my brother, refrain
from gathering together against divine testimonies so many, so
perspicuous, and so unchallenged, the calumnies which may be found in
the writings of bishops either of our communion, as Hilary, or of the
undivided Church itself in the age preceding the schism of Donatus, as
Cyprian or Agrippinus; <span id="fr_2250"></span>[2251](#fn_2250)
because, in the first place, this class of writings must be, so far as
authority is concerned, distinguished from the canon of Scripture. For
they are not read by us as if a testimony brought forward from them was
such that it would be unlawful to hold any different opinion, for it may
be that the opinions which they held were different from those to which
truth demands our assent. For we are amongst those who do not reject
what has been taught us even by an apostle: “If in anything ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you; nevertheless,
whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule,” <span
id="fr_2251"></span>[2252](#fn_2251) —in that way, namely, which Christ
is; of which way the Psalmist thus speaks: “God be merciful unto us, and
bless us, and cause His face to shine upon us: that Thy way may be known
upon earth, Thy saving health among all nations.” <span
id="fr_2252"></span>[2253](#fn_2252)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p162"></span>36. In the next place, if you are
charmed by the authority of that bishop and illustrious martyr St.
Cyprian, which we indeed regard, as I have said, as quite distinct from
the authority of canonical Scripture, why are you not charmed by such
things in him as these: that he maintained with loyalty, and defended in
debate, the unity of the Church in the world and in all nations; that he
censured, as full of self-sufficiency and pride, those who wished to
separate themselves as righteous from the Church, holding them up to
ridicule for assuming to themselves that which the Lord did not concede
even to apostles,—namely, the gathering of the tares before the
harvest,—and for attempting to separate the chaff from the wheat, as if
to them had been assigned the charge of removing the chaff and cleansing
the threshing-floor; that he proved that no man can be stained with
guilt by the sins of others, thus sweeping away the only ground alleged
by the authors of schism for their separation; that in the very matter
in regard to which he was of a different opinion from his colleagues, he
did not decree that those who thought otherwise than he did should be
condemned or excommunicated; that even in his letter to Jubaianus <span
id="fr_2253"></span>[2254](#fn_2253) (which was read for the first time
in the Council, <span id="fr_2254"></span>[2255](#fn_2254) the authority
of which you are wont to plead in defence of the practice of
rebaptizing), although he admits that in time past persons who had been
baptized in other communions had been received into the Church without
being a second time baptized, on which ground they were regarded by him
as having had no baptism, nevertheless he considers the use and benefit
of peace within the Church to be so great, that for its sake he holds
that these persons (though in his judgment unbaptized) should not be
excluded from office in the Church?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p165"></span>37. And by this you will very readily
perceive (for I know the acuteness of your mind) that your cause is
completely subverted and annihilated. For if, as you suppose, the Church
which had been spread abroad throughout the world perished through her
admitting sinners to partake in her sacraments (and this is the ground
alleged for your separation), it had wholly perished long before,—at the
time, namely, when, as Cyprian says, men were admitted into it without
baptism,—and thus Cyprian himself had no Church within which to be born;
and if so, how much more must this have been the case with one who, like
Donatus, the author of your schism, and the father of your sect,
belonged to a later age! But if at that time, although persons were
being admitted into the Church without baptism, the Church nevertheless
remained in being, so as to give birth to Cyprian and afterwards to
Donatus, it is manifest that the righteous are not defiled by the sins
of other men when they participate with them in the sacraments. And thus
you have no excuse by which you can wash away the guilt of the schism
whereby you have gone forth from the unity of the Church; and in you is
fulfilled that saying of Holy Writ: “There is a generation that esteem
themselves right, and have not cleansed themselves from the guilt of
their going forth.” <span id="fr_2255"></span>[2256](#fn_2255)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p167"></span>38. The man who, out of regard to the
sameness of the sacraments, does not presume to insist on the second
administration of baptism even to heretics, is not, by thus avoiding
Cyprian’s error, placed on a level with Cyprian in merit, any more than
the man who does not insist upon the Gentiles conforming to Jewish
ceremonies is thereby placed on a level in merit with the Apostle Peter.
In Peter’s case, however, the record not only of his halting, but also
of his correction, is contained in the canonical Scriptures; whereas the
statement that Cyprian entertained opinions at variance with those
approved by the constitution and practice of the Church is found, not in
canonical Scripture, but in his own writings, and in those of a Council;
and although it is not found in the same records that he corrected that
opinion, it is nevertheless by no means an unreasonable supposition that
he did correct it, and that this fact may perhaps <span id="page_396">p.
396</span> <span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_396"></span>have been suppressed
by those who were too much pleased with the error into which he fell,
and were unwilling to lose the patronage of so great a name. At the same
time, there are not wanting some who maintain that Cyprian never held
the view ascribed to him, but that this was an unwarrantable forgery
passed off by liars under his name. For it was impossible for the
integrity and authenticity of the writings of any one bishop, however
illustrious, to be secured and preserved as the canonical Scriptures are
through translation into so many languages, and through the regular and
continuous manner in which the Church has used them in public worship.
Even in the face of this, some have been found forging many things under
the names of the apostles. It is true, indeed, that they made such
attempts in vain, because the text of canonical Scripture was so well
attested, and so generally used and known; but this effort of an unholy
boldness, which has not forborne to assail writings which are defended
by the strength of such notoriety, has proved what it is capable of
essaying against writings which are not established upon canonical
authority.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p168"></span>39. We, however, do not deny that
Cyprian held the views ascribed to him: first, because his style has a
certain peculiarity of expression by which it may be recognised; and
secondly, because in this case our cause rather than yours is proved
victorious, and the pretext alleged for your schism—namely, that you
might not be defiled by the sins of other men—is in the most simple
manner exploded; since it is manifest from the letters of Cyprian that
participation in the sacraments was allowed to sinful men, when those
who, in your judgment (and as you will have it, in his judgment also),
were unbaptized were as such admitted to the Church, and that
nevertheless the Church did not perish, but remained in the dignity
belonging to her nature as the Lord’s wheat scattered throughout the
world. And, therefore, if in your consternation you thus betake
yourselves to Cyprian’s authority as to a harbour of refuge, you see the
rock against which your error dashes itself in this course; if, on the
other hand, you do not venture to flee thither, you are wrecked without
any struggle for escape.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p169"></span>40. Moreover, Cyprian either did not
hold at all the opinions which you ascribe to him, or did subsequently
correct his mistake by the rule of truth, or covered this blemish, as we
may call it, upon his otherwise spotless mind by the abundance of his
love, in his most amply defending the unity of the Church growing
throughout the whole world, and in his most stedfastly holding the bond
of peace; for it is written, “Charity \[love\] covereth a multitude of
sins.” <span id="fr_2256"></span>[2257](#fn_2256) To this was also
added, that in him, as a most fruitful branch, the Father removed by the
pruning-knife of suffering whatever may have remained in him requiring
correction: “For every branch in me,” saith the Lord, “that beareth
fruit He purgeth, that it may bring forth more fruit.” <span
id="fr_2257"></span>[2258](#fn_2257) And whence this care of him, if not
because, continuing as a branch in the far-spreading vine, he did not
forsake the root of unity? “For though he gave his body to be burned, if
he had not charity, it would profit him nothing.” <span
id="fr_2258"></span>[2259](#fn_2258)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p173"></span>41. Attend now a little while to the
letters of Cyprian, that you may see how he proves the man to be
inexcusable who desires ostensibly on the ground of his own
righteousness to withdraw himself from the unity of the Church (which
God promised and has fulfilled in all nations), and that you may more
clearly apprehend the truth of the text quoted by me shortly before:
“There is a generation that esteem themselves righteous, and have not
cleansed themselves from the guilt of their going forth.” In a letter
which he wrote to Antonianus <span id="fr_2259"></span>[2260](#fn_2259)
he discusses a matter very closely akin to that which we are now
debating; but it is better for us to give his very words: “Some of our
predecessors,” he says, “in the episcopal office in this province were
of opinion that the peace of the Church should not be given to
fornicators, and finally closed the door of repentance against those who
had been guilty of adultery. They did not, however, withdraw themselves
from fellowship with their colleagues in the episcopate; nor did they
rend asunder the unity of the Catholic Church, by such harshness and
obstinate perseverance in their censure as to separate themselves from
the Church because others granted while they themselves refused to
adulterers the peace of the Church. The bond of concord remaining
unbroken, and the sacrament of the Church continuing undivided, each
bishop arranges and orders his own conduct as one who shall give account
of his procedure to his Lord.” What say you to that, brother Vincentius?
Surely you must see that this great man, this peace-loving bishop and
dauntless martyr, made nothing more earnestly his care than to prevent
the sundering of the bond of unity. You see him travailing in birth for
the souls of men, not only that they might, when conceived, be born in
Christ, but also that, when born, they might not perish through their
being shaken out of their mother’s bosom.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p175"></span>42. Now give attention, I pray you,
further to this thing which he has mentioned in protesting against
impious schismatics. If those who granted peace to adulterers, who
repented of <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_397"></span>their sin, shared the guilt of
adulterers, were those who did not so act defiled by fellowship with
them as colleagues in office? If, again, it was a right thing, as truth
asserts and the Church maintains, that peace should be given to
adulterers who repented of their sin, those who utterly closed against
adulterers the door of reconciliation through repentance were
unquestionably guilty of impiety in refusing healing to the members of
Christ, in taking away the keys of the Church from those who knocked for
admission, and in opposing with heartless cruelty God’s most
compassionate forbearance, which permitted them to live in order that,
repenting, they might be healed by the sacrifice of a contrite spirit
and broken heart. Nevertheless this their heartless error and impiety
did not defile the others, compassionate and peace-loving men, when
these shared with them in the Christian sacraments, and tolerated them
within the net of unity, until the time when, brought to the shore, they
should be separated from each other; or if this error and impiety of
others did defile them, then the Church was already at that time
destroyed, and there was no Church to give Cyprian birth. But if, as is
beyond question, the Church continued in existence, it is also beyond
question that no man in the unity of Christ can be stained by the guilt
of the sins of other men if he be not consenting to the deeds of the
wicked, and thus defiled by actual participation in their crimes, but
only, for the sake of the fellowship of the good, tolerating the wicked,
as the chaff which lies until the final purging of the Lord’s
threshing-floor. These things being so, where is the pretext for your
schism? Are ye not an “evil generation, esteeming yourselves righteous,
yet not washed from the guilt of your going forth” \[from the Church\]?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p176"></span>43. If, now, I were disposed to quote
anything against you from the writings of Tychonius, a man of your
communion, who has written rather in defence of the Church and against
you than the reverse, in vain disowning the communion of African
Christians as traditors (by which one thing Parmenianus silences him),
what else can you say in reply than what Tychonius himself said of you
as I have shortly before reminded you: “That which is according to our
will is holy”? <span id="fr_2260"></span>[2261](#fn_2260) For this
Tychonius—a man, as I have said, of your communion—writes that a Council
was held at Carthage <span id="fr_2261"></span>[2262](#fn_2261) by two
hundred and seventy of your bishops; in which Council, after
seventy-five days of deliberation, all past decisions on the matter
being set aside, a carefully revised resolution was published, to the
effect that to those who were guilty of a heinous crime as traditors,
the privilege of communion should be granted as to blameless persons, if
they refused to be baptized. He says further, that Deuterius of
Macriana, a bishop of your party, added to the Church a whole crowd of
traditors, without making any distinction between them and others,
making the unity of the Church open to these traditors, in accordance
with the decree of the Council held by these two hundred and seventy of
your bishops, and that after that transaction Donatus continued unbroken
his communion with the said Deuterius, and not only with him, but also
with all the Mauritanian bishops for forty years, who, according to the
statement of Tychonius, admitted the traditors to communion without
insisting on their being rebaptized, up to the time of the persecution
made by Macarius.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p179"></span>44. You will say, “What has that
Tychonius to do with me?” It is true that Tychonius is the man whom
Parmenianus checked by his reply, and effectually warned not to write
such things; but he did not refute the statements themselves, but, as I
have said above, silenced him by this one thing, that while saying such
things concerning the Church which is diffused throughout the world, and
while admitting that the faults of other men within its unity cannot
defile one who is innocent, he nevertheless withdrew himself from the
contagion of communion with African Christians because of their being
traditors, and was an adherent of the party of Donatus. Parmenianus,
indeed, might have said that Tychonius had in all these things spoken
falsely; but, as Tychonius himself observes, many were still living at
that time by whom these things might be proved to be most unquestionably
true and generally known.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p180"></span>45. Of these things, however, I say
no more: maintain, if you choose, that Tychonius spoke falsely; I bring
you back to Cyprian, the authority which you yourself have quoted. If,
according to his writings, every one in the unity of the Church is
defiled by the sins of other members, then the Church had utterly
perished before Cyprian’s time, and all possibility of Cyprian’s own
existence (as a member of the Church) is taken away. If, however, the
very thought of this is impiety, and it be beyond question that the
Church continued in being, it follows that no one is defiled by the
guilt of the sins of other men within the Catholic unity; and in vain do
you, “an evil generation,” maintain that you are righteous, when you are
“not washed from the guilt of your going forth.”

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p181"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p181.1"></span>Chap. XI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p182"></span>46. You will say, “Why then do you
seek us? Why do you receive those whom you call heretics?” Mark how
simple and short is my reply. We seek you because you are lost, that we
may rejoice over you when found, as <span id="page_398">p. 398</span>
<span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_398"></span>over you while lost we grieved.
Again we call you heretics; but the name applies to you only up to the
time of your being turned to the peace of the Catholic Church, and
extricated from the errors by which you have been ensnared. For when you
pass over to us, you entirely abandon the position you formerly
occupied, so that, as heretics no longer, you pass over to us. You will
say, “Then baptize me.” I would, if you were not already baptized, or if
you had received the baptism of Donatus, or of Rogatus only, and not of
Christ. It is not the Christian sacraments, but the crime of schism,
which makes you a heretic. The evil which has proceeded from yourself is
not a reason for our denying the good that is permanent in you, but
which you possess to your own harm if you have it not in that Church
from which proceeds its power to do good. For from the Catholic Church
are all the sacraments of the Lord, which you hold and administer in the
same way as they were held and administered even before you went forth
from her. The fact, however, that you are no longer in that Church from
which proceeded the sacraments which you have, does not make it the less
true that you still have them. We therefore do not change in you that
wherein you are at one with ourselves, for in many things you are at one
with us; and of such it is said, “For in many things they were with
me:” <span id="fr_2262"></span>[2263](#fn_2262) but we correct those
things in which you are not with us, and we wish you to receive those
things which you have not where you now are. You are at one with us in
baptism, in creed, and in the other sacraments of the Lord. But in the
spirit of unity and bond of peace, in a word, in the Catholic Church
itself, you are not with us. If you receive these things, the others
which you already have will then not begin to be yours, but begin to be
of use to you. We do not therefore, as you think, receive your men of
your party as still belonging to you, but in the act of receiving them
we incorporate with ourselves those who forsake you that they may be
received by us; and in order that they may belong to us, their first
step is to renounce their connection with you. Nor do we compel into
union with us those who industriously serve an error which we abhor; but
our reason for wishing those men to be united to us is, that they may no
longer be worthy of our abhorrence.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p184"></span>47. But you will say, “The Apostle
Paul baptized after John.” <span id="fr_2263"></span>[2264](#fn_2263)
Did he then baptize after a heretic? If you do presume to call that
friend of the Bridegroom a heretic, and to say that he was not in the
unity of the Church, I beg that you will put this in writing. But if you
believe that it would be the height of folly to think or to say so, it
remains for your own wisdom to resolve the question why the Apostle Paul
baptized after John. For if he baptized after one who was his equal, you
ought all to baptize after one another. If after one who was greater
than himself, you ought to baptize after Rogatus; if after one who was
less than himself, Rogatus ought to have baptized after you those whom
you, as a presbyter, had baptized. If, however, the baptism which is now
administered is in all cases of equal value to those who receive it,
however unequal in merit the persons may be by whom it is administered,
because it is the baptism of Christ, not of those who administer the
right, I think you must already perceive that Paul administered the
baptism of Christ to certain persons because they had received the
baptism of John only, and not of Christ; for it is expressly called the
baptism of John, as the Divine Scripture bears witness in many passages,
and as the Lord Himself calls it, saying: “The baptism of John, whence
was it? from heaven, or of men?” <span
id="fr_2264"></span>[2265](#fn_2264) But the baptism which Peter
administered was the baptism, not of Peter, but of Christ; that which
Paul administered was the baptism, not of Paul, but of Christ; that
which was administered by those who, in the apostle’s time, preached
Christ not sincerely, but of contention, <span
id="fr_2265"></span>[2266](#fn_2265) was not their own, but the baptism
of Christ; and that which was administered by those who, in Cyprian’s
time, either by artful dishonesty obtained their possessions, or by
usury, at exorbitant interest, increased them, was not their own
baptism, but the baptism of Christ. And because it was of Christ,
therefore, although there was very great disparity in the persons by
whom it was administered, it was equally useful to those by whom it was
received. For if the excellency of baptism in each case is according to
the excellency of the person by whom one is baptized, it was wrong in
the apostle to give thanks that he had baptized none of the Corinthians,
but Crispus, and Gaius, and the house of Stephanas; <span
id="fr_2266"></span>[2267](#fn_2266) for the baptism of the converts in
Corinth, if administered by himself, would have been so much more
excellent as Paul himself was more excellent than other men. Lastly,
when he says, “I have planted, and Apollos watered,” <span
id="fr_2267"></span>[2268](#fn_2267) he seems to intimate that he had
preached the gospel, and that Apollos had baptized. Is Apollos better
than John? Why then did he, who baptized after John, not baptize after
Apollos? Surely because, in the one case, the baptism, by whomsoever
administered, was the baptism of Christ; and in the other case, by
whomsoever admin<span id="page_399">p. 399</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_399"></span>istered, it was, although preparing the
way for Christ, only the baptism of John.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p190"></span>48. It seems to you an odious thing
to say that baptism was given to some after John had baptized them, and
yet that baptism is not to be given to men after heretics have baptized
them; but it may be said with equal justice to be an odious thing that
baptism was given to some after John had baptized them, and yet that
baptism is not to be given to men after intemperate persons have
baptized them. I name this sin of intemperance rather than others,
because those in whom it reigns are not able to hide it: and yet what
man, even though he be blind, does not know how many addicted to this
vice are to be found everywhere? And yet among the works of the flesh,
of which it is said that they who do them shall not inherit the kingdom
of God, the apostle places this in an enumeration in which heresies also
are specified: “Now the works of the flesh,” he says, “are manifest,
which are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness,
idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, wrath, strife,
seditions, heresies, envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and
such like; of the which I tell you before, as I have also told you in
time past, that they who do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of
God.” <span id="fr_2268"></span>[2269](#fn_2268) Baptism, therefore,
although it was administered after John, is not administered after a
heretic, on the very same principle according to which, though
administered after John; it is not administered after an intemperate
man: for both heresies and drunkenness are among the works which exclude
those who do them from inheriting the kingdom of God. Does it not seem
to you as if it were a thing intolerably unseemly, that although baptism
was repeated after it had been administered by him who, not even
moderately drinking wine, but wholly refraining from its use, prepared
the way for the kingdom of God, and yet that it should not be repeated
after being administered by an intemperate man, who shall not inherit
the kingdom of God? What can be said in answer to this, but that the one
was the baptism of John, after which the apostle administered the
baptism of Christ; and that the other, administered by an intemperate
man, was the baptism of Christ? Between John Baptist and an intemperate
man there is a great difference, as of opposites; between the baptism of
Christ and the baptism of John there is no contrariety, but a great
difference. Between the apostle and an intemperate man there is a great
difference; but there is none between the baptism of Christ administered
by an apostle, and the baptism of Christ administered by an intemperate
man. In like manner, between John and a heretic there is a great
difference, as of opposites; and between the baptism of John and the
baptism of Christ which a heretic administers there is no contrariety,
but there is a great difference. But between the baptism of Christ which
an apostle administers, and the baptism of Christ which a heretic
administers, there is no difference. For the form of the sacrament is
acknowledged to be the same even when there is a great difference in
point of worth between the men by whom it is administered.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p192"></span>49. But pardon me, for I have made a
mistake in wishing to convince you by arguing from the case of an
intemperate man administering baptism; for I had forgotten that I am
dealing with a Rogatist, not with one bearing the wider name of
Donatist. For among your colleagues who are so few, and in the whole
number of your clergy, perhaps you cannot find one addicted to this
vice. For you are persons who hold that the name Catholic is given to
the faith not because communion of those who hold it embraces the whole
world, but because they observe the whole of the Divine precepts and the
whole of the sacraments; you are the persons in whom alone the Son of
man when He cometh shall find faith, when on the earth He shall find no
faith, forasmuch as you are not earth and on the earth, but heavenly and
dwelling in heaven! Do you not fear, or do you not observe that “God
resisteth the proud, but giveth grace to the humble”? <span
id="fr_2269"></span>[2270](#fn_2269) Does not that very passage in the
Gospel startle you, in which the Lord saith, “When the Son of man
cometh, shall He find faith in the earth?” <span
id="fr_2270"></span>[2271](#fn_2270) Immediately thereafter, as if
foreseeing that some would proudly arrogate to themselves the possession
of this faith, He spake to some who trusted in themselves that they were
righteous, and despised others, the parable of the two men who went up
to the temple to pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a publican. The
words which follow I leave for yourself to consider and to answer.
Nevertheless examine more minutely your small sect, to see whether not
so much as one who administers baptism is an intemperate man. For so
widespread is the havoc wrought among souls by this plague, that I am
greatly surprised if it has not reached even your infinitesimal flock,
although it is your boast that already, before the coming of Christ, the
one good Shepherd, you have separated between the sheep and the goats.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p195"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p195.1"></span>Chap. XII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p196"></span>50. Listen to the testimony which
through me is addressed to you by those who are the Lord’s wheat,
suffering meanwhile until the final winnowing, <span
id="fr_2271"></span>[2272](#fn_2271) among the chaff in <span
id="page_400">p. 400</span> <span id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_400"></span>the
Lord’s threshing-floor, *i.e.* throughout the whole world, because “God
hath called the earth from the rising of the sun unto the going down
thereof,” <span id="fr_2272"></span>[2273](#fn_2272) and throughout the
same wide field the “children praise Him.” <span
id="fr_2273"></span>[2274](#fn_2273) We disapprove of every one who,
taking advantage of this imperial edict, persecutes you, not with loving
concern for your correction, but with the malice of an enemy. Moreover,
although, since every earthly possession can be rightly retained only on
the ground either of divine right, according to which all things belong
to the righteous, or of human right, which is in the jurisdiction of the
kings of the earth, you are mistaken in calling those things yours which
you do not possess as righteous persons, and which you have forfeited by
the laws of earthly sovereigns, and plead in vain, “We have laboured to
gather them,” seeing that you may read what is written, “The wealth of
the sinner is laid up for the just;” <span
id="fr_2274"></span>[2275](#fn_2274) nevertheless we disapprove of any
one who, availing himself of this law which the kings of the earth,
doing homage to Christ, have published in order to correct your impiety,
covetously seeks to possess himself of your property. Also we disapprove
of any one who, on the ground not of justice, but of avarice, seizes and
retains the provision pertaining to the poor, or the chapels <span
id="fr_2275"></span>[2276](#fn_2275) in which you meet for worship,
which you once occupied in the name of the Church, and which are by all
means the rightful property only of that Church which is the true Church
of Christ. We disapprove of any one who receives a person that has been
expelled by you for some disgraceful action or crime, on the same terms
on which those are received who have lived among you chargeable with no
other crime beyond the error through which you are separated from us.
But these are things which you cannot easily prove; and although you can
prove them, we bear with some whom we are unable to correct or even to
punish; and we do not quit the Lord’s threshing-floor because of the
chaff which is there, nor break the Lord’s net because of bad fishes
enclosed therein, nor desert the Lord’s flock because of goats which are
to be in the end separated from it, nor go forth from the Lord’s house
because in it there are vessels destined to dishonour.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p202"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p202.1"></span>Chap. XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p203"></span>51. But, my brother, if you forbear
seeking the empty honour which comes from men, and despise the reproach
of fools, who will be ready to say, “Why do you now destroy what you
once laboured to build up?” it seems to me to be beyond doubt that you
will now pass over to the Church which I perceive that you acknowledge
to be the true Church: the proofs of which sentiment on your part I find
at hand. For in the beginning of your letter which I am now answering
you have these words: “I knew you, my excellent friend, as a man devoted
to peace and uprightness, when you were still far removed from the
Christian faith, and were in these earlier days occupied with literary
pursuits; but since your conversion at a more recent time to the
Christian faith, you give your time and labour, as I am informed by the
statements of many persons, to theological controversies.” <span
id="fr_2276"></span>[2277](#fn_2276) These words are undoubtedly your
own, if you were the person who sent me that letter. Seeing, therefore,
that you confess that I have been converted to the Christian faith,
although I have not been converted to the sect of the Donatists or of
the Rogatists, you unquestionably uphold the truth that beyond the pale
of Rogatists and Donatists the Christian faith exists. This faith
therefore is, as we say, spread abroad throughout all nations, which are
according to God’s testimony blessed in the seed of Abraham. <span
id="fr_2277"></span>[2278](#fn_2277) Why therefore do you still hesitate
to adopt what you perceive to be true, unless it be that you are humbled
because at some former time you did not perceive what you now see, or
maintained some different view, and so, while ashamed to correct an
error, are not ashamed (where shame would be much more reasonable) of
remaining wilfully in error?

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p206"></span>52. Such conduct the Scripture has
not passed over in silence; for we read, “There is a shame which
bringeth sin, and there is a shame which is graceful and
glorious.” <span id="fr_2278"></span>[2279](#fn_2278) Shame brings sin,
when through its influence any one forbears from changing a wicked
opinion, lest he be supposed to be fickle, or be held as by his own
judgment convicted of having been long in error: such persons descend
into the pit alive, that is, conscious of their perdition; whose future
doom the death of Dathan and Abiram and Korah, swallowed up by the
opening earth, long ago prefigured. <span
id="fr_2279"></span>[2280](#fn_2279) But shame is graceful and glorious
when one blushes for his own sin, and by repentance is changed to
something better, which you are reluctant to do because overpowered by
that false and fatal shame, fearing lest by men who know not whereof
they affirm, that sentence of the apostle may be quoted against you: “If
I build again the things which I destroyed, I make myself a
transgressor.” <span id="fr_2280"></span>[2281](#fn_2280) If, however,
this sentence admitted of application to those who, after being
corrected, preach the truth which in their perversity they opposed, it
might have been said at first against Paul himself, in regard to whom
<span id="page_401">p. 401</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-Page_401"></span>the churches of Christ glorified God
when they heard that he now “preached the faith which once he
destroyed.” <span id="fr_2281"></span>[2282](#fn_2281)

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p211"></span>53. Do not, however, imagine that one
can pass from error to truth, or from any sin, be it great or small, to
the correction of his sin, without giving some proof of his repentance.
It is, however, an error of intolerable impertinence for men to blame
the Church, which is proved by so many Divine testimonies to be the
Church of Christ, for dealing in one way with those who forsake her,
receiving them back on condition of correcting this fault by some
acknowledgment of their repentance, and in another way with those who
never were within her pale, and are receiving welcome to her peace for
the first time; her method being to humble the former more fully, and to
receive the latter upon easier terms, cherishing affection for both, and
ministering with a mother’s love to the health of both.

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p212"></span>You have here perhaps a longer letter
than you desired. It would have been much shorter if in my reply I had
been thinking of you alone; but as it is, even though it should be of no
use to yourself, I do not think that it can fail to be of use to those
who shall take pains to read it in the fear of God, and without respect
of persons. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2140"></span>[382:2141](1010399.htm#fr_2140) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p6"></span> [Ps.
108.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2141"></span>[383:2142](1010399.htm#fr_2141) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p9"></span> [Jer.
2.30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2142"></span>[383:2143](1010399.htm#fr_2142) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p10"></span> [John
13.36](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#036)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2143"></span>[383:2144](1010399.htm#fr_2143) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p13"></span> [Prov.
27.6](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2144"></span>[383:2145](1010399.htm#fr_2144) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p14"></span> [Gen.
12:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#000), [Gen.
26:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#000), [Gen.
42:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#000), [Gen.
43:0](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#000)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2145"></span>[383:2146](1010399.htm#fr_2145) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p15"></span> [2 Cor.
12.7-9](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2146"></span>[383:2147](1010399.htm#fr_2146) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p16"></span> [Matt.
5.45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2147"></span>[383:2148](1010399.htm#fr_2147) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p18"></span> [Luke
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2148"></span>[383:2149](1010399.htm#fr_2148) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p19"></span> [John
6.44](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#044)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2149"></span>[384:2150](1010399.htm#fr_2149) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p21"></span> [Gen.
16.5](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2150"></span>[384:2151](1010399.htm#fr_2150) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p22"></span> [Gal.
4.29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2151"></span>[384:2152](1010399.htm#fr_2151) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p23"></span> [Exod.
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#009), [Exod.
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2152"></span>[384:2153](1010399.htm#fr_2152) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p24"></span> [1 Kings
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004),
[40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2153"></span>[384:2154](1010399.htm#fr_2153) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p26"></span> [Matt.
26.52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2154"></span>[384:2155](1010399.htm#fr_2154) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p27"></span> [Acts
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023), [Acts
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2155"></span>[384:2156](1010399.htm#fr_2155) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p28"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p28.1"></span> παρέδωκεν</span>.

<span id="fn_2156"></span>[384:2157](1010399.htm#fr_2156) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p29"></span> [Rom.
8.32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2157"></span>[384:2158](1010399.htm#fr_2157) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p30"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p30.1"></span>παράδοντος</span>.

<span id="fn_2158"></span>[384:2159](1010399.htm#fr_2158) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p31"></span> [Gal.
2.20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2159"></span>[384:2160](1010399.htm#fr_2159) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p32"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p32.1"></span>παραδῷ</span>.

<span id="fn_2160"></span>[384:2161](1010399.htm#fr_2160) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p33"></span> [John
13.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2161"></span>[384:2162](1010399.htm#fr_2161) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p33.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p34"></span> [Acts
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2162"></span>[384:2163](1010399.htm#fr_2162) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p34.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p35"></span> [1 Cor.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2163"></span>[384:2164](1010399.htm#fr_2163) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p36"></span> [1 Tim.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2164"></span>[384:2165](1010399.htm#fr_2164) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p38"></span> [Matt.
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2165"></span>[384:2166](1010399.htm#fr_2165) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p39"></span> [Ps.
101.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2166"></span>[385:2167](1010399.htm#fr_2166) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p42"></span> [Ps.
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011),
[1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2167"></span>[385:2168](1010399.htm#fr_2167) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p44"></span> [Rom.
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2168"></span>[386:2169](1010399.htm#fr_2168) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p46"></span> [Matt.
5.40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2169"></span>[386:2170](1010399.htm#fr_2169) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p49.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p50"></span> See Letter LXXXVIII. § 2.

<span id="fn_2170"></span>[387:2171](1010399.htm#fr_2170) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p51.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p52"></span> “Quod volumus sanctum est.”—<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.XCIII-p52.1"></span>Tychonius.</span>

<span id="fn_2171"></span>[387:2172](1010399.htm#fr_2171) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p53.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p54"></span> [Matt.
13.24-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2172"></span>[387:2173](1010399.htm#fr_2172) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p54.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p55"></span> [Phil.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2173"></span>[387:2174](1010399.htm#fr_2173) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p55.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p56"></span> [Col.
3.5](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2174"></span>[388:2175](1010399.htm#fr_2174) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p59.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p60"></span> [Prov.
9.9](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2175"></span>[388:2176](1010399.htm#fr_2175) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p60.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p61"></span> [Prov.
29.19](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2176"></span>[389:2177](1010399.htm#fr_2176) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p63.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p64"></span> [John
10.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2177"></span>[389:2178](1010399.htm#fr_2177) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p64.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p65"></span> [Gen.
26.4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2178"></span>[389:2179](1010399.htm#fr_2178) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p65.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p66"></span> [Ps.
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2179"></span>[389:2180](1010399.htm#fr_2179) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p66.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p67"></span> [Ps.
72.8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2180"></span>[389:2181](1010399.htm#fr_2180) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p67.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p68"></span> [Dan.
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2181"></span>[389:2182](1010399.htm#fr_2181) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p68.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p69"></span> [Prov.
26.27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2182"></span>[389:2183](1010399.htm#fr_2182) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p71.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p72"></span> [Rom.
13.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p72.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2183"></span>[389:2184](1010399.htm#fr_2183) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p72.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p73"></span> [Ps.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p73.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2184"></span>[389:2185](1010399.htm#fr_2184) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p73.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p74"></span> [Mal.
1.11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2185"></span>[389:2186](1010399.htm#fr_2185) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p74.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p75"></span> [Ps.
72.17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2186"></span>[389:2187](1010399.htm#fr_2186) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p76.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p77"></span> [Luke
24.44-47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2187"></span>[390:2188](1010399.htm#fr_2187) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p77.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p78"></span> [Acts
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008), [Acts
2:0](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#000)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2188"></span>[390:2189](1010399.htm#fr_2188) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p78.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p79"></span> [Ps.
19.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p79.1"></span>; [Rom.
10.18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p79.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2189"></span>[390:2190](1010399.htm#fr_2189) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p79.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p80"></span> *Typhus morticinæ pelliculæ.*

<span id="fn_2190"></span>[390:2191](1010399.htm#fr_2190) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p80.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p81"></span> [Ps.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p81.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2191"></span>[390:2192](1010399.htm#fr_2191) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p81.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p82"></span> [1 Cor.
8.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2192"></span>[390:2193](1010399.htm#fr_2192) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p82.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p83"></span> [1 Cor.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2193"></span>[390:2194](1010399.htm#fr_2193) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p85.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p86"></span> [Matt.
24.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p86.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2194"></span>[390:2195](1010399.htm#fr_2194) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p87.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p88"></span> [Luke
17.8](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2195"></span>[390:2196](1010399.htm#fr_2195) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p88.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p89"></span> [Gal.
1.8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p89.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2196"></span>[390:2197](1010399.htm#fr_2196) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p89.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p90"></span> [Luke
14.46](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#046)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p90.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2197"></span>[390:2198](1010399.htm#fr_2197) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p90.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p91"></span> *Præter.*

<span id="fn_2198"></span>[391:2199](1010399.htm#fr_2198) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p91.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p92"></span> [Luke
24.47](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#047)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p92.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2199"></span>[391:2200](1010399.htm#fr_2199) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p92.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p93"></span> [Gal.
1.9](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2200"></span>[391:2201](1010399.htm#fr_2200) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p95.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p96"></span> *Meridie;* at noon, E. V. [Song.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p96.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2201"></span>[391:2202](1010399.htm#fr_2201) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p96.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p97"></span> Now Tunis.

<span id="fn_2202"></span>[391:2203](1010399.htm#fr_2202) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p97.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p98"></span> *Meridie.*

<span id="fn_2203"></span>[391:2204](1010399.htm#fr_2203) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p99.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p100"></span> [Ps.
48.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p100.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2204"></span>[391:2205](1010399.htm#fr_2204) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p100.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p101"></span> [Song.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p101.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2205"></span>[391:2206](1010399.htm#fr_2205) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p102.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p103"></span> [Josh.
22.9-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2206"></span>[392:2207](1010399.htm#fr_2206) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p103.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p104"></span> [Gal.
4.27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2207"></span>[392:2208](1010399.htm#fr_2207) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p104.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p105"></span> *Quoslibet* is obviously the true
reading.

<span id="fn_2208"></span>[392:2209](1010399.htm#fr_2208) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p108.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p109"></span> [Song.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2209"></span>[392:2210](1010399.htm#fr_2209) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p109.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p110"></span> [Ps.
61.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p110.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2210"></span>[392:2211](1010399.htm#fr_2210) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p110.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p111"></span> In this and the other passages
quoted, Augustin translates from the LXX.

<span id="fn_2211"></span>[392:2212](1010399.htm#fr_2211) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p111.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p112"></span> [Ps.
119:53](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#053),
[158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2212"></span>[392:2213](1010399.htm#fr_2212) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p112.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p113"></span> [Song.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p113.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2213"></span>[392:2214](1010399.htm#fr_2213) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p113.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p114"></span> [Ps.
90.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2214"></span>[392:2215](1010399.htm#fr_2214) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p114.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p115"></span> [Song.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2215"></span>[392:2216](1010399.htm#fr_2215) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p115.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p116"></span> [Ps.
55:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2216"></span>[392:2217](1010399.htm#fr_2216) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p117.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p118"></span> *Nisi cognoveris temetipsam.*

<span id="fn_2217"></span>[392:2218](1010399.htm#fr_2217) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p118.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p119"></span> *Gregum.*

<span id="fn_2218"></span>[392:2219](1010399.htm#fr_2218) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p119.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p120"></span> [Song.
1.8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p120.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2219"></span>[392:2220](1010399.htm#fr_2219) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p120.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p121"></span> [Matt.
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2220"></span>[392:2221](1010399.htm#fr_2220) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p121.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p122"></span> [Isa.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p122.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2221"></span>[393:2222](1010399.htm#fr_2221) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p122.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p123"></span> [Ps.
45.11-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2222"></span>[393:2223](1010399.htm#fr_2222) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p123.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p124"></span> [1 John
2.19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2223"></span>[393:2224](1010399.htm#fr_2223) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p124.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p125"></span> [John
21.17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p125.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2224"></span>[393:2225](1010399.htm#fr_2224) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p125.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p126"></span> [John
10.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p126.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2225"></span>[393:2226](1010399.htm#fr_2225) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p127.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p128"></span> [Matt.
7.14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p128.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2226"></span>[393:2227](1010399.htm#fr_2226) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p128.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p129"></span> [Gen.
22.14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p129.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2227"></span>[393:2228](1010399.htm#fr_2227) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p129.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p130"></span> [Matt.
8.11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p130.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2228"></span>[393:2229](1010399.htm#fr_2228) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p130.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p131"></span> [Tit.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p131.1"></span>; <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p131.2"></span> περιούσιος</span> being translated by
Augustin “*abundans*,” where our version has “peculiar.”

<span id="fn_2229"></span>[393:2230](1010399.htm#fr_2229) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p131.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p132"></span> [Rev.
7.9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p132.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2230"></span>[393:2231](1010399.htm#fr_2230) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p132.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p133"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p133.1"></span>ἐν σκοτομήνῃ</span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2231"></span>[393:2232](1010399.htm#fr_2231) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p133.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p134"></span> [Ps.
11.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p134.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2232"></span>[393:2233](1010399.htm#fr_2232) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p135.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p136"></span> Vincentius had quoted from Hilary’s
work, *De Synodis adversum Arianos*, a sentence to the effect that, with
the exception of a very small remnant, the ten provinces of Asia in
which he was settled were truly ignorant of God.

<span id="fn_2233"></span>[393:2234](1010399.htm#fr_2233) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p136.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p137"></span> [Gal.
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p137.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2234"></span>[393:2235](1010399.htm#fr_2234) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p137.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p138"></span> [Gal.
4.19](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p138.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2235"></span>[393:2236](1010399.htm#fr_2235) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p138.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p139"></span> [Gal.
2.11-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p139.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2236"></span>[394:2237](1010399.htm#fr_2236) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p139.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p140"></span> [Matt.
13.24-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p140.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2237"></span>[394:2238](1010399.htm#fr_2237) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p141.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p142"></span> [1 Cor.
15.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p142.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2238"></span>[394:2239](1010399.htm#fr_2238) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p142.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p143"></span> [1 Cor.
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#034)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p143.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2239"></span>[394:2240](1010399.htm#fr_2239) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p143.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p144"></span> [1 Cor.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p144.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2240"></span>[394:2241](1010399.htm#fr_2240) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p144.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p145"></span> [1 Cor.
1.4-7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p145.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2241"></span>[394:2242](1010399.htm#fr_2241) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p145.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p146"></span> [1 Cor.
2.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p146.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2242"></span>[394:2243](1010399.htm#fr_2242) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p146.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p147"></span> [1 John
5.19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p147.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2243"></span>[394:2244](1010399.htm#fr_2243) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p147.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p148"></span> [1 John
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p148.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2244"></span>[394:2245](1010399.htm#fr_2244) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p149.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p150"></span> [Matt.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p150.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2245"></span>[394:2246](1010399.htm#fr_2245) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p150.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p151"></span> [Matt.
24.31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2246"></span>[394:2247](1010399.htm#fr_2246) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p151.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p152"></span> [Ps.
12.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p152.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2247"></span>[394:2248](1010399.htm#fr_2247) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p152.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p153"></span> [Matt.
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p153.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2248"></span>[394:2249](1010399.htm#fr_2248) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p153.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p154"></span> [Ps.
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p154.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2249"></span>[394:2250](1010399.htm#fr_2249) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p155.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p156"></span> [Eph.
5.27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p156.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2250"></span>[395:2251](1010399.htm#fr_2250) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p158.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p159"></span> Agrippinus, successor of Cyprian in
the see of Carthage.

<span id="fn_2251"></span>[395:2252](1010399.htm#fr_2251) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p159.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p160"></span> [Phil.
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p160.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2252"></span>[395:2253](1010399.htm#fr_2252) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p160.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p161"></span> [Ps.
67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p161.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2253"></span>[395:2254](1010399.htm#fr_2253) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p162.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p163"></span> See *Ante-Nicene Fathers*, Am. ed.
vol. v. p. 379.

<span id="fn_2254"></span>[395:2255](1010399.htm#fr_2254) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p163.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p164"></span> Held at Carthage, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.XCIII-p164.1"></span>A.D.</span> 256.

<span id="fn_2255"></span>[395:2256](1010399.htm#fr_2255) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p165.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p166"></span> [Prov.
30.12](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p166.1"></span>, <span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p166.2"></span>ἔκγονον κακὸν δίκαιον ἐαυτὸν κρίνει, τὴν
δ’ ἔξοδον αὐτοῦ οὐκ ἀπένιψεν</span>.

<span id="fn_2256"></span>[396:2257](1010399.htm#fr_2256) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p169.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p170"></span> [1 Pet.
4.8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p170.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2257"></span>[396:2258](1010399.htm#fr_2257) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p170.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p171"></span> [John
15.2](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p171.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2258"></span>[396:2259](1010399.htm#fr_2258) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p171.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p172"></span> [1 Cor.
13.3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p172.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2259"></span>[396:2260](1010399.htm#fr_2259) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p173.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p174"></span> Letter LI. 21. *Ante-Nicene
Fathers*, Am. ed. vol. v. p. 332.

<span id="fn_2260"></span>[397:2261](1010399.htm#fr_2260) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p176.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p177"></span> P. 387.

<span id="fn_2261"></span>[397:2262](1010399.htm#fr_2261) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p177.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p178"></span> This Council at Carthage is not
elsewhere mentioned.

<span id="fn_2262"></span>[398:2263](1010399.htm#fr_2262) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p182.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p183"></span> [Ps.
55.18](../../../bib/sep/psa055.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p183.1"></span>, Septuagint.

<span id="fn_2263"></span>[398:2264](1010399.htm#fr_2263) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p184.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p185"></span> [Acts
19.5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p185.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2264"></span>[398:2265](1010399.htm#fr_2264) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p185.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p186"></span> [Matt.
21.25](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#025)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p186.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2265"></span>[398:2266](1010399.htm#fr_2265) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p186.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p187"></span> [Phil.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#015),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p187.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2266"></span>[398:2267](1010399.htm#fr_2266) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p187.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p188"></span> [1 Cor.
1.14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p188.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2267"></span>[398:2268](1010399.htm#fr_2267) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p188.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p189"></span> [1 Cor.
3.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p189.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2268"></span>[399:2269](1010399.htm#fr_2268) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p190.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p191"></span> [Gal.
5.19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p191.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2269"></span>[399:2270](1010399.htm#fr_2269) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p192.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p193"></span> [Jas.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p193.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2270"></span>[399:2271](1010399.htm#fr_2270) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p193.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p194"></span> [Luke
18.8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p194.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2271"></span>[399:2272](1010399.htm#fr_2271) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p196.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p197"></span> [Matt.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p197.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2272"></span>[400:2273](1010399.htm#fr_2272) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p197.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p198"></span> [Ps.
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p198.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2273"></span>[400:2274](1010399.htm#fr_2273) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p198.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p199"></span> [Ps.
113.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p199.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2274"></span>[400:2275](1010399.htm#fr_2274) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p199.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p200"></span> [Prov.
13.22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p200.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2275"></span>[400:2276](1010399.htm#fr_2275) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p200.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p201"></span> *Basilicæ.*

<span id="fn_2276"></span>[400:2277](1010399.htm#fr_2276) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p203.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p204"></span> *Disputationibus legalibus.*

<span id="fn_2277"></span>[400:2278](1010399.htm#fr_2277) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p204.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p205"></span> [Gen.
22.18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p205.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2278"></span>[400:2279](1010399.htm#fr_2278) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p206.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p207"></span> [Ecclus.
4.21](../../../bib/apo/sir004.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p207.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2279"></span>[400:2280](1010399.htm#fr_2279) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p207.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p208"></span> [Num.
16.31-33](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p208.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2280"></span>[400:2281](1010399.htm#fr_2280) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p208.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p209"></span> [Gal.
2.18](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p209.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2281"></span>[401:2282](1010399.htm#fr_2281) <span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p209.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCIII-p210"></span> [Gal.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.XCIII-p210.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCIV](1010400)
