[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010175)  [Next](1010177.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.XIX"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.XIX-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—What It is to Remember.</span>

<span id="vi.X.XIX-p2"></span>28. But how is it when the memory itself
loses anything, as it happens when we forget anything and try to recall
it? Where finally do we search, but in the memory itself? And there, if
perchance one thing be offered for another, we refuse it, until we meet
with what we seek; and when we do, we exclaim, “This is it!” which we
should not do unless we knew it again, nor should we recognise it unless
we remembered it. Assuredly, therefore, we had forgotten it. Or, had not
the whole of it slipped our memory, but by the part by which we had hold
was the other part sought for; since the memory perceived that it did
not revolve together as much as it was accustomed to do, and halting, as
if from the mutilation of its old habit, demanded the restoration of
that which was wanting. For example, if we see or think of some man
known to us, and, having forgotten his name, endeavour to recover it,
whatsoever other thing presents itself is not connected with it; because
it was not used to be thought of in connection with him, and is
consequently rejected, until that is present whereon the knowledge
reposes fittingly as its accustomed object. And whence, save from the
memory itself, does that present itself? For even when we recognise it
as put in mind of it by another, it is thence it comes. For we do not
believe it as something new, but, as we recall it, admit what was said
to be correct. But if it were entirely blotted out of the mind, we
should not, even when put in mind of it, recollect it. For we have not
as yet entirely forgotten what we remember that we have forgotten. A
lost notion, then, which we have entirely forgotten, we cannot even
search for.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX](1010177.md)
