[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010124)  [Next](1010126) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VII.XVII"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—Above His Changeable Mind, He
Discovers the Unchangeable Author of Truth.</span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p2"></span>23. And I marvelled that I now loved
Thee, and no phantasm instead of Thee. And yet I did not merit to enjoy
my God, but was transported to Thee by Thy beauty, and presently torn
away from Thee by mine own weight, sinking with grief into these
inferior things. This weight was carnal custom. Yet was there a
remembrance of Thee with me; nor did I any way doubt that there was one
to whom I might cleave, but that I was not yet one who could cleave unto
Thee; for that the body which is corrupted presseth down the soul, and
the earthly dwelling weigheth down the mind which thinketh upon many
things. <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544) And most certain I was
that Thy “invisible things from the creation of the world are clearly
seen, being understood by the things that are made, even Thy eternal
power and Godhead.” <span id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545) For,
inquiring whence it was that I admired the beauty of bodies whether
celestial or terrestrial, and what supported me in judging correctly on
things mutable, and pronouncing, “This should be thus, this
not,”—inquiring, then, whence I so judged, seeing I did so judge, I had
found the unchangeable and true eternity of Truth, above my changeable
mind. And thus, by degrees, I passed from bodies to the soul, which
makes use of the senses of the body to perceive; and thence to its
inward <span id="fr_546"></span>[547](#fn_546) faculty, to which the
bodily senses represent outward things, and up to which reach the
capabilities of beasts; and thence, again, I passed on to the reasoning
faculty, <span id="fr_547"></span>[548](#fn_547) unto which whatever is
received from <span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span
id="vi.VII.XVII-Page_112"></span>the senses of the body is referred to
be judged, which also, finding itself to be variable in me, raised
itself up to its own intelligence, and from habit drew away my thoughts,
withdrawing itself from the crowds of contradictory phantasms; that so
it might find out that light <span id="fr_548"></span>[549](#fn_548) by
which it was besprinkled, when, without all doubting, it cried out,
“that the unchangeable was to be preferred before the changeable;”
whence also it knew that unchangeable, which, unless it had in some way
known, it could have had no sure ground for preferring it to the
changeable. And thus, with the flash of a trembling glance, it arrived
at that which is. And then I saw Thy invisible things understood by the
things that are made. <span id="fr_549"></span>[550](#fn_549) But I was
not able to fix my gaze thereon; and my infirmity being beaten back, I
was thrown again on my accustomed habits, carrying along with me naught
but a loving memory thereof, and an appetite for what I had, as it were,
smelt the odour of, but was not yet able to eat.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_544"></span>[111:545](1010125.htm#fr_544) <span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p3"></span> [Wisd.
9.15](../../../bib/apo/wis009.htm#015)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[111:546](1010125.htm#fr_545) <span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p4"></span> [Rom.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[111:547](1010125.htm#fr_546) <span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p5"></span> See above, sec. 10.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[111:548](1010125.htm#fr_547) <span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p6"></span> Here, and more explicitly in sec. 25,
we have before us what has been called the “trichotomy” of man. This
doctrine Augustin does not deny in theory, but appears to consider (*De
Anima,* iv. 32) it prudent to overlook in practice. The biblical view of
psychology may well be considered here not only on its own account, but
as enabling us clearly to apprehend this passage and that which follows
it. It is difficult to understand how any one can doubt that St. Paul,
when speaking in [1 Thess. 5.23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.1"></span>, of our “*spirit, soul, and body* being
preserved unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,” implies a belief in
a kind of trinity in man. And it is very necessary to the understanding
of other Scriptures that we should realize what special attributes
pertain to the soul and the spirit respectively. It may be said,
generally, that the soul (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.2"></span>ψυχή</span>) is that passionate and
affectionate nature which is common to us and the inferior creatures,
while the spirit (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.3"></span>πνεῦμα</span>) is the higher intellectual
nature which is peculiar to man. Hence our Lord in His agony in the
garden says ([Matt. 26.38](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#038)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.4"></span>), “My <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.5"></span> Soul</span> is exceeding *sorrowful*”—the
soul being liable to emotions of pleasure and pain. In the same passage
(ver 41) he says to the apostles who had slept during His great agony,
“The <span class="c9"><span id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.6"></span>Spirit</span>
indeed is *willing*, but the flesh is weak,” so that the spirit is the
seat of the will. And that the spirit is also the seat of
*consciousness* we gather from St. Paul’s words ([1 Cor.
2.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.7"></span>), “What man knoweth the things of a man,
save the spirit of man which is in him? even so the things of God
knoweth no man, but the Spirit of God.” And it is *on the spirit of man
that the Spirit of God operates*; whence we read ([Rom.
8.16](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#016)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.8"></span>), “The Spirit beareth witness with our
spirit, that we are the children of God.” It is important to note that
the word “flesh” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.9"></span>σαρξ</span>) has its special significance,
as distinct from body. The word comes to us from the Hebrew through the
Hellenistic Greek of the LXX., and in biblical language (see Bishop
Pearson’s *Præfatio Parænetica* to his edition of the LXX.) stands for
our human nature with it worldly surroundings and liability to
temptation; so that when it is said, “The Word was made flesh,” we have
what is equivalent to, “The Word put on human nature.” It is, therefore,
the flesh and the spirit that are ever represented in conflict one with
the other when men are in the throes of temptation. So it must be while
life lasts; for it is characteristic of our position in the world that
we possess *soulish* bodies (to employ the barbarous but expressive word
of Dr. Candlish in his *Life in a Risen Saviour*, p. 182), and only on
the morning of the resurrection will the body be *spiritual* and suited
to the new sphere of its existence: “It is sown a natural \[<span
class="Greek"><span id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.10"></span>ψυχικὸν</span>,
“soulish”\] body, it is raised a spiritual \[<span class="Greek"><span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.11"></span>πνευματικόν</span>\] body” ([1 Cor.
15.44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.12"></span>); “for,” as Augustin says in his
*Enchiridion* (c. xci.), “just as now the body is called *animate* (or,
using the Greek term, as above, instead of the Latin, “soulish”), though
it is a body and not a soul, so then the body shall be called
*spiritual*, though it shall be a body, not a spirit.…No part of our
nature shall be in discord with another; but as we shall be free from
enemies without, so we shall not have ourselves for enemies within.” For
further information on this most interesting subject, see Delitzsch,
*Biblical Psychology*, ii. 4 (“The True and False Trichotomy”);
Olshausen, *Opuscula Theologica*, iv. (“De Trichotomia”) and cc. 2, 17,
and 18 of R. W. Evans’ *Ministry of the Body*, where the subject is
discussed with thoughtfulness and spiritual insight. This matter is also
treated of in the introductory chapters of Schlegel’s *Philosophy of
Life*.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[112:549](1010125.htm#fr_548) <span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p6.13"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p7"></span> That light which illumines the soul,
he tells us in his *De Gen. ad Lit.* (xii. 31), is God Himself, from
whom all light cometh; and, though created in His image and likeness,
when it tries to discover Him, *palpitat infirmitate, et minus valet*.
In sec. 13, above, speaking of Platonism, he describes it as holding
“that the soul of man, though it ‘bears witness of the Light,’ yet
itself ‘is not that Light.’” In his *De Civ. Dei*, x. 2, he quotes from
Plotinus (mentioned in note 2, sec. 13, above) in regard to the Platonic
doctrine as to enlightenment from on high. He says: “Plotinus,
commenting on Plato, repeatedly and strongly asserts that not even the
soul, which they believe to be the soul of the world, derives its
blessedness from any other source than we do, viz. from that Light which
is distinct from it and created it, and by whose intelligible
illumination it enjoys light in things intelligible. He also compares
those spiritual things to the vast and conspicuous heavenly bodies, as
if God were the sun, and the soul the moon; for they suppose that the
moon derives its light from the sun. That great Platonist, therefore,
says that the rational soul, or rather the intellectual soul,—in which
class he comprehends the souls of the blessed immortal who inhabit
heaven,—has no nature superior to it save God, the Creator of the world
and the soul itself, and that these heavenly spirits derive their
blessed life, and the light of truth, from the same source as ourselves,
agreeing with the gospel where we read, ‘There was a man sent from God,
whose name was John. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of
that Light, that through Him all might believe. He was not that Light,
but that he might bear witness of the Light. That was the true Light,
which lighteth every man that cometh into the world’ ([John
1.6-9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p7.1"></span>);—a distinction which sufficiently proves
that the rational or intellectual soul, such as John had, cannot be its
own light, but needs to receive illumination from another, the true
Light. This John himself avows when he delivers his witness ([John
1.16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p7.2"></span>): ‘We have all received of His fulness.’”
Comp. Tertullian, *De Testim. Anim*., and the note to iv. sec. 25,
above, where other references to God’s being the Father of Lights are
given.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[112:550](1010125.htm#fr_549) <span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p7.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.XVII-p8"></span> [Rom.
1.20](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#020)<span
id="vi.VII.XVII-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](1010126)
