[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010092)  [Next](1010094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.II"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.II-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.II-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—She, on the Prohibition of
Ambrose, Abstains from Honouring the Memory of the Martyrs.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.II-p2"></span>2. When, therefore, my mother had at one
time—as was her custom in Africa—brought to the oratories built in the
memory of the saints <span id="fr_437"></span>[438](#fn_437.md) certain
cakes, and bread, and wine, and was forbidden by the door-keeper, so
soon as she learnt that it was the bishop who had forbidden it, she so
piously and obediently acceded to it, that I myself marvelled how
readily she could bring herself to accuse her own custom, rather than
question his prohibition. For wine-bibbing did not take possession of
her spirit, nor did the love of wine stimulate her to hatred of the
truth, as it doth too many, both male and female, who nauseate at a song
of sobriety, as men well drunk at a draught of water. But she, when she
had brought her basket with the festive meats, of which she would taste
herself first and give the rest away, would never allow herself more
than one little cup of wine, diluted according to her own temperate
palate, which, out of courtesy, she would taste. And if there were many
oratories of departed saints that ought to be honoured in the same way,
she still carried round with her the selfsame cup, to be used
everywhere; and this, which was not only very much watered, but was also
very tepid with carrying about, she would distribute by small sips to
those around; for she sought their devotion, not pleasure. As soon,
therefore, as she found this custom to be forbidden by that famous
preacher and most pious prelate, even to those who would use it with
moderation, lest thereby an occasion of excess <span
id="fr_438"></span>[439](#fn_438.md) might be given to such as were
drunken, and because these, so to say, festivals in honour of the dead
were very like unto the superstition of the Gentiles, she most willingly
abstained from it. And in lieu of a basket filled with fruits of the
earth, she had learned to bring to the oratories of the martyrs a heart
full of more purified petitions, and to give all that she could to the
poor; <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md) that so the communion of
the Lord’s body might be rightly celebrated there, where, after the
example of His passion, the martyrs had been sacrificed and crowned. But
yet it seems to me, O Lord my God, and thus my heart thinks of it in thy
sight, that my mother perhaps would not so easily have given way to the
relinquishment of this custom had it been forbidden by another whom she
loved not as Ambrose, <span id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) whom, out
of regard for my salvation, she loved most dearly; and he loved her
truly, on account of her most religious conversation, whereby, in good
works so “fervent in spirit,” <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md)
she frequented the church; so that he would often, when he saw me, burst
forth into her praises, congratulating me that I had such a
mother—little knowing what a son she had in me, who was in doubt as to
all these things, <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="vi.VI.II-Page_91"></span>and did not imagine the way of life could
be found out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_437"></span>[90:438](1010093.htm#fr_437.md) <span
id="vi.VI.II-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.II-p3"></span> That is, as is explained further on in
the section, the *Martyrs*. Tertullian gives us many indications of the
veneration in which the martyrs were held towards the close of the
second century. The anniversary of the martyr’s death was called his
*natalitium*, or natal day, as his martyrdom ushered him into eternal
life, and *oblationes pro defunctis* were then offered. (*De Exhor.
Cast.* c. 11; *De Coro.* c. 3). Many extravagant things were said about
the glory of martyrdom, with the view, doubtless, of preventing apostasy
in time of persecution. It was described (*De Bap.* c. 16; and *De Pat.*
c. 13.) as a second baptism, and said to secure for a man immediate
entrance into heaven, and complete enjoyment of its happiness. These
views developed in Augustin’s time into all the wildness of Donatism.
Augustin gives us an insight into the customs prevailing in his day, and
their significance, which greatly illustrates the present section. In
his *De Civ. Dei*, viii. 27, we read: “But, nevertheless, we do not
build temples, and ordain priests, rites, and sacrifices for these same
martyrs; for they are not our gods, but their God is our God. Certainly
we honour their reliquaries, as the memorials of holy men of God, who
strove for the truth even to the death of their bodies, that the true
religion might be made known, and false and fictitious religions
exposed.…But who ever heard a priest of the faithful, standing at an
altar built for the honour and worship of God over the holy body of some
martyr, say in the prayers, I offer to thee a sacrifice, O Peter, or O
Paul, or O Cyprian? For it is to God that sacrifices are offered at
their tombs,—the God who made them both men and martyrs, and associated
them with holy angels in celestial honour; and the reason why we pay
such honours to their memory is, that by so doing we may both give
thanks to the true God for their victories, and, by recalling them
afresh to remembrance, may stir ourselves up to imitate them by seeking
to obtain like crowns and palms, calling to our help that same God on
whom they called. Therefore, whatever honours the religious may pay in
the places of the martyrs, they are but honours rendered to their memory
\[*ornamenta memoriarum*\], not sacred rites or sacrifices offered to
dead men as to gods. And even such as bring thither food—which, indeed,
is not done by the better Christians, and in most places of the world is
not done at all—do so in order that it may be sanctified to them through
the merits of the martyrs, in the name of the Lord of the martyrs, first
presenting the food and offering prayer, and thereafter taking it away
to be eaten, or to be in part bestowed upon the needy. But he who knows
the one sacrifice of Christians, which is the sacrifice offered in those
places, also knows that these are not sacrifices offered to the
martyrs.” He speaks to the same effect in Book xxii. sec. 10; and in his
*Reply to Faustus* (xx. 21), who had charged the Christians with
imitating the Pagans, “and appeasing the ‘shades’ of the departed with
wine and food.” See v. sec. 17, note.

<span id="fn_438"></span>[90:439](1010093.htm#fr_438.md) <span
id="vi.VI.II-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.II-p4"></span> Following the example of Ambrose,
Augustin used all his influence and eloquence to correct such shocking
abuses in the churches. In his letter to Alypius, Bishop of Thagaste
(when as yet only a presbyter assisting the venerable Valerius), he
gives an account of his efforts to overcome them in the church of Hippo.
The following passage is instructive (*Ep.* xxix. 9):—“I explained to
them the circumstances out of which this custom seems to have
necessarily risen in the Church, namely, that when, in the peace which
came after such numerous and violent persecutions, crowds of heathen who
wished to assume the Christian religion were kept back, because, having
been accustomed to celebrate the feasts connected with their worship of
idols in revelling and drunkenness, they could not easily refrain from
pleasures so hurtful and so habitual, it had seemed good to our
ancestors, making for the time a concession to this infirmity, to permit
them to celebrate, instead of the festivals which they renounced, other
feasts in honour of the holy martyrs, which were observed, not as before
with a profane design, but with similar self-indulgence.”

<span id="fn_439"></span>[90:440](1010093.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="vi.VI.II-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.II-p5"></span> See v. sec. 17, note 5, above.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[90:441](1010093.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="vi.VI.II-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.II-p6"></span> On another occasion, when Monica’s mind
was exercised as to non-essentials, Ambrose gave her advice which has
perhaps given origin to the proverb, “When at Rome, do as Rome does.” It
will be found in the letter to Casulanus (*Ep.* xxxvi. 32), and is as
follows:—“When my mother was with me in that city, I, as being only a
catechumen, felt no concern about these questions; but it was to her a
question causing anxiety, whether she ought, after the custom of our own
town, to fast on the Saturday, or, after the custom of the church of
Milan, not to fast. To deliver her from perplexity, I put the question
to the man of God whom I have first named. He answered, ‘What else can I
recommend to others than what I do myself?’ When I thought that by this
he intended simply to prescribe to us that we should take food on
Saturdays,—for I knew this to be his own practice,—he, following me,
added these words: ‘When I am here I do not fast on Saturday, but when I
am at Rome I do; Whatever church you may come to, conform to its custom,
if you would avoid either receiving or giving offence.’” We find the
same incident referred to in *Ep.* liv. 3.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[90:442](1010093.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="vi.VI.II-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.II-p7"></span> [Rom.
12.11](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#011.md)<span id="vi.VI.II-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](1010094.md)
