[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010046)  [Next](1010048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.III.I"></span>

<span id="vi.III.I-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.III.I-p1.1"></span>Chapter I.—Deluded by an Insane Love, He,
Though Foul and Dishonourable, Desires to Be Thought Elegant and
Urbane.</span>

<span id="vi.III.I-p2"></span>1. <span class="c9"><span
id="vi.III.I-p2.1"></span>To</span> Carthage I came, where a cauldron of
unholy loves bubbled up all around me. I loved not as yet, yet I loved
to love; and with a hidden want, I abhorred myself that I wanted not. I
searched about for something to love, in love with loving, and hating
security, and a way not beset with snares. For within me I had a dearth
of that inward food, Thyself, my God, though that dearth caused me no
hunger; but I remained without all desire for incorruptible food, not
because I was already filled thereby, but the more empty I was the more
I loathed it. For this reason my soul was far from well, and, full of
ulcers, it miserably cast itself forth, craving to be excited by contact
with objects of sense. Yet, had these no soul, they would not surely
inspire love. To love and to be loved was sweet to me, and all the more
when I succeeded in enjoying the person I loved. I befouled, therefore,
the spring of friendship with the filth of concupiscence, and I dimmed
its lustre with the hell of lustfulness; and yet, foul and dishonourable
as I was, I craved, through an excess of vanity, to be thought elegant
and urbane. I fell precipitately, then, into the love in which I longed
to be ensnared. My God, my mercy, with how much bitterness didst Thou,
out of Thy infinite goodness, besprinkle for me that sweetness! For I
was both beloved, and secretly arrived at the bond of enjoying; and was
joyfully bound with troublesome ties, that I might be scourged with the
burning iron rods of jealousy, suspicion, fear, anger, and strife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II](1010048)
