[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010098)  [Next](1010100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.VIII"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.VIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.VIII-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—The Same When at Rome, Being
Led by Others into the Amphitheatre, is Delighted with the Gladiatorial
Games.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.VIII-p2"></span>13. He, not relinquishing that worldly
way which his parents had bewitched him to pursue, had gone before me to
Rome, to study law, and there he was carried away in an extraordinary
manner with an incredible eagerness after the gladiatorial shows. For,
being utterly opposed to and detesting such spectacles, he was one day
met by chance by divers of his acquaintance and fellow-students
returning from dinner, and they with a friendly violence drew him,
vehemently objecting and resisting, into the amphitheatre, on a day of
these cruel and deadly shows, he thus protesting: “Though you drag my
body to that place, and there place me, can you force me to give my mind
and lend my eyes to these shows? Thus shall I be absent while present,
and so shall overcome both you and them.” They hearing this, dragged him
on nevertheless, desirous, perchance, to see whether he could do as he
said. When they had arrived thither, and had taken their places as they
could, the whole place became excited with the inhuman sports. But he,
shutting up the doors of his eyes, forbade his mind to roam abroad after
such naughtiness; and would that he had shut his ears also! For, upon
the fall of one in the fight, a mighty cry from the whole audience
stirring him strongly, he, overcome by curiosity, and prepared as it
were to despise and rise superior to it, no matter what it were, opened
his eyes, and was struck with a deeper wound in his soul than the other,
whom he desired to see, was in his body; <span
id="fr_459"></span>[460](#fn_459.md) and <span id="page_96">p. 96</span>
<span id="vi.VI.VIII-Page_96"></span>he fell more miserably than he on
whose fall that mighty clamour was raised, which entered through his
ears, and unlocked his eyes, to make way for the striking and beating
down of his soul, which was bold rather than valiant hitherto; and so
much the weaker in that it presumed on itself, which ought to have
depended on Thee. For, directly he saw that blood, he therewith imbibed
a sort of savageness; nor did he turn away, but fixed his eye, drinking
in madness unconsciously, and was delighted with the guilty contest, and
drunken with the bloody pastime. Nor was he now the same he came in, but
was one of the throng he came unto, and a true companion of those who
had brought him thither. Why need I say more? He looked, shouted, was
excited, carried away with him the madness which would stimulate him to
return, not only with those who first enticed him, but also before them,
yea, and to draw in others. And from all this didst Thou, with a most
powerful and most merciful hand, pluck him, and taughtest him not to
repose confidence in himself, but in Thee—but not till long after.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_459"></span>[95:460](1010099.htm#fr_459.md) <span
id="vi.VI.VIII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.VIII-p3"></span> The scene of this episode was,
doubtless, the great Flavian Amphitheatre, known by us at this day as
the Colosseum. It stands in the valley between the Cælian and Esquiline
hills, on the site of a lake formerly attached to the palace of Nero.
Gibbon, in his graphic way, says of the building (*Decline and Fall*, i.
355): “Posterity admires, and will long admire, the awful remains of the
amphitheatre of Titus, which so well deserved the epithet of colossal.
It was a building of an elliptic figure, five hundred and sixty-four
feet in length, and four hundred and sixty-seven in breadth, founded on
fourscore arches, and rising, with four successive orders of
architecture, to the height of one hundred and forty feet. The outside
of the edifice was encrusted with marble, and decorated with statues.
The slopes of the vast concave which formed the inside were filled and
surrounded with sixty or eighty rows of seats of marble, likewise
covered with cushions, and capable of receiving with ease above
fourscore thousand spectators. Sixty-four vomitories (for by that name
the doors were very aptly distinguished) poured forth the immense
multitude; and the entrances, passages, and staircases were contrived
with such exquisite skill, that each person, whether of the senatorial,
the equestrian, or the plebeian order, arrived at his destined place
without trouble or confusion. Nothing was omitted which in any respect
could be subservient to the convenience or pleasure of the spectators.
They were protected from the sun and rain by an ample canopy
occasionally drawn over their heads. The air was continually refreshed
by the playing of fountains, and profusely impregnated by the grateful
scent of aromatics. In the centre of the edifice, the arena, or stage,
was strewed with the finest sand, and successively assumed the most
different forms; at one moment it seemed to rise out of the earth, like
the garden of the Hesperides, and was afterwards broken into the rocks
and caverns of Thrace. The subterraneous pipes conveyed an inexhaustible
supply of water; and what had just before appeared a level plain might
be suddenly converted into a wide lake, covered with armed vessels and
replenished with the monsters of the deep. In the decoration of these
scenes the Roman emperors displayed their wealth and liberality; and we
read, on various occasions, that the whole furniture of the amphitheatre
consisted either of silver, or of gold, or of amber.” In this
magnificent building were enacted *venatios* or hunting scenes,
sea-fights, and gladiatorial shows, in all of which the greatest
lavishness was exhibited. The men engaged were for the most part either
criminals or captives taken in war. On the occasion of the triumph of
Trajan for his victory over the Dacians, it is said that ten thousand
gladiators were engaged in combat, and that in the *naumachia* or
sea-fight shown by Domitian, ships and men in force equal to two real
fleets were engaged, at an enormous expenditure of human life. “If,”
says James Martineau (*Endeavours after the Christian Life*, pp. 261,
262), “you would witness a scene characteristic of the popular life of
old, you must go to the amphitheatre of Rome, mingle with its eighty
thousand spectators, and watch the eager faces of senators and people;
observe how the masters of the world spend the wealth of conquest, and
indulge the pride of power. See every wild creature that God has made to
dwell, from the jungles of India to the mountains of Wales, from the
forests of Germany to the deserts of Nubia, brought hither to be hunted
down in artificial groves by thousands in an hour, behold the captives
of war, noble, perhaps, and wise in their own land, turned loose, amid
yells of insult, more terrible for their foreign tongue, to contend with
brutal gladiators, trained to make death the favourite amusement, and
present the most solemn of individual realities as a wholesale public
sport; mark the light look with which the multitude, by uplifted finger,
demands that the wounded combatant be slain before their eyes; notice
the troop of Christian martyrs awaiting hand in hand the leap from the
tiger’s den. And when the day’s spectacle is over, and the blood of two
thousand victims stains the ring, follow the giddy crowd as it streams
from the vomitories into the street, trace its lazy course into the
Forum, and hear it there scrambling for the bread of private indolence
doled out by the purse of public corruption; and see how it suns itself
to sleep in the open ways, or crawls into foul dens till morning brings
the hope of games and merry blood again;—and you have an idea of the
Imperial people, and their passionate living for the moment, which the
gospel found in occupation of the world.” The desire for these shows
increased as the empire advanced. Constantine failed to put a stop to
them at Rome, though they were not admitted into the Christian capital
he established at Constantinople. We have already shown (iii. sec. 2,
note, above) how strongly attendance at stage-plays and scenes like
these was condemned by the Christian teachers. The passion, however, for
these exhibitions was so great, that they were only brought to an end
after the monk Telemachus—horrified that Christians should witness such
scenes—had been battered to death by the people in their rage at his
flinging himself between the swordsmen to stop the combat. This tragic
episode occurred in the year 403, at a show held in commemoration of a
temporary success over the troops of Alaric.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](1010100.md)
