[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010350)  [Next](1010352) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XLIV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p1.1"></span>Letter XLIV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 398.)

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p3.1"></span>To My Lords Most Beloved, and Brethren
Worthy of All Praise, Eleusius, Glorius, and the Two Felixes, Augustin
Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p5"></span>1. In passing through Tubursi on my way
to the church at Cirta, though pressed for time, I visited Fortunius,
your bishop there, and found him to be, in truth, just such a man as you
were wont most kindly to lead me to expect. When I sent him notice of
your conversation with me concerning him, and expressed a desire to see
him, he did not decline the visit. I therefore went to him, because I
thought it due to his age that I should go to him, instead of insisting
upon his first coming to me. I went, therefore, accompanied by a
considerable number of persons, who, as it happened, were at that time
beside me. When, however, we had taken our seats in his house, the thing
becoming known, a considerable addition was made to the crowd assembled;
but in that whole multitude there appeared to me to be very few who
desired the matter to be discussed in a sound and profitable manner, or
with the deliberation and solemnity which so great a question demands.
All the others had come rather in the mood of playgoers, expecting a
scene in our debates, than in Christian seriousness of spirit, seeking
instruction in regard to salvation. Accordingly they could neither
favour us with silence when we spoke, nor speak with care, or even with
due regard to decorum and order,—excepting, as I have said, those few
persons about whose pious and sincere interest in the matter there was
no doubt. Everything was therefore thrown into confusion by the noise of
men speaking loudly, and each according to the unchecked impulse of his
own feelings; and though both Fortunius and I used entreaty and
remonstrance, we utterly failed in persuading them to listen silently to
what was spoken.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p6"></span>2. The discussion of the question was
opened notwithstanding, and for some hours we persevered, speeches being
delivered by each <span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-Page_286"></span>side in turn, so far as was permitted by
an occasional respite from the voices of the noisy onlookers. In the
beginning of the debate, perceiving that things which had been spoken
were liable to be forgotten by myself, or by those about whose salvation
I was deeply concerned; being desirous also that our debate should be
managed with caution and self-restraint, and that both you and other
brethren who were absent might be able to learn from a record what
passed in the discussion, I demanded that our words should be taken down
by reporters. This was for a long time resisted, either by Fortunius or
by those on his side. At length, however, he agreed to it; but the
reporters who were present, and were able to do the work thoroughly,
declined, for some reason unknown to me, to take notes. I urged them,
that at least the brethren who accompanied me, though not so expert in
the work, should take notes, and promised that I would leave the tablets
on which the notes were taken in the hands of the other party. This was
agreed to. Some words of mine were first taken down, and some statements
on the other side were dictated and recorded. After that, the reporters,
not being able to endure the disorderly interruptions vociferated by the
opposing party, and the increased vehemence with which under this
pressure our side maintained the debate, gave up their task. This,
however, did not close the discussion, many things being still said by
each as he obtained an opportunity. This discussion of the whole
question, or at least so much of all that was said as I can remember, I
have resolved, my beloved friends, that you shall not lose; and you may
read this letter to Fortunius, that he may either confirm my statements
as true, or himself inform you, without hesitation, of anything which
his more accurate recollection suggests.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p7"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p7.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p8"></span>3. He was pleased to begin with
commending my manner of life, which he said he had come to know through
your statements (in which I am sure there was more kindness than truth),
adding that he had remarked to you that I might have done well all the
things which you had told him of me, if I had done them within the
Church. I thereupon asked him what was the Church within which it was
the duty of a man so to live; whether it was that one which, as Sacred
Scripture had long foretold, was spread over the whole world, or that
one which a small section of Africans, or a small part of Africa,
contained. To this he at first attempted to reply, that his communion
was in all parts of the earth. I asked him whether he was able to issue
letters of communion, which we call regular, <span
id="fr_1648"></span>[1649](#fn_1648) to places which I might select; and
I affirmed, what was obvious to all, that in this way the question might
be most simply settled. In the event of his agreeing to this, my
intention was that we should send such letters to those churches which
we both knew, on the authority of the apostles, to have been already
founded in their time.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p10"></span>4. As the falsity of his statement,
however, was apparent, a hasty retreat from it was made in a cloud of
confused words, in the midst of which he quoted the Lord’s words:
“Beware of false prophets, which come to you in sheep’s clothing, but
inwardly they are ravening wolves. Ye shall know them by their
fruits.” <span id="fr_1649"></span>[1650](#fn_1649) When I said that
these words of the Lord might also be applied by us to them, he went on
to magnify the persecution which he affirmed that his party had often
suffered; intending thereby to prove that his party were Christians
because they endured persecution. When I was preparing, as he went on
with this, to answer him from the Gospel, he himself anticipated me in
bringing forward the passage in which the Lord says: “Blessed are they
which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake: for theirs is the kingdom
of heaven.” <span id="fr_1650"></span>[1651](#fn_1650) Thanking him for
the apt quotation, I immediately added that this behoved therefore to be
inquired into, whether they had indeed suffered persecution for
righteousness’ sake. In following up this inquiry I wished this to be
ascertained, though indeed it was patent to all, whether the
persecutions under Macarius <span id="fr_1651"></span>[1652](#fn_1651)
fell upon them while they were within the unity of the Church, or after
they had been severed from it by schism; so that those who wished to see
whether they had suffered persecution for righteousness’ sake might turn
rather to the prior question, whether they had done rightly in cutting
themselves off from the unity of the whole world. For if they were found
in this to have done wrong, it was manifest that they suffered
persecution for unrighteousness’ sake rather than for righteousness’
sake, and could not therefore be numbered among those of whom it is
said, “Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness’ sake.”
Thereupon mention was made of the surrender of the sacred books, a
matter about which much more has been spoken than has ever been proved
true. On our side it was said in reply, that their leaders rather than
ours had been traditors; but that if they would not believe the
documents with which we supported this charge, we could not be compelled
to accept those which they brought forward.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span> <span id="vii.1.XLIV-Page_287"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p14"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p14.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p15"></span>5. Having therefore laid aside that
question as one on which there was a doubt, I asked how they could
justify their separation of themselves from all other Christians who had
done them no wrong, who throughout the world preserved the order of
succession, and were established in the most ancient churches, but had
no knowledge whatever as to who were traditors in Africa; and who
assuredly could not hold communion with others than those whom they had
heard of as occupying the episcopal sees. He answered that the foreign
churches had done them no wrong, up to the time when they had consented
to the death of those who, as he had said, had suffered in the Macarian
persecution. Here I might have said that it was impossible for the
innocence of the foreign churches to be affected by the offence given in
the time of Macarius, seeing that it could not be proved that he had
done with their sanction what he did. I preferred, however, to save time
by asking whether, supposing that the foreign churches had, through the
cruelties of Macarius, lost their innocence from the time in which they
were said to have approved of these, it could even be proved that up to
that time the Donatists had remained in unity with the Eastern churches
and other parts of the world.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p16"></span>6. Thereupon he produced a certain
volume, by which he wished to show that a Council at Sardica had sent a
letter to African bishops who belonged to the party of Donatus. When
this was read aloud, I heard the name Donatus among the bishops to whom
the writing had been sent. I therefore insisted upon being told whether
this was the Donatus from whom their faction takes its name; as it was
possible that they had written to some bishop named Donatus belonging to
another section \[heresy\], especially since in these names no mention
had been made of Africa. How then, I asked, could it be proved that we
must believe the Donatus here named to be the Donatist bishop, when it
could not even be proved that this letter had been specially directed to
bishops in Africa? For although Donatus is a common African name, there
is nothing improbable in the supposition, that either some one in other
countries should be found bearing an African name, or that a native of
Africa should be made a bishop there. We found, moreover, no day or name
of consul given in the letter, from which any certain light might have
been furnished by comparison of dates. I had indeed once heard that the
Arians, when they had separated from the Catholic communion, had
endeavoured to ally the Donatists in Africa with themselves; and my
brother Alypius recalled this to me at the time in a whisper. Having
then taken up the volume itself, and glancing over the decrees of the
said Council, I read that Athanasius, Catholic bishop of Alexandria, who
was so conspicuous as a debater in the keen controversies with the
Arians, and Julius, bishop of the Roman Church, also a Catholic, had
been condemned by that Council of Sardica; from which we were sure that
it was a Council of Arians, against which heretics these Catholic
bishops had contended with singular fervour. I therefore wished to take
up and carry with me the volume, in order to give more pains to find out
the date of the Council. He refused it, however, saying that I could get
it there if I wished to study anything in it. I asked also that he would
allow me to mark the volume; for I feared, I confess, lest, if perchance
necessity arose for my asking to consult it, another should be
substituted in its room. This also he refused.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p17"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p17.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p18"></span>7. Thereafter he began to insist upon
my answering categorically this question: Whether I thought the
persecutor or the persecuted to be in the right? To which I answered,
that the question was not fairly stated: it might be that both were in
the wrong, or that the persecution might be made by the one who was the
more righteous of the two parties; and therefore it was not always right
to infer that one is on the better side because he suffers persecution,
although that is almost always the case. When I perceived that he still
laid great stress upon this, wishing to have the justice of the cause of
his party acknowledged as beyond dispute because they had suffered
persecution, I asked him whether he believed Ambrose, bishop of the
Church of Milan, to be a righteous man and a Christian? He was compelled
to deny expressly that that man was a Christian and a righteous man; for
if he had admitted this, I would at once have objected to him that he
esteemed it necessary for him to be rebaptized. When, therefore, he was
compelled to pronounce concerning Ambrose that he was not a Christian
nor a righteous man, I related the persecution which he endured when his
church was surrounded with soldiers. I also asked whether Maximianus,
who had made a schism from their party at Carthage, was in his view a
righteous man and a Christian. He could not but deny this. I therefore
reminded him that he had endured such persecution that his church had
been razed to the foundations. By these instances I laboured to persuade
him, if possible, to give up affirming that the suffering of persecution
is the most infallible mark of Christian righteousness.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p19"></span>8. He also related that, in the infancy
of their schism, his predecessors, being anxious to devise some way of
hushing up the fault of Cæcilianus, lest a schism should take place, had
appointed over the people belonging to his communion in Carthage an
interim bishop before Majorinus was ordained in opposition to
Cæcilianus. He <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-Page_288"></span>alleged that this interim bishop was
murdered in his own meeting house by our party. This, I confess, I had
never heard before, though so many charges brought by them against us
have been refuted and disproved, while by us greater and more numerous
crimes have been alleged against them. After having narrated this story,
he began again to insist on my answering whether in this case I thought
the murderer or the victim the more righteous man; as if he had already
proved that the event had taken place as he had stated. I therefore said
that we must first ascertain the truth of the story, for we ought not to
believe without examination all that is said: and that even were it
true, it was possible either that both were equally bad, or that one who
was bad had caused the death of another yet worse than himself. For, in
truth, it is possible that his guilt is more heinous who rebaptizes the
whole man than his who kills the body only.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p20"></span>9. After this there was no occasion for
the question which he afterwards put to me. He affirmed that even a bad
man should not be killed by Christians and righteous men; as if we
called those who in the Catholic Church do such things righteous men: a
statement, moreover, which it is more easy for them to affirm than to
prove to us, so long as they themselves, with few exceptions, bishops,
presbyters, and clergy of all kinds, go on gathering mobs of most
infatuated men, and causing, wherever they are able, so many violent
massacres, and devastations to the injury not of Catholics only, but
sometimes even of their own partisans. In spite of these facts,
Fortunius, affecting ignorance of the most villanous doings, which were
better known by him than by me, insisted upon my giving an example of a
righteous man putting even a bad man to death. This was, of course, not
relevant to the matter in hand; for I conceded that wherever such crimes
were committed by men having the name of Christians, they were not the
actions of good men. Nevertheless, in order to show him what was the
true question before us, I answered by inquiring whether Elijah seemed
to him to be a righteous man; to which he could not but assent.
Thereupon I reminded him how many false prophets Elijah slew with his
own hand. <span id="fr_1652"></span>[1653](#fn_1652) He saw plainly
herein, as indeed he could not but see, that such things were then
lawful to righteous men. For they did these things as prophets guided by
the Spirit and sanctioned by the authority of God, who knows infallibly
to whom it may be even a benefit to be put to death. <span
id="fr_1653"></span>[1654](#fn_1653) He therefore required me to show
him one who, being a righteous man, had in the New Testament times put
any one, even a criminal and impious man, to death.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p23"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p23.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p24"></span>10. I then returned to the argument
used in my former letter, <span id="fr_1654"></span>[1655](#fn_1654) in
which I laboured to show that it was not right either for us to reproach
them with atrocities of which some of their party had been guilty, or
for them to reproach us if any such deeds were found by them to have
been done on our side. For I granted that no example could be produced
from the New Testament of a righteous man putting any one to death; but
I insisted that by the example of our Lord Himself, it could be proved
that the wicked had been tolerated by the innocent. For His own
betrayer, who had already received the price of His blood, He suffered
to remain undistinguished from the innocent who were with Him, even up
to that last kiss of peace. He did not conceal from the disciples the
fact that in the midst of them was one capable of such a crime; and,
nevertheless, He administered to them all alike, without excluding the
traitor, the first sacrament of His body and blood. <span
id="fr_1655"></span>[1656](#fn_1655) When almost all felt the force of
this argument, Fortunius attempted to meet it by saying, that before the
Lord’s Passion that communion with a wicked man did no harm to the
apostles, because they had not as yet the baptism of Christ, but the
baptism of John only. When he said this, I asked him to explain how it
was written that Jesus baptized more disciples than John, though Jesus
Himself baptized not, but His disciples, that is to say, baptized by
means of His disciples? <span id="fr_1656"></span>[1657](#fn_1656) How
could they give what they had not received (a question often used by the
Donatists themselves)? Did Christ baptize with the baptism of John? I
was prepared to ask many other questions in connection with this opinion
of Fortunius; such as—how John himself was interrogated as to the Lord’s
baptizing, and replied that He had the bride, and was the
Bridegroom? <span id="fr_1657"></span>[1658](#fn_1657) Was it, then,
lawful for the Bridegroom to baptize with the baptism of him who was but
a friend or servant? Again, how could they receive the Eucharist if not
previously baptized? or how could the Lord in that case have said in
reply to Peter, who was willing to be wholly washed by Him, “He that is
washed needeth not save to wash his feet, but is clean every
whit”? <span id="fr_1658"></span>[1659](#fn_1658) For perfect cleansing
is by the baptism, not of John, but of the Lord, if the person receiving
it be worthy; if, however, he be unworthy, the sacraments abide in him,
not to his salvation, but to his perdition. When I was about to put
these questions, Fortunius himself saw that he ought not to have mooted
the subject of the baptism of the disciples of the Lord.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p30"></span>11. From this we passed to something
else, <span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-Page_289"></span>many on both sides discoursing to the
best of their ability. Among other things it was alleged that our party
was still intending to persecute them; and he \[Fortunius\] said that he
would like to see how I would act in the event of such persecution,
whether I would consent to such cruelty, or withhold from it all
countenance. I said that God saw my heart, which was unseen by them;
also that they had hitherto had no ground for apprehending such
persecution, which if it did take place would be the work of bad men,
who were, however, not so bad as some of their own party; but that it
was not incumbent on us to withdraw ourselves from communion with the
Catholic Church on the ground of anything done against our will, and
even in spite of our opposition (if we had an opportunity of testifying
against it), seeing that we had learned that toleration for the sake of
peace which the apostle prescribes in the words: “Forbearing one another
in love, endeavouring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace.” <span id="fr_1659"></span>[1660](#fn_1659) I affirmed that they
had not preserved this peace and forbearance, when they had caused a
schism, within which, moreover, the more moderate among them now
tolerated more serious evils, lest that which was already a fragment
should be broken again, although they did not, in order to preserve
unity, consent to exercise forbearance in smaller things. I also said
that in the ancient economy the peace of unity and forbearance had not
been so fully declared and commended as it is now by the example of the
Lord and the charity of the New Testament; and yet prophets and holy men
were wont to protest against the sins of the people, without
endeavouring to separate themselves from the unity of the Jewish people,
and from communion in partaking along with them of the sacraments then
appointed.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p32"></span>12. After that, mention was made, I
know not in what connection, of Genethlius of blessed memory, the
predecessor of Aurelius in the see of Carthage, because he had
suppressed some edict granted against the Donatists, and had not
suffered it to be carried into effect. They were all praising and
commending him with the utmost kindness. I interrupted their
commendatory speeches with the remark that, for all this, if Genethlius
himself had fallen into their hands, it would have been declared
necessary to baptize him a second time. (We were by this time all
standing, as the time of our going away was at hand.) On this the old
man said plainly, that a rule had now been made, according to which
every believer who went over from us to them must be baptized; but he
said this with the most manifest reluctance and sincere regret. When he
himself most frankly bewailed many of the evil deeds of his party,
making evident, as was further proved by the testimony of the whole
community, how far he was from sharing in such transactions, and told us
what he was wont to say in mild expostulation to those of his own party;
when also I had quoted the words of Ezekiel—“As the soul of the father,
so also the soul of the son is mine: the soul that sinneth it shall
die” <span id="fr_1660"></span>[1661](#fn_1660) —it which it is written
that the son’s fault is not to be reckoned to his father, nor the
father’s fault reckoned to his son, it was agreed by all that in such
discussions the excesses of bad men ought not to be brought forward by
either party against the other. There remained, therefore, only the
question as to schism. I therefore exhorted him again and again that he
should with tranquil and undisturbed mind join me in an effort to bring
to a satisfactory end, by diligent research, the examination of so
important a matter. When he kindly replied that I myself sought this
with a single eye, but that others who were on my side were averse to
such examination of the truth, I left him with this promise, that I
would bring to him more of my colleagues, ten at least, who desire this
question to be sifted with the same good-will and calmness and pious
care which I saw that he had discovered and now commended in myself. He
gave me a similar promise regarding a like number of his colleagues.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p34"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p34.1"></span>Chap. VI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p35"></span>13. Wherefore I exhort you, and by the
blood of the Lord implore you, to put him in mind of his promise, and to
insist urgently that what has been begun, and is now, as you see, nearly
finished, may be concluded. For, in my opinion, you will have difficulty
in finding among your bishops another whose judgment and feelings are so
sound as we have seen that old man’s to be. The next day he came to me
himself, and we began to discuss the matter again. I could not, however,
remain long with him, as the ordination of a bishop required my
departing from the place. I had already sent a messenger to the chief
man of the Cœlicolæ, <span id="fr_1661"></span>[1662](#fn_1661) of whom
I had heard that he had introduced a new baptism among them, and had by
this impiety led many astray, intending, so far as my limited time
permitted, to confer with him. Fortunius, when he learned that he was
coming, perceiving that I was to be otherwise engaged, and having
himself some other duty calling him from home, bade me a kind and
friendly farewell.

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p37"></span>14. It seems to me that if we would
avoid the attendance of a noisy crowd, rather hindering than helping the
debate, and if we wish to com<span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-Page_290"></span>plete by the Lord’s help so great a work
begun in a spirit of unfeigned good-will and peace, we ought to meet in
some small village in which neither party has a church, and which is
inhabited by persons belonging to both churches, such as Titia. Let this
or any other such place be agreed upon in the region of Tubursi or of
Thagaste, and let us take care to have the canonical books at hand for
reference. Let any other documents be brought thither which either party
may judge useful; and laying all other things aside, uninterrupted, if
it please God, by other cares, devoting our time for as many days as we
can to this one work, and each imploring in private the Lord’s guidance,
we may, by the help of Him to whom Christian peace is most sweet, bring
to a happy termination the inquiry which has been in such a good spirit
opened. Do not fail to write in reply what you or Fortunius think of
this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1648"></span>[286:1649](1010351.htm#fr_1648) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p9"></span> *Formatæ*.

<span id="fn_1649"></span>[286:1650](1010351.htm#fr_1649) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p11"></span> [Matt.
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1650"></span>[286:1651](1010351.htm#fr_1650) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p12"></span> [Matt.
5.10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1651"></span>[286:1652](1010351.htm#fr_1651) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p13"></span> Macarius was sent in <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.XLIV-p13.1"></span>a.d.</span> 348 by the
Emperor Constans to Africa, to exhort all to cherish the unity of the
Catholic Church, and at the same time to collect for the relief of the
poor. The vehement opposition with which the Donatists met him led to
conflicts and bloodshed, the Donatists claiming the honour of martyrdom
for all of their party who fell in fighting with the imperial soldiers.

<span id="fn_1652"></span>[288:1653](1010351.htm#fr_1652) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p21"></span> [1 Kings
18.40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#040)<span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1653"></span>[288:1654](1010351.htm#fr_1653) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p22"></span> *Qui novit cui etiam prosit occidi*.

<span id="fn_1654"></span>[288:1655](1010351.htm#fr_1654) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p25"></span> Let. XLIII. pp. 283, 284.

<span id="fn_1655"></span>[288:1656](1010351.htm#fr_1655) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p26"></span> [Matt.
26.20-28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1656"></span>[288:1657](1010351.htm#fr_1656) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p27"></span> [John
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#002)<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1657"></span>[288:1658](1010351.htm#fr_1657) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p28"></span> [John
3.29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1658"></span>[288:1659](1010351.htm#fr_1658) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p29"></span> [John
13.10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1659"></span>[289:1660](1010351.htm#fr_1659) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p31"></span> [Eph.
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1660"></span>[289:1661](1010351.htm#fr_1660) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p33"></span> [Ezek.
18.4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1661"></span>[289:1662](1010351.htm#fr_1661) <span
id="vii.1.XLIV-p35.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XLIV-p36"></span> The Cœlicolæ are mentioned in some
laws of Honorius as heretics whose heresy, if they refused to abandon
it, involved them in civil penalties.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XLV](1010352)
