[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010341)  [Next](1010343) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXXV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXXV-p1.1"></span>Letter XXXV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 396.)

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p3"></span>(Another letter to Eusebius on the same
subject.)

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXV-p4.1"></span>To Eusebius, My Excellent Lord and Brother,
Worthy of Affection and Esteem, Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p5"></span>1. I did not impose upon you, by
importunate exhortation or entreaty in spite of your reluctance, the
duty, as you call it, of arbitrating between bishops. Even if I had
desired to move <span id="page_264">p. 264</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXV-Page_264"></span>you to this, I might perhaps have easily
shown how competent you are to judge between us in a cause so clear and
simple; nay, I might show how you are already doing this, inasmuch as
you, who are afraid of the office of judge, do not hesitate to pronounce
sentence in favour of one of the parties before you have heard both. But
of this, as I have said, I do not meanwhile say anything. For I had
asked nothing else from your honourable good-nature,—and I beseech you
to be pleased to remark it in this letter, if you did not in the
former,—than that you should ask Proculeianus whether he himself said to
his presbyter Victor that which the public registers have by official
report ascribed to him, or whether those who were sent have written in
the public registers not what they heard from Victor, but a falsehood;
and further, what his opinion is as to our discussing the whole question
between us. I think that he is not constituted judge between parties,
who is only requested by the one to put a question to the other, and
condescend to write what reply he has received. This also I now again
ask you not to refuse to do, because, as I know by experiment, he does
not wish to receive a letter from me, otherwise I would not employ your
Excellency’s mediation. Since, therefore, he does not wish this, what
could I do less likely to give offence, than to apply through you, so
good a man and such a friend of his, for an answer concerning a matter
about which the burden of my responsibility forbids me to hold my peace?
Moreover, you say (because the son’s beating of his mother is
disapproved by your sound judgment), “If Proculeianus had known this, he
would have debarred that man from communion with his party.” I answer in
a sentence, “He knows it now, let him now debar him.”

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p6"></span>2. Let me mention another thing. A man
who was formerly a subdeacon of the church at Spana, Primus by name,
when, having been forbidden such intercourse with nuns as contravened
the laws of the Church, <span id="fr_1566"></span>[1567](#fn_1566) he
treated with contempt the established and wise regulations, was deprived
of his clerical office,—this man also, being provoked by the divinely
warranted discipline, went over to the other party, and was by them
rebaptized. Two nuns also, who were settled in the same lands of the
Catholic Church with him, either taken by him to the other party, or
following him, were likewise rebaptized: and now, among bands of
Circumcelliones and troops of homeless women, who have declined
matrimony that they may avoid restraint, he proudly boasts himself in
excesses of detestable revelry, rejoicing that he now has without
hindrance the utmost freedom in that misconduct from which in the
Catholic Church he was restrained. Perhaps Proculeianus knows nothing
about this case either. Let it therefore through you, as a man of grave
and dispassionate spirit, be made known to him; and let him order that
man to be dismissed from his communion, who has chosen it for no other
reason than that he had, on account of insubordination and dissolute
habits, forfeited his clerical office in the Catholic Church.

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p8"></span>3. For my own part, if it please the
Lord, I purpose to adhere to this rule, that whoever, after being
deposed among them by a sentence of discipline, shall express a desire
to pass over into the Catholic Church, must be received on condition of
submitting to give the same proofs of penitence as those which, perhaps,
they would have constrained him to give if he had remained among them.
But consider, I beseech you, how worthy of abhorrence is their procedure
in regard to those whom we check by ecclesiastical censures for unholy
living, persuading them first to come to a second baptism, in order to
their being qualified for which they declare themselves to be pagans
(and how much blood of martyrs has been poured out rather than that such
a declaration should proceed from the mouth of a Christian!); and
thereafter, as if renewed and sanctified, but in truth more hardened in
sin, to defy with the impiety of new madness, under the guise of new
grace, that discipline to which they could not submit. If, however, I am
wrong in attempting to obtain the correction of these abuses through
your benevolent interposition, let no one find fault with my causing
them to be made known to Proculeianus by the public registers,—a means
of notification which in this Roman city cannot, I believe, be refused
to me. For, since the Lord commands us to speak and proclaim the truth,
and in teaching to rebuke what is wrong, and to labour in season and out
of season, as I can prove by the words of the Lord and of the
apostles, <span id="fr_1567"></span>[1568](#fn_1567) let no man think
that I am to be persuaded to be silent concerning these things. If they
meditate any bold measures of violence or outrage, the Lord, who has
subdued under His yoke all earthly kingdoms in the bosom of His Church
spread abroad through the whole world, will not fail to defend her from
wrong.

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p10"></span>4. The daughter of one of the
cultivators of the property of the Church here, who had been one of our
catechumens, had been, against the will of her parents, drawn away by
the other party, and after being baptized among them, had assumed the
profession of a nun. Now her father wished to compel her by severe
treatment to return to the Catholic Church; but I was unwilling <span
id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span id="vii.1.XXXV-Page_265"></span>that
this woman, whose mind was so perverted, should be received by us unless
with her own will, and choosing, in the free exercise of judgment, that
which is better: and when the countryman began to attempt to compel his
daughter by blows to submit to his authority, I immediately forbade his
using any such means. Notwithstanding, after all, when I was passing
through the Spanian district, a presbyter of Proculeianus, standing in a
field belonging to an excellent Catholic woman, shouted after me with a
most insolent voice that I was a Traditor and a persecutor; and he
hurled the same reproach against that woman, belonging to our communion,
on whose property he was standing. But when I heard his words, I not
only refrained from pursuing the quarrel, but also held back the
numerous company which surrounded me. Yet if I say, Let us inquire and
ascertain who are or have been indeed Traditors and persecutors, they
reply, “We will not debate, but we will rebaptize. Leave us to prey upon
your flocks with crafty cruelty, like wolves; and if you are good
shepherds, bear it in silence.” For what else has Proculeianus commanded
but this, if indeed the order is justly ascribed to him: “If thou art a
Christian,” said he, “leave this to the judgment of God; whatever we do,
hold thou thy peace.” The same presbyter, moreover, dared to utter a
threat against a countryman who is overseer of one of the farms
belonging to the Church.

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p11"></span>5. I pray you to inform Proculeianus of
all these things. Let him repress the madness of his clergy, which,
honoured Eusebius, I have felt constrained to report to you. Be pleased
to write to me, not your own opinion concerning them all, lest you
should think that the responsibility of a judge is laid upon you by me,
but the answer which they give to my questions. May the mercy of God
preserve you from harm, my excellent lord and brother, most worthy of
affection and esteem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[264:1567](1010342.htm#fr_1566) <span
id="vii.1.XXXV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p7"></span> *Accessus indisciplinatus
sanctimonialium*.

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[264:1568](1010342.htm#fr_1567) <span
id="vii.1.XXXV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p9"></span> [2 Tim.
4.2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002)<span id="vii.1.XXXV-p9.1"></span>
and [Tit. 1.9-11](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.XXXV-p9.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXVI](1010343)
