[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010113)  [Next](1010115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VII.VI"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.VI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VII.VI-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—He Refutes the Divinations of the
Astrologers, Deduced from the Constellations.</span>

<span id="vi.VII.VI-p2"></span>8. Now also had I repudiated the lying
divinations and impious absurdities of the astrologers. Let Thy mercies,
out of the depth of my soul, confess unto thee <span
id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488.md) for this also, O my God. For Thou,
Thou altogether,—for who else is it that calls us back from the death of
all errors, but that Life which knows not how to die, and the Wisdom
which, requiring no light, enlightens the minds that do, whereby the
universe is governed, even to the fluttering leaves of trees?—Thou
providedst also for my obstinacy wherewith I struggled with
Vindicianus, <span id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489.md) an acute old man,
and Nebridius, a young one of remarkable talent; the former vehemently
declaring, and the latter frequently, though with a certain measure of
doubt, saying, “That no art existed by which to foresee future things,
but that men’s surmises had oftentimes the help of luck, and that of
many things which they foretold some came to pass unawares to the
predictors, who lighted on it by their oft speaking.” Thou, therefore,
didst provide a friend for me, who was no negligent consulter of the
astrologers, and yet not thoroughly skilled in those arts, but, as I
said, a curious consulter with them; and yet knowing somewhat, which he
said he had heard from his father, which, how far it would tend to
overthrow the estimation of that art, he knew not. This man, then, by
name Firminius, having received a liberal education, and being well
versed in rhetoric, consulted me, as one very dear to him, as to what I
thought on some affairs of his, wherein his worldly hopes had risen,
viewed with regard to his so-called constellations; and I, who had now
begun to lean in this particular towards Nebridius’ opinion, did not
indeed decline to speculate about the matter, and to tell him what came
into my irresolute mind, but still added that I was now almost persuaded
that these were but empty and ridiculous follies. Upon this he told me
that his father had been very curious in such books, and that he had a
friend who was as interested in them as he was himself, who, with
combined study and consultation, fanned the flame of their affection for
these toys, insomuch that they would observe the moment when the very
dumb animals which bred in their houses brought forth, and then observed
the position of the heavens with regard to them, so as to gather fresh
proofs of this so-called art. He said, moreover, that his father had
told him, that at the time his mother was about to give birth to him
(Firminius), a female servant of that friend of his father’s was also
great with child, which could not be hidden from her master, who took
care with most diligent exactness to know of the birth of his very dogs.
And so it came to pass that (the one for his wife, and the other for his
ser<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="vi.VII.VI-Page_106"></span>vant, with the most careful observation,
calculating the days and hours, and the smaller divisions of the hours)
both were delivered at the same moment, so that both were compelled to
allow the very selfsame constellations, even to the minutest point, the
one for his son, the other for his young slave. For so soon as the women
began to be in travail, they each gave notice to the other of what was
fallen out in their respective houses, and had messengers ready to
despatch to one another so soon as they had information of the actual
birth, of which they had easily provided, each in his own province, to
give instant intelligence. Thus, then, he said, the messengers of the
respective parties met one another in such equal distances from either
house, that neither of them could discern any difference either in the
position of the stars or other most minute points. And yet Firminius,
born in a high estate in his parents’ house, ran his course through the
prosperous paths of this world, was increased in wealth, and elevated to
honours; whereas that slave—the yoke of his condition being
unrelaxed—continued to serve his masters, as Firminius, who knew him,
informed me.

<span id="vi.VII.VI-p5"></span>9. Upon hearing and believing these
things, related by so reliable a person, all that resistance of mine
melted away; and first I endeavoured to reclaim Firminius himself from
that curiosity, by telling him, that upon inspecting his constellations,
I ought, were I to foretell truly, to have seen in them parents eminent
among their neighbours, a noble family in its own city, good birth,
becoming education, and liberal learning. But if that servant had
consulted me upon the same constellations, since they were his also, I
ought again to tell him, likewise truly, to see in them the meanness of
his origin, the abjectness of his condition, and everything else
altogether removed from and at variance with the former. Whence, then,
looking upon the same constellations, I should, if I spoke the truth,
speak diverse things, or if I spoke the same, speak falsely; thence
assuredly was it to be gathered, that whatever, upon consideration of
the constellations, was foretold truly, was not by art, but by chance;
and whatever falsely, was not from the unskillfulness of the art, but
the error of chance.

<span id="vi.VII.VI-p6"></span>10. An opening being thus made, I
ruminated within myself on such things, that no one of those dotards
(who followed such occupations, and whom I longed to assail, and with
derision to confute) might urge against me that Firminius had informed
me falsely, or his father him: I turned my thoughts to those that are
born twins, who generally come out of the womb so near one to another,
that the small distance of time between them—how much force soever they
may contend that it has in the nature of things—cannot be noted by human
observation, or be expressed in those figures which the astrologer is to
examine that he may pronounce the truth. Nor can they be true; for,
looking into the same figures, he must have foretold the same of Esau
and Jacob, <span id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490.md) whereas the same did
not happen to them. He must therefore speak falsely; or if truly, then,
looking into the same figures, he must not speak the same things. Not
then by art, but by chance, would he speak truly. For Thou, O Lord, most
righteous Ruler of the universe, the inquirers and inquired of knowing
it not, workest by a hidden inspiration that the consulter should hear
what, according to the hidden deservings of souls, he ought to hear, out
of the depth of Thy righteous judgment, to whom let not man say, “What
is this?” or “Why that?” Let him not say so, for he is man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_488"></span>[105:489](1010114.htm#fr_488.md) <span
id="vi.VII.VI-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.VI-p3"></span> [Ps.
107.8](../../../bib/vul/psa107.htm#008.md)<span
id="vi.VII.VI-p3.1"></span>, *Vulg*.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[105:490](1010114.htm#fr_489.md) <span
id="vi.VII.VI-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.VI-p4"></span> See iv. sec. 5, note, above.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[106:491](1010114.htm#fr_490.md) <span
id="vi.VII.VI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.VI-p7"></span> He uses the same illustration when
speaking of the *mathematici*, or astrologers, in his *De Doct. Christ.*
ii. 33.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](1010115.md)
