[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010191)  [Next](1010193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.XXXV"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.—Another Kind of Temptation is
Curiosity, Which is Stimulated by the Lust of the Eyes.</span>

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p2"></span>54. In addition to this there is another
form of temptation, more complex in its peril. For besides that
concupiscence of the flesh which lieth in the gratification of all
senses and pleasures, wherein its slaves who “are far from Thee
perish,” <span id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941.md) there pertaineth to the
soul, through the same senses of the body, a certain vain and curious
longing, cloaked under the name of knowledge and learning, not of having
pleasure in the flesh, but of making experiments through the flesh. This
longing, since it originates in an appetite for knowledge, and the sight
being the chief amongst the senses in the acquisition of knowledge, is
called in divine language, “the lust of the eyes.” <span
id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942.md) For seeing belongeth properly to the
eyes; yet we apply this word to the other senses also, when we exercise
them in the search after knowledge. For we do not say, Listen how it
glows, smell how it glistens, taste how it shines, or feel how it
flashes, since all these are said to be seen. And yet we say <span
id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span id="vi.X.XXXV-Page_158"></span>not
only, See how it shineth, which the eyes alone can perceive; but also,
See how it soundeth, see how it smelleth, see how it tasteth, see how
hard it is. And thus the general experience of the senses, as was said
before, is termed “the lust of the eyes,” because the function of
seeing, wherein the eyes hold the pre-eminence, the other senses by way
of similitude take possession of, whensoever they seek out any
knowledge.

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p5"></span>55. But by this is it more clearly
discerned, when pleasure and when curiosity is pursued by the senses;
for pleasure follows after objects that are beautiful, melodious,
fragrant, savoury, soft; but curiosity, for experiment’s sake, seeks the
contrary of these,—not with a view of undergoing uneasiness, but from
the passion of experimenting upon and knowing them. For what pleasure is
there to see, in a lacerated corpse, that which makes you shudder? And
yet if it lie near, we flock thither, to be made sad, and to turn pale.
Even in sleep they fear lest they should see it. Just as if when awake
any one compelled them to go and see it, or any report of its beauty had
attracted them! Thus also is it with the other senses, which it were
tedious to pursue. From this malady of curiosity are all those strange
sights exhibited in the theatre. Hence do we proceed to search out the
secret powers of nature (which is beside our end), which to know profits
not, <span id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943.md) and wherein men desire
nothing but to know. Hence, too, with that same end of perverted
knowledge we consult magical arts. Hence, again, even in religion
itself, is God tempted, when signs and wonders are eagerly asked of
Him,—not desired for any saving end, but to make trial only.

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p7"></span>56. In this so vast a wilderness, replete
with snares and dangers, lo, many of them have I lopped off, and
expelled from my heart, as Thou, O God of my salvation, hast enabled me
to do. And yet when dare I say, since so many things of this kind buzz
around our daily life,—when dare I say that no such thing makes me
intent to see it, or creates in me vain solicitude? It is true that the
theatres never now carry me away, nor do I now care to know the courses
of the stars, nor hath my soul at any time consulted departed spirits;
all sacrilegious oaths I abhor. O Lord my God, to whom I owe all humble
and single-hearted service, with what subtlety of suggestion does the
enemy influence me to require some sign from Thee! But by our King, and
by our pure land chaste country Jerusalem, I beseech Thee, that as any
consenting unto such thoughts is far from me, so may it always be
farther and farther. But when I entreat Thee for the salvation of any,
the end I aim at is far otherwise, and Thou who doest what Thou wilt,
givest and wilt give me willingly to “follow” Thee. <span
id="fr_944"></span>[945](#fn_944.md)

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p9"></span>57. Nevertheless, in how many most minute
and contemptible things is our curiosity daily tempted, and who can
number how often we succumb? How often, when people are narrating idle
tales, do we begin by tolerating them, lest we should give offence unto
the weak; and then gradually we listen willingly! I do not now-a-days go
to the circus to see a dog chasing a hare; <span
id="fr_945"></span>[946](#fn_945.md) but if by chance I pass such a
coursing in the fields, it possibly distracts me even from some serious
thought, and draws me after it,—not that I turn the body of my beast
aside, but the inclination of my mind. And except Thou, by demonstrating
to me my weakness, dost speedily warn me, either through the sight
itself, by some reflection to rise to Thee, or wholly to despise and
pass it by, I, vain one, am absorbed by it. How is it, when sitting at
home, a lizard catching flies, or a spider entangling them as they rush
into her nets, oftentimes arrests me? Is the feeling of curiosity not
the same because these are such tiny creatures? From them I proceed to
praise Thee, the wonderful Creator and Disposer of all things; but it is
not this that first attracts my attention. It is one thing to get up
quickly, and another not to fall, and of such things is my life full;
and my only hope is in Thy exceeding great mercy. For when this heart of
ours is made the receptacle of such things, and bears crowds of this
abounding vanity, then are our prayers often interrupted and disturbed
thereby; and whilst in Thy presence we direct the voice of our heart to
Thine ears, this so great a matter is broken off by the influx of I know
not what idle thoughts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_941"></span>[157:942](1010192.htm#fr_941.md) <span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p3"></span> [Ps.
63.27](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#027.md)<span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_942"></span>[157:943](1010192.htm#fr_942.md) <span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p4"></span> [1 John
2.16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#016.md)<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_943"></span>[158:944](1010192.htm#fr_943.md) <span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p6"></span> Augustin’s great end was to attain the
knowledge of God. Hence, in his *Soliloquia*, i. 7, we read: “Deum et
animam scire cupio. Nihilne plus? Nihil omnino.” And he only esteemed
the knowledge of physical laws so far as they would lead to Him. (See v.
sec. 7, above, and the note there.) In his *De Ordine*, ii. 14, 15,
etc., writing at the time of his conversion, he had contended that the
knowledge of the liberal sciences would lead to a knowledge of the
divine wisdom; but in his *Retractations* (i. 3, sec. 2) he regrets
this, pointing out that while many holy men have not this knowledge,
many who have it are not holy. Compare also *Enchir*. c. 16; *Serm.*
lxviii. 1, 2; and *De Civ. Dei*, ix. 22.

<span id="fn_944"></span>[158:945](1010192.htm#fr_944.md) <span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p8"></span> [John
21.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#022.md)<span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_945"></span>[158:946](1010192.htm#fr_945.md) <span
id="vi.X.XXXV-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.X.XXXV-p10"></span> In allusion to those *venatios*, or
hunting scenes, in which the less savage animals were slain. These were
held in the circus, which was sometimes planted for the occasion, so as
to resemble a forest. See Smith’s *Greek and Roman Antiquities*, under
“Venatio,” and vi. sec. 13, note, above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](1010193.md)
