[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010080)  [Next](1010082.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.V.V"></span>

<span id="vi.V.V-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.V.V-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—Of Manichæus Pertinaciously Teaching
False Doctrines, and Proudly Arrogating to Himself the Holy
Spirit.</span>

<span id="vi.V.V-p2"></span>8. But yet who was it that ordered Manichæus
to write on these things likewise, skill in which was not necessary to
piety? For Thou hast told man to behold piety and wisdom, <span
id="fr_385"></span>[386](#fn_385.md) of which he might be in ignorance
although having a complete knowledge of these other things; but since,
knowing not these things, he yet most impudently dared to teach them, it
is clear that he had no acquaintance with piety. For even when we have a
knowledge of these worldly matters, it is folly to make a profession of
them; but confession to Thee is piety. It was therefore with this view
that this straying one spake much of these matters, that, standing
convicted by those who had in truth learned them, the understanding that
he really had in those more difficult things might be made plain. For he
wished not to be lightly esteemed, but went about trying to persuade men
“that the Holy Ghost, the Comforter and Enricher of Thy faithful ones,
was with full authority personally resident in him.” <span
id="fr_386"></span>[387](#fn_386.md) When, therefore, it was dis<span
id="page_82">p. 82</span> <span id="vi.V.V-Page_82"></span>covered that
his teaching concerning the heavens and stars, and the motions of sun
and moon, was false, though these things do not relate to the doctrine
of religion, yet his sacrilegious arrogance would become sufficiently
evident, seeing that not only did he affirm things of which he knew
nothing, but also perverted them, and with such egregious vanity of
pride as to seek to attribute them to himself as to a divine being.

<span id="vi.V.V-p5"></span>9. For when I hear a Christian brother
ignorant of these things, or in error concerning them, I can bear with
patience to see that man hold to his opinions; nor can I apprehend that
any want of knowledge as to the situation or nature of this material
creation can be injurious to him, so long as he does not entertain
belief in anything unworthy of Thee, O Lord, the Creator of all. But if
he conceives it to pertain to the form of the doctrine of piety, and
presumes to affirm with great obstinacy that whereof he is ignorant,
therein lies the injury. And yet even a weakness such as this in the
dawn of faith is borne by our Mother Charity, till the new man may grow
up “unto a perfect man,” and not be “carried about with every wind of
doctrine.” <span id="fr_387"></span>[388](#fn_387.md) But in him who thus
presumed to be at once the teacher, author, head, and leader of all whom
he could induce to believe this, so that all who followed him believed
that they were following not a simple man only, but Thy Holy Spirit, who
would not judge that such great insanity, when once it stood convicted
of false teaching, should be abhorred and utterly cast off? But I had
not yet clearly ascertained whether the changes of longer and shorter
days and nights, and day and night itself, with the eclipses of the
greater lights, and whatever of the like kind I had read in other books,
could be expounded consistently with his words. Should I have found
myself able to do so, there would still have remained a doubt in my mind
whether it were so or no, although I might, on the strength of his
reputed godliness, <span id="fr_388"></span>[389](#fn_388.md) rest my faith
on his authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_385"></span>[81:386](1010081.htm#fr_385.md) <span
id="vi.V.V-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.V-p3"></span> [Job
28.28](../../../bib/sep/job028.htm#028.md)<span id="vi.V.V-p3.1"></span> in
LXX. reads: <span class="Greek"><span id="vi.V.V-p3.2"></span>Ἰδοὺ ἡ
θεοσέβεά ἐστι σοφία</span>.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[81:387](1010081.htm#fr_386.md) <span
id="vi.V.V-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vi.V.V-p4"></span> This claim of Manichæus was supported by
referring to the Lord’s promise ([John
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span id="vi.V.V-p4.1"></span>.md) to
send the Holy Ghost, the Comforter, to guide the apostles into that
truth which they were as yet “not able to bear.” The Manichæans used the
words “Paraclete” and “Comforter,” as indeed the names of the other two
persons of the blessed Trinity, in a sense entirely different from that
of the gospel. These terms were little more than the bodily frame, the
soul of which was his own heretical belief. Whenever opposition appeared
between that belief and the teaching of Scripture, their ready answer
was that the Scriptures had been corrupted (*De Mor. Ecc. Cath.* xxviii.
and xxix.); and in such a case, as we find Faustus contending (*Con.
Faust.* xxxii. 6), the Paraclete taught them what part to receive and
what to reject, according to the promise of Jesus that He should “guide
them into all truth,” and much more to the same effect. Augustin’s whole
argument in reply is well worthy of attention. Amongst other things, he
points out that the Manichæan pretension to having received the promised
Paraclete was precisely the same as that of the Montanists in the
previous century. It should be observed that Beausobre (*Histoire,* i.
254, 264, etc.) vigorously rebuts the charge brought against Manichæus
of claiming to *be* the Holy Ghost. An interesting examination of the
claims of Montanus will be found in Kaye’s *Tertullian*, pp. 13 to 33.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[82:388](1010081.htm#fr_387.md) <span
id="vi.V.V-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.V-p6"></span> [Eph.
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014.md)<span id="vi.V.V-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[82:389](1010081.htm#fr_388.md) <span
id="vi.V.V-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.V-p7"></span> See vi. sec. 12, note, below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](1010082.md)
