[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010464)  [Next](1010466.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 428 or 429.)

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p3.1"></span>To the Aged Alypius, Augustin Sends
Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p4"></span>Brother Paulus has arrived here
safely: he reports that the pains devoted to the business which engaged
him have been rewarded with success; the Lord will grant that with these
his trouble in that matter may terminate. He salutes you warmly, and
tells us tidings concerning Gabinianus which give us joy, namely, that
having by God’s mercy obtained a prosperous issue in his case, he is now
not only in name a Christian, but in sincerity a very excellent convert
to the faith, and was baptized recently at Easter, having both in his
heart and on his lips the grace which he received. How much I long for
him I can never express; but you know that I love him.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p5"></span>The president of the medical
faculty, <span id="fr_2975"></span>[2976](#fn_2975.md) Dioscorus, has also
professed the Christian faith, having obtained grace at the same time.
Hear the manner of his conversion, for his stubborn neck and his bold
tongue could not be subdued without some miracle. His daughter, the only
comfort of his life, was sick, and her sickness became so serious that
her life was, according even to her father’s own admission, despaired
of. It is reported, and the truth of the report is beyond question, for
even before brother Paul’s return the fact was mentioned to me by Count
Peregrinus, a most respectable and truly Christian man, who was baptized
at the same time with Dioscorus and Gabinianus,—it is reported, I say,
that the old man, feeling himself at last constrained to implore the
compassion of Christ, bound himself by a vow that he would become a
Christian if he saw her restored to health. She recovered, but he
perfidiously drew back from fulfilling his vow. Nevertheless the hand of
the Lord was still stretched forth, for suddenly he is smitten with
blindness, and immediately the cause of this calamity was impressed upon
his mind. He confessed his fault aloud, and vowed again that if his
sight were given back he would perform what he had vowed. He recovered
his sight, fulfilled his vow, and still the hand of God was stretched
forth. He had not committed the Creed to memory, or perhaps had refused
to commit it, and had excused himself on the plea of inability. God had
seen this. Immediately <span id="page_577">p. 577</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVII-Page_577"></span>after all the ceremonies of his
reception he is seized with paralysis, affecting many, indeed almost all
his members, and even his tongue. Then, being warned by a dream, he
confesses in writing that it had been told to him that this had happened
because he had not repeated the Creed. After that confession the use of
all his members was restored to him, except the tongue alone;
nevertheless he, being still under this affliction, made manifest by
writing that he had, notwithstanding, learned the Creed, and still
retained it in his memory; and so that frivolous loquacity which, as you
know, blemished his natural kindliness, and made him, when he mocked
Christians, exceedingly profane, was altogether destroyed in him. What
shall I say, but, “Let us sing a hymn to the Lord, and highly exalt Him
for ever! Amen.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2975"></span>[576:2976](1010465.htm#fr_2975.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVII-p6"></span> *Archiater.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCXXVIII](1010466.md)
