[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010009)  [Next](1010011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.4"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="iv.4-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER IV.—*The Writings of St. Augustin*.</span>

<span id="iv.4-p3"></span>The numerous writings of Augustin, the
composition of which extended through four and forty years, are a mine
of Christian knowledge, and experience. They abound in lofty ideas,
noble sentiments, devout effusions, clear statements of truth, strong
arguments against error, and passages of fervid eloquence and undying
beauty, but also in innumerable repetitions, fanciful opinions, and
playful conjectures of his uncommonly fertile brain. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23)

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span id="iv.4-Page_11"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p5"></span>His style is full of life and vigour and
ingenious plays on words, but deficient in simplicity, purity and
elegance, and by no means free from the vices of a degenerate rhetoric,
wearisome prolixity, and from that *vagabunda loquacitas*, with which
his adroit opponent, Julian of Eclanum, charged him. He would rather, as
he said, be blamed by grammarians, than not understood by the people;
and he bestowed little care upon his style, though he many a time rises
in lofty poetic flight. He made no point of literary renown, but,
impelled by love to God and to the church, he wrote from the fulness of
his mind and heart. <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) The writings
before his conversion, a treatise on the Beautiful (*De Pulchro et
Apto*), the orations and eulogies which he delivered as rhetorician at
Carthage, Rome, and Milan, are lost. The professor of eloquence, the
heathen philosopher, the Manichæan heretic, the sceptic and free
thinker, are known to us only from his regrets and recantations in the
Confessions and other works. His literary career for us commences in his
pious retreat at Cassiciacum where he prepared himself for a public
profession of his faith. He appears first, in the works composed at
Cassiciacum, Rome, and near Tagaste, as a Christian philosopher, after
his ordination to the priesthood as a theologian. Yet even in his
theological works he everywhere manifests the metaphysical and
speculative bent of his mind. He never abandoned or depreciated reason,
he only subordinated it to faith and made it subservient to the defence
of revealed truth. Faith is the pioneer of reason, and discovers the
territory which reason explores.

<span id="iv.4-p7"></span>The following is a classified view of his most
important works. <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25)

<span id="iv.4-p9"></span>I. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p9.1"></span>Autobiographical</span> works. To these belong the
*Confessions* and the *Retractations*; the former acknowledging his
sins, the latter retracting his theoretical errors. In the one he
subjects his life, in the other his writings, to close criticism; and
these productions therefore furnish the best standard for judging of his
entire labours. <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26)

<span id="iv.4-p11"></span>The *Confessions* are the most profitable, at
least the most edifying, product of his pen; indeed, we may say, the
most edifying book in all the patristic literature. They were
accordingly the most read even during his lifetime, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) and they have been the most frequently
published since. <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) A more sincere and
more earnest book was never written. The historical part, to the tenth
book, is one of the devotional classics of all creeds, and second in
popularity only to the “Imitation of Christ,” by Thomas a Kempis, and
Bunyan’s “Pilgrim’s Progress.” Certainly no autobiography is superior to
it in true humility, spiritual depth, and universal interest. Augustin
records his own experience, as a heathen sensualist, a Manichæan
heretic, an anxious inquirer, a sincere penitent, and a grateful
convert. He finds a response in every human soul that struggles through
the temptations of nature and the labyrinth of error to the knowledge of
<span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span id="iv.4-Page_12"></span>truth and
the beauty of holiness, and after many sighs and tears finds rest and
peace in the arms of a merciful Saviour. The style is not free from the
faults of an artificial rhetoric, involved periods and far-fetched
paronomasias; but these defects are more than atoned for by passages of
unfading beauty, the devout spirit and psalm-like tone of the book. It
is the incense of a sacred mysticism of the heart which rises to the
throne on high. The wisdom of some parts of the *Confessions* may be
doubted. <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) The world would never have
known Augustin’s sins, if he had not told them; nor were they of such a
nature as to destroy his respectability in the best heathen society of
his age; but we must all the more admire his honesty and humility.

<span id="iv.4-p15"></span>Rousseau’s “*Confessions*,” and Goethe’s
“*Truth and Fiction*,” may be compared with Augustin’s *Confessions* as
works of rare genius and of absorbing psychological interest, but they
are written in a radically different spirit, and by attempting to exalt
human nature in its unsanctified state, they tend as much to expose its
vanity and weakness, as the work of the bishop of Hippo, being written
with a single eye to the glory of God, raises man from the dust of
repentance to a new and imperishable life of the Spirit. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30)

<span id="iv.4-p17"></span>Augustin composed the *Confessions* about the
year 397, ten years after his conversion. The first nine books contain,
in the form of a continuos prayer and confession before God, a general
sketch of his earlier life, of his conversion, and of his return to
Africa in the thirty-fourth year of his age. The salient points in these
books are the engaging history of his conversion in Milan, and the story
of the last days of his noble mother in Ostia, spent as it were at the
very gate of heaven and in full assurance of a blessed reunion at the
throne of glory. The last three books and a part of the tenth are
devoted to speculative philosophy; they treat, partly in tacit
opposition to Manichæism, of the metaphysical questions of the
possibility of knowing God, and the nature of time and space; and they
give an interpretation of the Mosaic cosmogony in the style of the
typical allegorical exegesis usual with the fathers, but foreign to our
age; they are therefore of little value to the general reader, except as
showing that even abstract metaphysical subjects may be devotionally
treated.

<span id="iv.4-p18"></span>The *Retractations* were produced in the
evening of his life (427 and 428), when, mindful of the proverb: “In the
multitude of words there wanteth not transgression,” <span
id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) and remembering that we must give account
for every idle word, he judged himself, <span
id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) that he might not be judged. <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) He revised in chronological order the
numerous works he had written before and during his episcopate, and
retracted or corrected whatever in them seemed to his riper knowledge
false or obscure, or not fully agreed with the orthodox catholic faith.
Some of his changes were reactionary and no improvements, especially
those on the freedom of the will, and on religious toleration. In all
essential points, nevertheless, his theological system remained the same
from his conversion to this time. The *Retractations* give beautiful
evidence of his love of truth, his conscientiousness, and his
humility. <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34)

<span id="iv.4-p23"></span>To this same class should be added the
*Letters* of Augustin, of which the Benedictine editors, in their second
volume, give two hundred and seventy (including letters *to* Augustin)
in chronological order from A.D. 386 to A.D. 429. These letters treat,
sometimes very minutely, <span id="page_13">p. 13</span> <span
id="iv.4-Page_13"></span>of all the important questions of his time, and
give us an insight of his cares, his official fidelity, his large heart,
and his effort to become, like Paul, all things to all men.

<span id="iv.4-p24"></span>When the questions of friends and pupils
accumulated, he answered them in special works; and in this way he
produced various collections of *Quæstiones and Responsiones*,
dogmatical, exegetical, and miscellaneous (A.D. 390, 397, &c.).

<span id="iv.4-p25"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p26"></span>II. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p26.1"></span>Philosophical</span> treatises, in dialogue;
almost all composed in his earlier life; either during his residence on
the country-seat Cassiciacum in the vicinity of Milan, where he spent
half a year before his baptism in instructive and stimulating
conversation, in a sort of academy or Christian Platonic banquet with
Monnica, his son Adeodatus, his brother Navigius, his friend Alypius,
and some cousins and pupils; or during his second residence in Rome; or
soon after his return to Africa. <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35)

<span id="iv.4-p28"></span>To this class belong the works; *Contra
Academicos libri très* (386), in which he combats the skepticism and
probabilism of the New Academy,—the doctrine that man can never reach
the truth, but can at best attain only probability; *De vita beata*
(386), in which he makes true blessedness to consist in the perfect
knowledge of God; *De ordine*,—on the relation of evil to the divine
order of the world <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) (386);
*Soliloquia* (387), communings with his own soul concerning God, the
highest good, the knowledge of truth, and immortality; *De immortalitate
animæ* (387), a continuation of the *Soliloquies*; *De quantitate animæ*
(387), discussing sundry questions of the size, the origin, the
incorporeity of the soul; *De musica libri vi* (387-389); *De magistro*
(389), in which, in a dialogue with his son Adeodatus, a pious and
promising, but precocious youth, who died soon after his return to
Africa (389), he treats on the importance and virtue of the word of God,
and on Christ as the infallible Master. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) To these may be added the later work, *De
anima et ejus origine* (419). Other philosophical works on grammar,
dialectics (or *ars bene disputandi*), rhetoric, geometry, and
arithmetic, are lost. <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38)

<span id="iv.4-p32"></span>These works exhibit as yet little that is
specifically Christian and churchly; but they show a Platonism seized
and consecrated by the spirit of Christianity, full of high thoughts,
ideal views, and discriminating argument. They were designed to present
the different stages of human thought by which he himself had reached
the knowledge of the truth, and to serve others as steps to the
sanctuary. They form an elementary introduction to his theology. He
afterwards, in his *Retractations*, withdrew many things contained in
them, like the Platonic view of the pre-<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>
<span id="iv.4-Page_14"></span>existence of the soul, and the Platonic
idea that the acquisition of knowledge is a recollection or excavation
of the knowledge hidden in the mind. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) The philosopher in him afterwards yielded
more and more to the theologian, and his views became more positive and
empirical, though in some cases narrower also and more exclusive. Yet he
could never cease to philosophise, and even his later works, especially
*De Trinitate*, and *De Civitate Dei*, are full of profound
speculations. Before his conversion he followed a particular system of
philosophy, first the Manichæan, then the Platonic; after his conversion
he embraced the Christian philosophy, which is based on the divine
revelation of the Scriptures, and is the handmaid of theology and
religion; but at the same time he prepared the way for the catholic
ecclesiastical philosophy, which rests on the authority of the church,
and became complete in the scholasticism of the middle age.

<span id="iv.4-p34"></span>In the history of philosophy he deserves a
place in the highest rank, and has done greater service to the science
of sciences than any other father, Clement of Alexandria and Origen not
excepted. He attacked and refuted the pagan philosophy as pantheistic or
dualistic at heart; he shook the superstitions of astrology and magic;
he expelled from philosophy the doctrine of emanation, and the idea that
God is the soul of the world; he substantially advanced psychology; he
solved the question of the origin and the nature of evil more nearly
than any of his predecessors, and as nearly as most of his successors;
he was the first to investigate thoroughly the relation of divine
omnipotence and omniscience to human freedom, and to construct a
theodicy; in short, he is properly the founder of a Christian
philosophy, and not only divided with Aristotle the empire of the
mediæval scholasticism, but furnished also living germs for new systems
of philosophy, and will always be consulted in the speculative
discussions of Christian doctrines.

<span id="iv.4-p35"></span>The philosophical opinions of Augustin are
ably and clearly summed up by Ueberweg as follows: <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

<span id="iv.4-p37"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p38"></span>“Against the skepticism of the Academics
Augustin urges that man needs the knowledge of truth for his happiness,
that it is not enough merely to inquire and to doubt, and he finds a
foundation for all our knowledge, a foundation invulnerable against
every doubt, in the consciousness we have of our sensations, feelings,
our willing, and thinking, in short, of all our psychical processes.
From the undeniable existence and possession by man of some truth, he
concludes to the existence of God as the truth *per se*; but our
conviction of the existence of the material world he regards as only an
irresistible belief. Combating heathen religion and philosophy, Augustin
defends the doctrines and institutions peculiar to Christianity, and
maintains, in particular, against the Neo-Platoniste, whom he rates most
highly among all the ancient philosophers, the Christian theses that
salvation is to be found in Christ alone, that divine worship is due to
no other being beside the triune God, since he created all things
himself, and did not commission inferior beings, gods, demons, or angels
to create the material world; that the soul with its body will rise
again to eternal salvation or damnation, but will not return
periodically to renewed life upon the earth; that the soul begins to
exist at the same time with the body; that the world both had a
beginning and is perishable, and that only God and the souls of angels
and men are eternal.—Against the dualism of the Manichæans, who regarded
good and evil as equally primitive, and represented a portion of the
divine substance as having entered into the region of evil, in order to
war against and conquer it, Augustin defends the monism of the good
principle, or of the purely spiritual God, explaining evil as a mere
negation or privation, and seeking to show from the finiteness of the
things in the world, and from the differing degrees of perfection, that
the evils in the world are necessary, and not in contradiction with the
idea of creation; he also defends in opposition to Manichæism, and
Gnosticism in general, the Catholic doctrine of the essential harmony
between the Old and New Testaments. Against the Donatists, Augustin
maintains the unity of the church. In opposition to Pelagius and the
Pelagians, he asserts that divine grace is not conditioned on human
worthiness, and maintains the doctrine of absolute predestination, or,
that from the mass of men who, through the disobedience of Adam (in whom
all mankind were present potentially), have sunk into corruption and
sin, some are chosen by the free election of God to be monuments of his
grace, and are brought to believe and be saved, while the greater
number, as monuments of his justice, are left to eternal damnation.”

<span id="iv.4-p39"></span>

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="iv.4-Page_15"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p40"></span>III. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p40.1"></span>Apologetic</span> works against Pagans and Jews.
Among these the twenty-two books, *De Civitate Dei*, are still well
worth reading. They form the deepest and richest apologetic work of
antiquity; begun in 413, after the occupation of Rome by the Gothic king
Alaric, finished in 426, and often separately published. They condense
his entire theory of the world and of man, and are the first attempt at
a comprehensive philosophy of universal history under the dualistic view
of two antagonistic currents or organized forces, a kingdom of this
world which is doomed to final destruction, and a kingdom of God which
will last forever. <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)

<span id="iv.4-p43"></span>This work has controlled catholic
historiography ever since, and received the official approval of Pope
Leo XIII., who, in his famous Encyclical *Immortale Dei* (Nov. 1, 1885),
incidentally alludes to it in these worlds: “Augustin, in his work, *De
Civitate Dei*, set forth so clearly the efficacy of Christian wisdom and
the way in which it is bound up with the well-being of civil society,
that he seems not only to have pleaded the cause of the Christians at
his own time, but to have triumphantly refuted the calumnies against
Christianity for all time.”

<span id="iv.4-p44"></span>From the Protestant point of view Augustin
erred in identifying the kingdom of God with the visible Catholic
Church, which is only a part of it.

<span id="iv.4-p45"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p46"></span>IV. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p46.1"></span> Religious-Theological</span> works of a general
nature (in part anti-Manichæan): *De utilitate credendi*, against the
Gnostic exaltation of knowledge (392); *De fide et symbolo*, a discourse
which, though only presbyter, he delivered on the Apostles’ Creed before
the council at Hippo at the request of the bishops in 393; *De doctrina
Christiana iv libri* (397; the fourth book added in 426), a compend of
exegetical theology for instruction in the interpretation of the
Scriptures according to the analogy of the faith; *De catchizandis
rudibus* likewise for catechetical purposes (400); *Enchiridon*, or *De
fide, spe et caritate*, a brief compend of the doctrine of faith and
morals, which he wrote in 421, or later, at the request of Laurentius;
hence also called *Manuale ad Laurentium*. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42)

<span id="iv.4-p48"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p49"></span>V. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p49.1"></span>Polemic-Theological</span> works. These are the
most copious sources of the history of Christian doctrine in the
patristic age. The heresies collectively are reviewed in the book *De
hæresibus ad Quodvultdeum*, written between 428 and 430 to a friend and
deacon in Carthage, and give a survey of eighty-eight heresies, from the
Simonians to the Pelagians. <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43) In the
work *De vera religione* (390), Augustin proposed to show that the true
religion is to be found not with the heretics and schismatics, but only
in the catholic church of that time.

<span id="iv.4-p51"></span>The other controversial works are directed
against the particular heresies of Manichæism, Donatism, Arianism,
Pelagianism and Semi-Pelagianism. Augustin, with all the firmness of his
convictions, was free from personal antipathy, and used the pen of
controversy in the genuine Christian spirit, *fortiter in re, suaviter
in modo*. He understood Paul’s <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.4-p51.1"></span>ἀληθεύειν ἐν ἀγάπῃ</span>, and forms in this
respect a pleasing contrast to Jerome, who had by nature no more fiery
temperament than he, but was less able to control it. “Let those,” he
very beautifully says to the Manichæans, “burn with hatred against you,
who do not know how much pains it costs to find the truth, how hard it
is to guard against error;—but I, who after so great and long wavering
came to know the truth, must bear myself towards you with the same
patience which my fellow-believers showed towards me while I was
wandering in blind madness in your opinions.” <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44)

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="iv.4-Page_16"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p53"></span>1. The <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p53.1"></span>anti-Manichæan</span> works date mostly from his
earlier life, and in time and matter follow immediately upon his
philosophical writings. <span id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45) In them he
afterwards found most to retract, because he advocated the freedom of
the will against the Manichæan fatalism. The most important are: *De
moribus ecclesiæ catholicæ, et de moribus Manichæorum*, two books
(written during his second residence in Rome, 388); *De vera religione*
(390); *Unde malum, et de libero arbitrio*, usually simply *De libero
arbitrio*, in three books, against the Manichæan doctrine of evil as a
substance, and as having its seat in matter instead of free will (begun
in 388, finished in 395); *De Genesi contra Manichæos*, a defence of the
biblical doctrine of creation (389); *De duabus animabus*, against the
psychological dualism of the Manichæans (392); *Disputatio contra
Fortunatum* (a triumphant refutation of this Manichæan priest of Hippo
in August, 392); *Contra Epistolam Manichæi quam vocant fundamenti*
(397); *Contra Faustum Manichæum*, in thirty-three books (400-404); *De
natura boni* (404), &c.

<span id="iv.4-p55"></span>These works treat of the origin of evil; of
free will; of the harmony of the Old and New Testaments, and of
revelation and nature; of creation out of nothing, in opposition to
dualism and hylozoism; of the supremacy of faith over knowledge; of the
authority of the Scriptures and the Church; of the true and the false
asceticism, and other disputed points; and they are the chief source of
our knowledge of the Manichæan Gnosticism and of the arguments against
it.

<span id="iv.4-p56"></span>Having himself belonged for nine years to
this sect, Augustin was the better fitted for the task of refuting it,
as Paul was peculiarly prepared for the confutation of the Pharisaic
Judaism. His doctrine of the nature of evil is particularly valuable. He
has triumphantly demonstrated for all time, that evil is not a corporeal
thing, nor in any way substantial, but a product of the free will of the
creature, a perversion of substance in itself good, a corruption of the
nature created by God.

<span id="iv.4-p57"></span>2. Against the <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p57.1"></span> Priscillianists</span>, a sect in Spain built on
Manichæan principles, are directed the book *Ad Paulum Orosium contra
Priscillianistas et Origenistas* (411); <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46) the book *Contra mendacium*, addressed to
Consentius (420); and in part the 190th Epistle (alias Ep. 157<span
id="iv.4-p58.1"></span>), to the Bishop Optatus, on the origin of the
soul (418), and two other letters, in which he refutes erroneous views
on the nature of the soul, the limitation of future punishment, and the
lawfulness of fraud for supposed good purposes.

<span id="iv.4-p59"></span>3. The <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p59.1"></span>anti-Donatistic</span> works, composed between
the years 393 and 420, argue against separatism, and contain Augustin’s
doctrine of the church and church-discipline, and of the sacraments. To
these belong: *Psalmus contra partem Donati* (A.D. 393), a polemic
popular song without regular metre, intended to offset the songs of the
Donatists; *Contra epistolam Parmeniani*, written in 400 against the
Carthaginian bishop of the Donatists, the successor of Donatus; *De
baptismo contra Donastistas*, in favor of the validity of heretical
baptism (400); *Contra literas Petiliani* (about 400), against the view
of Cyprian and the Donatists, that the efficacy of the sacraments
depends on the personal worthiness and the ecclesiastical status of the
officiating priest; *Ad Catholicos Epistola contra Donatistas*, or *De
unitate ecclesiæ* (402); *Contra Cresconium grammaticum Donastistam*
(406); *Breviculus Collationis cum Donatistis*, a short account of the
three days’ religious conference with the Donatists (411); *De
correctione Donatistarum* (417); *Contra Gaudentium, Donat. Episcopum*,
the last anti-Donatistic work (420). <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47)

<span id="iv.4-p61"></span>These works are the chief patristic authority
of the Roman Catholic doctrine of the church and against the sects. They
are thoroughly Romanizing in spirit and aim, and least satisfactory to
Protestant readers. Augustin defended in his later years even the
principle of forcible <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="iv.4-Page_17"></span>coërcion and persecution against heretics and
schismatics by a false exegesis of the words in the parable “Compel them
to come in” ([Luke xiv. 23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023)<span
id="iv.4-p61.1"></span>). The result of persecution was that both
Catholics and Donatists in North Africa were overwhelmed in ruin first
by the barbarous Vandals, who were Arian heretics, and afterwards by the
Mohammedan conquerors.

<span id="iv.4-p62"></span>4. The <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p62.1"></span>anti-Arian</span> works have to do with the deity
of Christ and of the Holy Spirit, and with the Holy Trinity. By far the
most important of these are the fifteen books *De Trinitate*
(400-416);—the most profound and discriminating production of the
ancient church on the Trinity, in no respect inferior to the kindred
works of Athanasius and the two Gregories, and for centuries final to
the dogma. <span id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48) This may also be counted
among the positive didactic works, for it is not directly controversial.
The *Collatio cum Maximino Ariano*, an obscure babbler, belongs to the
year 428.

<span id="iv.4-p64"></span>5. The numerous <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p64.1"></span> anti-Pelagian</span> works of Augustin are his
most influential and most valuable, at least for Protestants. They were
written between the years 412 and 429. In them Augustin, in his
intellectual and spiritual prime, develops his system of anthropology
and soteriology, and most nearly approaches the position of Evangelical
Protestantism: *On the Guilt and the Remission of Sins*, and *Infant
Baptism* (412); *On the Spirit and the Letter* (413); *On Nature and
Grace* (415); *On the Acts of Pelagius* (417); *On the Grace of Christ,
and Original Sin* (418); *On Marriage and Concupiscence* (419); *On
Grace and Free Will* (426); *On Discipline and Grace* (427); *Against
Julian of Eclanum* (two large works, written between 421 and 429, the
second unfinished, and hence called *Opus imperfectum*); *On the
Predestination of the Saints* (428); *On the Gift of Perseverance*
(429); &c. <span id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49)

<span id="iv.4-p66"></span>These anti-Pelagian writings contain what is
technically called the Augustinian system of theology, which was
substantially adopted by the Lutheran Church, yet without the decree of
reprobation, and in a more rigorous logical form by the Calvinistic
Confessions. The system gives all glory to God, does full justice to the
sovereignty of divine grace, effectually humbles and yet elevates and
fortifies man, and furnishes the strongest stimulus to gratitude and the
firmest foundation of comfort. It makes all bright and lovely in the
circle of the elect. But it is gloomy and repulsive in its negative
aspect towards the non-elect. It teaches a universal damnation and only
a partial redemption, and confines the offer of salvation to the
minority of the elect; it ignores the general benevolence of God to all
his creatures; it weakens or perverts the passages which clearly teach
that “God would have all men to be saved”; it suspends their eternal
fate upon one single act of disobedience; it assumes an unconscious, and
yet responsible pre-existence of Adam’s posterity and their
participation in his sin and guilt; it reflects upon the wisdom of God
in creating countless millions of beings with the eternal foreknowledge
of their everlasting misery; and it does violence to the sense of
individual responsibility for accepting or rejecting the gospel-offer of
salvation. And yet this Augustinian system, especially in its severest
Calvinistic form, has promoted civil and religious liberty, and trained
the most virtuous, independent, and heroic types of Christians, as the
Huguenots, the Puritans, the Covenanters, and the Pilgrim Fathers. It is
still a mighty moral power, and will not lose its hold upon earnest
characters until some great theological genius produces from the
inexhaustible mine of the Scriptures a more satisfactory solution of the
awful problem which the universal reign of sin and death presents to the
thinking mind.

<span id="iv.4-p67"></span>In Augustin the anti-Pelagian system was
checked and moderated by his churchly and sacramental views, and we
cannot understand him without keeping both in view. The same apparent
contradiction we find in Luther, but he broke entirely with the
sacerdotal system <span id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span
id="iv.4-Page_18"></span>of Rome, and made the doctrine of justification
by faith the chief article of his creed, which Augustin never could have
done. Calvin was more logical than either, and went back beyond
justification and Adam’s fall, yea, beyond time itself, to the eternal
counsel of God which pre-ordains, directs and controls the whole history
of mankind to a certain end, the triumph of his mercy and justice.

<span id="iv.4-p68"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p69"></span>VI. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p69.1"></span>Exegetical</span> works. The best of these are:
*De Genesi ad literam* (The Genesis word for word), in twelve books, an
extended exposition of the first three chapters of Genesis, particularly
the history of the creation literally interpreted, though with many
mystical and allegorical interpretations also (written between 401 and
415); <span id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50) *Enarrationes in Psalmos*
(mostly sermons); <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51) hundred and
twenty-four Homilies on the Gospel of John (416 and 417); <span
id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52) ten Homilies on the First Epistle of John
(417); the Exposition of the Sermon on the Mount (393); the Harmony of
the Gospels (*De consensu evangelistarum*, 400); the Epistle to the
Galatians (394); and an unfinished commentary on the Epistle to the
Romans. <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53)

<span id="iv.4-p74"></span>Augustin deals more in lively, profound, and
edifying thoughts on the Scriptures than in proper grammatical and
historical exposition, for which neither he nor his readers had the
necessary linguistic knowledge, disposition, or taste. He grounded his
theology less upon exegesis than upon his Christian and churchly mind
saturated with Scriptural truths. He excels in spiritual insight, and is
suggestive even when he misses the natural meaning.

<span id="iv.4-p75"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p76"></span>VII. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p76.1"></span>Ethical and Ascetic</span> works. Among these
belong three hundred and ninety-six *Sermones* (mostly very short) *de
Scripturis* (on texts of Scripture), *de tempore* (festival sermons),
*de sanctis* (in memory of apostles, martyrs, and saints), and *de
diversis* (on various occasions), some of them dictated by Augustin,
some taken down by hearers. <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54) Also
various moral treatises: *De continentia* (395); *De mendaico* (395),
against deception (not to be confounded with the similar work already
mentioned *Contra mendacium*, against the fraud-theory of the
Priscillianists, written in 420); *De agone Christiano* (396); *De opere
monachorum*, against monastic idleness (400); *De bono conjugali adv.
Jovinianum* (400); *De virginitate* (401); *De fide et operibus* (413);
*De adulterinis conjugiis*, on [1 Cor. vii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010)<span id="iv.4-p77.5"></span> sqq.
(419); *De bono viduitatis* (418); *De patientia* (418); *De cura pro
mortuis gerenda*, to Paulinus of Nola (421); *De utilitate jejunii*; *De
diligendo Deo*; *Meditationes*; <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55) &c.

<span id="iv.4-p79"></span>As we survey this enormous literary labor,
augmented by many other treatises and letters now lost, and as we
consider his episcopal labors, his many journeys, and his adjudications
of controversies among the faithful, which often robbed him of whole
days, we must be really astounded at the fidelity, exuberance, energy,
and perseverance of this father of the church. Surely, such a life was
worth the living.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_23"></span>[10:24](1010010.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iv.4-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p4"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p4.1"></span>Ellies Dupin</span> (*Bibliothégue
ecclésiastique*, tom. iii. 1 partie, p. 818) and <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p4.2"></span>Nourrisson</span> (*l. c.* tom. ii. p. 449) apply
to Augustin the term *magnus opinator*, which Cicero used of himself.
There is, however, this important difference that Augustin, along with
his many opinions on speculative questions in philosophy and theology,
had very positive convictions in all essential doctrines, while Cicero
was a mere eclectic in philosophy.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[11:25](1010010.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iv.4-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p6"></span> He was not “intoxicated with the exuberance
of his own verbosity,” as a modern English statesman (Lord Beaconsfield)
charged his equally distinguished rival (Mr. Gladstone) in Parliament.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[11:26](1010010.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iv.4-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p8"></span> In his *Retractations*, he himself reviews
ninety-three of his works (embracing two hundred and thirty-two books,
see ii. 67), in chronological order: in the first book those which he
wrote while a layman and presbyter, in the second those which he wrote
when a bishop. See also the extended chronological index in <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p8.1"></span>Schönemann’s</span> *Biblioth.
historico-literaria Patrum Latinorum,* vol. ii (Lips, 1794), p. 340 sqq.
(reprinted in the supplemental volume, xii., of Migne’s ed. of the
*Opera*, p. 24 sqq.); and other systematic and alphabetical lists in the
eleventh volume of the Bened. ed (p. 494 sqq., ed. Venet.), and in
Migne, tom. xi.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[11:27](1010010.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iv.4-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p10"></span> For this reason the Benedictine editors have
placed the *Retractations* and the *Confessions* at the head of his
works.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[11:28](1010010.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iv.4-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p12"></span> He himself says of them, *Retract*. 1. ii.
c. 6: “*Maltis fratribus eos \[Confessionum libros tredecim\] multum
placuisse et, placere scio.*” Comp. *De donon perseverantiæ, c. 20:
“Quid autem meorum opusculorum freguentius et deleciabilius innotescere
potuit qam libri Confessionum mearum?*” Comp. *Ep.*. 231 *Dario comiti*.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[11:29](1010010.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iv.4-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p13"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p13.1"></span>Schönnemann</span> (in the supplemental volume of
Migne’s ed. of Augustin, p. 134 sqq.) cites a multitude of separate
editions of the Confessions in Latin, Italian, Spanish, Portuguese,
French, English, and German, from <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p13.2"></span> A.D.</span> 1475 to 1776. Since that time
several new editions have been added. One of the best Latin editions is
that of Karl von Raumer (Stuttgart, 1856), who used to read the
*Confessions* with his students at Erlangen once a week for many years.
In his preface he draws a comparison between them and Rousseau’s
*Confessions* and Hamann’s *<span id="iv.4-p13.3"></span>Gedanken über
meinen Lebenslauf*. English and German translations are noticed above in
the Lit. Dr. Shedd (in his ed., Pref. p. xxvii) calls the *Confessions*
the best commentary yet written upon the seventh and eighth chapters of
Romans. “That quickening of the human spirit, which puts it again into
vital and sensitive relations to the holy and eternal; that illumination
of the mind, whereby it is enabled to perceive with clearness the real
nature of truth and righteousness; that empowering of the will, to the
conflict of victory—the entire process of restoring the Divine image in
the soul of man—is delineated in this book, with a vividness and reality
never exceeded by the uninspired mind.”…“It is the life of God in the
soul of a strong man, rushing and rippling with the freedom of the life
of nature. He who watches can almost see the growth; he who listens can
hear the perpetual motion; and he who is in sympathy will be swept
along.”

<span id="fn_29"></span>[12:30](1010010.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iv.4-p13.4"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p14"></span> We mean his sexual sins. He kept a concubine
for sixteen years, the mother of his only child, Adeodatus, and after
her separation he formed for a short time a similar connection in Milan;
but in both cases he was faithful. *Conf*. IV. 2 (*unam habebam…servans
tori fidem*); VI. 15. Erasmus thought very leniently of this sin as
contrasted with the conduct of the priests and abbots of his time.
Augustin himself deeply repented of it, and devoted his life to
celibacy.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[12:31](1010010.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iv.4-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p16"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p16.1"></span>Nourrisson</span> (1. c. tom. i. p. 19) calls the
*Confessions “<span id="iv.4-p16.2"></span>cet ouvrage unique, souvent
imité, toujours parodié, où il s’accuse, se condamne et s’humilie,
priére ardente, récit entrainant, metaphysique incomparable, histoire de
tout un monde qui se refléte dans l’histoire d’ une ame.”* Comp. also an
article on the *Confessions* in “The Contemporary Review” for June,
1867, pp 133–160.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[12:32](1010010.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iv.4-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p19"></span> [Prov.
10.19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019)<span id="iv.4-p19.1"></span>.
This verse (*ex multiloquio non effugies peccatum*) the Semi-Pelagian
Gennadius (*De viris illustr. sub Aug.*) applies against Augustin in
excuse for his erroneous doctrines of freedom and predestination.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[12:33](1010010.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iv.4-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p20"></span> [Matt.
12.36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036)<span id="iv.4-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[12:34](1010010.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iv.4-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
11.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#031)<span id="iv.4-p21.1"></span>.
Comp. his Prologus to the two books of *Retractationes*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[12:35](1010010.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iv.4-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p22"></span> <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p22.1"></span>J. Morell Mackenzie</span> (in W Smith’s
*Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology*, vol. i. p. 422)
happily calls the *Retractations* of Augustin “one of the noblest
sacrifices ever laid upon the altar of truth by a majestic intellect
acting in obedience to the purest conscientiousness.”

<span id="fn_35"></span>[13:36](1010010.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iv.4-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p27"></span> In tom. i. of the ed. Bened., immediately
after the *Retractationes* and *Confessiones*, and at the close of the
volume. On these philosophical writings, see <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p27.1"></span> Brucker</span>: *Historia critica philosophiæ*,
Lips. 1766, tom. iii. pp. 485–507: <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p27.2"></span>H Ritter</span>: *<span
id="iv.4-p27.3"></span>Geschichte der Philosphie*, vol. vi. p. 153 sqq.;
<span class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p27.4"></span>Ueberweg</span>, History
of Philosophy, I. 333–346 (Am. ed.): <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p27.5"></span>Erdmann</span>, *<span
id="iv.4-p27.6"></span>Grundriss der Geschichte der Philosophie*, I.
231–240; <span class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p27.7"></span>Bindemann</span>,
l. *c.* I. 282 sqq. <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p27.8"></span>Huber</span>, *l. c.* I. 242 sqq.; <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p27.9"></span>Gangauf</span>, *l. c.* p. 25
sqq., and <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p27.10"></span>Nouerisson</span>, *l. c.* ch. i. and ii.
Nourrisson makes the just remark (i. p. 53): *“<span
id="iv.4-p27.11"></span>Si la philosophie est la recherché de la verité,
jamais sans douse il ne s’est rencontre une ame plus philosophe que
celle de saint Augustin. Car jamais ame n’a supporté avec plus d’
impatience les anxiétés du doute et n’a fait plus d’ efforts pour
dissiper les fantomes de l’erreur.”*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[13:37](1010010.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iv.4-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p29"></span> Or on the question: *“Utrum omnia bona et
mala divinæ providentie ordo contineat?”* Comp. *Retract*. i. 3.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[13:38](1010010.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iv.4-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p30"></span> Augustin, in his *Confessions* (l. ix. c.
6), expresses himself in this touching way about this son of his illicit
love: “We took with us \[on returning from the country to Milan to
receive the sacrament of baptism\] also the boy Adeodatus, the son of my
carnal sin. Thou hadst formed him well. He was but just fifteen years
old, and he was superior in mind to many grave and learned men. I
acknowledge Thy gifts, O Lord, my God, who createst all, and who canst
reform our deformities: for I had no part in that boy but sin. And when
we brought him up in Thy nurture, Thou, only Thou, didst prompt us to
it; I acknowledge Thy gifts. There is my book entitled, *De magistro*:
he speaks with me there. Thou knowest that all things there put into his
mouth were in his mind when he was sixteen years of age. That maturity
of mind was a terror to me; and who but Thou is the artificer of such
wonders? Soon Thou didst take his life from the earth; and I think more
quietly of him now, fearing no more for his boyhood, nor his youth, nor
his whole life. We took him to ourselves as one of the same age in Thy
grace, to be trained in Thy nurture; and we were baptised together; and
all trouble about the past fled from us.” He refers to him also in *De
vita beata*, § 6: “There was also with us, in age the youngest of all,
but whose talents, if affection deceives me not, promise something
great, my son Adeodatus.” In the same book (§ 18), he mentions an answer
of his: “He is truly chaste who waits on God, and keeps himself to Him
only.”

<span id="fn_38"></span>[13:39](1010010.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iv.4-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p31"></span> The books on grammar, dialectics, rhetoric,
and the ten Categories of Aristotle, in the Appendix to the first volume
of the Bened. ed., are spurious. For the genuine works of Augustin on
these subjects were written in a different form (the dialogue) and for a
higher purpose, and were lost in his own day. Comp. *Retract*. i. c. 6.
In spite of this, <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p31.1"></span>Prantl</span> *(<span
id="iv.4-p31.2"></span>Geschichte der Logik in Abendlande*, pp. 665–674,
cited by <span class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p31.3"></span> Huber</span>,
*l. c.* p. 240) has advocated the genuineness of the *Principia
dialecticæ*, and <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p31.4"></span>Huber</span> inclines to agree. <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p31.5"></span>Gangauf</span>, *l. c.* p. 5,
and <span class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p31.6"></span>Nourrisson</span>, i.
p. 37, consider them spurious.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[14:40](1010010.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iv.4-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p33"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.4-p33.1"></span>Ἡ μάθησις οὐκ ἄλλο τι ἢ ἀν€μνησις</span>. On this
Plato, in the Phædo, as is well known, rests his doctrine of
pre-existence. Augustin was at first in favor of the idea, *Solit.* ii.
20, n. 35; afterwards he rejected it, *Retract*. i. 4, § 4; but after
all he assumes in his anthropology a sort of unconscious, yet
responsible, pre-existence of the whole human *race* in Adam as its
organic head, and hence taught a universal fall in Adam’s fall.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[14:41](1010010.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iv.4-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p36"></span> *History of Philosophy*, vol. i. 333 sq.,
translated by Pro. Geo. S. Morris.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[15:42](1010010.htm#fr_41) <span
id="iv.4-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p41"></span> In the Bened. ed. tom. vii. Comp. *Retract*.
ii. 43, and *Ch. Hist*. III. § 12. The *City of God* and the
*Confessions* are the only writings of Augustin which <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p41.1"></span>Gibbon</span> thought worth
while to read (chap. xxxiii.). <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p41.2"></span>Huber</span> (*l. c.* p. 315) says: “Augustin’s
philosophy of history, as he presents it in his *Civitas Dei*, has
remained to this hour the standard philosophy of history for the church
orthodoxy, the bounds of which this orthodoxy, unable to perceive in the
motions of the modern spirit the fresh morning air of a higher day of
history, is scarcely able to transcend.” <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p41.3"></span>Nourrisson</span> devotes a special

<span id="iv.4-p42"></span>Chapter to the consideration of the two
cities of Augustin, the City of the World and the City of God (tom. ii.
43–88). Compare also the Introduction to <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p42.1"></span> Saisset’s</span> *<span
id="iv.4-p42.2"></span>Traduction de la Cité de Dieu*, Par. 1855, and
<span class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p42.3"></span>Reinken’s</span> (old
Cath. Bishop), <span id="iv.4-p42.4"></span>Geschichtsphilosophie des
heil. Aug. 1866. Engl. translation of the *City of God* by Dr. Marcus
Dods, Edinburgh, 1872, 2 vols., and in the second vol. of this *Library
of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers*.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[15:43](1010010.htm#fr_42) <span
id="iv.4-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p47"></span> Separately edited by Krabinger, Tubingen,
1861.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[15:44](1010010.htm#fr_43) <span
id="iv.4-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p50"></span> This work is also incorporated in the
*Corpus hæreseoloicum* of <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p50.1"></span>Fr. Oehler</span>, tom. i. pp. 192–225.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[15:45](1010010.htm#fr_44) <span
id="iv.4-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p52"></span> *Contra Epist. Manichæi quam vocant
fundamenti*, 1. i. 2.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[16:46](1010010.htm#fr_45) <span
id="iv.4-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p54"></span> The earliest anti-Manichæan writings (*De
libero arbitrio; De moribus eccl. cath. et de Moribus Manich.*) are in
tom. i. ed. Bened.; the latter in tom viii.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[16:47](1010010.htm#fr_46) <span
id="iv.4-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p58"></span> Tom. viii. p. 611 sqq.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[16:48](1010010.htm#fr_47) <span
id="iv.4-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p60"></span> All these in tom. ix. Comp. *Church Hist.*
III. §§69 and 70.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[17:49](1010010.htm#fr_48) <span
id="iv.4-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p63"></span> Tom. viii. ed Bened. p. 749 sqq. Comp. *Ch.
Hist.* III §131. The work was stolen from him by some impatient friends
before revision, and before the completion of the twelfth book, so that
he became much discouraged, and could only be moved to finish it by
urgent entreaties.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[17:50](1010010.htm#fr_49) <span
id="iv.4-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p65"></span> *Opera*, tom. x., in two parts, with an
Appendix. The same in Migne. W. Bright, of Oxford, has published *Select
Anti-Pelagian Treatises of St. Aug*., in Latin, 1880. On the Pelagian
controversy comp. *Ch. Hist.* III. §§146-160.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[18:51](1010010.htm#fr_50) <span
id="iv.4-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p70"></span> Tom. iii. 117-324. Not to be confounded with
the two other books on Genesis, in which he defends the biblical
doctrine of creation against the Manichæans. In this exegetical work he
aimed, as he says, *Retract.* ii. c. 24, to interpret Genesis “*non
secundum allegoricas significationes, sed secundum rerum gestarum
proprietatem*.” The work is more original and spirited than the
*Hexaëmeron* of Basil or of Ambrose.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[18:52](1010010.htm#fr_51) <span
id="iv.4-p70.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p71"></span> Tom. iv., the whole volume. The English
translation of the Com. on the Psalms occupies six volumes of the Oxford
Library of the Fathers.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[18:53](1010010.htm#fr_52) <span
id="iv.4-p71.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p72"></span> Tom. iii. 289-824. Translated in Clark’s ed.
of Augustin’s works.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[18:54](1010010.htm#fr_53) <span
id="iv.4-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p73"></span> All in tom. iii. Translated in part.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[18:55](1010010.htm#fr_54) <span
id="iv.4-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p77"></span> Tom. v. contains beside these a multitude
(317) of doubtful and spurious sermons, likewise divided into four
classes. To these must be added recently discovered sermons, edited from
manuscripts in Florence, Monte Cassino, etc., by <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p77.1"></span>M. Denis</span> (1792), <span class="c9"><span
id="iv.4-p77.2"></span>O. F. Frangipane</span> (1820), <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p77.3"></span>A. L. Caillau</span> (Paris,
1836), and <span class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p77.4"></span>Angelo
Mai</span> (in the *Nova Bibliotheca Patrum*).

<span id="fn_55"></span>[18:56](1010010.htm#fr_55) <span
id="iv.4-p77.6"></span>

<span id="iv.4-p78"></span> Most of them in tom. vi. ed. Bened. On the
*scripta deperdita, dubia et spuria* of Augustin, see the index by <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p78.1"></span> Schönemann</span>, *l. c.* p.
50 sqq., and in the supplemental volume of Migne’s edition, pp. 34-40.
The so-called *Meditations* of Augustin (German translation by <span
class="c9"><span id="iv.4-p78.2"></span>August Krohne</span>, Stuttgart,
1854) are a later compilation by the abbot of Fescamp in France, at the
close of the twelfth century, from the writings of Augustin, Gregory the
Great, Anselm, and others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](1010011)
