[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010099)  [Next](1010101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.IX"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.IX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.IX-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Innocent Alypius, Being
Apprehended as a Thief, is Set at Liberty by the Cleverness of an
Architect.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.IX-p2"></span>14. But this was all being stored up in
his memory for a medicine hereafter. As was that also, that when he was
yet studying under me at Carthage, and was meditating at noonday in the
market-place upon what he had to recite (as scholars are wont to be
exercised), Thou sufferedst him to be apprehended as a thief by the
officers of the market-place. For no other reason, I apprehend, didst
Thou, O our God, suffer it, but that he who was in the future to prove
so great a man should now begin to learn that, in judging of causes, man
should not with a reckless credulity readily be condemned by man. For as
he was walking up and down alone before the judgment-seat with his
tablets and pen, lo, a young man, one of the scholars, the real thief,
privily bringing a hatchet, got in without Alypius’ seeing him as far as
the leaden bars which protect the silversmiths’ shops, and began to cut
away the lead. But the noise of the hatchet being heard, the
silversmiths below began to make a stir, and sent to take in custody
whomsoever they should find. But the thief, hearing their voices, ran
away, leaving his hatchet, fearing to be taken with it. Now Alypius, who
had not seen him come in, caught sight of him as he went out, and noted
with what speed he made off. And, being curious to know the reasons, he
entered the place, where, finding the hatchet, he stood wondering and
pondering, when behold, those that were sent caught him alone, hatchet
in hand, the noise whereof had startled them and brought them thither.
They lay hold of him and drag him away, and, gathering the tenants of
the market-place about them, boast of having taken a notorious thief,
and thereupon he was being led away to apppear before the judge.

<span id="vi.VI.IX-p3"></span>15. But thus far was he to be instructed.
For immediately, O Lord, Thou camest to the succour of his innocency,
whereof Thou wert the sole witness. For, as he was being led either to
prison or to punishment, they were met by a <span id="page_97">p.
97</span> <span id="vi.VI.IX-Page_97"></span>certain architect, who had
the chief charge of the public buildings. They were specially glad to
come across him, by whom they used to be suspected of stealing the goods
lost out of the market-place, as though at last to convince him by whom
these thefts were committed. He, however, had at divers times seen
Alypius at the house of a certain senator, whom he was wont to visit to
pay his respects; and, recognising him at once, he took him aside by the
hand, and inquiring of him the cause of so great a misfortune, heard the
whole affair, and commanded all the rabble then present (who were very
uproarious and full of threatenings) to go with him. And they came to
the house of the young man who had committed the deed. There, before the
door, was a lad so young as not to refrain from disclosing the whole
through the fear of injuring his master. For he had followed his master
to the market-place. Whom, so soon as Alypius recognised, he intimated
it to the architect; and he, showing the hatchet to the lad, asked him
to whom it belonged. “To us,” quoth he immediately; and on being further
interrogated, he disclosed everything. Thus, the crime being transferred
to that house, and the rabble shamed, which had begun to triumph over
Alypius, he, the future dispenser of Thy word, and an examiner of
numerous causes in Thy Church, <span id="fr_460"></span>[461](#fn_460.md)
went away better experienced and instructed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_460"></span>[97:461](1010100.htm#fr_460.md) <span
id="vi.VI.IX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.IX-p4"></span> “Alypius became Bishop of Thagaste (Aug.
*De Gestis c. Emerit*. secs. 1 and 5). On the necessity which bishops
were under of hearing secular causes, and its use, see Bingham, ii. c.
7.”—E. B. P.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](1010101.md)
