[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010057)  [Next](1010059.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.III.XII"></span>

<span id="vi.III.XII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.III.XII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—The Excellent Answer of the
Bishop When Referred to by His Mother as to the Conversion of Her
Son.</span>

<span id="vi.III.XII-p2"></span>21. And meanwhile Thou grantedst her
another answer, which I recall; for much I pass over, hastening on to
those things which the more strongly impel me to confess unto Thee, and
much I do not remember. Thou didst grant her then another answer, by a
priest of Thine, a certain bishop, reared in Thy Church and well versed
in Thy books. He, when this woman had entreated that he would vouchsafe
to have some talk with me, refute my errors, unteach me evil things, and
teach me good (for this he was in the habit of doing when he found
people fitted to receive it), refused, very prudently, as I afterwards
came to see. For he answered that I was still unteachable, being
inflated with the novelty of that heresy, and that I had already
perplexed divers inexperienced persons with vexatious questions, <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264.md) as she had informed him. “But leave
him alone for a time,” saith he, “only pray God for him; he will of
himself, by reading, discover what that error is, and how great its
impiety.” He disclosed to her at the same time how he himself, when a
little one, had, by his misguided mother, been given over to the
Manichæans, and had not only read, but even written out almost all their
books, and had come to see (without argument or proof from any one) how
much that sect was to be shunned, and had shunned it. Which when he had
said, and she would not be satisfied, but repeated more earnestly her
entreaties, shedding copious tears, that he would see and discourse with
me, he, a little vexed at her importunity, exclaimed, “Go thy way, and
God bless thee, for it is not possible that the son of these tears
should perish.” Which answer (as she often mentioned in her
conversations with me) she accepted as though it were a voice from
heaven.

<span id="vi.III.XII-p4"></span>————————————

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[67:265](1010058.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="vi.III.XII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.III.XII-p3"></span> We can easily understand that
Augustin’s dialectic skill would render him a formidable opponent,
while, with the zeal of a neophyte, he urged those difficulties of
Scripture (*De Agon. Christ*. iv ) which the Manichæans knew so well how
to employ. In an interesting passage (*De Duab. Anim. con. Manich*. ix.)
he tells us that his victories over “inexperienced persons” stimulated
him to fresh conquests, and thus kept him bound longer than he would
otherwise have been in the chains of this heresy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book IV](1010059.md)
