[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010082)  [Next](1010084.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.V.VII"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.V.VII-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Clearly Seeing the Fallacies of
the Manichæans, He Retires from Them, Being Remarkably Aided by
God.</span>

<span id="vi.V.VII-p2"></span>12. For when it became plain to me that he
was ignorant of those arts in which I had believed him to excel, I began
to despair of his clearing up and explaining all the perplexities which
harassed me: though ignorant of these, however, he might still have held
the truth of piety, had he not been a Manichæan. For their books are
full of lengthy fables <span id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391.md)
concerning the heaven and stars, the sun and moon, and I had ceased to
think him able to decide in a satisfactory manner what I ardently
desired,—whether, on comparing these things with the calculations I had
read elsewhere, the explanations contained in the works of Manichæus
were preferable, or at any rate equally sound? But when I proposed that
these subjects should be deliberated upon and reasoned out, he very
modestly did not dare to endure the burden. For he was aware that he had
no knowledge of these things, and was not ashamed to confess it. For he
was not one of those loquacious persons, many of whom I had been
troubled with, who covenanted to teach me these things, and said
nothing; but this man possessed a heart, which, though not right towards
Thee, yet was not altogether false towards himself. For he was not
altogether ignorant of his own ignorance, nor would he without due
consideration be inveigled in a controversy, from which he could neither
draw back nor extricate himself fairly. And for that I was even more
pleased with him, for more beautiful is the modesty of an ingenuous mind
than the acquisition of the knowledge I desired,—and such I found him to
be in all the more abstruse and subtle questions.

<span id="vi.V.VII-p4"></span>13. My eagerness after the writings of
Manichæus having thus received a check, and despairing even more of
their other teachers,—seeing that in sundry things which puzzled me, he,
so famous amongst them, had thus turned out,—I began to occupy myself
with him in the study of that literature which he also much affected,
and which I, as Professor of Rhetoric, was then engaged in teaching the
young Carthaginian students, and in reading with him either what he
expressed a wish to hear, or I deemed suited to his bent of mind. But
all my endeavours by which I had concluded to improve in that sect, by
acquaintance with that man, came completely to an end: not that I
separated myself altogether from them, but, as one who could find
nothing better, I determined in the meantime upon contenting myself with
what I had in any way lighted upon, unless, by chance, something more
desirable should present itself. Thus that Faustus, who had entrapped so
many to their death,—neither willing nor witting it,—now began to loosen
the snare in which I had been taken. For Thy hands, O my God, in the
hidden design of Thy Providence, did not desert my soul; and out of the
blood of my mother’s heart, through the tears that she poured out by day
and by night, was a sacrifice offered unto Thee for me; and by
marvellous ways didst Thou deal with me. <span
id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392.md) It was Thou, O my God, who didst it,
for the steps of a man are ordered by the Lord, and He shall dispose his
way. <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393.md) Or how can we procure
salvation but from Thy hand, remaking what it hath made?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_391"></span>[83:392](1010083.htm#fr_391.md) <span
id="vi.V.VII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VII-p3"></span> We have referred in the note on iii. sec.
10, above, to the way in which the Manichæans parodied Scripture names.
In these “fables” this is remarkably evidenced. “To these filthy rags of
yours,” says Augustin (*Con. Faust.* xx. 6), “you would unite the
mystery of the Trinity; for you say that the Father dwells in a secret
light, the power of the Son in the sun, and His wisdom in the moon, and
the Holy Spirit in the air.” The Manichæan doctrine as to the mixture of
the divine nature with the substance of evil, and the way in which that
nature was released by the “elect,” has already been pointed out (see
note iii. sec. 18, above). The part of sun and moon, also, in
accomplishing this release, is alluded to in his *De Mor. Manich.* “This
part of God,” he says (c. xxxvi.), “is daily being set free in all parts
of the world, and restored to its own domain. But in its passage upwards
as vapour from earth to heaven, it enters plants, because their roots
are fixed in the earth, and so gives fertility and strength to all herbs
and shrubs.” These parts of God, arrested in their rise by the vegetable
world, were released, as above stated, by the “elect”. All that escaped
from them in the act of eating, as well as what was set free by
evaporation, passed into the sun and moon, as into a kind of purgatorial
state—they being purer light than the only recently emancipated good
nature. In his letter to Januarius (*Ep.* lv. 6), he tells us that the
moon’s waxing and waning were said by the Manichæans to be caused by its
receiving souls from matter as it were into a ship, and transferring
them “into the sun as into another ship.” The sun was called Christ, and
was worshipped; and accordingly we find Augustin, after alluding to
these monstrous doctrines, saying (*Con. Faust.* v. 11): “If your
affections were set upon spiritual and intellectual good instead of
material forms, you would not pay homage to the material sun as a divine
substance and as the light of wisdom.” Many other interesting quotations
might be added, but we must content ourselves with the following. In his
*Reply to Faustus* (xx. 6), he says: “You call the sun a ship, so that
you are not only astray worlds off, as the saying is, but adrift. Next,
while every one sees that the sun is round, which is the form
corresponding from its perfection to his position among the heavenly
bodies, you maintain that he is triangular \[perhaps in allusion to the
early symbol of the Trinity\]; that is, that his light shines on the
earth through a triangular window in heaven. Hence it is that you bend
and bow your heads to the sun, while you worship not this visible sun,
but some imaginary ship, which you suppose to be shining through a
triangular opening.”

<span id="fn_392"></span>[83:393](1010083.htm#fr_392.md) <span
id="vi.V.VII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VII-p5"></span> [Joel
2.26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026.md)<span id="vi.V.VII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[83:394](1010083.htm#fr_393.md) <span
id="vi.V.VII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.V.VII-p6"></span> [Ps.
37.23](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#023.md)<span id="vi.V.VII-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](1010084.md)
