[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010093)  [Next](1010095.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.III"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.III-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.III-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—As Ambrose Was Occupied with
Business and Study, Augustin Could Seldom Consult Him Concerning the
Holy Scriptures.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.III-p2"></span>3. Nor did I now groan in my prayers that
Thou wouldest help me; but my mind was wholly intent on knowledge, and
eager to dispute. And Ambrose himself I esteemed a happy man, as the
world counted happiness, in that such great personages held him in
honour; only his celibacy appeared to me a painful thing. But what hope
he cherished, what struggles he had against the temptations that beset
his very excellences, what solace in adversities, and what savoury joys
Thy bread possessed for the hidden mouth of his heart when
ruminating <span id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md) on it, I could
neither conjecture, nor had I experienced. Nor did he know my
embarrassments, nor the pit of my danger. For I could not request of him
what I wished as I wished, in that I was debarred from hearing and
speaking to him by crowds of busy people, whose infirmities he devoted
himself to. With whom when he was not engaged (which was but a little
time), he either was refreshing his body with necessary sustenance, or
his mind with reading. But while reading, his eyes glanced over the
pages, and his heart searched out the sense, but his voice and tongue
were silent. Ofttimes, when we had come (for no one was forbidden to
enter, nor was it his custom that the arrival of those who came should
be announced to him), we saw him thus reading to himself, and never
otherwise; and, having long sat in silence (for who durst interrupt one
so intent?), we were fain to depart, inferring that in the little time
he secured for the recruiting of his mind, free from the clamour of
other men’s business, he was unwilling to be taken off. And perchance he
was fearful lest, if the author he studied should express aught vaguely,
some doubtful and attentive hearer should ask him to expound it, or to
discuss some of the more abstruse questions, as that, his time being
thus occupied, he could not turn over as many volumes as he wished;
although the preservation of his voice, which was very easily weakened,
might be the truer reason for his reading to himself. But whatever was
his motive in so doing, doubtless in such a man was a good one.

<span id="vi.VI.III-p4"></span>4. But verily no opportunity could I find
of ascertaining what I desired from that Thy so holy oracle, his breast,
unless the thing might be entered into briefly. But those surgings in me
required to find him at full leisure, that I might pour them out to him,
but never were they able to find him so; and I heard him, indeed, every
Lord’s day, “rightly dividing the word of truth” <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md) among the people; and I was all the
more convinced that all those knots of crafty calumnies, which those
deceivers of ours had knit against the divine books, could be
unravelled. But so soon as I understood, withal, that man made “after
the image of Him that created him” <span
id="fr_444"></span>[445](#fn_444.md) was not so understood by Thy spiritual
sons (whom of the Catholic mother Thou hadst begotten again through
grace), as though they believed and imagined Thee to be bounded by human
form,—although what was the nature of a spiritual substance <span
id="fr_445"></span>[446](#fn_445.md) I had not the faintest or dimmest
suspicion,—yet rejoicing, I blushed that for so many years I had barked,
not against the Catholic faith, but against the fables of carnal
imaginations. For I had been both impious and rash in this, that what I
ought inquiring to have learnt, I had pronounced on condemning. For
Thou, O most high and most near, most secret, yet most present, who hast
not limbs some larger some smaller, but art wholly everywhere, and
nowhere in space, nor art Thou of such corporeal form, yet hast Thou
created man after Thine own image, and, behold, from head to foot is he
confined by space.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_442"></span>[91:443](1010094.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="vi.VI.III-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.III-p3"></span> In his *Reply to Faustus* (vi. 7), he,
conformably with this idea, explains the division into clean and unclean
beasts under the Levitical law symbolically. “No doubt,” he says, “the
animal is pronounced unclean by the law because it does not chew the
cud, which is not a fault, but its nature. But the men of whom this
animal is a symbol are unclean, not by nature, but from their own fault;
because, though they gladly hear the words of wisdom, they never reflect
on them afterwards. For to recall, in quiet repose, some useful
instruction from the stomach of memory to the mouth of reflection, is a
kind of spiritual rumination. The animals above mentioned are a symbol
of those people who do not do this. And the prohibition of the flesh of
these animals is a warning against this fault. Another passage of
Scripture ([Prov. 21.20](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#020.md)<span
id="vi.VI.III-p3.1"></span>) speaks of the precious treasure of wisdom,
and describes ruminating as clean, and not ruminating as unclean: ‘A
precious treasure resteth in the mouth of a wise man, but a foolish man
swallows it up.’ Symbols of this kind, either in words or in things,
give useful and pleasant exercise to intelligent minds in the way of
inquiry and comparison.”

<span id="fn_443"></span>[91:444](1010094.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="vi.VI.III-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.III-p5"></span> [2 Tim.
2.15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015.md)<span id="vi.VI.III-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[91:445](1010094.htm#fr_444.md) <span
id="vi.VI.III-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.III-p6"></span> [Col.
3.10](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#010.md)<span id="vi.VI.III-p6.1"></span>,
and [Gen. 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md)<span id="vi.VI.III-p6.2"></span>.
And because we are created in the image of God, Augustin argues (*Serm.*
lxxxviii. 6), we have the ability to see and know Him, just as, having
eyes to see, we can look upon the sun. And hereafter, too (*Ep.* xcii.
3), “We shall see Him according to the measure in which we shall be like
Him; because now the measure in which we do not see Him is according to
the measure of our unlikeness to Him.”

<span id="fn_445"></span>[91:446](1010094.htm#fr_445.md) <span
id="vi.VI.III-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.III-p7"></span> See iii. sec. 12, note, above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](1010095.md)
