[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010400)  [Next](1010402) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XCV"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XCV-p1.1"></span>Letter XCV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCV-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 408.)

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XCV-p3.1"></span>To Brother Paulinus and Sister Therasia, Most
Beloved and Sincere Saints Worthy of Affection and Veneration,
Fellow-Disciples with Himself Under the Lord Jesus as Master, Augustin
Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p4"></span>1. When brethren most closely united to
us, towards whom along with us you are accustomed both to cherish and to
express sentiments of regard which we all cordially reciprocate, have
frequent occasions of visiting you, this benefit is one by which we are
comforted under evil rather than made to rejoice in increase of good.
For we strive to the utmost of our power to avoid the causes and
emergencies which necessitate their journeys, and yet,—I know not how,
unless it be as just retribution,—they cannot be dispensed with: but
when they return to us and see us, that word of Scripture is fulfilled
in our experience: “In the multitude of my thoughts within me, Thy
comforts delight my soul.” <span id="fr_2282"></span>[2283](#fn_2282)
Accordingly, when you learn from our brother Possidius himself how sad
is the occasion which has compelled him to go to Italy, <span
id="fr_2283"></span>[2284](#fn_2283) you will know how true the remarks
I have made are in regard to the joy which he has in meeting you; and
yet, if any of us should cross the sea for the one purpose of enjoying a
meeting with you, what more cogent or worthy reason could be found?
This, however, would not be compatible with those obligations by which
we are bound to minister to those who are languid through infirmity, and
not to withdraw our bodily presence from them, unless their malady,
assuming dangerous form, makes such departure imperative. Whether in
these things we are receiving chastening or judgment I know not; but
this I know, that He is not dealing with us according to our sins, nor
requiting us according to our iniquities, <span
id="fr_2284"></span>[2285](#fn_2284) who mingles so great comfort with
our tribulation, and who, by remedies which fill us with wonder, secures
that we shall not love the world, and shall not by it be made to fall
away.

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p8"></span>2. I asked in a former letter your
opinion as to the nature of the future life of the saints; but you have
said in your reply that we have still much to study concerning our
condition in this present life, and you do well, except in this, that
you have expressed your desire to learn from me that of which you are
either equally ignorant or equally well-informed with myself, or rather,
of which you know much more perhaps than I do; for you have said with
perfect truth, that before we meet the dissolution of this mortal body,
we must die, in a gospel sense, by a voluntary departure, withdrawing
ourselves, not by death, but by deliberate resolution, from the life of
this world. This course is a simple one, and is beset with no waves of
uncertainty; because we are of opinion that we ought so to live in this
mortal life that we may be in some measure fitted for immortality. The
whole question, however, which, when discussed and investigated,
perplexes men like myself, is this—how we ought to live among or for the
welfare of those who have not yet learned to live by dying, not in the
dissolution of the body, but by turning themselves with a certain mental
resolution away from the attractions of mere natural things. For in most
cases, it seems to us that unless we in some small degree conform to
them in regard to those very things from which we desire to see <span
id="page_402">p. 402</span> <span id="vii.1.XCV-Page_402"></span>them
delivered, we shall not succeed in doing them any good. And when we do
thus conform, a pleasure in such things steals upon ourselves, so that
often we are pleased to speak and to listen to frivolous things, and not
only to smile at them, but even to be completely overcome with laughter:
thus burdening our souls with feelings which cleave to the dust, or even
to the mire of this world, we experience greater difficulty and
reluctance in raising ourselves to God that by dying a gospel-death we
may live a gospel-life. And whensoever this state of mind is reached,
immediately thereupon will follow the commendation, “Well done! well
done!” not from men, for no man perceives in another the mental act by
which divine things are apprehended, but in a certain inward silence
there sounds I know not whence, “Well done! well done!” Because of this
kind of temptation, the great apostle confesses that he was buffeted by
the angel. <span id="fr_2285"></span>[2286](#fn_2285) Behold whence it
comes that our whole life on earth is a temptation; for man is tempted
even in that thing in which he is being conformed so far as he can be to
the likeness of the heavenly life.

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p10"></span>3. What shall I say as to the infliction
or remission of punishment, in cases in which we have no other desire
than to forward the spiritual welfare of those in regard to whom we
judge that they ought or ought not to be punished? Also, if we consider
not only the nature and magnitude of faults, but also what each may be
able or unable to bear according to his strength of mind, how deep and
dark a question it is to adjust the amount of punishment so as to
prevent the person who receives it not only from getting no good, but
also from suffering loss thereby! Besides, I know not whether a greater
number have been improved or made worse when alarmed under threats of
such punishment at the hands of men as is an object of fear. What, then,
is the path of duty, seeing that it often happens that if you inflict
punishment on one he goes to destruction; whereas, if you leave him
unpunished, another is destroyed? I confess that I make mistakes daily
in regard to this, and that I know not when and how to observe the rule
of Scripture: “Them that sin rebuke before all, that others may
fear;” <span id="fr_2286"></span>[2287](#fn_2286) and that other rule,
“Tell him his fault between thee and him alone;” <span
id="fr_2287"></span>[2288](#fn_2287) and the rule, “Judge nothing before
the time;” <span id="fr_2288"></span>[2289](#fn_2288) “Judge not, that
ye be not judged” <span id="fr_2289"></span>[2290](#fn_2289) (in which
command the Lord has not added the words, “before the time”); and this
saying of Scripture, “Who art thou that judgest another man’s servant?
to his own master he standeth or falleth: yea, he shall be holden up,
for God is able to make him stand;” <span
id="fr_2290"></span>[2291](#fn_2290) by which words he makes it plain
that he is speaking of those who are within the Church; yet, on the
other hand, he commands them to be judged when he says, “What have I to
do to judge them also that are without? do not ye judge them that are
within? therefore put away from among yourselves that wicked
person.” <span id="fr_2291"></span>[2292](#fn_2291) But when this is
necessary, how much care and fear is occasioned by the question to what
extent it should be done, lest that happen which, in his second epistle
to them, the apostle is found admonishing these persons to beware of in
that very example, saying, “lest, perhaps, such an one should be
swallowed up with overmuch sorrow;” adding, in order to prevent men from
thinking this a thing not calling for anxious care, “lest Satan should
get an advantage of us; for we are not ignorant of his devices.” <span
id="fr_2292"></span>[2293](#fn_2292) What trembling we feel in all these
things, my brother Paulinus, O holy man of God! what trembling, what
darkness! May we not think that with reference to these things it was
said, “Fearfulness and trembling are come upon me, and horror hath
overwhelmed me. And I said, Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then
would I fly away, and be at rest. Lo, then would I wander far off, and
remain in the wilderness.” And yet even in the wilderness perchance he
still experienced it; for he adds, “I waited for Him who should deliver
me from weakness and from tempest.” <span
id="fr_2293"></span>[2294](#fn_2293) Truly, therefore, is the life of
man upon the earth a life of temptation. <span
id="fr_2294"></span>[2295](#fn_2294)

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p20"></span>4. Moreover, as to the oracles of God,
is it not true that they are lightly touched rather than grasped and
handled by us, seeing that in by far the greater part of them we do not
already possess opinions definite and ascertained, but are rather
inquiring what our opinion ought to be? And this caution, though
attended with abundant disquietude, is much better than the rashness of
dogmatic assertion. Also, if a man is not carnally minded (which the
apostle says is death), will he not be a great cause of offence to those
who are still carnally minded, in many parts of Scripture in the
exposition of which to say what you believe is most perilous, and to
refrain from saying it is most grievous, and to say something else than
what you believe is most pernicious? Nay more, when in the discourses or
writings of those who are within the Church we find some things
censurable, and do not conceal our disapprobation (supposing such
correction to be according to the freedom of brotherly love), how great
a sin is committed against us <span id="page_403">p. 403</span> <span
id="vii.1.XCV-Page_403"></span>when we are suspected of being actuated
in this by envy and not by goodwill! and how much do we sin against
others, when we in like manner impute to those who find fault with our
opinions a desire rather to wound than to correct us! Verily, there
arise usually from this cause bitter enmities even between persons bound
to each other by the greatest affection and intimacy, when, “thinking of
men above that which is written, any one is puffed up for one against
another;” <span id="fr_2295"></span>[2296](#fn_2295) and while they bite
and devour one another, “there is reason to fear lest they be consumed
one of another.” <span id="fr_2296"></span>[2297](#fn_2296) Therefore,
“Oh that I had wings like a dove! for then would I fly away, and be at
rest.” <span id="fr_2297"></span>[2298](#fn_2297) For whether it be that
the dangers by which one is beset seem to him greater than those of
which he has no experience, or that my impressions are correct, I cannot
help thinking that any amount of weakness and of tempest in the
wilderness would be more easily borne than the things which we feel or
fear in the busy world.

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p24"></span>5. I therefore greatly approve of your
saying that we should make the state in which men stand, or rather the
course which they run, in this present life, the theme of our
discussion. I add as another reason for our giving this subject the
preference, that the finding and following of the course itself must
come before our finding and possessing that towards which it leads.
When, therefore, I asked your views on this, I acted as if, through
holding and observing carefully the right rule of this life, we were
already free from disquietude concerning its course, although I feel in
so many things, and especially in those which I have mentioned, that I
toil in the midst of very great dangers. Nevertheless, forasmuch as the
cause of all this ignorance and embarrassment appears to me to be that,
in the midst of a great variety of manners and of minds having
inclinations and infirmities hidden altogether from our sight, we seek
the interest of those who are citizens and subjects, not of Rome which
is on earth, but of Jerusalem which is in heaven, it seemed to me more
agreeable to converse with you about what we shall be, than about what
we now are. For although we do not know the blessings which are to be
enjoyed yonder, of one thing at least we are assured, and it is not a
small thing, that yonder the evils which we experience here shall have
no place.

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p25"></span>6. Wherefore, as to the ordering of this
present life in the way which we must follow in order to the attainment
of eternal life, I know that our carnal appetites must be held in check,
only so much concession being made to the gratification of the bodily
senses as suffices for the support of this life and the active discharge
of its duties, and that all the vexations of this life which come upon
us in connection with the truth of God, and the eternal welfare of
ourselves or of our neighbours, must be borne with patience and
fortitude. I know also that with all the zeal of love we should seek the
good of our neighbour, that he may rightly spend the present life so as
to obtain life eternal. I know also that we ought to prefer spiritual to
carnal, immutable to mutable things, and that all this a man is so much
more or less enabled to do, according as he is more or less helped by
the grace of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. But I do not know the
reason why one or another is more or less helped or not helped by that
grace; this only I know, that God does this with perfect justice, and
for reasons which to Himself are known as sufficient. In regard,
however, to the things which I have mentioned above, as to the way in
which we ought to live amongst men, if anything has become known to you
through experience or meditation, I beseech you to give me instruction.
And if these things perplex you not less than myself, make them the
subject of conference with some judicious spiritual physician, whom you
may find either where you reside, or in Rome, when you make your annual
visit to the city, and thereafter write to me whatever the Lord may
reveal to you through his instructions, or to you and him together when
engaged in conversation on the subject.

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p26"></span>7. As to the resurrection of the body,
and the future offices of its members in the incorruptible and immortal
state, since you have, in return for the questions which I put to you,
inquired my views on these matters, listen to a brief statement which,
if it be not sufficient, may afterwards, with the Lord’s help, be
amplified by fuller discussion. It is to be held most firmly, as a
doctrine in regard to which the testimony of Holy Scripture is true and
unmistakable, that these visible and earthly bodies which are now called
natural <span id="fr_2298"></span>[2299](#fn_2298) shall, in the
resurrection of the faithful and just, be spiritual bodies. At the same
time, I do not know how the quality of a spiritual body can be
comprehended or stated by us, seeing that it lies beyond the range of
our experience. There shall be, assuredly, in such bodies no corruption,
and therefore they shall not require the perishable nourishment which is
now necessary; yet though unnecessary, it will not be impossible for
them at their pleasure to take and actually consume food; otherwise it
would not have been taken after His resurrection by the Lord, who has
given us such an example of the resurrection of the body, that the
apostle argues from it: “If the dead rise not, then is <span
id="page_404">p. 404</span> <span id="vii.1.XCV-Page_404"></span>not
Christ raised.” <span id="fr_2299"></span>[2300](#fn_2299) But He, when
He appeared to His disciples, having all His members, and using them
according to their functions, also pointed out to them the places where
His wounds had been, regarding which I have always supposed that they
were the scars, not the wounds themselves, and that they were there, not
of necessity, but according to His free exercise of power. He gave at
that time the clearest evidence of the ease with which He exercised this
power, both by showing Himself in another form to the two disciples, and
by His appearing, not as a spirit, but in His true body, to the
disciples in the upper chamber, although the doors were shut. <span
id="fr_2300"></span>[2301](#fn_2300)

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p30"></span>8. From this arises the question as to
angels, whether they have bodies adapted to their duties and their swift
motions from place to place, or are only spirits? For if we say that
they have bodies, we are met by the passage: “He maketh His angels
spirits;” <span id="fr_2301"></span>[2302](#fn_2301) and if we say that
they have not bodies, a still greater difficulty meets us in explaining
how, if they are without bodily form, it is written that they appeared
to the bodily senses of men, accepted offers of hospitality, permitted
their feet to be washed, and used the meat and drink which was provided
for them. <span id="fr_2302"></span>[2303](#fn_2302) For it seems to
involve us in less difficulty, if we suppose that the angels are there
called spirits in the same manner as men are called souls, *e.g.* in the
statement that so many souls (not signifying that they had not bodies
also) went down with Jacob into Egypt, <span
id="fr_2303"></span>[2304](#fn_2303) than if we suppose that, without
bodily form, all these things were done by angels. Again, a certain
definite height is named in the Apocalypse as the stature of an angel,
in dimensions which could apply only to bodies, proving that that which
appeared to the eyes of men is to be explained, not as an illusion, but
as resulting from the power which we have spoken of as easily put forth
by spiritual bodies. But whether angels have bodies or not, and whether
or not any one be able to show how without bodies they could do all
these things, it is nevertheless certain, that in that city of the holy
in which those of our race who have been redeemed by Christ shall be
united for ever to thousands of angels, voices proceeding from organs of
speech shall furnish expression to the thoughts of minds in which
nothing is hidden; for in that divine fellowship it will not be possible
for any thought in one to remain concealed from another, but there shall
be complete harmony and oneness of heart in the praise of God, and this
shall find utterance not only from the spirit, but through the spiritual
body as its instrument; this, at least, is what I believe.

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p34"></span>9. Meanwhile, if you have already found
or can learn from other teachers anything more fully agreeing with the
truth than this, I am most eagerly longing to be instructed therein by
you. Study carefully, if you please, my letter, in regard to which, as
you pled in excuse for your very hurried reply the haste of the deacon
who brought it to me, I do not make any complaint, but rather remind you
of it, in order that what was then omitted in your answer may now be
supplied. Look over it again, and observe what I wished to learn from
you, both regarding your opinion concerning Christian retirement as a
means to the acquisition and discussion of the truths of Christian
wisdom, and regarding that retirement in which I supposed that you had
found leisure, but in which it is reported to me that you are engrossed
with occupation to an incredible extent.

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p35"></span>May you, in whom the holy God has given
us great joy and consolation, live mindful of us, and in true felicity.
(*This sentence is added by another hand.*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2282"></span>[401:2283](1010401.htm#fr_2282) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p5"></span> [Ps.
94.19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2283"></span>[401:2284](1010401.htm#fr_2283) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p6"></span> Possidus, bishop of Calama, was going to
Rome to complain of the outrage of the Pagans of Calama, described in
Letter XCI. sec. 8, p. 378.

<span id="fn_2284"></span>[401:2285](1010401.htm#fr_2284) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p7"></span> [Ps.
103.10](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2285"></span>[402:2286](1010401.htm#fr_2285) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p9"></span> [2 Cor.
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2286"></span>[402:2287](1010401.htm#fr_2286) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p11"></span> [1 Tim.
5.20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2287"></span>[402:2288](1010401.htm#fr_2287) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p12"></span> [Matt.
18.15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2288"></span>[402:2289](1010401.htm#fr_2288) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p13"></span> [1 Cor.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2289"></span>[402:2290](1010401.htm#fr_2289) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p14"></span> [Matt.
7.1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2290"></span>[402:2291](1010401.htm#fr_2290) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p15"></span> [Rom.
14.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2291"></span>[402:2292](1010401.htm#fr_2291) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#013)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2292"></span>[402:2293](1010401.htm#fr_2292) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p17"></span> [2 Cor.
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#007),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#011)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2293"></span>[402:2294](1010401.htm#fr_2293) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p18"></span> [Ps.
55.5-8](../../../bib/sep/psa055.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p18.1"></span>, as given in the LXX.

<span id="fn_2294"></span>[402:2295](1010401.htm#fr_2294) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p19"></span> [Job
7.1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2295"></span>[403:2296](1010401.htm#fr_2295) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
4.6](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#006)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2296"></span>[403:2297](1010401.htm#fr_2296) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p22"></span> [Gal.
5.15](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2297"></span>[403:2298](1010401.htm#fr_2297) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p23"></span> [Ps.
55.6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2298"></span>[403:2299](1010401.htm#fr_2298) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p27"></span> *Animalia*, [1 Cor.
15.34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#034)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2299"></span>[404:2300](1010401.htm#fr_2299) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p28"></span> [1 Cor.
15.16](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2300"></span>[404:2301](1010401.htm#fr_2300) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p29"></span> [Luke
24.15-43](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#015)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p29.1"></span>; [John
20.14-29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p29.2"></span>; [Mark
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#012),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p29.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_2301"></span>[404:2302](1010401.htm#fr_2301) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p31"></span> [Ps.
104.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p31.1"></span> and [Heb.
1.7](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#007)<span id="vii.1.XCV-p31.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2302"></span>[404:2303](1010401.htm#fr_2302) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p31.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p32"></span> [Gen.
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#002), [Gen.
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2303"></span>[404:2304](1010401.htm#fr_2303) <span
id="vii.1.XCV-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XCV-p33"></span> [Gen.
46.27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.XCV-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XCVI](1010402)
