[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010383)  [Next](1010385) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 404.)

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p3.1"></span>To My Most Beloved Brethren, the Clergy,
Elders, and People of the Church of Hippo, Whom I Serve in the Love of
Christ, I, Augustin, Send Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p4"></span>1. Would that you, giving earnest
heed to the word of God, did not require counsel of mine to support you
under whatsoever offences may arise! Would that your comfort rather came
from Him by whom we also are comforted; who has foretold not only the
good things which He designs to give to those who are holy and faithful,
but also the evil things in which this world is to abound; and has
caused these to be written, in order that we may expect the blessings
which are to follow the end of this world with a certainty not less
complete than that which attends our present experience of the evils
which had been predicted as coming before the end of the world!
Wherefore also the apostle says, “Whatsoever things were written
aforetime, were written for our learning, that we through patience and
comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.” <span
id="fr_1971"></span>[1972](#fn_1971) And wherefore did our Lord Himself
judge it necessary not only to say, “Then shall the righteous shine
forth as the sun in the kingdom of their Father” <span
id="fr_1972"></span>[1973](#fn_1972) which shall come to pass after the
end of the world, but also to exclaim, “Woe unto the world because of
offences!” <span id="fr_1973"></span>[1974](#fn_1973) if not to prevent
us from flattering ourselves with the idea that we can reach the
mansions of eternal felicity, unless we have overcome the temptation to
yield when exercised by the afflictions of time? Why was it necessary
for Him to say, “Because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall
wax cold,” if not in order that those of whom He spoke in the next
sentence, “but he that shall endure to the end shall be saved,” <span
id="fr_1974"></span>[1975](#fn_1974) might, when they saw love waxing
cold through abounding iniquity, be saved from being put to confusion,
or filled with fear, or crushed with grief about such things, as if they
were strange and unlooked for, and might rather, through witnessing the
events which had been predicted as appointed to occur before the end, be
assisted in patiently enduring unto the end, so as to obtain after the
end the reward of reigning in peace in that life which has no end?

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p9"></span>2. Wherefore, beloved, in regard to
that scandal by which some are troubled concerning the presbyter
Boniface, I do not say to you that you are not to be grieved for it; for
in men who do not grieve for such things the love of Christ is not,
whereas those who take pleasure in such things are filled with the
malice of the devil. Not, however, that anything has come to our
knowledge which deserves censure in the presbyter aforesaid, but that
two in our house are so situated that one of them must be regarded as
<span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-Page_346"></span>beyond all doubt wicked; and though
the conscience of the other be not defiled, his good name is forfeited
in the eyes of some, and suspected by others. Grieve for these things,
for they are to be lamented; but do not so grieve as to let your love
grow cold, and yourselves be indifferent to holy living. Let it rather
burn the more vehemently in the exercise of prayer to God, that if your
presbyter is guiltless (which I am the more inclined to believe,
because, when he had discovered the immoral and vile proposal of the
other, he would neither consent to it nor conceal it), a divine decision
may speedily restore him to the exercise of his official duties with his
innocence vindicated; and that if, on the other hand, knowing himself to
be guilty, which I dare not suspect, he has deliberately tried to
destroy the good name of another when he could not corrupt his morals,
as he charges his accuser with having done, God may not permit him to
hide his wickedness, so that the thing which men cannot discover may be
revealed by the judgment of God, to the conviction of the one or of the
other.

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p10"></span>3. For when this case had long
disquieted me, and I could find no way of convicting either of the two
as guilty, although I rather inclined to believe the presbyter innocent,
I had at first resolved to leave both in the hand of God, without
deciding the case, until something should be done by the one of whom I
had suspicion, giving just and unquestionable reasons for his expulsion
from our house. But when he was labouring most earnestly to obtain
promotion to the rank of the clergy, either on the spot from myself, or
elsewhere through letter of recommendation from me, and I could on no
account be induced either to lay hands in the act of ordination upon one
of whom I thought so ill, or to consent to introduce him through
commendation of mine to any brother for the same purpose, he began to
act more violently demanding that if he was not to be promoted to
clerical orders, Boniface should not be permitted to retain his status
as a presbyter. This demand having been made, when I perceived that
Boniface was unwilling that, through doubts as to his holiness of life,
offence should be given to any who were weak and inclined to suspect
him, and that he was ready to suffer the loss of his honour among men
rather than vainly persist even to the disquieting of the Church in a
contention the very nature of which made it impossible for him to prove
his innocence (of which he was conscious) to the satisfaction of those
who did not know him, or were in doubt or prone to suspicion in regard
to him, I fixed upon the following as a means of discovering the truth.
Both pledged themselves in a solemn compact to go to a holy place, where
the more awe-inspiring works of God might much more readily make
manifest the evil of which either of them was conscious, and compel the
guilty to confess, either by judgment or through fear of judgment. God
is everywhere, it is true, and He that made all things is not contained
or confined to dwell in any place; and He is to be worshipped in spirit
and in truth by His true worshippers, <span
id="fr_1975"></span>[1976](#fn_1975) in order that, as He heareth in
secret, He may also in secret justify and reward. But in regard to the
answers to prayer which are visible to men, who can search out His
reasons for appointing some places rather than others to be the scene of
miraculous interpositions? To many the holiness of the place in which
the body of the blessed Felix is buried is well known, and to this place
I desired them to repair; because from it we may receive more easily and
more reliably a written account of whatever may be discovered in either
of them by divine interposition. For I myself knew how, at Milan, at the
tomb of the saints, where demons are brought in a most marvellous and
awful manner to confess their deeds, a thief who had come thither
intending to deceive by perjuring himself, was compelled to own his
theft, and to restore what he had taken away; and is not Africa also
full of the bodies of holy martyrs? Yet we do not know of such things
being done in any place here. Even as the gift of healing and the gift
of discerning of spirits are not given to all saints, <span
id="fr_1976"></span>[1977](#fn_1976) as the apostle declares; so it is
not at all the tombs of the saints that it has pleased Him who divideth
to each severally as He will, to cause such miracles to be wrought.

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p13"></span>4. Wherefore, although I had
purposed not to let this most heavy burden on my heart come to your
knowledge, lest I should disquiet you by a painful but useless vexation,
it has pleased God to make it known to you, perhaps for this reason,
that you may along with me devote yourselves to prayer, beseeching Him
to condescend to reveal that which He knoweth, but which we cannot know
in this matter. For I did not presume to suppress or erase from the roll
of his colleagues the name of this presbyter, lest I should seem to
insult the Divine Majesty, upon whose arbitration the case now depends,
if I were to forestall His decision by any premature decision of mine:
for even in secular affairs, when a perplexing case is referred to a
higher authority, the inferior judges do not presume to make any change
while the reference is pending. Moreover, it was decreed in a Council of
bishops <span id="fr_1977"></span>[1978](#fn_1977) that no clergyman who
has not yet been proved guilty be suspended from communion, unless he
fail to present himself for the examination of the charges against him.
Boniface, however, humbly agreed to fore<span id="page_347">p.
347</span> <span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-Page_347"></span>go his claim to a
letter of commendation, by the use of which on his journey he might have
secured the recognition of his rank, preferring that both should stand
on a footing of equality in a place where both were alike unknown. And
now if you prefer that his name should not be read that we “may cut off
occasion,” as the apostle says, from those that desire occasion <span
id="fr_1978"></span>[1979](#fn_1978) to justify their unwillingness to
come to the Church, this omission of his name shall be not our deed, but
theirs on whose account it may be done. For what does it harm any man,
that men through ignorance refuse to have his name read from that
tablet, so long as a guilty conscience does not blot his name out of the
Book of Life?

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p16"></span>5. Wherefore, my brethren who fear
God, remember what the Apostle Peter says: Your adversary, the devil, as
a roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may devour.” <span
id="fr_1979"></span>[1980](#fn_1979) When he cannot devour a man through
seducing him into iniquity, he attempts to injure his good name, that if
it be possible, he may give way under the reproaches of men and the
calumnies of slandering tongues, and may thus fall into his jaws. If,
however, he be unable even to sully the good name of one who is
innocent, he tries to persuade him to cherish unkindly suspicions of his
brother, and judge him harshly, and so become entangled, and be an easy
prey. And who is able to know or to tell all his snares and wiles?
Nevertheless, in reference to those three, which belong more especially
to the case before us; in the first place, lest you should be turned
aside to wickedness through following bad examples, God gives you by the
apostle these warnings: “Be ye not unequally yoked together with
unbelievers; for what fellowship hath righteousness with
unrighteousness, and what communion, hath light with darkness?” <span
id="fr_1980"></span>[1981](#fn_1980) and in another place: “Be not
deceived; evil communications corrupt good manners: awake to
righteousness, <span id="fr_1981"></span>[1982](#fn_1981) and sin
not.” <span id="fr_1982"></span>[1983](#fn_1982) Secondly, that ye may
not give way under the tongues of slanderers, He saith by the prophet,
“Hearken unto Me, ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart
is My law: fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of
their revilings. <span id="fr_1983"></span>[1984](#fn_1983) For the moth
shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool;
but My righteousness shall be for ever.” <span
id="fr_1984"></span>[1985](#fn_1984) And thirdly, lest you should be
undone through groundless and malevolent suspicions concerning any
servants of God, remember that word of the apostle, “Judge nothing
before the time, until the Lord come, who both will bring to light the
hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the counsels of the
hearts, and then shall every man have praise of God;” <span
id="fr_1985"></span>[1986](#fn_1985) and this also, “The things which
are revealed belong to you, but the secret things belong unto the Lord
your God.” <span id="fr_1986"></span>[1987](#fn_1986)

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p25"></span>6. It is indeed manifest that such
things do not take place in the Church without great sorrow on the part
of saints and believers; but let Him be our Comforter who hath foretold
all these events, and has warned us not to become cold in love through
abounding iniquity, to endure to the end that we may be saved. For, as
far as I am concerned, if there be in me a spark of the love of Christ,
who among you is weak, and I am not weak? who among you is offended, and
I burn not? <span id="fr_1987"></span>[1988](#fn_1987) Do not therefore
add to my distresses, by your yielding either by groundless suspicions
or by occasion of other men’s sins. Do not, I beseech you, lest I say of
you, “They have added to the pain of my wounds.” <span
id="fr_1988"></span>[1989](#fn_1988) For it is much more easy to bear
the reproach of those who take open pleasure in these our pains, of whom
it was foretold in regard to Christ Himself, “They that sit in the gate
speak against Me, and I was the song of the drunkards,” <span
id="fr_1989"></span>[1990](#fn_1989) for whom also we have been taught
to pray, and to seek their welfare. For why do they sit at the gate, and
what do they watch for, if it be not for this, that so soon as any
bishop or clergyman or monk or nun has fallen, they may have ground for
believing, and boasting, and maintaining that all are the same as the
one that has fallen, but that all cannot be convicted and unmasked? Yet
these very men do not straightway cast forth their wives, or bring
accusation against their mothers, if some married woman has been
discovered to be an adulteress. But the moment that any crime is either
falsely alleged or actually proved against any one who makes a
profession of piety, these men are incessant and unwearied in their
efforts to make this charge be believed against all religious men. Those
men, therefore, who eagerly find what is sweet to their malicious
tongues in the things which grieve us, we may compare to those dogs (if,
indeed, they are to be understood as increasing his misery) which licked
the sores of the beggar who lay before the rich man’s gate, and endured
with patience every hardship and indignity until he should come to rest
in Abraham’s bosom. <span id="fr_1990"></span>[1991](#fn_1990)

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p30"></span>7. Do not add to my sorrows, O ye
who have some hope toward God. Let not the wounds which these lick be
multiplied by you, for whom <span id="page_348">p. 348</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-Page_348"></span>we are in jeopardy every hour, having
fightings without and fears within, and perils in the city, perils in
the wilderness, perils by the heathen, and perils by false
brethren. <span id="fr_1991"></span>[1992](#fn_1991) I know that you are
grieved, but is your grief more poignant than mine? I know that you are
disquieted, and I fear lest by the tongues of slanderers some weak one
for whom Christ died should perish. Let not my grief be increased by
you, for it is not through my fault that this grief was made yours. For
I used the utmost precautions to secure, if it were possible, both that
the steps necessary for the prevention of this evil should not be
neglected, and that it should not be brought to your knowledge, since
this could only cause unavailing vexation to the strong, and dangerous
disquietude to the weak, among you. But may He who hath permitted you to
be tempted by knowing this, give you strength to bear the trial, and
“teach you out of His law, and give you rest from the days of adversity,
until the pit be digged for the wicked.” <span
id="fr_1992"></span>[1993](#fn_1992)

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p33"></span>8. I hear that some of you are more
cast down with sorrow by this event, than by the fall of the two deacons
who had joined us from the Donatist party, as if they had brought
reproach upon the discipline of Proculeianus; <span
id="fr_1993"></span>[1994](#fn_1993) whereas this checks your boasting
about me, that under my discipline no such inconsistency among the
clergy had taken place. Let me frankly say to you, whoever you are that
have done this, you have not done well. Behold, God hath taught you, “He
that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord;” <span
id="fr_1994"></span>[1995](#fn_1994) and ye ought to bring no reproach
against heretics but this, that they are not Catholics. Be not like
these heretics, who, because they have nothing to plead in defence of
their schism, attempt nothing beyond heaping up charges against the men
from whom they are separated, and most falsely boast that in these we
have an unenviable pre-eminence, in order that since they can neither
impugn nor darken the truth of the Divine Scripture, from which the
Church of Christ spread abroad everywhere receives its testimony, they
may bring into disfavour the men by whom it is preached, against whom
they are capable of affirming anything—whatever comes into their mind.
“But ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that ye have heard Him, and
have been taught by Him.” <span id="fr_1995"></span>[1996](#fn_1995) For
He Himself has guarded His believing people from undue disquietude
concerning wickedness, even in stewards of the divine mysteries, as
doing evil which was their own, but speaking good which was His. “All
therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do
not ye after their works: for they say, and do not.” <span
id="fr_1996"></span>[1997](#fn_1996) Pray by all means for me, lest
perchance “when I have preached to others, I myself should be a
castaway;” <span id="fr_1997"></span>[1998](#fn_1997) but when you
glory, glory not in me, but in the Lord. For however watchful the
discipline of my house may be, I am but a man, and I live among men; and
I do not presume to pretend that my house is better than the ark of
Noah, in which among eight persons one was found a castaway; <span
id="fr_1998"></span>[1999](#fn_1998) or better than the house of
Abraham, regarding which it was said, “Cast out the bondwoman and her
son;” <span id="fr_1999"></span>[2000](#fn_1999) or better than the
house of Isaac, regarding whose twin sons it was said, “I loved Jacob,
and I hated Esau;” <span id="fr_2000"></span>[2001](#fn_2000) or better
than the house of Jacob himself, in which Reuben defiled his father’s
bed; <span id="fr_2001"></span>[2002](#fn_2001) or better than the house
of David, in which one son wrought folly with his sister, <span
id="fr_2002"></span>[2003](#fn_2002) and another rebelled against a
father of such holy clemency; or better than the band of companions of
Paul the apostle, who nevertheless would not have said, as above quoted,
“Without are fightings, and within are fears,” if he had dwelt with none
but good men; nor would have said, in speaking of the holiness and
fidelity of Timothy, “I have no man like-minded who will naturally care
for your state; for all seek their own, not the things which are Jesus
Christ’s;” <span id="fr_2003"></span>[2004](#fn_2003) or better than the
band of the disciples of the Lord Christ Himself, in which eleven good
men bore with Judas, who was a thief and a traitor; or, finally, better
than heaven itself, from which the angels fell.

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p45"></span>9. I frankly avow to your Charity,
before the Lord our God, whom I have taken, since the time when I began
to serve Him, as a witness upon my soul, that as I have hardly found any
men better than those who have done well in monasteries, so I have not
found any men worse than monks who have fallen; whence I suppose that to
them applies the word written in the Apocalypse, “He that is righteous,
let him be still more righteous; and he that is filthy, let him be still
more filthy.” <span id="fr_2004"></span>[2005](#fn_2004) Wherefore, if
we be grieved by some foul blemishes, we are comforted by a much larger
proportion of examples of an opposite kind. Let not, therefore, the
dregs which offend your eyes cause you to hate the oil-presses whence
the Lord’s storehouses are supplied to their profit with a more brightly
illuminating oil.

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p47"></span>May the mercy of our Lord keep you
in His peace, safe from all the snares of the enemy, my dearly beloved
brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[345:1972](1010384.htm#fr_1971) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p5"></span> [Rom.
15.4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[345:1973](1010384.htm#fr_1972) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p6"></span> [Matt.
13.43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[345:1974](1010384.htm#fr_1973) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p7"></span> [Matt.
18.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[345:1975](1010384.htm#fr_1974) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p8"></span> [Matt.
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[346:1976](1010384.htm#fr_1975) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p11"></span> [John
4.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[346:1977](1010384.htm#fr_1976) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#010),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#030)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[346:1978](1010384.htm#fr_1977) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p14"></span> Third Council of Carthage, <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p14.1"></span> A.D.</span> 397, Can.
7, 8.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[347:1979](1010384.htm#fr_1978) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p15"></span> [2 Cor.
11.12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1979"></span>[347:1980](1010384.htm#fr_1979) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p17"></span> [1 Pet.
5.8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1980"></span>[347:1981](1010384.htm#fr_1980) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p18"></span> [2 Cor.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1981"></span>[347:1982](1010384.htm#fr_1981) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p19"></span> Aug. translates, “be sober and
righteous.”

<span id="fn_1982"></span>[347:1983](1010384.htm#fr_1982) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p20"></span> [1 Cor.
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#034)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1983"></span>[347:1984](1010384.htm#fr_1983) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p21"></span> “Nor count it a great thing that
they despise you.”—<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p21.1"></span>Aug</span>.

<span id="fn_1984"></span>[347:1985](1010384.htm#fr_1984) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p21.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p22"></span> [Isa.
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#008)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1985"></span>[347:1986](1010384.htm#fr_1985) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p23"></span> [1 Cor.
4.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1986"></span>[347:1987](1010384.htm#fr_1986) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p24"></span> [Deut.
29.29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p24.1"></span>. This verse is the nearest I can find
to the words here quoted by the apostle. The reference in the Bened.
edition to [1 Cor. 5.12](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p24.2"></span> must be a mistake.

<span id="fn_1987"></span>[347:1988](1010384.htm#fr_1987) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p26"></span> [2 Cor.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1988"></span>[347:1989](1010384.htm#fr_1988) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p27"></span> [Ps.
69.26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p27.1"></span>, as translated by Aug.

<span id="fn_1989"></span>[347:1990](1010384.htm#fr_1989) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p28"></span> [Ps.
69.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1990"></span>[347:1991](1010384.htm#fr_1990) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p29"></span> [Luke
16.21-23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1991"></span>[348:1992](1010384.htm#fr_1991) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p31"></span> [2 Cor.
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005), [2 Cor.
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1992"></span>[348:1993](1010384.htm#fr_1992) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p32"></span> [Ps.
94:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1993"></span>[348:1994](1010384.htm#fr_1993) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p34"></span> Donatist bishop of Hippo.

<span id="fn_1994"></span>[348:1995](1010384.htm#fr_1994) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p35"></span> [1 Cor.
1.31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1995"></span>[348:1996](1010384.htm#fr_1995) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p35.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p36"></span> [Eph.
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1996"></span>[348:1997](1010384.htm#fr_1996) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p36.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p37"></span> [Matt.
23.3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1997"></span>[348:1998](1010384.htm#fr_1997) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p38"></span> [1 Cor.
9.27](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1998"></span>[348:1999](1010384.htm#fr_1998) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p39"></span> [Gen.
9.27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#027)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1999"></span>[348:2000](1010384.htm#fr_1999) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p40"></span> [Gen.
21.10](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#010)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2000"></span>[348:2001](1010384.htm#fr_2000) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p40.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p41"></span> [Mal.
1.2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2001"></span>[348:2002](1010384.htm#fr_2001) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p41.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p42"></span> [Gen.
49.4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2002"></span>[348:2003](1010384.htm#fr_2002) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p42.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p43"></span> [2 Sam.
13.14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#014)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2003"></span>[348:2004](1010384.htm#fr_2003) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p43.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p44"></span> [Phil.
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2004"></span>[348:2005](1010384.htm#fr_2004) <span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p46"></span> [Rev.
22.11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.LXXVIII-p46.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXIX](1010385)
