[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010335)  [Next](1010337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p1.1"></span>Letter XXIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 395.)

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p3.1"></span>A Letter from the Presbyter of the District
of Hippo to Alypius the Bishop of Thagaste, Concerning the Anniversary
of the Birth of Leontius</span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p3.2"></span>, <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524)
*Formerly Bishop of Hippo.*</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p5"></span>1. In the absence of brother Macharius,
I have not been able to write anything definite concerning a matter
about which I could not feel otherwise than anxious: it is said,
however, that he will soon return, and whatever can be with God’s help
done in the matter shall be done. Although also our brethren, citizens
of your town, who were with us, might sufficiently assure you of our
solicitude on their behalf when they returned, nevertheless the thing
which the Lord has granted to me is one worthy to be the subject of that
epistolary intercourse which ministers so much to the comfort of us
both; it is, moreover, a thing in the obtaining of which I believe that
I have been greatly assisted by your own solicitude regarding it, seeing
that it could not but constrain you to intercession on our behalf.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p6"></span>2. Therefore let me not fail to relate
to your Charity what has taken place; so that, as you joined us in
pouring out prayers for this mercy before it was obtained, you may now
join us in rendering thanks for it after it has been received. When I
was informed after your departure that some were becoming openly
violent, and declaring that they could not submit to the prohibition
(intimated while you were here) of that feast which they call Lætitia,
vainly attempting to disguise their revels under a fair name, it
happened most opportunely for me, by the hidden fore-ordination of the
Almighty God, that on the fourth holy day that

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p7"></span>Chapter of the Gospel fell to be
expounded in ordinary course, in which the words occur: “Give not that
which is holy unto the dogs, neither cast ye your pearls before
swine.” <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) I discoursed
therefore concerning dogs and swine in such a way as to compel those who
clamour with obstinate barking against the divine precepts, and who are
given up to the abominations of carnal pleasures, to blush for shame;
and followed it up by saying, that they might plainly see how criminal
it was to do, under the name of religion, within the walls of the
church, that which, if it were practised by them in their own houses,
would make it necessary for them to be debarred from that which is holy,
and from the privileges which are the pearls of the Church.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p9"></span>3. Although these words were well
received, nevertheless, as few had attended the meeting, all had not
been done which so great an emergency required. When, however, this
discourse was, according to the ability and zeal of each, made known
abroad by those who had heard it, it found many opponents. But when the
morning of Quadragesima came round, and a great multitude had assembled
at the hour of exposition of Scripture, that passage in the Gospel was
read in which our Lord said, concerning those sellers who were driven
out of the temple, and the tables of the money-changers which He had
overthrown, that the house of His Father had been made a den of thieves
instead of a house of prayer. <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526)
After awakening their attention by bringing forward the subject of
immoderate indulgence in wine, I myself also read this chapter, and
added to it an argument to prove with how much greater anger and
vehemence our Lord would cast forth drunken revels, which are every<span
id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span id="vii.1.XXIX-Page_254"></span>where
disgraceful, from that temple from which He thus drove out merchandise
lawful elsewhere, especially when the things sold were those required
for the sacrifices appointed in that dispensation; and I asked them
whether they regarded a place occupied by men selling what was
necessary, or one used by men drinking to excess, as bearing the greater
resemblance to a den of thieves.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p11"></span>4. Moreover, as passages of Scripture
which I had prepared were held ready to be put into my hands, I went on
to say that the Jewish nation, with all its lack of spirituality in
religion, never held feasts, even temperate feasts, much less feasts
disgraced by intemperance, in their temple, in which at that time the
body and blood of the Lord were not yet offered, and that in history
they are not found to have been excited by wine on any public occasion
bearing the name of worship, except when they held a feast before the
idol which they had made. <span id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527)
While I said these things I took the manuscript from the attendant, and
read that whole passage. Reminding them of the words of the apostle, who
says, in order to distinguish Christians from the obdurate Jews, that
they are his epistle written, not on tables of stone, but on the fleshly
tables of the heart, <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) I asked
further, with the deepest sorrow, how it was that, although Moses the
servant of God broke both the tables of stone because of these rulers of
Israel, I could not break the hearts of those who, though men of the New
Testament dispensation, were desiring in their celebration of saints’
days to repeat often the public perpetration of excesses of which the
people of the Old Testament economy were guilty only once, and that in
an act of idolatry.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p14"></span>5. Having then given back the
manuscript of Exodus, I proceeded to enlarge, so far as my time
permitted, on the crime of drunkenness, and took up the writings of the
Apostle Paul, and showed among what sins it is classed by him, reading
the text, “If any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or
covetous, or an idolater, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner;
with such an one (ye ought) not even to eat;” <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) pathetically reminding them how
great is our danger in eating with those who are guilty of intemperance
even in their own houses. I read also what is added, a little further
on, in the same epistle: “Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor
idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers of themselves
with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers,
nor extortioners, shall inherit the kingdom of God. And such were some
of you: but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified
in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.” <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) After reading these, I charged them
to consider how believers could hear these words, “but ye are washed,”
if they still tolerated in their own hearts—that is, in God’s inner
temple—the abominations of such lusts as these against which the kingdom
of heaven is shut. Then I went on to that passage: “When ye come
together into one place, this is not to eat the Lord’s supper: for in
eating, every one taketh before other his own supper; and one is hungry,
and another is drunken. What! have ye not houses to eat and to drink in,
or despise ye the church of God?” <span
id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531) After reading which, I more
especially begged them to remark that not even innocent and temperate
feasts were permitted in the church: for the apostle said not, “Have ye
not houses of your own in which to be drunken?”—as if it was drunkenness
alone which was unlawful in the church; but, “Have ye not houses to eat
and to drink in?”—things lawful in themselves, but not lawful in the
church, inasmuch as men have their own houses in which they may be
recruited by necessary food: whereas now, by the corruption of the times
and the relaxation of morals, we have been brought so low, that, no
longer insisting upon sobriety in the houses of men, all that we venture
to demand is, that the realm of tolerated excess be restricted to their
own homes.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p18"></span>6. I reminded them also of a passage in
the Gospel which I had expounded the day before, in which it is said of
the false prophets: “Ye shall know them by their fruits.” <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) I also bade them remember that in
that place our works are signified by the word fruits. Then I asked
among what kind of fruits drunkenness was named, and read that passage
in the Epistle to the Galatians: “Now the works of the flesh are
manifest, which are these: adultery, fornication, uncleanness,
lasciviousness, idolatry, witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations,
wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, envyings, murder, drunkenness,
revellings, and such like; of the which I tell you before, as I have
told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not inherit
the kingdom of God.” <span id="fr_1533"></span>[1534](#fn_1533) After
these words, I asked how, when God has commanded that Christians be
known by their fruits, we could be known as Christians by this fruit of
drunkenness? I added also, that we must read what follows there: “But
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance.” <span
id="fr_1534"></span>[1535](#fn_1534) And I pled with them to consider
how shameful and lamentable it would be, <span id="page_255">p.
255</span> <span id="vii.1.XXIX-Page_255"></span>if, not content with
living at home in the practice of these works of the flesh, they even
wished by them, forsooth, to honour the church, and to fill the whole
area of so large a place of worship, if they were permitted, with crowds
of revellers and drunkards: and yet would not present to God those
fruits of the Spirit which, by the authority of Scripture, and by my
groans, they were called to yield, and by the offering of which they
would most suitably celebrate the saints’ days.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p22"></span>7. This being finished, I returned the
manuscript; and being asked to speak, <span
id="fr_1535"></span>[1536](#fn_1535) I set before their eyes with all my
might, as the danger itself constrained me, and as the Lord was pleased
to give strength, the danger shared by them who were committed to my
care, and by me, who must give account to the Chief Shepherd, and
implored them by His humiliation, by the unparalleled insults, the
buffetings and spitting on the face which He endured, by His pierced
hands and crown of thorns, and by His cross and blood, to have pity on
me at least, if they were displeased with themselves, and to consider
the inexpressible love cherished towards me by the aged and venerable
Valerius, who had not scrupled to assign to me for their sakes the
perilous burden of expounding to them the word of truth, and had often
told them that in my coming here his prayers were answered; not
rejoicing, surely, that I had come to share or to behold the death of
our hearers, but rejoicing that I had come to share his labours for the
eternal life. In conclusion, I told them that I was resolved to trust in
Him who cannot lie, and who has given us a promise by the mouth of the
prophet, saying of our Lord Jesus Christ, “If His children forsake my
law, and walk not in my judgments; if they break my statutes, and keep
not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression with the rod,
and their iniquity with stripes: nevertheless my loving-kindness will I
not utterly take from Him.” <span id="fr_1536"></span>[1537](#fn_1536) I
declared, therefore, that I put my trust in Him, that if they despised
the weighty words which had now been read and spoken to them, He would
visit them with the rod and with stripes, and not leave them to be
condemned with the world. In this appeal I put forth all the power in
thought and utterance which, in an emergency so great and hazardous, our
Saviour and Ruler was pleased to supply. I did not move them to weep by
first weeping myself; but while these things were being spoken, I own
that, moved by the tears which they began to shed, I myself could not
refrain from following their example. And when we had thus wept
together, I concluded my sermon with full persuasion that they would be
restrained by it from the abuses denounced.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p25"></span>8. Next morning, however, when the day
dawned, which so many were accustomed to devote to excess in eating and
drinking, I received notice that some, even of those who were present
when I preached, had not yet desisted from complaint, and that so great
was the power of detestable custom with them, that, using no other
argument, they asked, “Wherefore is this now prohibited? Were they not
Christians who in former times did not interfere with this practice?” On
hearing this, I knew not what more powerful means for influencing them I
could devise; but resolved, in the event of their judging it proper to
persevere, that after reading in Ezekiel’s prophecy that the watchman
has delivered his own soul if he has given warning, even though the
persons warned refuse to give heed to him, I would shake my garments and
depart. But then the Lord showed me that He leaves us not alone, and
taught me how He encourages us to trust Him; for before the time at
which I had to ascend the pulpit, <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) the very persons of whose complaint
against interference with long-established custom I had heard came to
me. Receiving them kindly, I by a few words brought them round to a
right opinion; and when it came to the time for my discourse, having
laid aside the lecture which I had prepared as now unnecessary, I said a
few things concerning the question mentioned above, “Wherefore *now*
prohibit this custom?” saying that to those who might propose it the
briefest and best answer would be this: “Let us now at last put down
what ought to have been earlier prohibited.”

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p27"></span>9. Lest, however, any slight should
seem to be put by us on those who, before our time, either tolerated or
did not dare to put down such manifest excesses of an undisciplined
multitude, I explained to them the circumstances out of which this
custom seems to have necessarily risen in the Church,—namely, that when,
in the peace which came after such numerous and violent persecutions,
crowds of heathen who wished to assume the Christian religion were kept
back, because, having been accustomed to celebrate the feasts connected
with their worship of idols in revelling and drunkenness, they could not
easily refrain from pleasures so hurtful and so habitual, it had seemed
good to our ancestors, making for the time a concession to this
infirmity, to permit them to celebrate, instead of the festivals which
they renounced, other feasts in honour of the holy martyrs, which were
observed, not as before with a profane design, but with similar
self-indulgence. I <span id="page_256">p. 256</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-Page_256"></span>added that now upon them, as persons
bound together in the name of Christ, and submissive to the yoke of His
august authority, the wholesome restraints of sobriety were
laid—restraints with which the honour and fear due to Him who appointed
them should move them to comply—and that therefore the time had now come
in which all who did not dare to cast off the Christian profession
should begin to walk according to Christ’s will; and being now confirmed
Christians, should reject those concessions to infirmity which were made
only for a time in order to their becoming such.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p28"></span>10. I then exhorted them to imitate the
example of the churches beyond the sea, in some of which these practices
had never been tolerated, while in others they had been already put down
by the people complying with the counsel of good ecclesiastical rulers;
and as the examples of daily excess in the use of wine in the church of
the blessed Apostle Peter were brought forward in defence of the
practice, I said in the first place, that I had heard that these
excesses had been often forbidden, but because the place was at a
distance from the bishop’s control, and because in such a city the
multitude of carnally-minded persons was great, the foreigners
especially, of whom there is a constant influx, clinging to that
practice with an obstinacy proportioned to their ignorance, the
suppression of so great an evil had not yet been possible. If, however,
I continued, we would honour the Apostle Peter, we ought to hear his
words, and look much more to the epistles by which his mind is made
known to us, than to the place of worship, by which it is not made
known; and immediately taking the manuscript, I read his own words:
“Forasmuch then as Christ hath suffered for us in the flesh arm
yourselves likewise with the same mind for he that hath suffered in the
flesh hath ceased from sin; that he no longer should live the rest of
his time in the flesh to the lusts of men, but to the will of God. For
the time past of our life may suffice us to have wrought the will of the
Gentiles, when we walked in lasciviousness, lusts, excess of wine,
revellings, banquetings, and abominable idolatries.” <span
id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538) After this, when I saw that all
were with one consent turning to a right mind, and renouncing the custom
against which I had protested, I exhorted them to assemble at noon for
the reading of God’s word and singing of psalms; stating that we had
resolved thus to celebrate the festival in a way much more accordant
with purity and piety; and that, by the number of worshippers who should
assemble for this purpose, it would plainly appear who were guided by
reason, and who were the slaves of appetite. With these words the
discourse concluded.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p30"></span>11. In the afternoon a greater number
assembled than in the forenoon, and there was reading and praise
alternately up to the hour at which I went out in company with the
bishop; and after our coming two psalms were read. Then the old man
\[Valerius\] constrained me by his express command to say something to
the people; from which I would rather have been excused, as I was
longing for the close of the anxieties of the day. I delivered a short
discourse in order to express our gratitude to God. And as we heard the
noise of the feasting, which was going on as usual in the church of the
heretics, who still prolonged their revelry while we were so differently
engaged, I remarked that the beauty of day is enhanced by contrast with
the night, and that when anything black is near, the purity of white is
the more pleasing; and that, in like manner, our meeting for a spiritual
feast might perhaps have been somewhat less sweet to us, but for the
contrast of the carnal excesses in which the others indulged; and I
exhorted them to desire eagerly such feasts as we then enjoyed, if they
had tasted the goodness of the Lord. At the same time, I said that those
may well be afraid who seek anything which shall one day be destroyed as
the chief object of their desire, seeing that every one shares the
portion of that which he worships; a warning expressly given by the
apostle to such, when he says of them their “god is their belly,” <span
id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539) inasmuch as he has elsewhere said,
“Meats for the belly, and the belly for meats; but God shall destroy
both it and them.” <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) I added
that it is our duty to seek that which is imperishable, which, far
removed from carnal affections, is obtained through sanctification of
the spirit; and when those things which the Lord was pleased to suggest
to me had been spoken on this subject as the occasion required, the
daily evening exercises of worship were performed; and when with the
bishop I retired from the church, the brethren said a hymn there, a
considerable multitude remaining in the church, and engaging in
praise <span id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541) even till daylight
failed.

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p34"></span>12. I have thus related as concisely as
I could that which I am sure you longed to hear. Pray that God may be
pleased to protect our efforts from giving offence or provoking odium in
any way. In the tranquil prosperity which you enjoy we do with lively
warmth of affection participate in no small measure, when tidings so
frequently reach us of the gifts possessed by the highly spiritual
church of Thagaste. The ship bringing our brethren has not yet arrived.
At Hasna, where our brother Argentius is presbyter, the Circumcelliones,
entering our church, <span id="page_257">p. 257</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-Page_257"></span>demolished the altar. The case is now in
process of trial; and we earnestly ask your prayers that it may be
decided in a peaceful way and as becomes the Catholic Church, so as to
silence the tongues of turbulent heretics. I have sent a letter to the
Asiarch. <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542)

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p36"></span>Brethren most blessed, may ye persevere
in the Lord, and remember us. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[253:1525](1010336.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p3.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p4"></span> Leontius was Bishop of Hippo in the
latter part of the second century. He built a church which was called
after him, and in which some of the sermons of Augustin were delivered.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[253:1526](1010336.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p8"></span> [Matt.
7.6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[253:1527](1010336.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p10"></span> [Matt.
21.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[254:1528](1010336.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p12"></span> [Ex.
32.6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[254:1529](1010336.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p13"></span> [2 Cor.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[254:1530](1010336.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
5.11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[254:1531](1010336.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
6.9-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#009)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[254:1532](1010336.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
11.20-22](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#020)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[254:1533](1010336.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p19"></span> [Matt.
7.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1533"></span>[254:1534](1010336.htm#fr_1533) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p20"></span> [Gal.
5.19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1534"></span>[254:1535](1010336.htm#fr_1534) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p21"></span> [Gal.
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#023)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1535"></span>[255:1536](1010336.htm#fr_1535) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p23"></span> *Imperatâ oratione.*

<span id="fn_1536"></span>[255:1537](1010336.htm#fr_1536) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p24"></span> [Ps.
89.30-33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[255:1538](1010336.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p26"></span> *Exhedra*.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[256:1539](1010336.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p29"></span> [1 Pet.
4.1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#001)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[256:1540](1010336.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p31"></span> [Phil.
3.19](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#019)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[256:1541](1010336.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p32"></span> [1 Cor.
6.13](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[256:1542](1010336.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p33"></span> *Psallente*.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[257:1543](1010336.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="vii.1.XXIX-p34.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIX-p35"></span> A magistrate who was also charged with
the affairs pertaining to the protection of religion. The title belonged
primarily to those who in the province of Asia had charge of the
games.—*Codex Theodosianus*, xv. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXX](1010337)
