[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010061)  [Next](1010063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.IV.III"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.IV.III-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.—Not Even the Most Experienced
Men Could Persuade Him of the Vanity of Astrology to Which He Was
Devoted.</span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p2"></span>4. Those impostors, then, whom they
designate Mathematicians, I consulted without hesitation, because they
used no sacrifices, and invoked the aid of no spirit for their
divinations, which art Christian and true piety fitly rejects and
condemns. <span id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276) For good it is to
confess unto Thee, and to say, “Be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I
have sinned against Thee;” <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277) and
not to abuse Thy goodness for a license to sin, but to remember the
words of the Lord, “Behold, thou art made whole; sin no more, lest a
worse thing come unto thee.” <span id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) All
of which salutary advice they endeavour to destroy when they say, “The
cause of thy sin is inevitably determined in heaven;” and, “This did
Venus, or Saturn, or Mars;” in order that man, forsooth, flesh and
blood, and proud corruption, may be blameless, while the Creator and
Ordainer of heaven and stars is to bear the blame. And who is this but
Thee, our God, the sweetness and well-spring of righteousness, who
renderest “to every man according to his deeds,” <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279) and despisest not “a broken and a
contrite heart!” <span id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280)

<span id="vi.IV.III-p8"></span>5. There was in those days a wise man,
very skilful in medicine, and much renowned therein, who had with his
own proconsular hand put the Agonistic garland upon my distempered head,
not, though, as a physician; <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281) for
this disease Thou alone healest, who resistest the proud, and givest
grace to the humble. <span id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282) But didst
Thou fail me even by that old man, or forbear from healing my soul? For
when I had become more familiar with him, and hung assiduously and
fixedly on his conversation (for though couched in simple language, it
was replete with vivacity, life, and earnestness), when he had perceived
from my discourse that I was given to books of the horoscope-casters,
he, in a kind and fatherly manner, advised me to throw them away, and
not vainly bestow the care and labour necessary for useful things upon
these vanities; saying that he himself in his earlier years had studied
that art with a view to gaining his living <span id="page_70">p.
70</span> <span id="vi.IV.III-Page_70"></span>by following it as a
profession, and that, as he had understood Hippocrates, he would soon
have understood this, and yet he had given it up, and followed medicine,
for no other reason than that he discovered it to be utterly false, and
he, being a man of character, would not gain his living by beguiling
people. “But thou,” saith he, “who hast rhetoric to support thyself by,
so that thou followest this of free will, not of necessity—all the more,
then, oughtest thou to give me credit herein, who laboured to attain it
so perfectly, as I wished to gain my living by it alone.” When I asked
him to account for so many true things being foretold by it, he answered
me (as he could) “that the force of chance, diffused throughout the
whole order of nature, brought this about. For if when a man by accident
opens the leaves of some poet, who sang and intended something far
different, a verse oftentimes fell out wondrously apposite to the
present business, it were not to be wondered at,” he continued, “if out
of the soul of man, by some higher instinct, not knowing what goes on
within itself, an answer should be given by chance, not art, which
should coincide with the business and actions of the questioner.”

<span id="vi.IV.III-p18"></span>6. And thus truly, either by or through
him, Thou didst look after me. And Thou didst delineate in my memory
what I might afterwards search out for myself. But at that time neither
he, nor my most dear Nebridius, a youth most good and most circumspect,
who scoffed at that whole stock of divination, could persuade me to
forsake it, the authority of the authors influencing me still more; and
as yet I had lighted upon no certain proof—such as I sought—whereby it
might without doubt appear that what had been truly foretold by those
consulted was by accident or chance, not by the art of the star-gazers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[69:277](1010062.htm#fr_276) <span
id="vi.IV.III-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p3"></span> Augustin classes the votaries of both
wizards and astrologers (*De Doctr. Christ.* ii. 23; and *De Civ. Dei*,
x. 9; compare also Justin Martyr, *Apol.* ii. c. 5) as alike “deluded
and imposed on by the false angels, to whom the lowest part of the world
has been put in subjection by the law of God’s providence;” and he says,
“All arts of this sort are either nullities, or are part of a guilty
superstition springing out of a baleful fellowship between men and
devils, and are to be utterly repudiated and avoided by the Christian,
as the covenants of a false and treacherous friendship.” It is
remarkable that though these arts were strongly denounced in the
Pentateuch, the Jews—acquiring them from the surrounding Gentile
nations—have embedded them deeply in their oral law, said also to be
given by Moses (*e.g.* in *<span class="c75"><span
id="vi.IV.III-p3.1"></span>Moed Katon</span>* 28, and *<span
class="c75"><span id="vi.IV.III-p3.2"></span>Shabbath</span>* 156,
prosperity comes from the influence of the stars; in *<span
class="c75"><span id="vi.IV.III-p3.3"></span> Shabbath</span>* 61 it is
a question whether the influence of the stars or a charm has been
effective; and in *<span class="c75"><span
id="vi.IV.III-p3.4"></span>Sanhedrin</span>* 17 magic is one of the
qualifications for the Sanhedrim). It might have been expected that the
Christians, if only from that reaction against Judaism which shows
itself in Origen’s disparagement of the letter of the Old Testament
Scriptures (see *De Princip*. iv. 15, 16), would have shrunk from such
strange arts. But the influx of pagans, who had practiced them, into the
Christian Church appears gradually to have leavened it in no slight
degree. This is not only true of the Valentinians (see Kaye’s *Clement
of Alex*. vi.) and other heretics, but the influence of these contacts
is seen even in the writings of the “orthodox.” Those who can read
between the lines will find no slight trace of this (after separating
what they would conceive to be true from what is manifestly false) in
the story told by Zonaras, in his *Annals*, of the controversy between
the Rabbis and Sylvester, Bishop of Rome, before Constantine. The Jews
were worsted in argument, and evidently thought an appeal to miracles
might, from the Emperor’s education, bring him over to their side. An ox
is brought forth. The Jewish wonder-worker whispers a mystic name into
its ear, and it falls dead; but Sylvester, according to the story, is
quite equal to the occasion, and restores the animal to life again by
uttering the name of the Redeemer. It may have been that the cessation
of miracles may have gradually led unstable professors of Christianity
to invent miracles; and, as Bishop Kaye observes (*Tertullian*, p. 95),
“the success of the first attempts naturally encouraged others to
practice similar impositions on the credulity of mankind.” As to the
time of the cessation of miracles, comparison may be profitably made of
the views of Kaye, in the early part of c. ii. of his *Tertullian*, and
of Blunt, in his *Right Use of the Early Fathers*, series ii. lecture 6.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[69:278](1010062.htm#fr_277) <span
id="vi.IV.III-p3.5"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p4"></span> [Ps.
41.4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004)<span id="vi.IV.III-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[69:279](1010062.htm#fr_278) <span
id="vi.IV.III-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p5"></span> [John
5.14](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#014)<span id="vi.IV.III-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[69:280](1010062.htm#fr_279) <span
id="vi.IV.III-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p6"></span> [Rom.
2.6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)<span id="vi.IV.III-p6.1"></span>,
and [Matt. 16.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027)<span
id="vi.IV.III-p6.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_280"></span>[69:281](1010062.htm#fr_280) <span
id="vi.IV.III-p6.3"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p7"></span> [Ps.
51.17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017)<span
id="vi.IV.III-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_281"></span>[69:282](1010062.htm#fr_281) <span
id="vi.IV.III-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p9"></span> This physician was Vindicianus, the
“acute old man” mentioned in vii. sec. 8, below, and again in *Ep.* 138,
as “the most eminent physician of his day.” Augustin’s disease, however,
could not be reached by his remedies. We are irresistibly reminded of
the words of our great poet:—

<span id="vi.IV.III-p10"></span>“Canst thou minister to a mind diseased;

<span id="vi.IV.III-p11"></span>Pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow;

<span id="vi.IV.III-p12"></span>Raze out the written troubles of the
brain;

<span id="vi.IV.III-p13"></span>And, with some sweet oblivious antidote,

<span id="vi.IV.III-p14"></span>Cleanse the stuff’d bosom of that
perilous stuff

<span id="vi.IV.III-p15"></span> Which weighs upon the heart!”
—*Macbeth*, act. v. scene 3.

<span id="vi.IV.III-p16"></span>

<span id="fn_282"></span>[69:283](1010062.htm#fr_282) <span
id="vi.IV.III-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vi.IV.III-p17"></span> [1 Pet.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#005)<span id="vi.IV.III-p17.1"></span>,
and [Jas. 4.6](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#006)<span
id="vi.IV.III-p17.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](1010063)
