[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010109)  [Next](1010111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VII.II"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.II-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VII.II-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Disputation of Nebridius
Against the Manichæans, on the Question “Whether God Be Corruptible or
Incorruptible.”</span>

<span id="vi.VII.II-p2"></span>3. It was sufficient for me, O Lord, to
oppose to those deceived deceivers and dumb praters (dumb, since Thy
word sounded not forth from them) that which a long while ago, while we
were at Carthage, Nebridius used to propound, at which all we who heard
it were disturbed: “What could that reputed nation of darkness, which
the Manichæans are in the habit of setting up as a mass opposed to Thee,
have done unto Thee hadst Thou objected to fight with it? For had it
been answered, ‘It would have done Thee some injury,’ then shouldest
Thou be subject to violence and corruption; but if the reply were: ‘It
could do Thee no injury,’ then was no cause assigned for Thy fighting
with it; and so fighting as that a certain portion and member of Thee,
or offspring of Thy very substance, should be blended with adverse
powers and natures not of Thy creation, and be by them corrupted and
deteriorated to such an extent as to be turned from happiness into
misery, and need help whereby it might be delivered and purged; and that
this offspring of Thy substance was the soul, to which, being enslaved,
contaminated, and corrupted, Thy word, free, pure, and entire, might
bring succour; but yet also the word itself being corruptible, because
it was from one and the same substance. So that should they affirm Thee,
whatsoever Thou art, that is, Thy substance whereby Thou art, to be
incorruptible, then were all these assertions false and execrable; but
if corruptible, then that were false, and at the first utterance to be
abhorred.” <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) This argument, then,
was enough against those who wholly merited to be vomited forth from the
surfeited stomach, since they had no means of escape without horrible
sacrilege, both of heart and tongue, thinking and speaking such things
of Thee.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_483"></span>[103:484](1010110.htm#fr_483) <span
id="vi.VII.II-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VII.II-p3"></span> Similar arguments are made use of in his
controversy with Fortunatus (*Dis.* ii. 5), where he says, that as
Fortunatus could find no answer, so neither could he when a Manichæan,
and that this led him to the true faith. Again, in his *De Moribus*
(sec. 25), where he examines the answers which had been given, he
commences: “For this gives rise to the question, which used to throw us
into great perplexity, even when we were your zealous disciples, nor
could we find any answer,—what the race of darkness would have done to
God, supposing He had refused to fight with it at the cost of such
calamity to part of Himself. For if God would not have suffered any loss
by remaining quiet, we thought it hard that we had been sent to endure
so much. Again, if He would have suffered, His nature cannot have been
incorruptible, as it behooves the nature of God to be.” We have already,
in the note to book iv. sec. 26, referred to some of the matters touched
on in this section; but they call for further elucidation. The following
passage, quoted by Augustin from Manichæus himself (*Con. Ep. Manich.*
19), discloses to us (1) their ideas as to the nature and position of
the two kingdoms: “In one direction, on the border of this bright and
holy region, there was a land of darkness, deep and vast in extent,
where abode fiery bodies, destructive races. Here was boundless darkness
flowing from the same source in immeasurable abundance, with the
productions properly belonging to it. Beyond this were muddy, turbid
waters with their inhabitants; and inside of them winds terrible and
violent, with their prince and their progenitors. Then, again, a fiery
region of destruction, with its chiefs and peoples. And similarly inside
of this, a race full of smoke and gloom, where abode the dreadful prince
and chief of all, having around him innumerable princes, himself the
mind and source of them all. Such are the five natures of the region of
corruption.” Augustin also designates them (*ibid.* sec. 20) “the five
dens of the race of darkness.” The nation of darkness desires to possess
the kingdom of light, and prepares to make war upon it; and in the
controversy with Faustus we have (2) the beginning and issue of the war
(*Con. Faust.* ii. 3; see also *De Hæres*, 46). Augustin says: “You
dress up for our benefit some wonderful First Man, who came down from
the race of light, to war with the race of darkness, armed with his
waters against the waters of the enemy, and with his fire against their
fire, and with his winds against their winds.” And again (*ibid.* sec.
5): “You say that he mingled with the principles of darkness in his
conflict with the race of darkness, that by capturing these principles
the world might be made out of the mixture. So that, by your profane
fancies, Christ is not only mingled with heaven and all the stars, but
conjoined and compounded with the earth and all its productions—a
Saviour no more, but needing to be saved by you, by your eating and
disgorging Him. This foolish custom of making your disciples bring you
food, that your teeth and stomach may be the means of relieving Christ,
who is bound up in it, is a consequence of your profane fancies. You
declare that Christ is liberated in this way,—not, however, entirely;
for you hold that some tiny particles of no value still remain in the
excrement, to be mixed up and compounded again and again in various
material forms, and to be released and purified at any rate by the fire
in which the world will be burned up, if not before. Nay, even then, you
say, Christ is not entirely liberated, but some extreme particles of His
good and divine nature, which have been so defiled that they cannot be
cleansed, are condemned to stay for ever in the mass of darkness.” The
result of this commingling of the light with the darkness was, that a
certain portion and member of God was turned “from happiness into
misery,” and placed in bondage in the world, and was in need of help
“whereby it might be delivered and purged.” (See also *Con. Fortunat.*
i. 1.) Reference may be made (3), for information as to the method by
which the divine substance was released in the eating of the elect, to
the notes on book iii. sec. 18, above; and for the influence of the sun
and moon in accomplishing that release, to the note on book v. sec, 12,
above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](1010111)
