[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010374)  [Next](1010376) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXIX-p1.1"></span>Letter LXIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 402.)

<span id="vii.1.LXIX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXIX-p3.1"></span>To Their Justly Beloved Lord Castorius,
Their Truly Welcomed and Worthily Honoured Son, Alypius and Augustin
Send Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIX-p4"></span>1. An attempt was made by the enemy of
Christians to cause, by occasion of our very dear and sweet son your
brother, the agitation of a most dangerous scandal within the Catholic
Church, which as a mother welcomed you to her affectionate embrace when
you fled from a disinherited and separated fragment into the heritage of
Christ; the desire of that enemy being evidently to becloud with
unseemly melancholy the calm beauty of joy which was imparted to us by
the blessing of your conversion. But the Lord our God, who is
compassionate and merciful, who comforteth them that are cast down,
nourishing the infants, and cherishing the infirm, permitted him to gain
in some measure success in this design, only to make us rejoice more
over the prevention of the calamity than we grieved over the danger. For
it is a far more magnanimous thing to have resigned the onerous
responsibilities of the bishop’s dignity in order to save the Church
from danger, than to have accepted these in order to have a share in her
government. He truly proves that he was worthy of holding that office,
had the interests of peace permitted him to do so, who does not insist
upon retaining it when he cannot do so without endangering the peace of
the Church. It has accordingly pleased God to show, by means of your
brother, our beloved son Maximianus, unto the enemies of His Church,
that there are within her those who seek not their own things, but the
things of Jesus Christ. For in laying down that ministry of stewardship
of the mysteries of God, he was not deserting his duty under the
pressure of some worldly desire, but acting under the impulse of a pious
love of peace, lest, on account of the honour conferred upon him, there
should arise among the members of Christ an unseemly and dangerous,
perhaps even fatal, dissension. For could anything have been more
infatuated and worthy of utter reprobation, than to forsake schismatics
because of the peace of the Catholic Church, and then to trouble that
same Catholic peace by the question of one’s own rank and preferment? On
the other hand, could anything be more praiseworthy, and more in
accordance with Christian charity, than that, after having forsaken the
frenzied pride of the Donatists, he should, in the manner of his
cleaving to the heritage of Christ, give such a signal proof of humility
under the power of love for the unity of the Church? As for him,
therefore, we rejoice indeed that he has been proved of such stability
that the storm of this temptation has not cast down what divine truth
had built in his heart; and therefore we desire and pray the Lord to
grant that, by his life and conversation in the future, he may make it
more and more manifest how well he would have discharged the
responsibilities of that office which he would have accepted if that had
been his duty. May that eternal peace which is promised to the Church be
given in recompense to him, who discerned that the things which were not
compatible with the peace of the Church were not expedient for him!

<span id="vii.1.LXIX-p5"></span>2. As for you, our dear son, in whom we
have great joy, since you are not restrained from ac<span
id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXIX-Page_326"></span>cepting the office of bishop by any such
considerations as have guided your brother in declining it, it becomes
one of your disposition to devote to Christ that which is in you by His
own gift. Your talents, prudence, eloquence, gravity, self-control, and
everything else which adorns your conversation, are the gifts of God. To
what service can they be more fittingly devoted than to His by whom they
were bestowed, in order that they may be preserved, increased,
perfected, and rewarded by Him? Let them not be devoted to the service
of this world, lest with it they pass away and perish. We know that, in
dealing with you, it is not necessary to insist much on your reflecting,
as you may so easily do, upon the hopes of vain men, their insatiable
desires, and the uncertainty of life. Away, therefore, with every
expectation of deceptive and earthly felicity which your mind had
grasped: labour in the vineyard of God, where the fruit is sure, where
so many promises have already received so large measure of fulfilment,
that it would be the height of madness to despair as to those which
remain. We beseech you by the divinity and humanity of Christ, and by
the peace of that heavenly city where we receive eternal rest after
labouring for the time of our pilgrimage, to take the place as the
bishop of the Church of Vagina which your brother has resigned, not
under ignominious deposition, but by magnanimous concession. Let that
people for whom we expect the richest increase of blessings through your
mind and tongue, endowed and adorned by the gifts of God,—let that
people, we say, perceive through you, that in what your brother has
done, he was consulting not his own indolence, but their peace.

<span id="vii.1.LXIX-p6"></span>We have given orders that this letter be
not read to you until those to whom you are necessary hold you in actual
possession. <span id="fr_1884"></span>[1885](#fn_1884) For we hold you
in the bond of spiritual love, because to us also you are very necessary
as a colleague. Our reason for not coming in person to you, you shall
afterwards learn.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1884"></span>[326:1885](1010375.htm#fr_1884) <span
id="vii.1.LXIX-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXIX-p7"></span> It would seem that there was some
reason to fear lest Castorius should elsewhere devote his talents to
some other calling, and that a deputation from Vagina had been sent to
seek him and bring him to that place. Alypius and Augustin for some
reason did not accompany the deputation, but sent this letter with them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXX](1010376)
