[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010414)  [Next](1010416) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 410.)

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p3.1"></span>Augustin to Dioscorus.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p5"></span>1. You have sent suddenly upon me a
countless multitude of questions, by which you must have purposed to
blockade me on every side, or rather bury me completely, even if you
were under the impression that I was otherwise unoccupied and at
leisure; for how could I, even though wholly at leisure, furnish the
solution of so many questions to one in such haste as you are, and, in
fact, as you write, on the eve of a journey? I would, indeed, be
prevented by the mere number of the questions to be resolved, even if
their solution were easy. But they are so perplexingly intricate, and so
hard, that even if they were few in number, and engaging me when
otherwise wholly at leisure, they would, by the mere time required,
exhaust my powers of application, and wear out my strength. I would,
however, fain snatch you forcibly away from the midst of those inquiries
in which you so much delight, and fix you down among the cares which
engage my attention, in order that you may either learn not to be
unprofitably curious, or desist from presuming to impose the task of
feeding and fostering your curiosity upon men among whose cares one of
the greatest is to repress and curb those who are too inquisitive. For
if time and pains are devoted to writing anything to you, how much
better and more profitably are these employed in endeavours to cut off
those vain and treacherous passions (which are to be guarded against
with a caution proportioned to the ease with which they impose upon us,
by their being disguised and cloaked under the semblance of virtue and
the name of liberal studies), rather than in causing them to be, by our
service, or rather obsequiousness, so to speak, roused to a more
vehement assertion of the despotism under which they so oppress your
excellent spirit.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p6"></span>2. For tell me what good purpose is
served by the many Dialogues which you have read, if they have in no way
helped you towards the discovery and attainment of the end of all your
actions? For by your letter you indicate plainly enough what you have
proposed to yourself as the end to be attained by all this most ardent
study of yours, which is at once useless to yourself and troublesome to
me. For when you were in your letter using every means to persuade me to
answer the questions which you sent, you wrote these words: “I might
importune you at greater length, and through many of your dear friends;
but I know your disposition, that you do not desire to be solicited, but
show kindness readily to all, if only there be nothing improper in the
thing requested: and there is absolutely nothing improper in what I ask.
Be this, however, as it may, I beg you to do me this kindness, for I am
on the point of embarking on a voyage.” In these words of your letter
you are indeed right in your opinion as to myself, that I am desirous of
showing kindness to all, if only there be nothing improper in the
request made; but it is not my opinion that there is nothing improper in
what you ask. For when I consider how a bishop is distracted and
overwrought by the cares of his office clamouring on every side, it does
not seem to me proper for him suddenly, as if deaf, to withdraw himself
from all these, and devote himself to the work of expounding to a single
student some unimportant questions in the Dialogues of Cicero. The
impropriety of this you yourself apprehend, although, carried away with
zeal in the pursuit of your studies, you will by no means give heed to
it. For what other construction can I put on the fact that, after saying
that in this matter there is absolutely nothing improper, you have
immediately subjoined: “Be this, however, as it may, I beg you to do me
this kindness, for I am on the point of embarking on a voyage”? For this
intimates that in your view, at least, there is no impropriety in your
request, but that whatever impro<span id="page_439">p. 439</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_439"></span>priety may be in it, you nevertheless
ask me to do what you ask, because you are about to go on a voyage. Now
what is the force of this supplementary plea—“I am on the point of
embarking on a voyage”? Do you mean that, unless you were in these
circumstances, I ought not to do you service in which anything improper
may be involved? You think, forsooth, that the impropriety can be washed
away by salt water. But even were it so, my share at least of the fault
would remain unexpiated, because I do not propose undertaking a voyage.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p7"></span>3. You write, further, that I know how
very painful it is to you to be burdensome to any one, and you solemnly
protest that God alone knows how irresistible is the necessity under
which you make the application. When I came to this statement in your
letter, I turned my attention eagerly to learn the nature of the
necessity; and, behold, you bring it before me in these words: “You know
the ways of men, how prone they are to censure, and how any one will be
regarded as illiterate and stupid who, when questions are addressed to
him, can return no answer.” On reading this sentence, I felt a burning
desire to reply to your letter; for, by the morbid weakness of mind
which this indicated, you pierced my inmost heart, and forced your way
into the midst of my cares, so that I could not refuse to minister to
your relief, so far as God might enable me—not by devising a solution of
your difficulties, but by breaking the connection between your happiness
and the wretched support on which it now insecurely hangs, viz. the
opinions of men, and fastening it to a hold which is firm and immovable.
Do you not, O Dioscorus, remember an ingenious line of your favourite
Persius, in which he not only rebukes your folly, but administers to
your boyish head, if you have only sense to feel it, a deserved
correction, restraining your vanity with the words, “To know is nothing
in your eyes unless another knows that you know”? <span
id="fr_2396"></span>[2397](#fn_2396) You have, as I said before, read so
many Dialogues, and devoted your attention to so many discussions of
philosophers—tell me which of them has placed the chief end of his
actions in the applause of the vulgar, or in the opinion even of good
and wise men? But you,—and what should make you the more ashamed,—you,
when on the eve of sailing away from Africa, give evidence of your
having made signal progress, forsooth, in your studies here, when you
affirm that the only reason why you impose the task of expounding Cicero
to you upon bishops, who are already oppressed with work and engrossed
with matters of a very different nature, is, that you fear that if, when
questioned by men prone to censure, you cannot answer, you will be
regarded by them as illiterate and stupid. O cause well worthy to occupy
the hours which bishops devote to study while other men sleep!

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p9"></span>4. You seem to me to be prompted to
mental effort night and day by no other motive than ambition to be
praised by men for your industry and acquisitions in learning. Although
I have ever regarded this as fraught with danger to persons who are
striving after the true and the right, I am now, by your case, more
convinced of the danger than before. For it is due to no other cause
than this same pernicious habit that you have failed to see by what
motive we might be induced to grant to you what you asked; for as by a
perverted judgment you yourself are urged on to acquire a knowledge of
the things about which you put questions, from no other motive than that
you may receive praise or escape censure from men, you imagine that we,
by a like perversity of judgment, are to be influenced by the
considerations alleged in your request. Would that, when we declare to
you that by your writing such things concerning yourself we are moved,
not to grant your request, but to reprove and correct you, we might be
able to effect for you also complete emancipation from the influence of
a boon so worthless and deceitful as the applause of men! “It is the
manner of men,” you say, “to be prone to censure.” What then? “Any one
who can make no reply when questions are addressed to him,” you say,
“will be regarded as illiterate and stupid.” Behold, then, I ask you a
question not concerning something in the books of Cicero, whose meaning,
perchance, his readers may not be able to find, but concerning your own
letter and the meaning of your own words. My question is: Why did you
not say, “Any one who can make no reply will be *proved* to be
illiterate and stupid,” but prefer to say, “He will be *regarded* as
illiterate and stupid “? Why, if not for this reason, that you yourself
already understand well enough that the person who fails to answer such
questions is not in reality, but only in the opinion of some, illiterate
and stupid? But I warn you that he who fears to be subjected to the edge
of the pruning-hook by the tongues of such men is a sapless log, and is
therefore not only regarded as illiterate and stupid, but is actually
such, and proved to be so.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p10"></span>5. Perhaps you will say, “But seeing
that I am not stupid, and that I am specially earnest in striving not to
be stupid, I am reluctant even to be regarded as stupid.” And rightly
so; but I ask, What is your motive in this reluctance? For in stating
why you did not hesitate to burden us with those questions which you
wish to have solved and explained, you said that this was the reason,
and that this was the end, and an end so <span id="page_440">p.
440</span> <span id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_440"></span>necessary in your
estimation that you said it was of overwhelming urgency,—lest, forsooth,
if you were posed with these questions and gave no answer, you should be
regarded as illiterate and stupid by men prone to censure. Now, I ask,
is this \[jealousy as to your own reputation\] the whole reason why you
beg this from us, or is it because of some ulterior object that you are
unwilling to be thought illiterate and stupid? If this be the whole
reason, you see, as I think, that this one thing \[the praise of men\]
is the end pursued by that vehement zeal of yours, by which, as you
admit, a burden is imposed on us. But, from Dioscorus, what can be to us
a burden, except that burden which Dioscorus himself unconsciously
bears,—a burden which he will begin to feel only when he attempts to
rise,—a burden of which I would fain believe that it is not so bound to
him as to defy his efforts to shake his shoulders free? And this I say
not because these questions engage your studies, but because they are
studied by you for such an end. For surely you by this time feel that
this end is trivial, unsubstantial, and light as air. It is also apt to
produce in the soul what may be likened to a dangerous swelling, beneath
which lurk the germs of decay, and by it the eye of the mind becomes
suffused, so that it cannot discern the riches of truth. Believe this,
my Dioscorus, it is true: so shall I enjoy thee in unfeigned longing for
truth, and in that essential dignity of truth by the shadow of which you
are turned aside. If I have failed to convince you of this by the method
which I have now used, I know no other that I can use. For you do not
see it; nor can you possibly see it so long as you build your joys on
the crumbling foundation of human applause.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p11"></span>6. If, however, this be not the end
aimed at in these actions and by this zeal of yours, but there is some
other ulterior reason for your unwillingness to be regarded as
illiterate and stupid, I ask what that reason is. If it be to remove
impediments to the acquisition of temporal riches, or the obtaining of a
wife, or the grasping of honours, and other things of that kind which
are flowing past with a headlong current, and dragging to the bottom
those who fall into them, it is assuredly not our duty to help you
towards that end, nay, rather we ought to turn you away from it. For we
do not so forbid your fixing the aim of your studies in the precarious
possession of renown as to make you leave, as it were, the waters of the
Mincius and enter the Eridanus, into which, perchance, the Mincius would
carry you even without yourself making the change. For when the vanity
of human applause has failed to satisfy the soul, because it furnishes
for its nourishment nothing real and substantial, this same eager desire
compels the mind to go on to something else as more rich and productive;
and if, nevertheless, this also belong to the things which pass away
with time, it is as when one river leads us into another, so that there
can be no rest from our miseries so long as the end aimed at in our
discharge of duty is placed in that which is unstable. We desire,
therefore, that in some firm and immutable good you should fix the home
of your most stedfast efforts, and the perfectly secure resting-place of
all your good and honourable activity. Is it, perchance, your intention,
if you succeed by the breath of propitious fame, or even by spreading
your sails for its fitful gusts, in reaching that earthly happiness of
which I have spoken, to make it subservient to the acquisition of the
other—the sure and true and satisfying good? But to me it does not seem
probable—and truth itself forbids the supposition—that it should be
reached either by such a circuitous way when it is at hand, or at such
cost when it is freely given.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p12"></span>7. Perhaps you think that we ought to
turn the praise of men itself to good account as an instrument for
making others accessible to counsels regarding that which is good and
useful; and perhaps you are anxious lest, if men regard you as
illiterate and stupid, they think you unworthy to receive their earnest
or patient attention, if you were either exhorting any one to do well,
or reproving the malice and wickedness of an evil-doer. If, in proposing
these questions, you contemplated this righteous and beneficent end, we
have certainly been wronged by your not giving the preference to this in
your letter as the consideration by which we might be moved either to
grant willingly what you asked, or, if declining your request, to do so
on the ground of some other cause which might perchance prevent us, but
not on the ground of our being ashamed to accept the position of serving
or even not resisting the aspirations of your vanity. For, I pray you,
consider how much better and more profitable it is for you to receive
from us with far more certainty and with less loss of time those
principles of truth by which you can for yourself refute all that is
false, and by so doing be prevented from cherishing an opinion so false
and contemptible as this—that you are learned and intelligent if you
have studied with a zeal in which there is more pride than prudence the
worn-out errors of many writers of a bygone age. But this opinion I do
not suppose you now to hold, for surely I have not in vain spoken so
long to Dioscorus things so manifestly true; and from this, as
understood, I proceed with my letter.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p13"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p13.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p14"></span>8. Wherefore, seeing that you do not
consider a man illiterate and stupid merely on the ground of ignorance
of these things, but only if he be ignorant of the truth itself, and
that, consequently, the opinions of any one who has <span
id="page_441">p. 441</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_441"></span>written or may have written on these
subjects are either true, and therefore are already held by you, or
false, and therefore you may be content not to know them, and need not
be consumed with vain solicitude about knowing the variety of the
opinions of other men under the fear of otherwise remaining illiterate
and stupid,—seeing, I say, that this is the case, let us now, if you
please, consider whether, in the event of other men, who are, as you
say, prone to censure, finding you ignorant of these things, and
therefore regarding you, though falsely, as an illiterate and stupid
person, this mistake of theirs ought to have so much weight with you as
to make it not unseemly for you to apply to bishops for instruction in
these things. I propose this on the assumption that we now believe you
to be seeking this instruction in order that by it you may be helped in
recommending the truth to men, and in reclaiming men who, if they
supposed you to be illiterate and stupid in regard to those books of
Cicero, would regard you as a person from whom they considered it
unworthy of them to receive any useful or profitable instruction.
Believe me, you are under a mistake.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p15"></span>9. For, in the first place, I do not
at all see that, in the countries in which you are so afraid of being
esteemed deficient in education and acuteness, there are any persons who
will ask you a single question about these matters. Both in this
country, to which you came to learn these things, and at Rome, you know
by experience how little they are esteemed, and that, in consequence,
they are neither taught nor learned; and throughout all Africa, so far
are you from being troubled by any such questioner, that you cannot find
any one who will be troubled with your questions, and are compelled by
the dearth of such persons to send your questions to bishops to be
solved by them: as if, indeed, these bishops, although in their youth,
under the influence of the same ardour—let me rather say error—which
carries you away, they were at pains to learn these things as matters of
great moment, permitted them still to remain in memory now that their
heads are white with age and they are burdened with the responsibilities
of episcopal office; or as if, supposing them to desire to retain these
things in memory, greater and graver cares would not in spite of their
desire banish them from their hearts; or as if, in the event of some of
these things lingering in recollection by the force of long habit, they
would not wish rather to bury in utter oblivion what was thus
remembered, than to answer senseless questions at a time when, even
amidst the comparative leisure enjoyed in the schools and in the
lecture-rooms of rhetoricians, they seem to have so lost both voice and
vigour that, in order to have instruction imparted concerning them, it
is deemed necessary to send from Carthage to Hippo,—a place in which all
such things are so unwonted and so wholly foreign, that if, in taking
the trouble of writing an answer to your question, I wished to look at
any passage to discover the order of thought in the context preceding or
following the words requiring exposition, I would be utterly unable to
find a manuscript of the works of Cicero. However, these teachers of
rhetoric in Carthage who have failed to satisfy you in this matter are
not only not blamed, but, on the contrary, commended by me, if, as I
suppose, they have not forgotten that the scene of these contests was
wont to be, not the Roman forum, but the Greek gymnasia. But when you
have applied your mind to these gymnasia, and have found even them to be
in such things bare and cold, the church of the Christians of Hippo
occurred to you as a place where you might lay down your cares, because
the bishop now occupying that see at one time took fees for instructing
boys in these things. But, on the one hand, I do not wish you to be
still a boy, and, on the other hand, it is not becoming for me, either
for a fee or as a favour, to be dealing now in childish things. This,
therefore, being the case—seeing, that is to say, that these two great
cities, Rome and Carthage, the living centres of Latin literature,
neither try your patience by asking you such questions as you speak of,
nor care patiently to listen to you when you propound them, I am amazed
in a degree beyond all expression that a young man of your good sense
should be afraid lest you should be afflicted with any questioner on
these subjects in the cities of Greece and of the East. You are much
more likely to hear jackdaws <span id="fr_2397"></span>[2398](#fn_2397)
in Africa than this manner of conversation in those lands.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p17"></span>10. Suppose, however, in the next
place, that I am wrong, and that perchance some one should arise putting
questions like these,—a phenomenon the more unwelcome because in those
parts peculiarly absurd,—are you not much more afraid lest far more
readily men arise who, being Greeks, and finding you settled in Greece,
and acquainted with the Greek language as your mother tongue, may ask
you some things in the original works of their philosophers which Cicero
may not have put into his treatises? If this happen, what reply will you
make? Will you say that you preferred to learn these things from the
books of Latin rather than of Greek authors? By such an answer you will,
in the first place, put an affront upon Greece; and you know how men of
that nation resent this. And in the next place, they being now wounded
and angry, how <span id="page_442">p. 442</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_442"></span>readily will you find what you are too
anxious to avoid, that they will count you on the one hand stupid,
because you preferred to learn the opinions of the Greek philosophers,
or, more properly speaking, some isolated and scattered tenets of their
philosophy, in Latin dialogues, rather than to study the complete and
connected system of their opinions in the Greek originals, and, on the
other hand, illiterate, because, although ignorant of so many things
written in your language, you have unsuccessfully laboured to gather
some of them together from writings in a foreign tongue. Or will you
perhaps reply that you did not despise the Greek writings on these
subjects, but that you devoted your attention first to the study of
Latin works, and now, proficient in these, are beginning to inquire
after Greek learning? If this does not make you blush, to confess that
you, being a Greek, have in your boyhood learned Latin, and are now,
like a man of some foreign nation, <span
id="fr_2398"></span>[2399](#fn_2398) desirous of studying Greek
literature, surely you will not blush to own that in the department of
Latin literature you are ignorant of some things, of which you may
perceive how many versed in Latin learning are equally ignorant, if you
will only consider that, although living in the midst of so many learned
men in Carthage, you assure me that it is under the pressure of
necessity that you impose this burden on me.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p19"></span>11. Finally, suppose that you, being
asked all those questions which you have submitted to me, have been able
to answer them all. Behold! you are now spoken of as most learned and
most acute; behold! now this insignificant breath of Greek laudation
raises you to heaven. Be it yours now to remember your responsibilities
and the end for which you coveted these praises, namely, that to men who
have been easily won to admire you by these trifles, and who are now
hanging most affectionately and eagerly on your lips, you may impart
some truly important and wholesome instruction; and I should like to
know whether you possess, and can rightly impart to others, that which
is truly most important and wholesome. For it is absurd if, after
learning many unnecessary things with a view to preparing the ears of
men to receive what is necessary, you be found not to possess those
necessary things for the reception of which you have by these
unnecessary things prepared the way; it is absurd if, while busying
yourself with learning things by which you may win men’s attention, you
refuse to learn that which may be poured into their minds when their
attention is secured. But if you reply that you have already learned
this, and say that the truth supremely necessary is Christian doctrine,
which I know that you esteem above all other things, placing in it alone
your hope of everlasting salvation, then surely this does not demand a
knowledge of the Dialogues of Cicero, and a collection of the beggarly
and divided opinions of other men, in order to your persuading men to
give it a hearing. Let your character and manner of life command the
attention of those who are to receive any such teaching from you. I
would not have you open the way for teaching truth by first teaching
what must be afterwards unlearned.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p20"></span>12. For if the knowledge of the
discordant and mutually contradictory opinions of others is of any
service to him who would obtain an entrance for Christian truth in
overthrowing the opposition of error, it is useful only in the way of
preventing the assailant of the truth from being at liberty to fix his
eye solely on the work of controverting your tenets, while carefully
hiding his own from view. For the knowledge of the truth is of itself
sufficient both to detect and to subvert all errors, even those which
may not have been heard before, if only they are brought forward. If,
however, in order to secure not only the demolition of open errors, but
also the rooting out of those which lurk in darkness, it is necessary
for you to be acquainted with the erroneous opinions which others have
advanced, let both eye and ear be wakeful, I beseech you,—look well and
listen well whether any of our assailants bring forward a single
argument from Anaximenes and from Anaxagoras, when, though the Stoic and
Epicurean philosophies were more recent and taught largely, even their
ashes are not so warm as that a single spark can be struck out from them
against the Christian faith. The din which resounds in the battle-field
of controversy now comes from innumerable small companies and cliques of
sectaries, some of them easily discomfited, others presuming to make
bold resistance,—such as the partisans of Donatus, Maximian, and
Manichæus here, or the unruly herds of Arians, Eunomians, Macedonians,
and Cataphrygians and other pests which abound in the countries to which
you are on your way. If you shrink from the task of acquainting yourself
with the errors of all these sects, what occasion have we in defending
the Christian religion to inquire after the tenets of Anaximenes, and
with idle curiosity to awaken anew controversies which have slept for
ages, when already the cavillings and arguments even of some of the
heretics who claimed the glory of the Christian name, such as the
Marcionites and the Sabellians, and many more, have been put to silence?
Nevertheless, if it be necessary, as I have said, to know beforehand
some of the opinions which war against the truth, and become thoroughly
conversant with these, it is our duty to give a place in such study to
the here<span id="page_443">p. 443</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_443"></span>tics who call themselves Christians,
much rather than to Anaxagoras and Democritus.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p21"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p21.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p22"></span>13. Again, whoever may put to you the
questions which you have propounded to us, let him understand that,
under the guidance of deeper erudition and greater wisdom, you are
ignorant of things like these. For if Themistocles regarded it as a
small matter that he was looked upon as imperfectly educated when he had
declined to play on the lyre at a banquet, and at the same time, when,
after he had confessed ignorance of this accomplishment, one said,
“What, then, do you know?” gave as his reply, “The art of making a small
republic great”—are you to hesitate about admitting ignorance in trifles
like these, when it is in your power to answer any one who may ask,
“What, then, do you know?”—“The secret by which without such knowledge a
man may be blessed”? And if you do not yet possess this secret, you act
in searching into those other matters with as blind perversity as if,
when labouring under some dangerous disease of the body, you eagerly
sought after dainties in food and finery in dress, instead of physic and
physicians. For this attainment ought not to be put off upon any pretext
whatever, and no other knowledge ought, especially in our age, to
receive a prior place in your studies. And now see how easily you may
have this knowledge if you desire it. He who inquires how he may attain
a blessed life is assuredly inquiring after nothing else than this:
where is the highest good? in other words, wherein resides man’s supreme
good, not according to the perverted and hasty opinions of men, but
according to the sure and immovable truth? Now its residence is not
found by any one except in the body, or in the mind, or in God, or in
two of these, or in the three combined. If, then, you have learned that
neither the supreme good nor any part whatever of the supreme good is in
the body, the remaining alternatives are, that it is in the mind, or in
God, or in both combined. And if now you have also learned that what is
true of the body in this respect is equally true of the mind, what now
remains but God Himself as the One in whom resides man’s supreme
good?—not that there are no other goods, but that good is called the
supreme good to which all others are related. For every one is blessed
when he enjoys that for the sake of which he desires to have all other
things, seeing that it is loved for its own sake, and not on account of
something else. And the supreme good is said to be there because at this
point nothing is found towards which the supreme good can go forth, or
to which it is related. In it is the resting-place of desire; in it is
assured fruition; in it the most tranquil satisfaction of a will morally
perfect.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p23"></span>14. Give me a man who sees at once
that the body is not the good of the mind, but that the mind is rather
the good of the body: with such a man we would, of course, forbear from
inquiring whether the highest good of which we speak, or any part of it,
is in the body. For that the mind is better than the body is a truth
which it would be utter folly to deny. Equally absurd would it be to
deny that that which gives a happy life, or any part of a happy life, is
better than that which receives the boon. The mind, therefore, does not
receive from the body either the supreme good or any part of the supreme
good. Men who do not see this have been blinded by that sweetness of
carnal pleasures which they do not discern to be a consequence of
imperfect health. Now, perfect health of body shall be the consummation
of the immortality of the whole man. For God has endowed the soul with a
nature so powerful, that from that consummate fulness of joy which is
promised to the saints in the end of time, some portion overflows also
upon the lower part of our nature, the body,—not the blessedness which
is proper to the part which enjoys and understands, but the plenitude of
health, that is, the vigour of incorruption. Men who, as I have said, do
not see this war with each other in unsatisfactory debates, each
maintaining the view which may please his own fancy, but all placing the
supreme good of man in the body, and so stir up crowds of disorderly
carnal minds, of whom the Epicureans have flourished in pre-eminent
estimation with the unlearned multitude.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p24"></span>15. Give me a man who sees at once,
moreover, that when the mind is happy, it is happy not by good which
belongs to itself, else it would never be unhappy: and with such a man
we would, of course, forbear from inquiring whether that highest and, so
to speak, bliss-bestowing good, or any part of it, is in the mind. For
when the mind is elated with joy in itself, as if in good which belongs
to itself, it is proud. But when the mind perceives itself to be
mutable,—a fact which may be learned from this, even though nothing else
proved it, that the mind from being foolish may be made wise,—and
apprehends that wisdom is unchangeable, it must at the same time
apprehend that wisdom is superior to its own nature, and that it finds
more abundant and abiding joy in the communications and light of wisdom
than in itself. Thus desisting and subsiding from boasting and
self-conceit, it strives to cling to God, and to be recruited and
reformed by Him who is unchangeable; whom it now understands to be the
Author not only of every species of all things with which it comes in
contact, either by the bodily senses or by intellectual faculties, but
also of even the very capacity of taking form before any form has been
taken, since the formless is defined to <span id="page_444">p.
444</span> <span id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_444"></span>be that which can
receive a form. Therefore it feels its own instability more, just in
proportion as it clings less to God, whose being is perfect: it discerns
also that the perfection of His being is consummate because He is
immutable, and therefore neither gains nor loses, but that in itself
every change by which it gains capacity for perfect clinging to God is
advantageous, but every change by which it loses is pernicious, and
further, that all loss tends towards destruction; and although it is not
manifest whether any thing is ultimately destroyed, it is manifest to
every one that the loss brings destruction so far that the object no
longer is what it was. Whence the mind infers that the one reason why
things suffer loss, or are liable to suffer loss, is, that they were
made out of nothing; so that their property of being, and of permanence,
and the arrangement whereby each finds even according to its
imperfections its own place in the complex whole, all depend on the
goodness and omnipotence of Him whose being is perfect, <span
id="fr_2399"></span>[2400](#fn_2399) and who is the Creator able to make
out of nothing not only something, but something great; and that the
first sin, *i.e.* the first voluntary loss, is rejoicing in its own
power: for it rejoices in something less than would be the source of its
joy if it rejoiced in the power of God, which is unquestionably greater.
Not perceiving this, and looking only to the capacities of the human
mind, and the great beauty of its achievements in word and deed, some,
who would have been ashamed to place man’s supreme good in the body,
have, by placing it in the mind, assigned to it unquestionably a lower
sphere than that assigned to it by unsophisticated reason. Among Greek
philosophers who hold these views, the chief place both in number of
adherents and in subtlety of disputation has been held by the Stoics,
who have, however, in consequence of their opinion that in nature
everything is material, succeeded in turning the mind rather from carnal
than material objects.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p26"></span>16. Among those, again, who say that
our supreme and only good is to enjoy God, by whom both we ourselves and
all things were made, the most eminent have been the Platonists, who not
unreasonably judged it to belong to their duty to confute the Stoics and
Epicureans—the latter especially, and almost exclusively. The Academic
School is identical with the Platonists, as is shown plainly enough by
the links of unbroken succession connecting the schools. For if you ask
who was the predecessor of Arcesilas, the first who, announcing no
doctrine of his own, set himself to the one work of refuting the Stoics
and Epicureans, you will find that it was Polemo; ask who preceded
Polemo, it was Xenocrates; but Xenocrates was Plato’s disciple, and by
him appointed his successor in the academy. Wherefore, as to this
question concerning the supreme good, if we set aside the
representatives of conflicting views, and consider the abstract
question, you find at once that two errors confront each other as
diametrically opposed—the one declaring the body, and the other
declaring the mind to be the seat of the supreme good of men. You find
also that truly enlightened reason, by which God is perceived to be our
supreme good, is opposed to both of these errors, but does not impart
the knowledge of what is true until it has first made men unlearn what
is false. If now you consider the question in connection with the
advocates of different views, you will find the Epicureans and Stoics
most keenly contending with each other, and the Platonists, on the other
hand, endeavouring to decide the controversy between them, concealing
the truth which they held, and devoting themselves only to prove and
overthrow the vain confidence with which the others adhered to error.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p27"></span>17. It was not in the power of the
Platonists, however, to be so efficient in supporting the side of reason
enlightened by truth, as the others were in supporting their own errors.
For from them all there was then withheld that example of divine
humility, which, in the fullness of time, <span
id="fr_2400"></span>[2401](#fn_2400) was furnished by our Lord Jesus
Christ,—that one example before which, even in the mind of the most
headstrong and arrogant, all pride bends, breaks, and dies. And
therefore the Platonists, not being able by their authority to lead the
mass of mankind, blinded by love of earthly things, into faith in things
invisible,—although they saw them moved, especially by the arguments of
the Epicureans, not only to drink freely the cup of the pleasures of the
body to which they were naturally inclined, but even to plead for these,
affirming that they constitute man’s highest good; although, moreover,
they saw that those who were moved to abstinence from these pleasures by
the praise of virtue found it easier to regard pleasure as having its
true seat in the soul, whence the good actions, concerning which they
were able, in some measure, to form an opinion, proceeded,—at the same
time, saw that if they attempted to introduce into the minds of men the
notion of something divine and supremely immutable, which cannot be
reached by any one of the bodily senses, but is apprehensible only by
reason, which, nevertheless, surpasses in its nature the mind itself,
and were to teach that this is God, set before the human soul to be
enjoyed by it when purged from all stains of human desires, in whom
alone every longing after happiness <span id="page_445">p. 445</span>
<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_445"></span>finds rest, and in whom alone we
ought to find the consummation of all good,—men would not understand
them, and would much more readily award the palm to their antagonists,
whether Epicureans or Stoics; the result of which would be a thing most
disastrous to the human race, namely, that the doctrine, which is true
and profitable, would become sullied by the contempt of the uneducated
masses. So much in regard to Ethical questions.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p29"></span>18. As to Physics, if the Platonists
taught that the originating cause of all natures is immaterial wisdom,
and if, on the other hand, the rival sects of philosophers never got
above material things, while the beginning of all things was attributed
by some to atoms, by others to the four elements, in which fire was of
special power in the construction of all things,—who could fail to see
to which opinion a favourable verdict would be given, when the great
mass of unthinking men are enthralled by material things, and can in no
wise comprehend that an immaterial power could form the universe?

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p30"></span>19. The department of dialectic
questions remains to be discussed; for, as you are aware, all questions
in the pursuit of wisdom are classified under three heads,—Ethics,
Physics, and Dialectics. When, therefore, the Epicureans said that the
senses are never deceived, and, though the Stoics admitted that they
sometimes are mistaken, both placed in the senses the standard by which
truth is to be comprehended, who would listen to the Platonists when
both of these sects opposed them? Who would look upon them as entitled
to be esteemed men at all, and much less wise men, if, without
hesitation or qualification, they affirmed not only that there is
something which cannot be discerned by touch, or smell, or taste, or
hearing, or sight, and which cannot be conceived of by any image
borrowed from the things with which the senses acquaint us, but that
this alone truly exists, and is alone capable of being perceived,
because it is alone unchangeable and eternal, but is perceived only by
reason, the faculty whereby alone truth, in so far as it can be
discovered by us, is found?

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p31"></span>20. Seeing, therefore, that the
Platonists held opinions which they could not impart to men enthralled
by the flesh; seeing also that they were not of such authority among the
common people as to persuade them to accept what they ought to believe
until the mind should be trained to that condition in which these things
can be understood,—they chose to hide their own opinions, and to content
themselves with arguing against those who, although they affirmed that
the discovery of truth is made through the senses of the body, boasted
that they had found the truth. And truly, what occasion have we to
inquire as to the nature of their teaching? We know that it was not
divine, nor invested with any divine authority. But this one fact merits
our attention, that whereas Plato is in many ways most clearly proved by
Cicero to have placed both the supreme good and the causes of things,
and the certainty of the processes of reason, in Wisdom, not human, but
divine, whence in some way the light of human wisdom is derived—in
Wisdom which is wholly immutable, and in Truth always consistent with
itself; and whereas we also learn from Cicero that the followers of
Plato laboured to overthrow the philosophers known as Epicureans and
Stoics, who placed the supreme good, the causes of things, and the
certainty of the processes of reason, in the nature either of body or of
mind,—the controversy had continued rolling on with successive
centuries, so that even at the commencement of the Christian era, when
the faith of things invisible and eternal was with saving power preached
by means of visible miracles to men, who could neither see nor imagine
anything beyond things material, these same Epicureans and Stoics are
found in the Acts of the Apostles to have opposed themselves to the
blessed Apostle Paul, who was beginning to scatter the seeds of that
faith among the Gentiles.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p32"></span>21. By which thing it seems to me to
be sufficiently proved that the errors of the Gentiles in ethics,
physics, and the mode of seeking truth, errors many and manifold, but
conspicuously represented in these two schools of philosophy, continued
even down to the Christian era, notwithstanding the fact that the
learned assailed them most vehemently, and employed both remarkable
skill and abundant labour in subverting them. Yet these errors we see in
our time to have been already so completely silenced, that now in our
schools of rhetoric the question what their opinions were is scarcely
ever mentioned; and these controversies have been now so completely
eradicated or suppressed in even the Greek gymnasia, notably fond of
discussion, that whenever now any school of error lifts up its head
against the truth, *i.e.* against the Church of Christ, it does not
venture to leap into the arena except under the shield of the Christian
name. Whence it is obvious that the Platonist school of philosophers
felt it necessary, having changed those few things in their opinions
which Christian teaching condemned, to submit with pious homage to
Christ, the only King who is invincible, and to apprehend the Incarnate
Word of God, at whose command the truth which they had even feared to
publish was immediately believed.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p33"></span>22. To Him, my Dioscorus, I desire
you to submit yourself with unreserved piety, and I wish you to prepare
for yourself no other way of seizing and holding the truth than that
which <span id="page_446">p. 446</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_446"></span>has been prepared by Him who, as God,
saw the weakness of our goings. In that way the first part is humility;
the second, humility; the third, humility: and this I would continue to
repeat as often as you might ask direction, not that there are no other
instructions which may be given, but because, unless humility precede,
accompany, and follow every good action which we perform, being at once
the object which we keep before our eyes, the support to which we cling,
and the monitor by which we are restrained, pride wrests wholly from our
hand any good work on which we are congratulating ourselves. <span
id="fr_2401"></span>[2402](#fn_2401) All other vices are to be
apprehended when we are doing wrong; but pride is to be feared even when
we do right actions, lest those things which are done in a praiseworthy
manner be spoiled by the desire for praise itself. Wherefore, as that
most illustrious orator, on being asked what seemed to him the first
thing to be observed in the art of eloquence, is said to have replied,
Delivery; and when he was asked what was the second thing, replied
again, Delivery; and when asked what was the third thing, still gave no
other reply than this, Delivery; so if you were to ask me, however often
you might repeat the question, what are the instructions of the
Christian religion, I would be disposed to answer always and only,
“Humility,” although, perchance, necessity might constrain me to speak
also of other things.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p35"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p35.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p36"></span>23. To this most wholesome humility,
in which our Lord Jesus Christ is our teacher—having submitted to
humiliation that He might instruct us in this—to this humility, I say,
the most formidable adversary is a certain kind of most unenlightened
knowledge, if I may so call it, in which we congratulate ourselves on
knowing what may have been the views of Anaximenes, Anaxagoras,
Pythagoras, Democritus, and others of the same kind, imagining that by
this we become learned men and scholars, although such attainments are
far removed from true learning and erudition. For the man who has
learned that God is not extended or diffused through space, either
finite or infinite, so as to be greater in one part and less in another,
but that He is wholly present everywhere, as the Truth is, of which no
one in his senses will affirm that it is partly in one place, partly in
another—and the Truth is God Himself—such a man will not be moved by the
opinions of any philosopher soever who believes \[like Anaximenes\] that
the infinite air around us is the true God. What matters it to such a
man though he be ignorant what bodily form they speak of, since they
speak of a form which is bounded on all sides? What matters it to him
whether it was only as an Academician, and merely for the purpose of
confuting Anaximenes, who had said that God is a material existence,—for
air is material,—that Cicero objected that God must have form and
beauty? <span id="fr_2402"></span>[2403](#fn_2402) or himself perceived
that truth has immaterial form and beauty, by which the mind itself is
moulded, and by which we judge all the deeds of the wise man to be
beautiful, and therefore affirmed that God must be of the most perfect
beauty, not merely for the purpose of confuting an antagonist, but with
profound insight into the fact that nothing is more beautiful than truth
itself, which is cognisable by the understanding alone, and is
immutable? Moreover, as to the opinion of Anaximenes, who held that the
air is generated, and at the same time believed it to be God, it does
not in the least move the man who understands that, since the air is
certainly not God, there is no likeness between the manner in which the
air is generated, that is to say, produced by some cause, and the
manner, understood by none except through divine inspiration, in which
He was begotten who is the Word of God, God with God. Moreover, who does
not see that even in regard to material things he speaks most foolishly
in affirming that air is generated, and is at the same time God, while
he refuses to give the name of God to that by which the air has been
generated,—for it is impossible that it could be generated by no power?
Yet once more, his saying that the air is always in motion will have no
disturbing influence as proof that the air is God upon the man who knows
that all movements of body are of a lower order than movements of the
soul, but that even the movements of the soul are infinitely slow
compared with His who is supreme and immutable Wisdom.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p38"></span>24. In like manner, if Anaxagoras or
any other affirm that the mind is essential truth and wisdom, <span
id="fr_2403"></span>[2404](#fn_2403) what call have I to debate with a
man about a word? For it is manifest that mind gives being to the order
and mode of all things, and that it may be suitably called infinite with
respect not to its extension in space, but to its power, the range of
which transcends all human thought. Nor \[shall I dispute his
assertion\] that this essential wisdom is formless; for this is a
property of material things, that whatever <span id="page_447">p.
447</span> <span id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_447"></span>bodies are infinite
are also formless. Cicero, however, from his desire to confute such
opinions, as I suppose, in contending with adversaries who believed in
nothing immaterial, denies that anything can be annexed to that which is
infinite, because in things material there must be a boundary at the
part to which anything is annexed. Therefore he says that Anaxagoras
“did not see that motion joined to sensation and to it” (*i.e.* linked
to it in unbroken connection) “is impossible in the infinite” (that is,
in a substance which is infinite), as if treating of material
substances, to which nothing can be joined except at their boundaries.
Moreover, in the succeeding words—“and that sensation of which the whole
system of nature is not sensible when struck is an impossibility” <span
id="fr_2404"></span>[2405](#fn_2404) —Cicero speaks as if Anaxagoras had
said that mind—to which he ascribed the power of ordering and fashioning
all things—had sensation such as the soul has by means of the body. For
it is manifest that the whole soul has sensation when it feels anything
by means of the body; for whatever is perceived by sensation is not
concealed from the whole soul. Now, Cicero’s design in saying that the
whole system of nature must be conscious of every sensation was, that he
might, as it were, take from the philosopher that mind which he affirms
to be infinite. For how does the whole of nature experience sensation if
it be infinite? Bodily sensation begins at some point, and does not
pervade the whole of any substance unless it be one in which it can
reach an end; but this, of course, cannot be said of that which is
infinite. Anaxagoras, however had not said anything about bodily
sensation. The word “whole,” moreover, is used differently when we speak
of that which is immaterial, because it is understood to be without
boundaries in space, so that it may be spoken of as a whole and at the
same time as infinite—the former because of its completeness, the latter
because of its not being limited by boundaries in space.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p41"></span>25. “Furthermore,” says Cicero, “if
he will affirm that the mind itself is, so to speak, some kind of
animal, there must be some principle from within from which it receives
the name ‘animal,’”—so that mind, according to Anaxagoras, is a kind of
body, and has within it an animating principle, because of which it is
called “animal.” Observe how he speaks in language which we are
accustomed to apply to things corporeal,—animals being in the ordinary
sense of the word visible substances,—adapting himself, as I suppose, to
the blunted perceptions of those against whom he argues; and yet he has
uttered a thing which, if they could awake to perceive it, might suffice
to teach them that everything which presents itself to our minds as a
living body must be thought of not as itself a soul, but as an animal
having a soul. For having said, “There must be something within from
which it receives the name animal,” he adds, “But what is deeper within
than mind?” The mind, therefore, cannot have any inner soul, by
possessing which it is an animal; for it is itself that which is
innermost. If, then, it is an animal, let it have some external body in
relation to which it may be within; for this is what he means by saying,
“It is therefore girt round by an exterior body,” as if Anaxagoras had
said that mind cannot be otherwise than as belonging to some animal. And
yet Anaxagoras held the opinion that essential supreme Wisdom is mind,
although it is not the peculiar property of any living being, so to
speak, since Truth is near to all souls alike that are able to enjoy it.
Observe, therefore, how wittily he concludes the argument: “Since this
is not the opinion of Anaxagoras” (*i.e.* seeing that he does not hold
that that mind which he calls God is girt about with an external body,
through its relation to which it could be an animal), “we must say that
mind pure and simple, without the addition of anything” (*i.e.* of any
body) “through which it may exercise sensation, seems to be beyond the
range and conceptions of our intelligence.” <span
id="fr_2405"></span>[2406](#fn_2405)

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p43"></span>26. Nothing is more certain than that
this lies beyond the range and conception of the intelligence of Stoics
and Epicureans, who cannot think of anything which is not material. But
by the word “our” intelligence he means “human” intelligence; and he
very properly does not say, “it lies beyond our intelligence,” but “it
seems to lie beyond.” For their opinion is, that this lies beyond the
understanding of all men, and therefore they think that nothing of the
kind can be. But there are some whose intelligence apprehends, in so far
as this is given to man, the fact that there is pure and simple Wisdom
and Truth, which is the peculiar property of no living being, but which
imparts wisdom and truth to all souls alike which are susceptible of its
influence. If Anaxagoras perceived the existence of this supreme Wisdom,
and apprehended it to be God, and called it Mind, it is not by the mere
name of this philosopher—with whom, on account of his place in the
remote antiquity of erudition, all raw recruits in literature <span
id="fr_2406"></span>[2407](#fn_2406) (to adopt a military phrase)
delight to boast an acquaintance—that we are made learned and wise; nor
is it even by our having the knowledge through which he knew this truth.
For truth ought to be dear to me not <span id="page_448">p. 448</span>
<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_448"></span>merely because it was not
unknown to Anaxagoras, but because, even though none of these
philosophers had known it, it is the truth.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p45"></span>27. If, therefore, it is unbecoming
for us to be elated either by the knowledge of the man who peradventure
apprehended the truth, by which knowledge we obtain, as it were, the
appearance of learning, or even by the solid possession of the truth
itself, whereby we obtain real acquisitions in learning, how much less
can the names and tenets of those men who were in error assist us in
Christian learning and in making known things obscure? For if we be men,
it would be more fitting that we should grieve on account of the errors
into which so many famous men fell, if we happen to hear of them, than
that we should studiously investigate them, in order that, among men who
are ignorant of them, we may enjoy the gratification of a most
contemptible conceit of knowledge. For how much better would it be that
I should never have heard the name of Democritus, than that I should now
with sorrow ponder the fact that a man was highly esteemed in his own
age who thought that the gods were images which emanated from solid
bodies, but were not solid themselves; and that these, circling this way
and that way by their independent motion, and gliding into the minds of
men, make the divine power enter into the region of their thoughts,
although, certainly, that body from which the image emanated may be
rightly judged to surpass the image in excellence and proportion, as it
surpasses it in solidity. Hence his opinion wavered, as they say, and
oscillated, so that sometimes he said that the deity was some kind of
nature from which images emanate, and which nevertheless can be thought
of only by means of those images which he pours forth and sends out,
that is, which from that nature (which he considered to be something
material and eternal, and on this very account divine) were borne as by
a kind of evaporation or continuous emanation, and came and entered into
our minds, so that we could form the thought of a god or gods. For these
philosophers conceive of no cause of thought in our minds, except when
images from those bodies which are the object of our thoughts come and
enter into our minds; as if, forsooth, there were not many things, yea,
more than we can number, which, without any material form, and yet
intelligible, are apprehended by those who know how to apprehend such
things. Take as an example essential Wisdom and Truth, of which if they
can frame no idea, I wonder why they dispute concerning it at all; if,
however, they do frame some idea of it in thought, I wish they would
tell me either from what body the image of truth comes into their minds,
or of what kind it is.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p46"></span>28. Democritus, however, is said to
differ here also in his doctrine on physics from Epicurus; for he holds
that there is in the concourse of atoms a certain vital and breathing
power, by which power (I believe) he affirms that the images themselves
(not all images of all things, but images of the gods) are endued with
divine attributes, and that the first beginnings of the mind are in
those universal elements to which he ascribed divinity, and that the
images possess life, inasmuch as they are wont either to benefit or to
hurt us. Epicurus, however, does not assume anything in the first
beginnings of things but atoms, that is, certain corpuscles, so minute
that they cannot be divided or perceived either by sight or by touch;
and his doctrine is, that by the fortuitous concourse (clashing) of
these atoms, existence is given both to innumerable worlds and to living
things, and to the souls which animate them, and to the gods whom, in
human form, he has located, not in any world, but outside of the worlds,
and in the spaces which separate them; and he will not allow of any
object of thought beyond things material. But in order to these becoming
an object of thought, he says that from those things which he represents
as formed of atoms, images more subtle than those which come to our eyes
flow down and enter into the mind. For according to him, the cause of
our seeing is to be found in certain images so huge that they embrace
the whole outer world. But I suppose that you already understand their
opinions regarding these images.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p47"></span>29. I wonder that Democritus was not
convinced of the error of his philosophy even by this fact, that such
huge images coming into our minds, which are so small (if being, as they
affirm, material, the soul is confined within the body’s dimensions),
could not possibly, in the entirety of their size, come into contact
with it. For when a small body is brought into contact with a large one,
it cannot in any wise be touched at the same moment by all points of the
larger. How, then, are these images at the same moment in their whole
extent objects of thought, if they become objects of thought only in so
far as, coming and entering into the mind, they touch it, seeing that
they cannot in their whole extent either find entrance into so small a
body or come in contact with so small a mind? Bear in mind, of course,
that I am speaking now after their manner; for I do not hold the mind to
be such as they affirm. It is true that Epicurus alone can be assailed
with this argument, if Democritus holds that the mind is immaterial; but
we may ask him in turn why he did not perceive that it is at once
unnecessary and impossible for the mind, being immaterial, to think
through the approach and contact of material <span id="page_449">p.
449</span> <span id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_449"></span>images. Both
philosophers alike are certainly confuted by the facts of vision; for
images so great cannot possibly touch in their entirety eyes so small.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p48"></span>30. Moreover, when the question is
put to them, how it comes that one image is seen of a body from which
images emanate in countless multitudes, their answer is, that just
because the images are emanating and passing in such multitudes, the
effect produced by their being crowded and massed together is, that out
of the many one is seen. The absurdity of this Cicero exposes by saying
that their deity cannot be thought of as eternal, for this very reason,
that he is thought of through images which are in countless multitudes
flowing forth and passing away. And when they say that the forms of the
gods are rendered eternal by the innumerable hosts of atoms supplying
constant reinforcements, so that other corpuscles immediately take the
place of those which depart from the divine substance, and by the same
succession prevent the nature of the gods from being dissolved, Cicero
replies, “On this ground all things would be eternal as well as the
gods,” since there is nothing which has not the same boundless store of
atoms by which it may repair its perpetual decays. Again, he asks how
their god could be otherwise than afraid of coming to destruction,
seeing that he is without a moment’s intermission beaten and shaken by
an unceasing incursion of atoms,—beaten, inasmuch as he is struck by
atoms rushing upon him, and shaken, inasmuch as he is penetrated by
atoms rushing through him. Nay, more; seeing that from himself there
emanate continually images (of which we have said enough), what good
ground can he have for persuasion of his own immortality? <span
id="fr_2407"></span>[2408](#fn_2407)

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p50"></span>31. As to all these ravings of the
men who entertain such opinions, it is especially deplorable that the
mere statement of them does not suffice to secure their rejection
without any one controverting them in discussion; instead of which, the
minds of men most gifted with acuteness have accepted the task of
copiously refuting opinions which, as soon as they were enunciated,
ought to have been rejected with contempt even by the slowest
intellects. For even granting that there are atoms, and that these
strike and shake each other by clashing together as chance may guide
them, is it lawful for us to grant also that atoms thus meeting in
fortuitous concourse can so make anything as to fashion its distinctive
forms, determine its figure, polish its surface, enliven it with color,
or quicken it by imparting to it a spirit?—all which things every one
sees to be accomplished in no other way than by the providence of God,
if only he loves to see with the mind rather than with the eye alone,
and asks this faculty of intelligent perception from the Author of his
being. Nay, more; we are not at liberty even to grant the existence of
atoms themselves, for, without discussing the subtle theories of the
learned as to the divisibility of matter, observe how easily the
absurdity of atoms may be proved from their own opinions. For they, as
is well known, affirm that there is nothing else in nature but bodies
and empty space, and the accidents of these, by which I believe that
they mean motion and striking, and the forms which result from these.
Let them tell us, then, under which category they reckon the images
which they suppose to flow from the more solid bodies, but which, if
indeed they are bodies, possess so little solidity that they are not
discernible except by their contact with the eyes when we see them, and
with the mind when we think of them. For the opinion of these
philosophers is, that these images can proceed from the material object
and come to the eyes or to the mind, which, nevertheless, they affirm to
be material. Now, I ask, do these images flow from atoms themselves? If
they do, how can these be atoms from which some bodily particles are in
this process separated? If they do not, either something can be the
object of thought without such images, which they vehemently deny, or we
ask, whence have they acquired a knowledge of atoms, seeing that they
can in nowise become objects of thought to us? But I blush to have even
thus far refuted these opinions, although they did not blush to hold
them. When, however, I consider that they have even dared to defend
them, I blush not on their account, but for the race of mankind itself
whose ears could tolerate such nonsense.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p51"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p51.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p52"></span>32. Wherefore, seeing that the minds
of men are, through the pollution of sin and the lust of the flesh, so
blinded that even these monstrous errors could waste in discussion
concerning them the leisure of learned men, will you, Dioscorus, or will
any man of an servant mind, hesitate to affirm that in no way could
better provision have been made for the pursuit of truth by mankind than
that a Man, assumed into ineffable and miraculous union by the Truth
Himself, and being the manifestation of His Person on the earth, should
by perfect teaching and divine acts move men to saving faith in that
which could not as yet be intellectually apprehended? To the glory of
Him who has done this we give our service; and we exhort you to believe
immoveably and stedfastly in Him through whom it has come to pass that
not a select few, but whole peoples, unable to discern these things by
reason, do accept them in faith, until, upheld by instruction in saving
truth, they <span id="page_450">p. 450</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-Page_450"></span>escape from these perplexities into
the atmosphere of perfectly pure and simple truth. It becomes us,
moreover, to yield submission to His authority all the more
unreservedly, when we see that in our day no error dares to lift up
itself to rally round it the uninstructed crowd without seeking the
shelter of the Christian name, and that of all who, belonging to an
earlier age, now remain outside of the Christian name, those alone
continue to have in their obscure assemblies a considerable attendance
who retain the Scriptures by which, however they may pretend not to see
or understand it, the Lord Jesus Christ Himself was prophetically
announced. Moreover, those who, though they are not within the Catholic
unity and communion, boast of the name of Christians, are compelled to
oppose them that believe, and presume to mislead the ignorant by a
pretence of appealing to reason, since the Lord came with this remedy
above all others, that He enjoined on the nations the duty of faith. But
they are compelled, as I have said, to adopt this policy because they
feel themselves most miserably overthrown if their authority is compared
with the Catholic authority. They attempt, accordingly, to prevail
against the firmly-settled authority of the immoveable Church by the
name and the promises of a pretended appeal to reason. This kind of
effrontery is, we may say, characteristic of all heretics. But He who is
the most merciful Lord of faith has both secured the Church in the
citadel of authority by most famous œcumenical Councils and the
Apostolic sees themselves, and furnished her with the abundant armour of
equally invincible reason by means of a few men of pious erudition and
unfeigned spirituality. The perfection of method in training disciples
is, that those who are weak be encouraged to the utmost to enter the
citadel of authority, in order that when they have been safely placed
there, the conflict necessary for their defence may be maintained with
the most strenuous use of reason.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p53"></span>33. The Platonists, however, who,
amidst the errors of false philosophies assailing them at that time on
all sides, rather concealed their own doctrine to be searched for than
brought it into the light to be vilified, as they had no divine
personage to command faith, began to exhibit and unfold the doctrines of
Plato after the name of Christ had become widely known to the wondering
and troubled kingdoms of this world. Then flourished at Rome the school
of Plotinus, which had as scholars many men of great acuteness and
ability. But some of them were corrupted by curious inquiries into
magic, and others, recognising in the Lord Jesus Christ the
impersonation of that essential and immutable Truth and Wisdom which
they were endeavouring to reach, passed into His service. Thus the whole
supremacy of authority and light of reason for regenerating and
reforming the human race has been made to reside in the one saving Name,
and in His one Church.

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p54"></span>34. I do not at all regret that I
have stated these things at great length in this letter, although
perhaps you would have preferred that I had taken another course; for
the more progress that you make in the truth, the more will you approve
what I have written, and you will then approve of my counsel, though now
you do not think it helpful to your studies. At the same time, I have,
to the best of my ability, given answers to your questions,—to some of
them in this letter, and to almost all the rest by brief annotations on
the parchments on which you had sent them. If in these answers you think
I have done too little, or done something else than you expected, you do
not duly consider, my Dioscorus, to whom you addressed your questions. I
have passed without reply all the questions concerning the orator and
the books of Cicero de Oratore. I would have seemed to myself a
contemptible trifler if I had entered on the exposition of these topics.
For I might with propriety be questioned on all the other subjects, if
any one desired me to handle and expound them, not in connection with
the works of Cicero, but by themselves; but in these questions the
subjects themselves are not in harmony with my profession now. I would
not, however, have done all that I have done in this letter had I not
removed from Hippo for a time after the illness under which I laboured
when your messenger came to me. Even in these days I have been visited
again with interruption of health and with fever, on which account there
has been more delay than might otherwise have been in sending these to
you. I earnestly beg you to write and let me know how you receive them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2396"></span>[439:2397](1010415.htm#fr_2396) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p8"></span> “Scire tuum nihil est nisi te scire
hoc sciat alter.”—Persius, *Sat.* i. 27.

<span id="fn_2397"></span>[441:2398](1010415.htm#fr_2397) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p16"></span> *Corniculas.* The lapse of centuries
may have introduced into the north of Africa birds unknown in Augustin’s
time. The translator has seen these birds in Egypt.

<span id="fn_2398"></span>[442:2399](1010415.htm#fr_2398) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p18"></span> *Barbarum.*

<span id="fn_2399"></span>[444:2400](1010415.htm#fr_2399) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p25"></span> *Qui summe est.*

<span id="fn_2400"></span>[444:2401](1010415.htm#fr_2400) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p28"></span> *Opportunissimo tempore.*

<span id="fn_2401"></span>[446:2402](1010415.htm#fr_2401) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p34"></span> We give the original of this
exquisite sentence, both for its intrinsic value, and because it is a
good example of that antithetic style of writing which makes the exact
and felicitous rendering of Augustin’s words into any other language
peculiarly difficult: *Nisi humilitas omnia quæcumque bene facimus et
præcesserit, et comitetur, et consecuta fuerit, et proposita quam
intueamur, et apposita cui adhæreamus, et imposita qua reprimamur, jam
nobis de aliquo bono facto gaudentibus totum extorquet de manu
superbia.*

<span id="fn_2402"></span>[446:2403](1010415.htm#fr_2402) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p37"></span> The words of Cicero are: “Post,
Anaximenes æra Deum statuit, eumque gigni, esseque immensum, et
infinitum, et semper in motu: quasi aut ær sine ulla forma Deus esse
possit, cum præsertim Deum non modo aliqua sed pulcherrima specie esse
deceat: aut non omne quod ortum sit mortalitas consequatur.”—*De Natura
Deorum*, Book 1.

<span id="fn_2403"></span>[446:2404](1010415.htm#fr_2403) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p38.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p39"></span> *Ipsam veritatem atque sapientiam.*

<span id="fn_2404"></span>[447:2405](1010415.htm#fr_2404) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p39.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p40"></span> The words of Cicero are these: “Nec
vidit neque motum sensui junctum et continentem in infinito ullum esse
posse, neque sensum omnino quo non tota natura pulsa sentiret.”
Augustin, quoting probably from memory (see § 9), gives *infinto* as the
dative of possession instead of *in infinito*.

<span id="fn_2405"></span>[447:2406](1010415.htm#fr_2405) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p41.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p42"></span> Cicero, *de Natura Deorum,* lib. 1.

<span id="fn_2406"></span>[447:2407](1010415.htm#fr_2406) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p44"></span> *Litteriones ut militariter loquar.*

<span id="fn_2407"></span>[449:2408](1010415.htm#fr_2407) <span
id="vii.1.CXVIII-p48.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXVIII-p49"></span> Cicero, *de Natura Deorum,* lib. I.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXII](1010416)
