[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010249)  [Next](1010251) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XII.XVII"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XII.XVII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.—He Mentions Five Explanations
of the Words of Genesis I. I.</span>

<span id="vi.XII.XVII-p2"></span>24. For they say, “Although these
things be true, yet Moses regarded not those two things, when by divine
revelation he said, ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the
earth.’ <span id="fr_1129"></span>[1130](#fn_1129) Under the name of
heaven he did not indicate that spiritual or intellectual creature which
always beholds the face of God; nor under the name of earth, that
shapeless matter.” “What then?” “That man,” say they, “meant as we say;
this it is that he declared by those words.” “What is that?” “By the
name of heaven and earth,” say they, “did he first wish to set forth,
universally and briefly, all this visible world, that afterwards by the
enumeration of the days he might distribute, as if in detail, all those
things which it pleased the Holy Spirit thus to reveal. For such men
were that rude and carnal people to which he spoke, that he judged it
prudent that only those works of God as were visible should be entrusted
to them.” They agree, however, that the earth invisible and formless,
and the darksome deep (out of which it is subsequently pointed out that
all these visible things, which are known to all, were made and set in
order during those “days”), may not unsuitably be understood of this
formless matter.

<span id="vi.XII.XVII-p4"></span>25. What, now, if another should say
“That this same formlessness and confusion of matter was first
introduced under the name of heaven and earth, because out of it this
visible world, with all those natures which most manifestly appear in
it, and which is wont to be called by the name of heaven and earth, was
created and perfected”? But what if another should say, that “That
invisible and visible nature is not inaptly called heaven and earth; and
that consequently the universal creation, which God in His wisdom hath
made,—that is, ‘in the begining,’—was comprehended under these two
words. Yet, since all things have been made, not of the substance of
God, but out of nothing <span id="fr_1130"></span>[1131](#fn_1130)
(because they are not that same thing that God is, and there is in them
all a certain mutability, whether they remain, as doth the eternal house
of God, or be changed, as are the soul and body of man), therefore, that
the common matter of all things invisible and visible,—as yet shapeless,
but still capable of form,—out of which was to be created heaven and
earth (that is, the invisible and visible creature already formed), was
spoken of by the same names by which the earth invisible and formless
and the darkness upon the deep would be called; with this difference,
however, that the earth invisible and formless is understood as
corporeal matter, before it had any manner of form, but the darkness
upon the deep as spiritual matter, before it was restrained at all of
its unlimited fluidity, and before the enlightening of wisdom.”

<span id="vi.XII.XVII-p6"></span>26. Should any man wish, he may still
say, “That the already perfected and formed natures, invisible and
visible, are not signified under the name of heaven and earth when it is
read, ‘In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth;’ but that
the yet same formless beginning of things, the matter capable of being
formed and made, was called by these names, because contained in it
there were these confused things not as yet distinguished by their
qualities and forms, the which now being digested in their own orders,
are called heaven and earth, the former being the spiritual, the latter
the corporeal creature.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1129"></span>[182:1130](1010250.htm#fr_1129) <span
id="vi.XII.XVII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XVII-p3"></span> [Gen.
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)<span
id="vi.XII.XVII-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1130"></span>[182:1131](1010250.htm#fr_1130) <span
id="vi.XII.XVII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XVII-p5"></span> See p. 165, note 4, above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII](1010251)
