[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010447)  [Next](1010449.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CLXXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 416.)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p3.1"></span>To the Lady Juliana, Worthy to Be
Honoured in Christ with the Service Due to Her Rank, Our Daughter
Deservedly Distinguished, Alypius and Augustin Send Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p5"></span>1. Lady, worthy to be honoured in
Christ with the service due to your rank, and daughter deservedly
distinguished, it was very pleasant and agreeable to us that your letter
reached us when together at Hippo, so that we might send this joint
reply to you, to express our joy in hearing of your welfare, and with
sincere reciprocation of your love to let you know of our welfare, in
which we are sure that you take an affectionate interest. We are well
aware that you are not ignorant how great Christian affection we
consider due to you, and how much, both before God and among men, we are
interested in you. For though we knew you, at first by letter,
afterwards by personal intercourse, to be pious and Catholic, that is,
true members <span id="page_549">p. 549</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-Page_549"></span>of the body of Christ,
nevertheless, our humble ministry also was of use to you, for when you
had received the word of God from us, “you received it,” as says the
apostle, “not as the word of men, but as it is in truth the word of
God.” <span id="fr_2832"></span>[2833](#fn_2832.md) Through the grace and
mercy of the Saviour, so great was the fruit arising from this ministery
of ours in your family, that when preparations for her marriage <span
id="fr_2833"></span>[2834](#fn_2833.md) were already completed, the holy
Demetrias preferred the spiritual embrace of that Husband who is fairer
than the sons of men, and in espousing themselves to whom virgins retain
their virginity, and gain more abundant spiritual fruitfulness. We
should not, however, yet have known how this exhortation of ours had
been received by the faithful and noble maiden, as we departed shortly
before she took on her the vow of chastity, had we not learned from the
joyful announcement and reliable testimony of your letter, that this
great gift of God, planted and watered indeed by means of His servants,
but owing its increase to Himself, had been granted to us as labourers
in His vineyard.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p8"></span>2. Since these things are so, no
one may charge us with presuming, if, on the ground of this closer
spiritual relation, we manifest our solicitude for your welfare by
warning you to avoid opinions opposed to the grace of God. For though
the apostle commands us in preaching the word to be “instant in season
and out of season,” <span id="fr_2834"></span>[2835](#fn_2834.md) yet we do
not reckon you among the number of those to whom a word or a letter from
us exhorting you carefully to avoid what is inconsistent with sound
doctrine would seem “out of season.” Hence it was that you received our
admonition in so kindly a manner, that, in the letter to which we are
now replying, you say, “I thank you heartily for the pious advice which
your Reverence gave me, not to lend an ear to those men who, by their
mischievous writings, often corrupt our holy faith.”

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p10"></span>3. In this letter you go on to
say, “But your Reverence knows that I and my household are entirely
separated from persons of this description; and all our family follow so
strictly the Catholic faith as never at any time to have wandered from
it, or fallen into any heresy,—I speak not of the heresy of sects who
have erred in a measure hardly admiting of expiation, but of those whose
errors seem to be trivial.” This statement renders it more and more
necessary for us, in writing to you, not to pass over in silence the
conduct of those who are attempting to corrupt even those who are sound
in the faith. We consider your house to be no insignificant Church of
Christ, nor indeed is the error of those men trivial who think that we
have of ourselves whatever righteousness, temperance, piety, chastity is
in us, on the ground that God has so formed us, that beyond the
revelation which He has given He imparts to us no further aid for
performing by our own choice those things which by study we have
ascertained to be our duty; declaring nature and knowledge to be the
grace of God, and the only aid for living righteously and justly. For
the possession, indeed, of a will inclined to what is good, whence
proceed the life of uprightness and that love which so far excels all
other gifts that God Himself is said to be love, and by which alone is
fulfilled in us as far as we fulfil them, the divine law and
council,—for the possession, I say, of such a will, they hold that we
are not indebted to the aid of God, but affirm that we ourselves of our
own will are sufficient for these things. Let it not appear to you a
trifling error that men should wish to profess themselves Christians,
and yet be unwilling to hear the apostle of Christ, who, having said,
“The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts,” lest any one should
think that he had this love through his own free will, immediately
subjoined, “by the Holy Spirit who is given unto us.” <span
id="fr_2835"></span>[2836](#fn_2835.md) Understand, then, how greatly and
how fatally that man errs who does not acknowledge that this is the
“great gift of the Saviour,” <span id="fr_2836"></span>[2837](#fn_2836.md)
who, when He ascended on high, “led captivity captive, and gave gifts
unto men.” <span id="fr_2837"></span>[2838](#fn_2837.md)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p14"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p14.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p15"></span>4. How, then, could we so far
conceal our true feelings as not to warn you, in whom we feel so deep an
interest, to beware of such doctrines, after we had read a certain book
addressed to the holy Demetrias? Whether this book has reached
you, <span id="fr_2838"></span>[2839](#fn_2838.md) and who is its author,
we are desirous to hear in your answer to this. In this book, were it
lawful for such a one to read it, a virgin of Christ would read that her
holiness and all her spiritual riches are to spring from no other source
than herself, and thus, before she attains to the perfection of
blessedness, she would learn,—which may God forbid!—to be ungrateful to
God. For the words addressed to her in the said book are these:—“You
have here, then, those things on account of which you are deservedly,
nay more, more especially to be preferred before others; for your
earthly rank and wealth are understood to be derived from your
relatives, not from yourself, but your spiritual riches no one can have
conferred on you but yourself; for these, then, you are justly to be
praised, for these you are de<span id="page_550">p. 550</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-Page_550"></span>servedly to be preferred to others,
for they can exist only from yourself, and in yourself.” <span
id="fr_2839"></span>[2840](#fn_2839.md)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p18"></span>5. You see, doubtless, how
dangerous is the doctrine in these words, against which you must be on
your guard. For the affirmation, indeed, that these spiritual riches can
exist only in yourself, is very well and truly said: that evidently is
food; but the affirmation that they cannot exist except from you is
unmixed poison. Far be it from any virgin of Christ willingly to listen
to statements like these. Every virgin of Christ understands the innate
poverty of the human heart, and therefore declines to have it adorned
otherwise than by the gifts of her Spouse. Let her rather listen to the
apostle when he says: “I have espoused you to one husband, that I may
present you as a chaste virgin to Christ. But I fear, lest by any means,
as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should
be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ.” <span
id="fr_2840"></span>[2841](#fn_2840.md) And therefore in regard to these
spiritual riches let her listen, not to him who says: “No one can confer
them on you except yourself, and they cannot exist except from you and
in you;” but to him who says: “We have this treasure in earthen vessels,
that the excellency of the power may be of God, and not of us.” <span
id="fr_2841"></span>[2842](#fn_2841.md)

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p21"></span>6. In regard to that sacred
virginal chastity, also, which does not belong to her from herself, but
is the gift of God, bestowed, however, on her who is believing and
willing, let her hear the same truthful and pious teacher, who when he
treats of this subject says: “I would that all men were even as I
myself: but every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this
manner, and another after that.” <span
id="fr_2842"></span>[2843](#fn_2842.md) Let her hear also Him who is the
only Spouse, not only of herself, but of the whole Church, thus speaking
of this chastity and purity: “All cannot receive this saying, save they
to whom it is given;” <span id="fr_2843"></span>[2844](#fn_2843.md) that
she may understand that for her possession of this so great and
excellent gift, she ought rather to render thanks to our God and Lord,
than to listen to the words of any one who says that she possessed it
from herself,—words which we may not designate as those of a flatterer
seeking to please, lest we seem to judge rashly concerning the hidden
thoughts of men, but which are assuredly those of a misguided eulogist.
For “every good gift and every perfect gift,” as the Apostle James says,
“is from above, and cometh down from the Father of Lights;” <span
id="fr_2844"></span>[2845](#fn_2844.md) from this source, therefore, cometh
this holy virginity, in which you who approve of it, and rejoice in it,
have been excelled by your daughter, who, coming after you in birth, has
gone before you in conduct; descended from you in lineage, has risen
above you in honour; following you in age, has gone beyond you in
holiness; in whom also that begins to be yours which could not be in
your own person. For she did not contract an earthly marriage, that she
might be, not for herself only, but also for you, spiritually enriched,
in a higher degree than yourself, since you, even with this addition,
are inferior to her, because you contracted the marriage of which she is
the offspring. These things are gifts of God, and are yours, indeed, but
are not from yourselves; for you have this treasure in earthly bodies,
which are still frail as the vessels of the potter, that the excellency
of the power may be of God, and not of you. And be not surprised because
we say that these things are yours, and not from you, for we speak of
“daily bread” as ours, but yet add, <span
id="fr_2845"></span>[2846](#fn_2845.md) “give it to us,” lest it should be
thought that it was from ourselves.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p26"></span>7. Wherefore obey the precept of
Scripture, “Pray without ceasing. In everything give thanks;” <span
id="fr_2846"></span>[2847](#fn_2846.md) for you pray in order that you may
have constantly and increasingly these gifts, you render thanks because
you have them not of yourself. For who separates you from that mass of
death and perdition derived from Adam? Is it not He “who came to seek
and to save that which was lost?” <span
id="fr_2847"></span>[2848](#fn_2847.md) Was, then, a man, indeed, on
hearing the apostle’s question, “Who maketh thee to differ?” to reply,
“My own good will, my faith, my righteousness,” and to disregard what
immediately follows? “What hast thou that thou didst not receive? Now,
if thou didst receive it, why dost thou glory as if thou hadst not
received it?” <span id="fr_2848"></span>[2849](#fn_2848.md) We are
unwilling, then, yea, utterly unwilling, that a consecrated virgin, when
she hears or reads these words: “Your spiritual riches no one can have
conferred on you; for these you are justly to be praised, for these you
are deservedly to be preferred to others, for they can exist only from
yourself, and in yourself,” should thus boast of her riches as if she
had not received them. Let her say, indeed, “In me are Thy vows, O God,
I will render praises unto Thee;” <span
id="fr_2849"></span>[2850](#fn_2849.md) but since they are *in* her, not
*from* her, let her remember also to say, “Lord, by Thy will Thou hast
furnished strength to my beauty,” <span
id="fr_2850"></span>[2851](#fn_2850.md) because, though it be from her,
inasmuch as it is the acting of her own will, without which we cannot do
what is good, yet we are not to say, as he said, that it is “only from
her.” For our own will, unless it be aided by the grace <span
id="page_551">p. 551</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-Page_551"></span>of God, cannot alone be even in
name good will, for, says the apostle, “it is God who worketh in us,
both to will, and to do according to good will,” <span
id="fr_2851"></span>[2852](#fn_2851.md) —not, as these persons think,
merely by revealing knowledge, that we may know what we ought to do, but
also by inspiring Christian love, that we may also by choice perform the
things which by study we have learned.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p33"></span>8. For doubtless the value of the
gift of continence was known to him who said, “I perceived that no man
can be continent unless God bestowed the gift.” He not only knew then
how great a benefit it was, and how eagerly it ought to be coveted, but
also that, unless God gave it, it could not exist; for wisdom had taught
him this for he says, “This also was a point of wisdom, to know whose
gift it was; and the knowledge did not suffice him, but he says, “I went
to the Lord and made my supplication to Him.” <span
id="fr_2852"></span>[2853](#fn_2852.md) God then aids us in this matter,
not only by making us know what is to be done, but also by making us do
through love what we already know through learning. No one, therefore,
can possess, not only knowledge, but also continence, unless God give it
to him. Whence it was that when he had knowledge he prayed that he might
have continence, that it might be in him, because he knew that it was
not from him; or if on account of the freedom of his will it was in a
certain sense from himself, yet it was not from himself alone, because
no one can be continent unless God bestow on him the gift. But he whose
opinions I am censuring, in speaking of spiritual riches, among which is
doubtless that bright and beautiful gift of continence, does not say
that they may exist in you, and from yourself, but says that they can
exist *only* from you, and in you, in such a way that, as a virgin of
Christ has these things nowhere else than in herself, so it can be
believed possible for her to have them from no other source than from
herself, and in this way (which may a merciful God avert from her
heart!) she shall so boast as if she had not received them!

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p35"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p35.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p36"></span>9. We indeed hold such an opinion
concerning the training of this holy virgin, and the Christian humility
in which she was nourished and brought up, as to be assured that when
she read these words, if she did read, them, she would break out into
lamentations, and humbly smite her breast, and perhaps burst into tears,
and pray in faith to the Lord to whose service she was dedicated and by
whom she was sanctified, pleading with Him that these were not her own
words, but another’s, and asking that her faith might not be such as to
believe that she had anything whereof to glory in herself and not in the
Lord. For her glory is in herself, not in the words of another, as the
apostle says: “Let every man prove his own work, and then shall he have
glory (rejoicing) in himself alone, and not in another.” <span
id="fr_2853"></span>[2854](#fn_2853.md) But God forbid that her glory
should be in herself, and not in Him to whom the Psalmist says, “Thou
art my glory, and the lifter up of mine head.” <span
id="fr_2854"></span>[2855](#fn_2854.md) For her glory is then profitably in
herself, when God, who is in her, is Himself her glory, from whom she
has every good, by which she is good, and shall have all things by which
she shall be made better, in as far as she may become better in this
life, and by which she shall be made perfect when rendered so by divine
grace, not by human praise. “For her soul shall be praised in the
Lord,” <span id="fr_2855"></span>[2856](#fn_2855.md) “who satisfieth her
desire with good things,” <span id="fr_2856"></span>[2857](#fn_2856.md)
because He Himself has inspired this desire, that His virgin should not
boast of any good, as if she had not received it.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p41"></span>10. Inform us, then, in reply to
this letter, whether we have judged truly in supposing these to be your
daughter’s sentiments. For we know well that you and all your family
are, and have been, worshippers of the indivisible Trinity. But human
error insinuates itself in other forms than in erroneous opinions
concerning the indivisible Trinity. There are other subjects also, in
regard to which men fall into very dangerous errors. As, for example,
that of which we have spoken in this letter at greater length, perhaps,
than might have sufficed to a person of your stedfast and pure wisdom.
And yet we know not to whom, except to God, and therefore to the
Trinity, wrong is done by the man who denies that the good that comes
from God is from God; which evil may God avert from you, as we believe
He does! May God altogether forbid that the book out of which we have
thought it our duty to extract some words, that they might be more
easily understood, should produce any such impression, we do not say on
your mind, or on that of the holy virgin your daughter, but on the mind
of the least deserving of your male or female servants.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p42"></span>11. But if you study more
carefully even those words in which the writer appears to speak in
favour of grace or the aid of God, you will find them so ambiguous that
they may have reference either to nature or to knowledge, or to
forgiveness of sins. For even in regard to that which they are forced to
acknowledge, that we ought to pray that we may not enter into
temptation, they may consider that the words mean that we are so far
helped to it that, by our praying and knocking, the knowledge of the
truth <span id="page_552">p. 552</span> <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-Page_552"></span>is so revealed to us that we may
learn what it is our duty to do, not so far as that our will receives
strength, whereby we may do that which we learn to be our duty; and as
to their saying that it is by the grace or help of God that the Lord
Christ has been set before us as an example of holy living, they
interpret this so as to teach the same doctrine, affirming, namely, that
we learn by His example how we ought to live, but denying that we are so
aided as to do through love what we know by learning.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p43"></span>12. Find in this book, if you can,
anything in which, excepting nature and the freedom of the will (which
pertains to the same nature), and the remission of sin and the revealing
of doctrine, any such aid of God is acknowledged as that which he
acknowledges who said: “When I perceived that no man can be continent
unless God bestow the gift, and that this also is a point of wisdom to
know whose gift it is, I went to the Lord, and made my supplication to
Him.” <span id="fr_2857"></span>[2858](#fn_2857.md) For he did not desire
to receive, in answer to his prayer, the nature in which he was made;
nor was he solicitous to obtain the natural freedom of the will with
which he was made; nor did he crave the remission of sins, seeing that
he prayed rather for continence, that he might not sin; nor did he
desire to know what he ought to do, seeing that he already confessed
that he knew whose gift this continence was; but he wished to receive
from the Spirit of wisdom such strength of will, such ardour of love, as
should suffice for fully practising the great virtue of continence. If,
therefore, you succeed in finding any such statement in that book, we
will heartily thank you if, in your answer, you deign to inform us of
it.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p45"></span>13. It is impossible for us to
tell how greatly we desire to find in the writings of these men, whose
works are read by very many for their pungency and eloquence, the open
confession of that grace which the apostle vehemently commends, who says
that “God has given to every man the measure of faith,” <span
id="fr_2858"></span>[2859](#fn_2858.md) “without which it is impossible to
please God,” <span id="fr_2859"></span>[2860](#fn_2859.md) “by which the
just live,” <span id="fr_2860"></span>[2861](#fn_2860.md) “which worketh by
love,” <span id="fr_2861"></span>[2862](#fn_2861.md) before which and
without which no works of any man are in any respect to be reckoned
good, since “whatsoever is not of faith is sin.” <span
id="fr_2862"></span>[2863](#fn_2862.md) He affirms that God distributes to
every man, <span id="fr_2863"></span>[2864](#fn_2863.md) and that we
receive divine assistance to live piously and justly, not only by the
revelation of that knowledge which without charity “puffeth up,” <span
id="fr_2864"></span>[2865](#fn_2864.md) but by our being inspired with that
“love which is the fulfilling of the law,” <span
id="fr_2865"></span>[2866](#fn_2865.md) and which so edifies our heart that
knowledge does not puff it up. But hitherto I have failed to find any
such statements in the writings of these men.

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p54"></span>14. But especially we should wish
that these sentiments should be found in that book from which we have
quoted the words in which the author, praising a virgin of Christ as if
no one except herself could confer on her spiritual riches, and as if
these could not exist except from herself, does not wish her to glory in
the Lord, but to glory as if she had not received them. In this book,
though it contain neither his name nor your own honoured name, he
nevertheless mentions that a request had been made to him by the mother
of the virgin to write to her. In a certain epistle of his, however, to
which he openly attaches his name, and does not conceal the name of the
sacred virgin, the same Pelagius says that he had written to her, and
endeavours to prove, by appealing to the said work, that he most openly
confessed the grace of God, which he is alleged to have passed over in
silence, or denied. But we beg you to condescend to inform us, in your
reply, whether that be the very book in which he has inserted these
words about spiritual riches, and whether it has reached your Holiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2832"></span>[549:2833](1010448.htm#fr_2832.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p6"></span> [1 Thess.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2833"></span>[549:2834](1010448.htm#fr_2833.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p7"></span> In a letter of Jerome (the eighth)
to Demetrias, we have a very graphic narrative of the manner in which
Demetrias formed and carried into effect the vow for which she is here
commended.

<span id="fn_2834"></span>[549:2835](1010448.htm#fr_2834.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p9"></span> [2 Tim.
3.2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2835"></span>[549:2836](1010448.htm#fr_2835.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p11"></span> [Rom.
5.5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2836"></span>[549:2837](1010448.htm#fr_2836.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p12"></span> [Eph.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2837"></span>[549:2838](1010448.htm#fr_2837.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p13"></span> [Ps.
68.18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2838"></span>[549:2839](1010448.htm#fr_2838.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p16"></span> In the end of this letter,
Augustin distinctly ascribes to Pelagius the authorship of the letter to
Demetrias, as also in his work on *The Grace of Christ*, ch. xxii.

<span id="fn_2839"></span>[550:2840](1010448.htm#fr_2839.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p17"></span> *Epistle to Demetrias,* ch. xi.

<span id="fn_2840"></span>[550:2841](1010448.htm#fr_2840.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p19"></span> [2 Cor.
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2841"></span>[550:2842](1010448.htm#fr_2841.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p20"></span> [2 Cor.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2842"></span>[550:2843](1010448.htm#fr_2842.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p22"></span> [1 Cor.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2843"></span>[550:2844](1010448.htm#fr_2843.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p22.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p23"></span> [Matt.
19.11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2844"></span>[550:2845](1010448.htm#fr_2844.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p23.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p24"></span> [Jas.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2845"></span>[550:2846](1010448.htm#fr_2845.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p25"></span> [Luke
11.3](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2846"></span>[550:2847](1010448.htm#fr_2846.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p27"></span> [1 Thess.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017.md),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="fn_2847"></span>[550:2848](1010448.htm#fr_2847.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p27.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p28"></span> [Luke
19.10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2848"></span>[550:2849](1010448.htm#fr_2848.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p29"></span> [1 Cor.
4.7](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2849"></span>[550:2850](1010448.htm#fr_2849.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p30"></span> [Ps.
56.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2850"></span>[550:2851](1010448.htm#fr_2850.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p30.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p31"></span> [Ps.
30.7](../../../bib/sep/psa030.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p31.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2851"></span>[551:2852](1010448.htm#fr_2851.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p31.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p32"></span> [Phil.
2.13](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2852"></span>[551:2853](1010448.htm#fr_2852.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p34"></span> [Wisd.
8.21](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2853"></span>[551:2854](1010448.htm#fr_2853.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p37"></span> [Gal.
6.4](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#004.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2854"></span>[551:2855](1010448.htm#fr_2854.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p37.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p38"></span> [Ps.
3.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2855"></span>[551:2856](1010448.htm#fr_2855.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p38.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p39"></span> [Ps.
34.2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2856"></span>[551:2857](1010448.htm#fr_2856.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p39.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p40"></span> [Ps.
103.5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2857"></span>[552:2858](1010448.htm#fr_2857.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p43.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p44"></span> [Wisd.
8.21](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2858"></span>[552:2859](1010448.htm#fr_2858.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p45.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p46"></span> [Rom.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2859"></span>[552:2860](1010448.htm#fr_2859.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p46.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p47"></span> [Heb.
11.6](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2860"></span>[552:2861](1010448.htm#fr_2860.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p47.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p48"></span> [Rom.
1.17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2861"></span>[552:2862](1010448.htm#fr_2861.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p48.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p49"></span> [Gal.
5.6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2862"></span>[552:2863](1010448.htm#fr_2862.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p49.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p50"></span> [Rom.
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2863"></span>[552:2864](1010448.htm#fr_2863.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p50.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p51"></span> [Rom.
12.3](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2864"></span>[552:2865](1010448.htm#fr_2864.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p51.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p52"></span> [1 Cor.
8.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2865"></span>[552:2866](1010448.htm#fr_2865.md) <span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p52.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p53"></span> [Rom
13.10](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CLXXXVIII-p53.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CLXXXIX](1010449.md)
