[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010465)  [Next](1010467) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 428 or 429.)

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p3"></span>*<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p3.1"></span>To His Holy Brother and Co-Bishop
Honoratus,</span>* <span id="fr_2976"></span>[2977](#fn_2976) *<span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p4.1"></span>Augustin Sends Greeting
in the Lord.</span>*

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p5"></span>1. I thought that by sending to your
Grace a copy of the letter which I wrote to our brother and co-bishop
Quodvultdeus, <span id="fr_2977"></span>[2978](#fn_2977) I had earned
exemption from the burden which you have imposed upon me, by asking my
advice as to what you ought to do in the midst of the dangers which have
befallen us in these times. For although I wrote briefly, I think that I
did not pass over anything that was necessary either to be said by me or
heard by my questioner in correspondence on the subject: for I said
that, on the one hand, those who desire to remove, if they can, to
fortified places are not to be forbidden to do so; and, on the other
hand, we ought not to break the ties by which the love of Christ has
bound us as ministers not to forsake the churches which it is our duty
to serve. The words which I used in the letter referred to were:
“Therefore, however small may be the congregation of God’s people among
whom we are, if our ministry is so necessary to them that it is a clear
duty not to withdraw it from them, it remains for us to say to the Lord,
‘Be Thou to us a God of defence, and a strong fortress.’” <span
id="fr_2978"></span>[2979](#fn_2978)

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p8"></span>2. But this counsel does not commend
itself to you, because, as you say in your letter, it does not become us
to endeavour to act in opposition to the precept or example of the Lord,
admonishing us that we should flee from one city to another. We
remember, indeed, the words of the Lord, “When they persecute you in one
city, flee to another;” <span id="fr_2979"></span>[2980](#fn_2979) but
who can believe that the Lord wished this to be done in cases in which
the flocks which He purchased with His own blood are by the desertion of
their pastors left without that necessary ministry which is
indispensable to their life? Did Christ do this Himself, when, carried
by His parents, He fled into Egypt in His infancy? No; for He had not
then gathered churches which we could affirm to have been deserted by
Him. Or, when the Apostle Paul was “let down in a basket through a
window,” to prevent his enemies from seizing him, and so escaped their
hands, <span id="fr_2980"></span>[2981](#fn_2980) was the church in
Damascus deprived of the necessary labours of Christ’s servants? Was not
all the service that was requisite supplied after his departure by other
brethren settled in that city? For the apostle had done this at their
request, in order that he might preserve for the Church’s good his life,
which the persecutor on that occasion specially sought to destroy. Let
those, therefore, who are servants of Christ, His ministers in word and
sacrament, do what he has commanded or permitted. When any of them is
specially sought for by persecutors, let him by all means flee from one
city to another, provided that the Church is not hereby deserted, but
that others who are not specially sought after remain to supply
spiritual food to their fellow-servants, whom they know to be unable
otherwise to maintain spiritual life. When, however, the danger of all,
bishops, clergy, and laity, is alike, let not those who depend upon the
aid of others be deserted by those on whom they depend. In that case,
either let all remove together to fortified places, or let those who
must remain be not deserted by those through whom in things pertaining
to the Church their necessities must be provided for; and so let them
share life in common, or share in common that which the Father of their
family appoints them to suffer.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p11"></span>3. But if it shall happen that all
suffer, whether some suffer less, and others more, or all suffer
equally, it is easy to see who among them are suffering for the sake of
others: they are obviously those who, although they might have freed
themselves from such evils by flight, have chosen to remain rather than
abandon others to whom they are necessary. By such conduct especially is
proved the love commended by the Apostle John in the words: “Christ laid
down His life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the
brethren.” <span id="fr_2981"></span>[2982](#fn_2981) For those who
betake themselves to flight, or are prevented from doing so only by
circumstances thwarting their design, if they be seized and made to
suffer, endure this suffering only for themselves; not for their
breth<span id="page_578">p. 578</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-Page_578"></span>ren; but those who are involved in
suffering because of their resolving not to abandon others, whose
Christian welfare depended on them, are unquestionably “laying down
their lives for the brethren.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p13"></span>4. For this reason, the saying
which we have heard attributed to a certain bishop, namely: “If the Lord
has commanded us to flee, in those persecutions in which we may reap the
fruit of martyrdom, how much more ought we to escape by flight, if we
can, from barren sufferings inflicted by the hostile incursions of
barbarians!” is a saying true and worthy of acceptation, but applicable
only to those who are not confined by the obligations of ecclesiastical
office. For the man who, having it in his power to escape from the
violence of the enemy, chooses not to flee from it, lest in so doing he
should abandon the ministry of Christ, without which men can neither
become Christians nor live as such, assuredly finds a greater reward of
his love, than the man who, fleeing not for his brethren’s sake but for
his own, is seized by persecutors, and, refusing to deny Christ, suffers
martyrdom.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p14"></span>5. What, then, shall we say to the
position which you thus state in your former epistle:—“I do not see what
good we can do to ourselves or to the people by continuing to remain in
the churches, except to see before our eyes men slain, women outraged,
churches burned, ourselves expiring amid torments applied in order to
extort from us what we do not possess”? God is powerful to hear the
prayers of His children and to avert those things which they fear; and
we ought not, on account of evils that are uncertain, to make up our
minds absolutely to the desertion of that ministry, without which the
people must certainly suffer ruin, not in the affairs of this life, but
of that other life which ought to be cared for with incomparably greater
diligence and solicitude. For if those evils which are apprehended, as
possibly visiting the places in which we are, were certain, all those
for whose sake it was our duty to remain would take flight before us,
and would thus exempt us from the neccessity of remaining; for no one
says that ministers are under obligation to remain in any place where
none remain to whom their ministry is necessary. In this way some holy
bishops fled from Spain when their congregations had, before their
flight, been annihilated, the members having either fled, or died by the
sword, or perished in the siege of their towns, or gone into captivity:
but many more of the bishops of that country remained in the midst of
these abounding dangers, because those for whose sakes they remained
were still remaining there. And if some have abandoned their flocks,
this is what we say ought not to be done, for they were not taught to do
so by divine authority, but were, through human infirmity, either
deceived by an error or overcome by fear.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p15"></span>6. \[We maintain, as one
alternative, that they were deceived by an error,\] for why do they
think that indiscriminate compliance must be given to the precept in
which they read of fleeing from one city to another, and not shrink with
abhorrence from the character of the “hireling,” who “seeth the wolf
coming, and fleeth, because he careth not for the sheep”? <span
id="fr_2982"></span>[2983](#fn_2982) Why do they not honour equally both
of these true sayings of the Lord, the one in which flight is permitted
or enjoined, the other in which it is rebuked and censured, by taking
pains so to understand them as to find that they are, as is indeed the
case, not opposed to each other? And how is their reconciliation to be
found, unless that which I have above proved be borne in mind, that
under pressure of persecution we who are ministers of Christ ought to
flee from the places in which we are only in one or other of two cases,
namely, either that there is no congregation to which we may minister,
or that there is a congregation, but that the ministry necessary for it
can be supplied by others who have not the same reason for flight as
makes it imperative on us? Of which we have one example, as already
mentioned, in the Apostle Paul escaping by being let down from the wall
in a basket, when he was personally sought by the persecutor, there
being others on the spot who had not the same necessity for flight,
whose remaining would prevent the Church from being destitute of the
service of ministers. Another example we have in the holy Athanasius,
Bishop of Alexandria, who fled when the Emperor Constantius wished to
seize him specially, the Catholic people who remained in Alexandria not
being abandoned by the other servants of God. But when the people remain
and the servants of God flee, and their service is withdrawn, what is
this but the guilty flight of the “hireling” who careth not for the
sheep? For the wolf will come,—not man, but the devil, who has very
often perverted to apostasy believers to whom the daily ministry of the
Lord’s body was wanting; and so, not “through thy knowledge,” but
through thine ignorance, “shall the weak brother perish for whom Christ
died.” <span id="fr_2983"></span>[2984](#fn_2983)

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p18"></span>7. As for those, however, who flee
not because they are deceived by an error, but because they have been
overcome by fear, why do they not rather, by the compassion and help of
the Lord bestowed on them, bravely fight against their fear, lest evils
incomparably heavier and much more to be dreaded befall them? This
victory over fear is won wherever the flame of the love of God, without
the smoke of worldliness, burns <span id="page_579">p. 579</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-Page_579"></span>in the heart. For love says, “Who is
weak, and I am not weak? who is offended, and I burn not?” <span
id="fr_2984"></span>[2985](#fn_2984) But love is from God. Let us,
therefore, beseech Him who requires it of us to bestow it on us, and
under its influence let us fear more lest the sheep of Christ should be
slaughtered by the sword of spiritual wickedness reaching the heart,
than lest they should fall under the sword that can only harm that body
in which men are destined at any rate, at some time, and in some way or
other, to die. Let us fear more lest the purity of faith should perish
through the taint of corruption in the inner man, than lest our women
should be subjected by violence to outrage; for if chastity is preserved
in the spirit, it is not destroyed by such violence, since it is not
destroyed even in the body when there is no base consent of the sufferer
to the sin, but only a submission without the consent of the will to
that which another does. Let us fear more lest the spark of life in
“living stones” be quenched through our absence, than lest the stones
and timbers of our earthly buildings be burned in our presence. Let us
fear more lest the members of Christ’s body should die for want of
spiritual food, than lest the members of our own bodies, being
overpowered by the violence of enemies, should be racked with torture.
Not because these are things which we ought not to avoid when this is in
our power, but because we ought to prefer to suffer them when they
cannot be avoided without impiety, unless, perchance, any one be found
to maintain that that servant is not guilty of impiety who withdraws the
service necessary to piety at the very time when it is peculiarly
necessary.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p20"></span>8. Do we forget how, when these
dangers have reached their extremity, and there is no possibility of
escaping from them by flight, an extraordinary crowd of persons, of both
sexes and of all ages, is wont to assemble in the church,—some urgently
asking baptism, others reconciliation, others even the doing of penance,
and all calling for consolation and strengthening through the
administration of sacraments? If the ministers of God be not at their
posts at such a time, how great perdition overtakes those who depart
from this life either not regenerated or not loosed from their
sins! <span id="fr_2985"></span>[2986](#fn_2985) How deep also is the
sorrow of their believing kindred, who shall not have these lost ones
with them in the blissful rest of eternal life! In fine, how loud are
the cries of all, and the indignant imprecations of not a few, because
of the want of ordinances and the absence of those who should have
dispensed them! See what the fear of temporal calamities may effect, and
of how great a multitude of eternal calamities it may be the procuring
cause. But if the ministers be at their posts, through the strength
which God bestows upon them, all are aided,—some are baptized, others
reconciled to the Church. None are defrauded of the communion of the
Lord’s body; all are consoled, edified, and exhorted to ask of God, who
is able to do so, to avert all things which are feared,—prepared for
both alternatives, so that “if the cup may not pass” from them, His will
may be done <span id="fr_2986"></span>[2987](#fn_2986) who cannot will
anything that is evil.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p23"></span>9. Assuredly you now see (what,
according to your letter, you did not see before) how great advantage
the Christian people may obtain if, in the presence of calamity, the
presence of the servants of Christ be not withdrawn from them. You see,
also, how much harm is done by their absence, when “they seek their own,
not the things that are Jesus Christ’s,” <span
id="fr_2987"></span>[2988](#fn_2987) and are destitute of that charity
of which it is said, “it seeketh not her own,” <span
id="fr_2988"></span>[2989](#fn_2988) and fail to imitate him who said,
“I seek not mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved,” <span id="fr_2989"></span>[2990](#fn_2989) and who, moreover,
would not have fled from the insidious attacks of the imperial
persecutor, had he not wished to save himself for the sake of others to
whom he was necessary; on which account he says, “I am in a strait
betwixt two, having a desire to depart, and to be with Christ; which is
far better: nevertheless to abide in the flesh is more needful for
you.” <span id="fr_2990"></span>[2991](#fn_2990)

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p28"></span>10. Here, perhaps, some one may say
that the servants of God ought to save their lives by flight when such
evils are impending, in order that they may reserve themselves for the
benefit of the Church in more peaceful times. This is rightly done by
some, when others are not wanting by whom the service of the Church may
be supplied, and the work is not deserted by all, as we have stated
above that Athanasius did; for the whole Catholic world knows how
necessary it was to the Church that he should do so, and how useful was
the prolonged life of the man who by his word and loving service
defended her against the Arian heretics. But this ought by no means to
be done when the danger is common to all; and the thing to be dreaded
above all is, lest any one should be supposed to do this not from a
desire to secure the welfare of others, but from fear of losing his own
life, and should therefore do more harm by the example of deserting the
post of duty than all the good that he could do by the preservation of
his life for future service. Finally, observe how the holy David
acquiesced in the urgent petition of his people, that he should <span
id="page_580">p. 580</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-Page_580"></span>not expose himself to the dangers of
battle, and, as it is said in the narrative, “quench the light of
Israel,” <span id="fr_2991"></span>[2992](#fn_2991) but was not himself
the first to propose it; for had he been so, he would have made many
imitate the cowardice which they might have attributed to him, supposing
that he had been prompted to this not through regard to the advantage of
others, but under the agitation of fear as to his own life.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p30"></span>11. Another question which we must
not regard as unworthy of notice is suggested here. For if the interests
of the Church are not to be lost sight of, and if these make it
necessary that when any great calamity is impending some ministers
should flee, in order that they may survive to minister to those whom
they may find remaining after the calamity is passed,—the question
arises, what is to be done when it appears that, unless some flee, all
must perish together? what if the fury of the destroyer were so
restricted as to attack none but the ministers of the Church? What shall
we reply? Is the Church to be deprived of the service of her ministers
because of fleeing from their work through fear lest she should be more
unhappily deprived of their service because of their dying in the midst
of their work? Of course, if the laity are exempted from the
persecution, it is in their power to shelter and conceal their bishops
and clergy in some way, as He shall help them under whose dominion all
things are, and who, by His wondrous power, can preserve even one who
does not flee from danger. But the reason for our inquiring what is the
path of our duty in such circumstances is, that we may not be chargeable
with tempting the Lord by expecting divine miraculous interposition on
every occasion.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p31"></span>There is, indeed, a difference in
the severity of the tempest of calamity when the danger is common to
both laity and clergy, as the perils of stormy weather are common to
both merchants and sailors on board of the same ship. But far be it from
us to esteem this ship of ours so lightly as to admit that it would be
right for the crew, and especially for the pilot, to abandon her in the
hour of peril, although they might have it in their power to escape by
leaping into a small boat, or even swimming ashore. For in the case of
those in regard to whom we fear lest through our deserting our work they
should perish, the evil which we fear is not temporal death, which is
sure to come at one time or other, but eternal death, which may come or
may not come, according as we neglect or adopt measures whereby it may
be averted. Moreover, when the lives of both laity and clergy are
exposed to common danger, what reason have we for thinking that in every
place which the enemy may invade all the clergy are likely to be put to
death, and not that all the laity shall also die, in which event the
clergy, and those to whom they are necessary, would pass from this life
at the same time? Or why may we not hope that, as some of the laity are
likely to survive, some of the clergy may also be spared, by whom the
necessary ordinances may be dispensed to them?

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p32"></span>12. Oh that in such circumstances
the question debated among the servants of God were which of their
number should remain, that the Church might not be left destitute by all
fleeing from danger, and which of their number should flee, that the
Church might not left destitute by all perishing in the danger. Such a
contest will arise among the brethren who are all alike glowing with
love and satisfying the claims of love. And if it were in any case
impossible otherwise to terminate the debate, it appears to me that the
persons who are to remain and who are to flee should be chosen by lot.
For those who say that they, in preference to others, ought to flee,
will appear to be chargeable either with cowardice, as persons unwilling
to face impending danger, or with arrogance, as esteeming their own
lives more necessary to be preserved for the good of the Church than
those of other men. Again, perhaps, those who are better will be the
first to choose to lay down their lives for the brethren; and so
preservation by flight will be given to men whose life is less valuable
because their skill in counselling and ruling the Church is less; yet
these, if they be pious and wise, will resist the desires of men in
regard to whom they see, on the one hand, that it is more important for
the Church that they should live, and on the other hand, that they would
rather lose their lives than flee from danger. In this case, as it is
written, “the lot causeth contentions to cease, and parteth between the
mighty;” <span id="fr_2992"></span>[2993](#fn_2992) for, in difficulties
of this kind, God judges better than men, whether it please Him to call
the better among His servants to the reward of suffering, and to spare
the weak, or to make the weak stronger to endure trials, and then to
withdraw them from this life, as persons whose lives could not be so
serviceable to the Church as the lives of the others who are stronger
than they. If such an appeal to the lot be made, it will be, I admit, an
unusual proceeding, but if it is done in any case, who will dare to find
fault with it? Who but the ignorant or the prejudiced will hesitate to
praise with the approbation which it deserves? If, however, the use of
the lot is not adopted because there is no precedent for such an appeal,
let it by all means be secured that the Church <span id="page_581">p.
581</span> <span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-Page_581"></span>be not, through the
flight of any one, left destitute of that ministry which is more
especially necessary and due to her in the midst of such great dangers.
Let no one hold himself in such esteem because of apparent superiority
in any grace as to say that he is more worthy of life than others, and
therefore more entitled to seek safety in flight. For whoever thinks
this is too self-satisfied, and whoever utters this must make all
dissatisfied with him.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p34"></span>13. There are some who think that
bishops and clergy may, by not fleeing but remaining in such dangers,
cause the people to be misled, because, when they see those who are set
over them remaining, this makes them not flee from danger. It is easy
for them, however, to obviate this objection, and the reproach of
misleading others, by addressing their congregations, and saying: “Let
not the fact that we are not fleeing from this place be the occasion of
misleading you, for we remain here not for our own sakes but for yours,
that we may continue to minister to you whatever we know to be necessary
to your salvation, which is in Christ; therefore, if you choose to flee,
you thereby set us also at liberty from the obligations by which we are
bound to remain.” This, I think, ought to be said, when it seems to be
truly advantageous to remove to places of greater security. If, after
such words have been spoken in their hearing, either all or some shall
say: “We are at His disposal from whose anger none can escape
whithersoever they may go, and whose mercy may be found wherever their
lot is cast by those who, whether hindered by known insuperable
difficulties, or unwilling to toil after unknown refuges, in which
perils may be only changed not finished, prefer not to go away
elsewhere,”—most assuredly those who thus resolve to remain ought not to
be left destitute of the service of Christian ministers. If, on the
other hand after hearing their bishops and clergy speak as above, the
people prefer to leave the place, to remain behind them is not now the
duty of those who were only remaining for their sakes, because none are
left there on whose account it would still be their duty to remain.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p35"></span>14. Whoever, therefore, flees from
danger in circumstances in which the Church is not deprived, through his
flight, of necessary service, is doing that which the Lord has commanded
or permitted. But the minister who flees when the consequence of his
flight is the withdrawal from Christ’s flock of that nourishment by
which its spiritual life is sustained, is an “hireling who seeth the
wolf coming, and fleeth because he careth not for the sheep.”

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p36"></span>With love, which I know to be
sincere, I have now written what I believe to be true on this question,
because you asked my opinion, my dearly beloved brother; but I have not
enjoined you to follow my advice, if you can find any better than mine.
Be that as it may, we cannot find anything better for us to do in these
dangers than continually beseech the Lord our God to have compassion on
us. And as to the matter about which I have written, namely, that
ministers should not desert the churches of God, some wise and holy men
have by the gift of God been enabled both to will and to do this thing,
and have not in the least degree faltered in the determined prosecution
of their purpose, even though exposed to the attacks of slanderers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2976"></span>[577:2977](1010466.htm#fr_2976) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p3.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p4"></span> Bishop of Thiaba in Mauritania.

<span id="fn_2977"></span>[577:2978](1010466.htm#fr_2977) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p6"></span> This letter is not extant.

<span id="fn_2978"></span>[577:2979](1010466.htm#fr_2978) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p7"></span> [Ps.
31.3](../../../bib/sep/psa031.htm#003)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p7.1"></span>, LXX.

<span id="fn_2979"></span>[577:2980](1010466.htm#fr_2979) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p9"></span> [Matt.
10.23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2980"></span>[577:2981](1010466.htm#fr_2980) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p10"></span> [2 Cor.
11.33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#033)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2981"></span>[577:2982](1010466.htm#fr_2981) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p12"></span> [1 John
3.16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2982"></span>[578:2983](1010466.htm#fr_2982) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p16"></span> [John
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2983"></span>[578:2984](1010466.htm#fr_2983) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p17"></span> [1 Cor.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#009),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#011)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2984"></span>[579:2985](1010466.htm#fr_2984) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p19"></span> [2 Cor.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2985"></span>[579:2986](1010466.htm#fr_2985) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p20.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p21"></span> *Ligati.*

<span id="fn_2986"></span>[579:2987](1010466.htm#fr_2986) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p22"></span> [Matt.
26.42](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#042)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2987"></span>[579:2988](1010466.htm#fr_2987) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p24"></span> [Phil.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2988"></span>[579:2989](1010466.htm#fr_2988) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p24.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p25"></span> [1 Cor.
13.5](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#005)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2989"></span>[579:2990](1010466.htm#fr_2989) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p25.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p26"></span> [1 Cor.
10.33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2990"></span>[579:2991](1010466.htm#fr_2990) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p26.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p27"></span> [Phil.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2991"></span>[580:2992](1010466.htm#fr_2991) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p28.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p29"></span> [2 Sam.
21.17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2992"></span>[580:2993](1010466.htm#fr_2992) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p32.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p33"></span> [Prov.
18.18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXVIII-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCXXIX](1010467)
