[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010394)  [Next](1010396.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p1.1"></span>Letter LXXXIX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 406.)

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p3.1"></span>To Festus, My Lord Well Beloved, My Son
Honourable and Worthy of Esteem, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p4"></span>1. If, on behalf of error and
inexcusable dissension, and falsehoods which have been in every way
possible disproved, men are so presumptuous as to persevere in boldly
assailing and threatening the Catholic Church, which seeks their
salvation, how much more is it reasonable and right for those who
maintain the truth of Christian peace and unity,—truth which commends
itself even to those who profess to deny it or attempt to resist it,—to
labour constantly and with energy, not only in the defence of those who
are already Catholics, but also for the correction of those who are not
yet within the <span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-Page_374"></span>Church! For if obstinacy aims at the
possession and exercise of indomitable strength, how great should be the
strength of constancy which devotes persevering and unwearied labours to
a cause which it knows to be both pleasing to God, and beyond all
question necessarily approved by the judgment of wise men!

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p5"></span>2. Could there, moreover, be anything
more lamentable as an instance of perversity, than for men not only to
refuse to be humbled by the correction of their wickedness, but even to
claim commendation for their conduct, as is done by the Donatists, when
they boast that they are the victims of persecution; either through
incredible blindness not knowing, or through inexcusable passion
pretending not to know, that men are made martyrs not by the amount of
their suffering, but by the cause in which they suffer? This I would say
even were I opposing men who were only involved in the darkness of
error, and suffering penalties on that account most truly merited, and
who had not dared to assault any one with insane violence. But what
shall I say against those whose fatal obstinacy is such that it is
checked only by fear of losses, and is taught only by exile how
universal (as had been foretold) is the diffusion of the Church, which
they prefer to attack rather then to acknowledge? And if the things
which they suffer under this most gentle discipline be compared with
those things which they in reckless fury perpetrate, who does not see to
which party the name of persecutors more truly belongs? Nay, even though
wicked sons abstain from violence, they do, by their abandoned way of
life, inflict upon their affectionate parents a much more serious wrong
than their father and mother inflict upon them, when, with a sternness
proportioned to the strength of their love, they endeavour without
dissimulation to compel them to live uprightly.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p6"></span>3. There exist the strongest evidences
in public documents, which you can read if you please, or rather, which
I beseech and exhort you to read, by which it is proved that their
predecessors, who originally separated themselves from the peace of the
Church, did of their own accord dare to bring accusation against
Cæcilianus before the Emperor by means of Anulinus, who was proconsul at
that time. Had they gained the day in that trial, what else would
Cæcilianus have suffered at the hands of the Emperor than that which,
when they were defeated, he awarded to them? But truly, if they having
accused him had prevailed, and Cæcilianus and his colleagues had been
expelled from their sees, or, through persisting in their conspiracy,
had exposed themselves to severer punishments (for the imperial censure
could not pass unpunished the resistance of persons who had been
defeated in the civil courts), they would then have published as worthy
of all praise the Emperor’s wise measures and anxious care for the good
of the Church. But now, because they have themselves lost their case,
being wholly unable to prove the charges which they advanced, if they
suffer anything for their iniquity, they call it persecution; and not
only set no bounds to their wicked violence, but also claim to be
honoured as martyrs: as if the Catholic Christian emperors were
following in their measures against their most obstinate wickedness any
other precedent than the decision of Constantine, to whom they of their
own accord appealed as the accusers of Cæcilianus, and whose authority
they so esteemed above that of all the bishops beyond the sea, that to
him rather than to them they referred this ecclesiastical dispute. To
him, again, they protested against the first judgment given against them
by the bishops whom he had appointed to examine the case in Rome, and to
him also they appealed against the second judgment given by the bishops
at Arles: yet when at last they were defeated by his own decision, they
remained unchanged in their perversity. I think that even the devil
himself would not have had the assurance to persist in such a cause, if
he had been so often overthrown by the authority of the judge to whom he
had of his own will chosen to appeal.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p7"></span>4. It may be said, however, that these
are human tribunals, and that they might have been cajoled, misguided,
or bribed. Why, then, is the Christian world libelled and branded with
the crime laid to the charge of some who are said to have surrendered to
persecutors the sacred books? For surely it was neither possible for the
Christian world, nor incumbent upon it, to do otherwise than believe the
judges whom the plaintiffs had chosen, rather than the plaintiffs
against whom these judges pronounced judgments. These judges are
responsible to God for their opinion, whether just or unjust; but what
has the Church, diffused throughout the world, done that it should be
deemed necessary for her to be rebaptized by the Donatists upon no other
ground than because, in a case in which she was not able to decide as to
the truth, she has thought herself called upon to believe those who were
in a position to judge it rightly, rather than those who, though
defeated in the civil courts, refused to yield? O weighty indictment
against all the nations to which God promised that they should be
blessed in the seed of Abraham, and has now made His promise good! When
they with one voice demand, Why do you wish to rebaptize us? the answer
given is, Because you do not know what men in Africa were guilty of
surrendering the sacred books; and being thus ignorant, accepted the
testimony of the judges who decided <span id="page_375">p. 375</span>
<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-Page_375"></span>the case as more worthy of
credit than that of those by whom the accusation was brought. No man
deserves to be blamed for the crime of another; what, then, has the
whole world to do with the sin which some one in Africa may have
committed? No man deserves to be blamed for a crime about which he knows
nothing; and how could the whole world possibly know the crime in this
case, whether the judges or the party condemned were guilty? Ye who have
understanding, judge what I say. Here is the justice of heretics: the
party of Donatus condemns the whole world unheard, because the whole
world does not condemn a crime unknown. But for the world, truly, it
suffices to have the promises of God, and to see fulfilled in itself
what prophets predicted so long ago, and to recognise the Church by
means of the same Scriptures by which Christ her King is recognised. For
as in them are foretold concerning Christ the things which we read in
gospel history to have been fulfilled in Him, so also in them have been
foretold concerning the Church the things which we now behold fulfilled
in the world.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p8"></span>5. Possibly some thinking people might
be disturbed by what they are accustomed to say regarding baptism, viz.
that it is the true baptism of Christ only when it is administered by a
righteous man, were it not that on this subject the Christian world
holds what is most manifestly evangelical truth as taught in the words
of John: “He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me,
Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him,
the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.” <span
id="fr_2117"></span>[2118](#fn_2117.md) Wherefore the Church calmly
declines to place her hope in man, lest she fall under the curse
pronounced in Scripture, “Cursed be the man that trusteth in man,” <span
id="fr_2118"></span>[2119](#fn_2118.md) but places her hope in Christ, who
so took upon Him the form of a servant as not to lose the form of God,
of whom it is said, “The same is He which baptizeth.” Therefore, whoever
the man be, and whatever office he bear who administers the ordinance,
it is not he who baptizes,—that is the work of Him upon whom the dove
descended. So great is the absurdity in which the Donatists are involved
in consequence of these foolish opinions, that they can find no escape
from it. For when they admit the validity and reality of baptism when
one of their sect baptizes who is a guilty man, but whose guilt is
concealed, we ask them, Who baptizes in this case? and they can only
answer, God; for they cannot affirm that a man guilty of sin (say of
adultery) can sanctify any one. If, then, when baptism is administered
by a man known to be righteous, he sanctifies the person baptized; but
when it is administered by a wicked man, whose wickedness is hidden, it
is not he, but God, who sanctifies. Those who are baptized ought to wish
to be baptized rather by men who are secretly bad than by men manifestly
good, for God sanctifies much more effectually than any righteous man
can do. If it be palpably absurd that one about to be baptized ought to
wish to be baptized by a hypocritical adulterer rather than by a man of
known chastity, it follows plainly, that whoever be the minister that
dispenses the rite, the baptism is valid, because He Himself baptizes
upon whom the dove descended.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p11"></span>6. Notwithstanding the impression
which truth so obvious should produce on the ears and hearts of men,
such is the whirlpool of evil custom by which some have been engulfed,
that rather than yield, they will resist both authority and argument of
every kind. Their resistance is of two kinds—either with active rage or
with passive immobility. What remedies, then, must the Church apply when
seeking with a mother’s anxiety the salvation of them all, and
distracted by the frenzy of some and the lethargy of others? Is it
right, is it possible, for her to despise or give up any means which may
promote their recovery? She must necessarily be esteemed burdensome by
both, just because she is the enemy of neither. For men in frenzy do not
like to be bound, and men in lethargy do not like to be stirred up;
nevertheless the diligence of charity perseveres in restraining the one
and stimulating the other, out of love to both. Both are provoked, but
both are loved; both, while they continue under their infirmity, resent
the treatment as vexatious; both express their thankfulness for it when
they are cured.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p12"></span>7. Moreover, whereas they think and
boast that we receive them into the Church just as they were, it is not
so. We receive them completely changed, because they do not begin to be
Catholics until they have ceased to be heretics. For their sacraments,
which we have in common with them, are not the objects of dislike to us,
because they are not human, but Divine. That which must be taken from
them is the error, which is their own, and which they have wickedly
imbibed; not the sacraments, which they have received like ourselves,
and which they bear and have,—to their own condemnation, indeed, because
they use them so unworthily; nevertheless, they truly have them.
Wherefore, when their error is forsaken, and the perversity of schism
corrected in them, they pass over from heresy into the peace of the
Church, which they formerly did not possess, and without which all that
they did possess was only doing them harm. If, however, in thus passing
over they are not sincere, this is a matter not for us, but for God, to
judge. And yet, some who were suspected of insincerity because they had
passed over to us <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-Page_376"></span>through fear, have been found in some
subsequent temptations so faithful as to surpass others who had been
originally Catholics. Therefore let it not be said that nothing is
accomplished when strong measures are employed. For when the
entrenchments of stubborn custom are stormed by fear of human authority,
this is not all that is done, because at the same time faith is
strengthened, and the understanding convinced, by authority and
arguments which are Divine.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p13"></span>8. These things being so, be it known
to your Grace that your men in the region of Hippo are still Donatists,
and that your letter has had no influence upon them. The reason why it
failed to move them I need not write; but send some one, either a
servant or a friend of your own, whose fidelity you can entrust with the
commission, and let him come not to them in the first place, but to us
without their knowledge; and when he has carefully consulted with us as
to what is best to be done, let him do it with the Lord’s help. For in
these measures we are acting not only for their welfare, but also on
behalf of our own men who have become Catholics, to whom the vicinity of
these Donatists is so dangerous, that it cannot be looked upon by us as
a small matter.

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p14"></span>I could have written much more
briefly; but I wished you to have a letter from me, by which you might
not only be yourself informed of the reason of my solicitude, but also
be provided with an answer to any one who might dissuade you from
earnestly devoting your energies to the correction of the people who
belong to you, and might speak against us for wishing you to do this. If
in this I have done what was unnecessary, because you had yourself
either learned or thought out these principles, or if I have been
burdensome to you by inflicting so long a letter upon one so engrossed
with public affairs, I beg you to forgive me. I only entreat you not to
despise what I have brought before you and requested at your hands. May
the mercy of God be your safeguard!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2117"></span>[375:2118](1010395.htm#fr_2117.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p9"></span> [John
1.33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2118"></span>[375:2119](1010395.htm#fr_2118.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p10"></span> [Jer.
17.5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXXXIX-p10.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XC](1010396.md)
