[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010102)  [Next](1010104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.VI.XII"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.VI.XII-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Discussion with Alypius
Concerning a Life of Celibacy.</span>

<span id="vi.VI.XII-p2"></span>21. It was in truth Alypius who prevented
me from marrying, alleging that thus we could <span id="page_99">p.
99</span> <span id="vi.VI.XII-Page_99"></span>by no means live together,
having so much undistracted leisure in the love of wisdom, as we had
long desired. For he himself was so chaste in this matter that it was
wonderful—all the more, too, that in his early youth he had entered upon
that path, but had not clung to it; rather had he, feeling sorrow and
disgust at it, lived from that time to the present most continently. But
I opposed him with the examples of those who as married men had loved
wisdom, found favour with God, and walked faithfully and lovingly with
their friends. From the greatness of whose spirit I fell far short, and,
enthralled with the disease of the flesh and its deadly sweetness,
dragged my chain along, fearing to be loosed; and, as if it pressed my
wound, rejected his kind expostulations, as it were the hand of one who
would unchain me. Moreover, it was by me that the serpent spake unto
Alypius himself, weaving and laying in his path, by my tongue, pleasant
snares, wherein his honourable and free feet <span
id="fr_470"></span>[471](#fn_470.md) might be entangled.

<span id="vi.VI.XII-p4"></span>22. For when he wondered that I, for whom
he had no slight esteem, stuck so fast in the bird-lime of that pleasure
as to affirm whenever we discussed the matter that it would be
impossible for me to lead a single life, and urged in my defence when I
saw him wonder that there was a vast difference between the life that he
had tried by stealth and snatches (of which he had now but a faint
recollection, and might therefore, without regret, easily despise), and
my sustained acquaintance with it, whereto if but the honourable name of
marriage were added, he would not then be astonished at my inability to
contemn that course,—then began he also to wish to be married, not as if
overpowered by the lust of such pleasure, but from curiosity. For, as he
said, he was anxious to know what that could be without which my life,
which was so pleasing to him, seemed to me not life but a penalty. For
his mind, free from that chain, was astounded at my slavery, and through
that astonishment was going on to a desire of trying it, and from it to
the trial itself, and thence, perchance, to fall into that bondage
whereat he was so astonished, seeing he was ready to enter into “a
covenant with death;” <span id="fr_471"></span>[472](#fn_471.md) and he
that loves danger shall fall into it. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[473](#fn_472.md) For whatever the conjugal honour be in
the office of well-ordering a married life, and sustaining children,
influenced us but slightly. But that which did for the most part afflict
me, already made a slave to it, was the habit of satisfying an
insatiable lust; him about to be enslaved did an admiring wonder draw
on. In this state were we, until Thou, O most High, not forsaking our
lowliness, commiserating our misery, didst come to our rescue by
wonderful and secret ways.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_470"></span>[99:471](1010103.htm#fr_470.md) <span
id="vi.VI.XII-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XII-p3"></span> “Paulinus says that though he lived
among the people and sat over them, ruling the sheep of the Lord’s fold,
as a watchful shepherd, with anxious sleeplessness, yet by renunciation
of the world, and denial of flesh and blood, he had made himself a
wilderness, severed from the many, called among the few” (Ap. Aug. *Ep.*
24, sec. 2). St. Jerome calls him “his holy and venerable brother,
Father (Papa) Alypius” (*Ep.* 39, *ibid.*). Earlier, Augustin speaks of
him as “abiding in union with him, to be an example to the brethren who
wished to avoid the cares of this world” (*Ep.* 22); and to Paulinus
(*Ep*. 27), \[Romanianus\] “is a relation of the venerable and truly
blessed Bishop Alypius, whom you embrace with your whole heart
deservedly; for whosoever thinks favourably of that man, thinks of the
great mercy of God. Soon, by the help of God, I shall transfuse Alypius
wholly into your soul \[Paulinus had asked Alypius to write him his
life, and Augustin had, at Alypius’ request, undertaken to relieve him,
and to do it\]; for I feared chiefly lest he should shrink from laying
open all which the Lord has bestowed upon him, lest, if read by any
ordinary person (for it would not be read by you only), he should seem
not so much to set forth the gifts of God committed to men, as to exalt
himself.”—E. B. P.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[99:472](1010103.htm#fr_471.md) <span
id="vi.VI.XII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XII-p5"></span> [Isa.
28.15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015.md)<span
id="vi.VI.XII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[99:473](1010103.htm#fr_472.md) <span
id="vi.VI.XII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vi.VI.XII-p6"></span> [Ecclus.
3.27](../../../bib/apo/sir003.htm#027.md)<span id="vi.VI.XII-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](1010104.md)
