[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010337)  [Next](1010339.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXXI"></span><span id="page_258">p. 258</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-Page_258"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p1.1"></span>Second Division.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p2.1"></span>Letters Which Were Written by Augustin After
His Becoming Bishop of Hippo, and Before the Conference Held with the
Donatists at Carthage, and the Discovery of the Heresy of Pelagius in
Africa (<span class="c9"><span id="vii.1.XXXI-p2.2"></span>a.d.</span>
396–410).</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p4"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p4.1"></span>Letter XXXI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p5"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 396.)

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p6"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p6.1"></span>To Brother Paulinus and to Sister Therasia,
Most Beloved and Sincere, Truly Most Blessed and Most Eminent for the
Very Abundant Grace of God Bestowed on Them Augustin Sends Greeting in
the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p7"></span>1. <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p7.1"></span>Although</span> in my longing to be without
delay near you in one sense, while still remote in another, I wished
much that what I wrote in answer to your former letter (if, indeed, any
letter of mine deserves to be called an answer to yours) should go with
all possible expedition to your Grace, <span
id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543.md) my delay has brought me the
advantage of a second letter from you. The Lord is good, who often
withholds what we desire, that He may add to it what we would prefer.
For it is one pleasure to me that you will write me on receiving my
letter, and it is another that, through not receiving it at once, you
have written now. The joy which I have felt in reading this letter would
have been lost to me if my letter to your Holiness had been quickly
conveyed to you, as I intended and earnestly desired. But now, to have
this letter, and to expect a reply to my own, multiplies my
satisfaction. The blame of the delay cannot be laid to my charge; and
the Lord, in His more abundant kindness, has done that which He judged
to be more conducive to my happiness.

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p9"></span>2. We welcomed with great gladness in
the Lord the holy brothers Romanus and Agilis, who were, so to speak, an
additional letter from you, capable of hearing and answering our voices,
whereby most agreeably your presence was in part enjoyed by us, although
only to make us long the more eagerly to see you. It would be at all
times and in every way impossible for you to give, and unreasonable for
us to ask, as much information from you concerning yourself by letter as
we received from them by word of mouth. There was manifest also in them
(what no paper could convey) such delight in telling us of you, that by
their very countenance and eyes while they spoke, we could with
unspeakable joy read you written on their hearts. Moreover, a sheet of
paper, of whatever kind it be, and however excellent the things written
upon it may be, enjoys no benefit itself from what it contains, though
it may be unfolded with great benefit to others; but, in reading this
letter of yours—namely, the minds of these brethren—when conversing with
them, we found that the blessedness of those upon whom you had written
was manifestly proportioned to the fulness with which they had been
written upon by you. In order, therefore, to attain to the same
blessedness, we transcribed in our own hearts what was written in
theirs, by most eager questioning as to everything concerning you.

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p10"></span>3. Notwithstanding all this, it is with
deep regret that we consent to their so soon leaving us, even to return
to you. For observe, I beseech you, the conflicting emotions by which we
are agitated. Our obligation to let them go without delay was increased
according to the vehemence of their desire to obey you; but the greater
the vehemence of this desire in them, the more completely did they set
you forth as almost present with us, because they let us see how tender
your affections are. Therefore our reluctance to let them go increased
with our sense of the reasonableness of their urgency to be permitted to
go. Oh insupportable trial, were it not that by such partings we are
not, after all, separated from each other,—were it not that we are
“members of one body, having one Head, enjoying the effusion of the same
grace, living by the same bread, walking in the same way, and dwelling
in the same home!” <span id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544.md) You
recognise these words, I suppose, as quoted from your own letter; and
why should not I also use them? Why should they be yours any more than
mine, seeing that, inasmuch as they are true, they proceed from
communion with the same head? And in so far as they contain something
that has been specially given to you, I have so loved them the more on
that account, that they have taken possession of the way leading through
my breast, and would suffer no words to pass from my heart to my tongue
until they went first, with the priority which is due to them as yours.
My brother and sister, holy and beloved in God, members of the same body
with us, who could doubt that we are animated by one spirit, except
those who are strangers to that affection by which we are bound to each
other?

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p12"></span>4. Yet I am curious to know whether you
<span id="page_259">p. 259</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-Page_259"></span>bear with more patience and ease than I
do this bodily separation. If it be so, I do not, I confess, take any
pleasure in your fortitude in this respect, unless perhaps because of
its reasonableness, seeing that I confess myself much less worthy of
your affectionate longing than you are of mine. At all events, if I
found in myself a power of bearing your absence patiently, this would
displease me, because it would make me relax my efforts to see you; and
what could be more absurd than to be made indolent by power of
endurance? But I beg to acquaint your Charity with the ecclesiastical
duties by which I am kept at home, inasmuch as the blessed father
Valerius (who with me salutes you, and thirsts for you with a vehemence
of which you will hear from our brethren), not content with having me as
his presbyter, has insisted upon adding the greater burden of sharing
the episcopate with him. This office I was afraid to decline, being
persuaded, through the love of Valerius and the importunity of the
people, that it was the Lord’s will, and being precluded from excusing
myself on other grounds by some precedents of similar appointments. The
yoke of Christ, it is true, is in itself easy, and His burden
light; <span id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545.md) yet, through my
perversity and infirmity, I may find the yoke vexatious and the burden
heavy in some degree; and I cannot tell how much more easy and light my
yoke and burden would become if I were comforted by a visit from you,
who live, as I am informed, more disengaged and free from such
cares. <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546.md) I therefore feel
warranted in asking, nay, demanding and imploring you to condescend to
come over into Africa, which is more oppressed with thirst for men such
as you are than even by the well-known aridity of her soil. <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547.md)

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p16"></span>5. God knoweth that I long for your
visiting this country, not merely to gratify my own desire, nor merely
on account of those who through me, or by public report, have heard of
your pious resolution; <span id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548.md) I long
for it for the sake of others also who either have not heard, or,
hearing, have not believed the fame of your piety, but who might be
constrained to love excellence of which they could then be no longer in
ignorance or doubt. For although the perseverance and purity of your
compassionate benevolence is good, more is required of you; namely, “Let
your light so shine before men, that they may behold your good works,
and may glorify your Father which is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549.md) The fishermen of Galilee found
pleasure not only in leaving their ships and their nets at the Lord’s
command, but also in declaring that they had left all and followed
Him. <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550.md) And truly he despises
all who despises not only all that he was able, but also all that he was
desirous to possess. What may have been desired is seen only by the eyes
of God; what was actually possessed is seen also by the eyes of men.
Moreover, when things trivial and earthly are loved by us, we are
somehow more firmly wedded to what we have than to what we desire to
have. For whence was it that he who sought from the Lord counsel as to
the way of eternal life, went away sorrowful upon hearing that, if he
would be perfect, he must sell all, and distribute to the poor, and have
treasure in heaven, unless because, as the Gospel tells us, he had great
possessions? <span id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551.md) For it is one
thing to forbear from appropriating what is wanting to us; it is another
thing to rend away that which has become a part of ourselves: the former
action is like declining food, the latter is like cutting off a limb.
How great and how full of wonder is the joy with which Christian charity
beholds in our day a sacrifice cheerfully made in obedience to the
Gospel of Christ, which that rich man grieved and refused to make at the
bidding of Christ Himself!

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p21"></span>6. Although language fails to express
that which my heart has conceived and labours to utter, nevertheless,
since you perceive with your discernment and piety that the glory of
this is not yours, that is to say, not of man, but the glory of the Lord
in you (for you yourselves are most carefully on your guard against your
Adversary, and most devoutly strive to be found as learners of Christ,
meek and lowly in heart; and, indeed, it were better with humility to
retain than with pride to renounce this world’s wealth);—since, I say,
you are aware that the glory here is not yours, but the Lord’s, you see
how weak and inadequate are the things which I have spoken. For I have
been speaking of the praises of Christ, a theme transcending the tongue
of angels. We long to see this glory of Christ brought near to the eyes
of our people; that in you, united in the bonds of wedlock, there may be
given to both sexes an example of the way in which pride must be trodden
under foot, and perfection hopefully pursued. I know not any way in
which you could give greater proof of your benevolence, than in
resolving to be not less willing to permit your worth to be seen, than
you are zealous to acquire and retain it.

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p22"></span>7. I recommend to your kindness and
charity this boy Vetustinus, whose case might draw forth the sympathy
even of those who are not religious: the causes of his affliction and of
his leav<span id="page_260">p. 260</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-Page_260"></span>ing his country you will hear from his
own lips. As to his pious resolution—his promise, namely, to devote
himself to the service of God—it will be more decisively known after
some time has elapsed, when his strength has been confirmed, and his
present fear is removed. Perceiving the warmth of your love for me, and
encouraged thereby to believe that you will not grudge the labour of
reading what I have written, I send to your Holiness and Charity three
books: would that the size of the volumes were an index of the
completeness of the discussion of so great a subject; for the question
of free-will is handled in them! I know that these books, or at least
some of them, are not in the possession of our brother Romanianus; but
almost everything which I have been able for the benefit of any readers
to write is, as I have intimated, accessible to your perusal through
him, because of your love to me, although I did not charge him to carry
them to you. For he already had them all, and was carrying them with
him: moreover, it was by him that my answer to your first letter was
sent. I suppose that your Holiness has already discovered, by that
spiritual sagacity which the Lord has given you, how much that man bears
in his soul of what is good, and how far he still comes short through
infirmity. In the letter sent through him you have, as I trust, read
with what anxiety I commended himself and his son to your sympathy and
love, as well as how close is the bond by which they are united to me.
May the Lord build them up by your means! This must be asked from Him
rather than from you, for I know how much it is already your desire.

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p23"></span>8. I have heard from the brethren that
you are writing a treatise against the Pagans: if we have any claim on
your heart, send it at once to us to read. For your heart is such an
oracle of divine truth, that we expect from it answers which shall
satisfactorily and clearly decide the most prolix debates. I understand
that your Holiness has the books of the most blessed father <span
id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552.md) Ambrose, of which I long greatly to
see those which, with much care and at great length, he has written
against some most ignorant and pretentious men, who affirm that our Lord
was instructed by the writings of Plato. <span
id="fr_1553"></span>[1554](#fn_1553.md)

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p26"></span>9. Our most blessed brother Severus,
formerly of our community, now president <span
id="fr_1554"></span>[1555](#fn_1554.md) of the church in Milevis, and well
known by the brethren in that city, joins me in respectful salutation to
your Holiness. The brethren also who are with me serving the Lord salute
you as warmly as they long to see you: they long for you as much as they
love you; and they love you as your eminent goodness merits. The loaf
which we send you will become more rich as a blessing through the love
with which your kindness receives it. May the Lord keep you for ever
from this generation, <span id="fr_1555"></span>[1556](#fn_1555.md) my
brother and sister most beloved and sincere, truly benevolent, and most
eminently endowed with abundant grace from the Lord.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[258:1544](1010338.htm#fr_1543.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p8"></span> *Charitas*.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[258:1545](1010338.htm#fr_1544.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p11"></span> Letter XXX. p. 257.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[259:1546](1010338.htm#fr_1545.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p13"></span> [Matt.
11.30](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#030.md)<span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[259:1547](1010338.htm#fr_1546.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p14"></span> Paulinus was then at Nola, having gone
thither from Barcelona in <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p14.1"></span>A.D.</span> 393 or 394. He became Bishop of
Nola in 409.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[259:1548](1010338.htm#fr_1547.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p15"></span> *Nobilitate siccitatis*.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[259:1549](1010338.htm#fr_1548.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p17"></span> This refers to the voluntary poverty
which Paulinus and Therasia, though of high rank and great wealth,
embraced, selling all that they had in order to give to the poor.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[259:1550](1010338.htm#fr_1549.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p18"></span> [Matt.
5.16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[259:1551](1010338.htm#fr_1550.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p19"></span> [Matt.
19.27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md)<span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[259:1552](1010338.htm#fr_1551.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p20"></span> [Luke
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#022.md),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[260:1553](1010338.htm#fr_1552.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p24"></span> *Beatissimi papæ*.

<span id="fn_1553"></span>[260:1554](1010338.htm#fr_1553.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p25"></span> These books of Ambrose are lost.

<span id="fn_1554"></span>[260:1555](1010338.htm#fr_1554.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p27"></span> *Antistes*.

<span id="fn_1555"></span>[260:1556](1010338.htm#fr_1555.md) <span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXXI-p28"></span> See [Ps.
12.7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.XXXI-p28.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXXII](1010339.md)
