[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010313)  [Next](1010315) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.VII"></span><span id="page_224">p. 224</span> <span
id="vii.1.VII-Page_224"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.VII-p1.1"></span>Letter VII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.VII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.VII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VII-p3.1"></span>To Nebridius Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.VII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>—*Memory may be exercised
independently of such images as are presented by the imagination.*

<span id="vii.1.VII-p5"></span>1. I shall dispense with a formal
preface, and to the subject on which you have for some time wished to
hear my opinion I shall address myself at once; and this I do the more
willingly, because the statement must take some time.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p6"></span>It seems to you that there can be no
exercise of memory without images, or the apprehension of some objects
presented by the imagination, which you have been pleased to call
“phantasiæ.” For my part, I entertain a different opinion. In the first
place, we must observe that the things which we remember are not always
things which are passing away, but are for the most part things which
are permanent. Wherefore, seeing that the function of memory is to
retain hold of what belongs to time past, it is certain that it embraces
on the one hand things which leave us, and on the other hand things from
which we go away. When, for example, I remember my father, the object
which memory recalls is one which has left me, and is now no more; but
when I remember Carthage, the object is in this case one which still
exists, and which I have left. In both cases, however, memory retains
what belongs to past time. For I remember that man and this city, not by
seeing them now, but by having seen them in the past.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p7"></span>2. You perhaps ask me at this point, Why
bring forward these facts? And you may do this the more readily, because
you observe that in both the examples quoted the object remembered can
come to my memory in no other way than by the apprehension of such an
image as you affirm to be always necessary. For my purpose it suffices
meanwhile to have proved in this way that memory can be spoken of as
embracing also those things which have not yet passed away: and now mark
attentively how this supports my opinion. Some men raise a groundless
objection to that most famous theory invented by Socrates, according to
which the things that we learn are not introduced to our minds as new,
but brought back to memory by a process of recollection; supporting
their objection by affirming that memory has to do only with things
which have passed away, whereas, as Plato himself has taught, those
things which we learn by the exercise of the understanding are
permanent, and being imperishable, cannot be numbered among things which
have passed away: the mistake into which they have fallen arising
obviously from this, that they do not consider that it is only the
mental act of apprehension by which we have discerned these things which
belongs to the past; and that it is because we have, in the stream of
mental activity, left these behind, and begun in a variety of ways to
attend to other things, that we require to return to them by an effort
of recollection, that is, by memory. If, therefore, passing over other
examples, we fix our thoughts upon eternity itself as something which is
for ever permanent, and consider, on the one hand, that it does not
require any image fashioned by the imagination as the vehicle by which
it may be introduced into the mind; and, on the other hand, that it
could never enter the mind otherwise than by our remembering it,—we
shall see that, in regard to some things at least, there can be an
exercise of memory without any image of the thing remembered being
presented by the imagination.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p8"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VII-p8.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>—*The mind is destitute of
images presented by the imagination, so long as it has not been informed
by the senses of external things.*

<span id="vii.1.VII-p9"></span>3. In the second place, as to your
opinion that it is possible for the mind to form to itself images of
material things independently of the services of the bodily senses, this
is refuted by the following argument:—If the mind is able, before it
uses the body as its instrument in perceiving material objects, to form
to itself the images of these; and if, as no sane man can doubt, the
mind received more reliable and correct impressions before it was
involved in the illusions which the senses produce, it follows that we
must attribute greater value to the impressions of men asleep than of
men awake, and of men insane than of those who are free from such mental
disorder: for they are, in these states of mind, impressed by the same
kind of images as impressed them before they were indebted for
information to these most deceptive messengers, the senses; and thus,
either the sun which they see must be more real than the sun which is
seen by men in their sound judgment and in their waking hours, or that
which is an illusion must be better than what is real. But if these
conclusions, my dear Nebridius, are, as they obviously are, wholly
absurd, it is demonstrated that the image of which you speak is nothing
else than a blow inflicted by the senses, the function of which in
connection with these images is not, as you write, the mere suggestion
or admonition occasioning their formation by the mind within itself, but
the actual bringing in to the mind, or, to speak more definitely,
impressing upon it of the illusions to which through the senses we are
subject. The difficulty which you feel as to the question how <span
id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span id="vii.1.VII-Page_225"></span>it
comes to pass that we can conceive in thought, faces and forms which we
have never seen, is one which proves the acuteness of your mind. I shall
therefore do what may extend this letter beyond the usual length; not,
however, beyond the length which you will approve, for I believe that
the greater the fulness with which I write to you, the more welcome
shall my letter be.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p10"></span>4. I perceive that all those images
which you as well as many others call *phantasiæ*, may be most
conveniently and accurately divided into three classes, according as
they originate with the senses, or the imagination, or the faculty of
reason. Examples of the first class are when the mind forms within
itself and presents to me the image of your face, or of Carthage, or of
our departed friend Verecundus, or of any other thing at present or
formerly existing, which I have myself seen and perceived. Under the
second class come all things which we imagine to have been, or to be so
and so: *e.g.* when, for the sake of illustration in discourse, we
ourselves suppose things which have no existence, but which are not
prejudicial to truth; or when we call up to our own minds a lively
conception of the things described while we read history, or hear, or
compose, or refuse to believe fabulous narrations. Thus, according to my
own fancy, and as it may occur to my own mind, I picture to myself the
appearance of Æneas, or of Medea with her team of winged dragons, or of
Chremes, or Parmeno. <span id="fr_1453"></span>[1454](#fn_1453) To this
class belong also those things which have been brought forward as true,
either by wise men wrapping up some truth in the folds of such
inventions, or by foolish men building up various kinds of superstition;
*e.g.* the Phlegethon of Tortures, and the five caves of the nation of
darkness, <span id="fr_1454"></span>[1455](#fn_1454) and the North Pole
supporting the heavens, and a thousand other prodigies of poets and of
heretics. Moreover, we often say, when carrying on a discussion,
“Suppose that three worlds, such as the one which we inhabit, were
placed one above another;” or, “Suppose the earth to be enclosed within
a four-sided figure,” and so on: for all such things we picture to
ourselves, and imagine according to the mood and direction of our
thoughts. As for the third class of images, it has to do chiefly with
numbers and measure; which are found partly in the nature of things, as
when the figure of the entire world is discovered, and an image
consequent upon this discovery is formed in the mind of one thinking
upon it; and partly in sciences, as in geometrical figures and musical
harmonies, and in the infinite variety of numerals: which, although they
are, as I think, true in themselves as objects of the understanding, are
nevertheless the causes of illusive exercises of the imagination, the
misleading tendency of which reason itself can only with difficulty
withstand; although it is not easy to preserve even the science of
reasoning free from this evil, since in our logical divisions and
conclusions we form to ourselves, so to speak, calculi or counters to
facilitate the process of reasoning.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p13"></span>5. In this whole forest of images, I
believe that you do not think that those of the first class belong to
the mind previous to the time when they find access through the senses.
On this we need not argue any further. As to the other two classes a
question might reasonably be raised, were it not manifest that the mind
is less liable to illusions when it has not yet been subjected to the
deceptive influence of the senses, and of things sensible; and yet who
can doubt that these images are much more unreal than those with which
the senses acquaint us? For the things which we suppose, or believe, or
picture to ourselves, are in every point wholly unreal; and the things
which we perceive by sight and the other senses, are, as you see, far
more near to the truth than these products of imagination. As to the
third class, whatever extension of body in space I figure to myself in
my mind by means of an image of this class, although it seems as if a
process of thought had produced this image by scientific reasonings
which did not admit of error, nevertheless I prove it to be deceptive,
these same reasonings serving in turn to detect its falsity. Thus it is
wholly impossible for me to believe \[as, accepting your opinion, I must
believe\] that the soul, while not yet using the bodily senses, and not
yet rudely assaulted through these fallacious instruments by that which
is mortal and fleeting, lay under such ignominious subjection to
illusions.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p14"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.VII-p14.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>—*Objection answered*.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p15"></span>6. “Whence then comes our capacity of
conceiving in thought things which we have never seen?” What, think you,
can be the cause of this, but a certain faculty of diminution and
addition which is innate in the mind, and which it cannot but carry with
it whithersoever it turns (a faculty which may be observed especially in
relation to numbers)? By the exercise of this faculty, if the image of a
crow, for example, which is very familiar to the eye, be set before the
eye of the mind, as it were, it may be brought, by the taking away of
some features and the addition of others, to almost any image such as
never was seen by the eye. By this faculty also it comes to pass, that
when men’s minds habitually ponder such things, figures of <span
id="page_226">p. 226</span> <span id="vii.1.VII-Page_226"></span>this
kind force their way as it were unbidden into their thoughts. Therefore
it is possible for the mind, by taking away, as has been said, some
things from objects which the senses have brought within its knowledge,
and by adding some things, to produce in the exercise of imagination
that which, as a whole, was never within the observation of any of the
senses; but the parts of it had all been within such observation, though
found in a variety of different things: *e.g.*, when we were boys, born
and brought up in an inland district, we could already form some idea of
the sea, after we had seen water even in a small cup; but the flavour of
strawberries and of cherries could in no wise enter our conceptions
before we tasted these fruits in Italy. Hence it is also, that those who
have been born blind know not what to answer when they are asked about
light and colours. For those who have never perceived coloured objects
by the senses are not capable of having the images of such objects in
the mind.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p16"></span>7. And let it not appear to you strange,
that though the mind is present in and intermingled with all those
images which in the nature of things are figured or can be pictured by
us, these are not evolved by the mind from within itself before it has
received them through the senses from without. For we also find that,
along with anger, joy, and other such emotions, we produce changes in
our bodily aspect and complexion, before our thinking faculty even
conceives that we have the power of producing such images \[or
indications of our feeling\]. These follow upon the experience of the
emotion in those wonderful ways (especially deserving your attentive
consideration), which consist in the repeated action and reaction of
hidden numbers <span id="fr_1455"></span>[1456](#fn_1455) in the soul,
without the intervention of any image of illusive material things.
Whence I would have you understand—perceiving as you do that so many
movements of the mind go on wholly independently of the images in
question—that of all the movements of the mind by which it may
conceivably attain to the knowledge of bodies, every other is more
likely than the process of creating forms of sensible things by unaided
thought, because I do not think that it is capable of any such
conceptions before it uses the body and the senses.

<span id="vii.1.VII-p18"></span>Wherefore, my well beloved and most
amiable brother, by the friendship which unites us, and by our faith in
the divine law itself, <span id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456) I
would warn you never to link yourself in friendship with those shadows
of the realm of darkness, and to break off without delay whatever
friendship may have been begun between you and them. That resistance to
the sway of the bodily senses which it is our most sacred duty to
practise, is wholly abandoned if we treat with fondness and flattery the
blows and wounds which the senses inflict upon us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1453"></span>[225:1454](1010314.htm#fr_1453) <span
id="vii.1.VII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VII-p11"></span> *Dramatis personæ* in Terence.

<span id="fn_1454"></span>[225:1455](1010314.htm#fr_1454) <span
id="vii.1.VII-p11.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VII-p12"></span> Referring to Manichæan notions.

<span id="fn_1455"></span>[226:1456](1010314.htm#fr_1455) <span
id="vii.1.VII-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VII-p17"></span> *Numeri actitantur occulti.*

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[226:1457](1010314.htm#fr_1456) <span
id="vii.1.VII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.VII-p19"></span> *Pro ipsius divini juris fide.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter VIII](1010315)
