[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010467)  [Next](1010469.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p1.1"></span>Letter CCXXXI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 429.)

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p3.1"></span>To Darius, His Son, and a Member of
Christ, Augustin, a Servant of Christ and of the Members of Christ,
Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p4"></span>1. You requested an answer from me as
a proof that I had gladly received your letter. <span
id="fr_2997"></span>[2998](#fn_2997.md) Behold, then, I write again; and
yet I cannot express the pleasure I felt, either by this answer or by
any other, whether I write briefly or at the utmost length, for neither
by few words nor by many is it possible for me to express to you what
words can never express. I, indeed, am not eloquent, though ready in
speech; but I could by no means allow any man, however eloquent, even
though he could see as well into my mind as I do myself, to do that
which is beyond my own power, viz. to describe in a letter, however able
and however long, the effect which your epistle had on my mind. It
remains, then, for me so to express to you what you wished to know, that
you may understand as being in my words that which they do not express.
What, then, shall I say? That I was delighted with your letter,
exceedingly delighted;—the repetition of this word is not a mere
repetition, but, as it were, a perpetual affirmation; because it was
impossible to be always saying it, therefore it has been at least once
repeated, for in this way perhaps my feelings may be expressed.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p6"></span>2. If some one inquire here what after
all delighted me so exceedingly in your letter,—“Was it its eloquence?”
I will answer, No; and he, perhaps, will reply, “Was it, then, the
praises bestowed on yourself?” but again I will reply, No; and I shall
reply thus not because these things are not in that letter, for the
eloquence in it is so great that it is very clearly evident that you are
naturally endowed with the highest talents, and that you have been most
carefully educated; and your letter is undeniably full of my praises.
Some one then may say, “Do not these things delight you?” Yes, truly,
for “my heart is not,” as the poet says, “of horn, <span
id="fr_2998"></span>[2999](#fn_2998.md) so that I should either not observe
these things or observe them without delight. These things do delight;
but what have these things to do with that with which I said I was
highly delighted? Your eloquence delights me since it is at once genial
in sentiment and dignified in expression; and though assuredly I am not
delighted with all sorts of praise from all sorts of persons, but only
with such praises as you have thought me worthy of, and only coming from
those who are such as you are—that is, from persons who, for Christ’s
sake, love His servants, I cannot deny that I am delighted with the
praises bestowed upon me in your letter.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p8"></span>3. Thoughtful and experienced men will
be at no loss as to the opinion which they should form of Themistocles
(if I remember the name rightly), who, having refused at a banquet to
play on the lyre, a thing which the distinguished and learned men of
Greece were accustomed to do, and having been on that account regarded
as uneducated, was asked, when he expressed his contempt for that sort
of amusement, “What, then, does it delight you to hear?” and is reported
to have answered: “My own praises.” Thoughtful and experienced men will
readily see with what design and in what sense these words must have
been used by him, or must be understood by them, if they are to believe
that he uttered them; for he was in the affairs of this world a most
remarkable man, as may be illustrated by the answer which he gave when
he was further pressed with the question: “What, then, do you know?” “I
know,” he replied, <span id="page_583">p. 583</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-Page_583"></span>“how to make a small republic great.”
As to the thirst for praise spoken of by Ennius in the words: “All men
greatly desire to be praised,” I am of opinion that it is partly to be
approved of, partly guarded against. For as, on the one hand, we should
vehemently desire the truth, which is undoubtedly to be eagerly sought
after as alone worthy of praise, even though it be not praised: so, on
the other hand, we must carefully shun the vanity which readily
insinuates itself along with praise from men: and this vanity is present
in the mind when either the things which are worthy of praise are not
reckoned worth having unless the man be praised for them by his
fellow-men, or things on account of possessing which any man wishes to
be much praised are deserving either of small praise, or it may be of
severe censure. Hence Horace, a more careful observer than Ennius, says:
“Is fame your passion? Wisdom’s powerful charm if thrice read over shall
its power disarm.” <span id="fr_2999"></span>[3000](#fn_2999.md)

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p10"></span>4. Thus the poet thought that the
malady arising from the love of human praise, which was thoroughly
attacked with his satire, was to be charmed away by words of healing
power. The great Teacher has accordingly taught us by His apostle, that
we ought not to do good with a view to be praised by men, that is, we
ought not to make the praises of men the motive for our well-doing; and
yet, for the sake of men themselves, He teaches us to seek their
approbation. For when good men are praised, the praise does not benefit
those on whom it is bestowed, but those who bestowed it. For to the
good, so far as they are themselves concerned, it is enough that they
are good; but those are to be congratulated whose interest it is to
imitate the good when the good are praised by them, since they thus show
that the persons whom they sincerely praise are persons whose conduct
they appreciate. The apostle says in a certain place, “If I yet pleased
men, I should not be the servant of Christ;” <span
id="fr_3000"></span>[3001](#fn_3000.md) and the same apostle says in
another place, “I please all men in all things,” and adds the reason,
“Not seeking mine own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be
saved.” <span id="fr_3001"></span>[3002](#fn_3001.md) Behold what he sought
in the praise of men, as it is declared in these words: “Finally, my
brethren, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,
whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report; if there be any
virtue, and if there be any praise, think on these things. Those things,
which ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do:
and the God of peace shall be with you.” <span
id="fr_3002"></span>[3003](#fn_3002.md) All the other things which I have
named above, he summed up under the name of Virtue, saying, “If there be
any virtue;” but the definition which he subjoined, “Whatsoever things
are of good report,” he followed up by another suitable word, “If there
be any praise.” What the apostle says, then, in the first of these
passages, “If I yet pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ,”
is to be understood as if he said, If the good things which I do were
done by me with human praise as my motive, if I were puffed up with the
love of praise, I should not be the servant of Christ. The apostle,
then, wished to please all men, and rejoiced in pleasing them, not that
he might himself be inflated with their praises, but that he being
praised might build them up in Christ. Why, then, should it not delight
me to be praised by you, since you are too good a man to speak
insincerely, and you bestow your praise on things which you love, and
which it is profitable and wholesome to love, even though they be not in
me? This, moreover, does not benefit you alone, but also me. For if they
are not in me, it is good for me that I am put to the blush, and am made
to burn with desire to possess them. And in regard to anything in your
praise which I recognise as in my possession, I rejoice that I possess
it, and that such things are loved by you, and that I am loved for their
sake. And in regard to those things which I do not recognise as
belonging to me, I not only desire to obtain them, that I may possess
them for myself, but also that those who love me sincerely may not
always be mistaken in praising me for them.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p14"></span>5. Behold how many things I have
said, and still I have not yet spoken of that in your letter which
delighted me more than your eloquence, and far more than the praises you
bestowed on me. What do you think, O excellent man, that this can be? It
is that I have acquired the friendship of so distinguished a man as you
are, and that without having even seen you; if, indeed, I ought to speak
of one as unseen whose soul I have seen in his own letters, though I
have not seen his body. In which letters I rest my opinion concerning
you on my own knowledge, and not, as formerly, on the testimony of my
brethren. For what your character was I had already heard, but how you
stood affected to me I knew not until now. From this, your friendship to
me, I doubt not that even the praises bestowed on me, which give me
pleasure for a reason about which I have already said enough, will much
more abundantly benefit the Church of Christ, since the fact that you
possess, and study, and love, and commend my labours in defence of the
gospel against the remnant of impious idolaters, secures for me a wider
influence in these writings in proportion to the high position which you
occupy; for, illustrious your<span id="page_584">p. 584</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-Page_584"></span>self, you insensibly shed a lustre
upon them. You, being celebrated, give celebrity to them, and wherever
you shall see that the circulation of them might do good, you will not
suffer them to remain altogether unknown. If you ask me how I know this,
my reply is, that such is the impression concerning you produced on me
by reading your letters. Herein you will now see how great delight your
letter could impart to me, for if your opinion of me be favourable, you
are aware how great delight is given to me by gain to the cause of
Christ. Moreover, when you tell me concerning yourself that, although,
as you say, you belong to a family which not for one or two generations,
but even to remote ancestors, has been known as able to accept the
doctrine of Christ, you have nevertheless been aided by my writings
against the Gentile rites so to understand these as you never had done
before, can I esteem it a small matter how great benefit our writings,
commended and circulated by you, may confer upon others, and to how many
and how illustrious persons your testimony may bring them, and how
easily and profitably through these persons they may reach others? Or,
reflecting on this, can the joy diffused in my heart be small or
moderate in degree?

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p15"></span>6. Since, then, I cannot in words
express how great delight I have received from your letter, I have
spoken of the reason why it delighted me, and may that which I am unable
adequately to utter on this subject I leave to you to conjecture.
Accept, then, my son—accept, O excellent man, Christian not by outward
profession merely, but by Christian love—accept, I say, the books
containing my “Confessions,” which you desired to have. In these behold
me, that you may not praise me beyond what I am; in these believe what
is said of me, not by others, but by myself; in these contemplate me,
and see what I have been in myself, by myself; and if anything in me
please you, join me, because of it, in praising Him to whom, and not to
myself, I desire praise to be given. For “He hath made us, and not we
ourselves;” <span id="fr_3003"></span>[3004](#fn_3003.md) indeed, we had
destroyed ourselves, but He who made us has made us anew. When, however,
you find me in these books, pray for me that I may not fail, but be
perfected. Pray, my son; pray. I feel what I say; I know what I ask. Let
it not seem to you a thing unbecoming, and, as it were, beyond your
merits. You will defraud me of a great help if you do not do so. Let not
only you yourself, but all also who by your testimony shall come to love
me, pray for me. Tell them that I have entreated this, and if you think
highly of us, consider that we command what we have asked; in any case,
whether as granting a request or obeying a command, pray for us. Read
the Divine Scriptures, and you will find that the apostles themselves,
the leaders of Christ’s flock, requested this from their sons, or
enjoined it on their hearers. I certainly, since you ask it of me, will
do this for you as far as I can. He sees this who is the Hearer of
prayer, and who saw that I prayed for you before you asked me; but let
this proof of love be reciprocated by you. We are placed over you; you
are the flock of God. Consider and see that our dangers are greater than
yours, and pray for us, for this becomes both us and you, that we may
give a good account of you to the Chief Shepherd and Head over us all,
and may escape both from the trials of this world and its allurements,
which are still more dangerous, except when the peace of this world has
the effect for which the apostle has directed us to pray, “That we may
lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty.” <span
id="fr_3004"></span>[3005](#fn_3004.md) For if godliness and honesty be
wanting, what is a quiet and peaceful exemption from the evils of the
world but an occasion either of inviting men to enter, or assisting men
to follow, a course of self-indulgence and perdition? Do you, then, ask
for us what we ask for you, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life
in all godliness and honesty. Let us ask this for each other wherever
you are and wherever we are, for He whose we are is everywhere present.

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p18"></span>7. I have sent you also other books
which you did not ask, that I might not rigidly restrict myself to what
you asked:—my works on Faith in Things Unseen, on Patience, on
Continence, on Providence, and a large work on Faith, Hope, and Charity.
If, while you are in Africa, you shall read all these, either send your
opinion of them to me, or let it be sent to some place whence it may be
sent us by my lord and brother Aurelius, though wherever you shall be we
hope to have letters from you; and do you expect letters from us as long
as we are able. I most gratefully received the things you sent to me, in
which you deigned to aid me both in regard to my bodily health, <span
id="fr_3005"></span>[3006](#fn_3005.md) since you desire me to be free from
the hindrance of sickness in devoting my time to God, and in regard to
my library, that I may have the means to procure new books and repair
the old. May God recompense you, both in the present life and in that to
come, with those favours which He has prepared for such as He has willed
you to be. I request you now to salute again for me, as before, the
pledge of peace entrusted to you, very dear to both of us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2997"></span>[582:2998](1010468.htm#fr_2997.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p5"></span> Referring to Darius’ reply (Letter
CCXXX.) to the foregoing Letter (CCXXIX.). In it, Darius, after
reciprocating in the warmest manner every expression of admiration and
esteem, expresses his hope that the peace concluded with the Vandals may
be permanent, entreats Augustin to pray for him (alluding to the letter
said to have been written by Abgaris, king ot Edessa, to our Saviour),
and asks him to send a copy of his Confessions along with his reply to
this communication.

<span id="fn_2998"></span>[582:2999](1010468.htm#fr_2998.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p7"></span> Persius, *Sat.* i. line 47. “Cornea.”

<span id="fn_2999"></span>[583:3000](1010468.htm#fr_2999.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p9"></span> Horace, Book 1. *Ep.* i. lines 36–37.
Francis’ translation.

<span id="fn_3000"></span>[583:3001](1010468.htm#fr_3000.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p11"></span> [Gal.
1.10](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#010.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3001"></span>[583:3002](1010468.htm#fr_3001.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
10.33](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#033.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3002"></span>[583:3003](1010468.htm#fr_3002.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p12.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p13"></span> [Phil.
4.8-9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3003"></span>[584:3004](1010468.htm#fr_3003.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p16"></span> [Ps.
100.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3004"></span>[584:3005](1010468.htm#fr_3004.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p17"></span> [1 Tim.
2.2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#002.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3005"></span>[584:3006](1010468.htm#fr_3005.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCXXXI-p19"></span> The reference is to some medicines
sent by Darius, and mentioned by him in the end of his letters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCXXXII](1010469.md)
