[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010366)  [Next](1010368.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.LXI"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXI-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.LXI-p1.1"></span>Letter LXI.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXI-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXI-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 401.)

<span id="vii.1.LXI-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.LXI-p3.1"></span>To His well-Beloved and honourable Brother
Theodorus, Bishop Augustin Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.LXI-p4"></span>1. I have resolved to commit to writing
in this letter what I said when you and I were conversing together as to
the terms on which we would welcome clergy of the party of Donatus
desiring to become Catholics, in order that, if any one asked you what
are our sentiments and practice in regard to this, you might exhibit
these by producing what I have written with my own hand. Be assured,
therefore, that we detest nothing in the Donatist clergy but that which
renders them schismatics and heretics, namely, their dissent from the
unity and truth of the Catholic Church, in their not remaining in peace
with the people of God, which is spread abroad throughout the world, and
in their refusing to recognise the baptism of Christ in those who have
received it. This their grievous error, therefore, we reject; but the
good name of God which they bear, and His sacrament which they have
received, we acknowledge in them, and embrace it with reverence and
love. But for this very reason we grieve over their wandering, and long
to gain them for God by the love of Christ, that they may have within
the peace of the Church that holy sacrament for their salvation, which
they meanwhile have beyond the pale of the Church for their destruction.
If, therefore, there be taken away from between us the evil things which
proceed from men, and if the good which comes from God and belongs to
both parties in common be duly honoured, there will ensue such brotherly
concord, such amiable peace, that the love of Christ shall gain the
victory in men’s hearts over the temptation of the devil.

<span id="vii.1.LXI-p5"></span>2. When, therefore, any come to us from
the party of Donatus, we do not welcome the evil which belongs to them,
viz. their error and schism: these, the only obstacles to our concord,
are removed from between us, and we embrace our brethren, standing with
them, as the apostle says, in “the unity of the Spirit, in the bond of
peace,” <span id="fr_1859"></span>[1860](#fn_1859.md) and acknowledging in
them the good things which are divine, as their holy baptism, the
blessing conferred by ordination, their profession of self-denial, their
vow of celibacy, their faith in the Trinity, and such like; all which
things were indeed theirs before, but “profited them nothing, because
they had not charity.” For what truth is there in the profession of
Christian charity by him who does not embrace Christian unity? When,
therefore, they come to the Catholic Church, they gain thereby not what
they already possessed, but something which they had not before,—namely,
that those things which they possessed begin then to be profitable to
them. For in the Catholic Church they obtain the root of charity in the
bond of peace and in the fellowship of unity: so that all the sacraments
of truth which they hold serve not to condemn, but to deliver them. The
branches <span id="page_319">p. 319</span> <span
id="vii.1.LXI-Page_319"></span>ought not to boast that their wood is the
wood of the vine, not of the thorn; for if they do not live by union to
the root, they shall, notwithstanding their outward appearance, be cast
into the fire. But of some branches which were broken off the apostle
says that “God is able to graft them in again.” <span
id="fr_1860"></span>[1861](#fn_1860.md) Wherefore, beloved brother, if you
see any one of the Donatist party in doubt as to the place into which
they shall be welcomed by us, show them this writing in my own hand,
which is familiar to you, and let them have it to read if they desire
it; for “I call God for a record upon my soul,” that I will welcome them
on such terms as that they shall retain not only the baptism of Christ
which they have received, but also the honour due to their vow of
holiness and to their self-denying virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[318:1860](1010367.htm#fr_1859.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXI-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXI-p6"></span> [Eph.
4.3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003.md)<span id="vii.1.LXI-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1860"></span>[319:1861](1010367.htm#fr_1860.md) <span
id="vii.1.LXI-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.LXI-p7"></span> [Rom.
11.23](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.1.LXI-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXII](1010368.md)
