[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010315)  [Next](1010317.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.IX"></span><span id="page_227">p. 227</span> <span
id="vii.1.IX-Page_227"></span>

<span id="vii.1.IX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.IX-p1.1"></span>Letter IX.</span>

<span id="vii.1.IX-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.IX-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.IX-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.IX-p3.1"></span>To Nebridius Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.IX-p4"></span>1. Although you know my mind well, you are
perhaps not aware how much I long to enjoy your society. This great
blessing, however, God will some day bestow on me. I have read your
letter, so genuine in its utterances, in which you complain of your
being in solitude, and, as it were, forsaken by your friends, in whose
society you found the sweetest charm of life. But what else can I
suggest to you than that which I am persuaded is already your exercise?
Commune with your own soul, and raise it up, as far as you are able,
unto God. For in Him you hold us also by a firmer bond, not by means of
bodily images, which we must meanwhile be content to use in remembering
each other, but by means of that faculty of thought through which we
realize the fact of our separation from each other.

<span id="vii.1.IX-p5"></span>2. In considering your letters, in
answering all of which I have certainly had to answer questions of no
small difficulty and importance, I was not a little stunned by the one
in which you ask me by what means certain thoughts and dreams are put
into our minds by higher powers or by superhuman agents. <span
id="fr_1457"></span>[1458](#fn_1457.md) The question is a great one, and,
as your own prudence must convince you, would require, in order to its
being satisfactorily answered, not a mere letter, but a full oral
discussion or a whole treatise. I shall try, however, knowing as I do
your talents, to throw out a few germs of thought which may shed light
on this question, in order that you may either complete the exhaustive
treatment of the subject by your own efforts, or at least not despair of
the possibility of this important matter being investigated with
satisfactory results.

<span id="vii.1.IX-p7"></span>3. It is my opinion that every movement of
the mind affects in some degree the body. We know that this is patent
even to our senses, dull and sluggish though they are, when the
movements of the mind are somewhat vehement, as when we are angry, or
sad, or joyful. Whence we may conjecture that, in like manner, when
thought is busy, although no bodily effect of the mental act is
discernible by us, there may be some such effect discernible by beings
of aërial or etherial essence whose perceptive faculty is in the highest
degree acute,—so much so, that, in comparison with it, our faculties are
scarcely worthy to be called perceptive. Therefore these footprints of
its motion, so to speak, which the mind impresses on the body, may
perchance not only remain, but remain as it were with the force of a
habit; and it may be that, when these are secretly stirred and played
upon, they bear thoughts and dreams into our minds, according to the
pleasure of the person moving or touching them: and this is done with
marvellous facility. For if, as is manifest, the attainments of our
earth-born and sluggish bodies in the department of exercise, *e.g.* in
the playing of musical instruments, dancing on the tight-rope, etc., are
almost incredible, it is by no means unreasonable to suppose that beings
which act with the powers of an aërial or etherial body upon our bodies,
and are by the constitution of their natures able to pass unhindered
through these bodies, should be capable of much greater quickness in
moving whatever they wish, while we, though not perceiving what they do,
are nevertheless affected by the results of their activity. We have a
somewhat parallel instance in the fact that we do not perceive how it is
that superfluity of bile impels us to more frequent outbursts of
passionate feeling; and yet it does produce this effect, while this
superfluity of bile is itself an effect of our yielding to such
passionate feelings.

<span id="vii.1.IX-p8"></span>4. If, however, you hesitate to accept
this example as a parallel one, when it is thus cursorily stated by me,
turn it over in your thoughts as fully as you can. The mind, if it be
continually obstructed by some difficulty in the way of doing and
accomplishing what it desires, is thereby made continually angry. For
anger, so far as I can judge of its nature, seems to me to be a
tumultuous eagerness to take out of the way those things which restrict
our freedom of action. Hence it is that usually we vent our anger not
only on men, but on such a thing, for example, as the pen with which we
write, bruising or breaking it in our passion; and so does the gambler
with his dice, the artist with his pencil, and every man with the
instrument which he may be using, if he thinks that he is in some way
thwarted by it. Now medical men themselves tell us that by these
frequent fits of anger bile is increased. But, on the other hand, when
the bile is increased, we are easily, and almost without any provocation
whatever, made angry. Thus the effect which the mind has by its movement
produced upon the body, is capable in its turn of moving the mind again.

<span id="vii.1.IX-p9"></span>5. These things might be treated at very
great length, and our knowledge of the subject might be brought to
greater certainty and fulness by a large induction from relevant facts.
But take along with this letter the one which I sent you lately
concerning images and memory, <span id="fr_1458"></span>[1459](#fn_1458.md)
and study it somewhat more carefully; for it was manifest to me, from
your reply, that it had not been fully <span id="page_228">p. 228</span>
<span id="vii.1.IX-Page_228"></span>understood. When, to the statements
now before you, you add the portion of that letter in which I spoke of a
certain natural faculty whereby the mind does in thought add to or take
from any object as it pleases, you will see that it is possible for us
both in dreams and in waking thoughts to conceive the images of bodily
forms which we have never seen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1457"></span>[227:1458](1010316.htm#fr_1457.md) <span
id="vii.1.IX-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.IX-p6"></span> *Dæmonibus.*

<span id="fn_1458"></span>[227:1459](1010316.htm#fr_1458.md) <span
id="vii.1.IX-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.IX-p10"></span> See Letter VII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter X](1010317.md)
