[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010261)  [Next](1010263.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.XII.XXIX"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXIX-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.XII.XXIX-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX.—Concerning the Opinion of
Those Who Explain It “At First He Made.”</span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXIX-p2"></span>40. But he who does not otherwise
understand, “In the beginning He made,” than if it were said, “At first
He made,” can only truly understand heaven and earth of the matter of
heaven and earth, namely, of the universal, that is, intelligible and
corporeal creation. For if he would have it of the universe. as already
formed, it might rightly be asked of him: “If at first God made this,
what made He afterwards?” And after the universe he will find nothing;
thereupon must he, though unwilling, hear, “How is this first, if there
is nothing afterwards?” But when he says that God made matter first
formless, then formed, he is not absurd if he be but able to discern
what precedes by eternity, what by time, what by choice, what by origin.
By eternity, as God is before all things; by time, as the flower is
before the fruit; by choice, as the fruit is before the flower; by
origin, as sound is before the tune. Of these four, the first and last
which I have referred to are with much difficulty understood; the two
middle very easily. For an uncommon and too lofty vision it is to
behold, O Lord, Thy Eternity, immutably making things mutable, and
thereby before them. Who is so acute of mind as to be able without great
labour to discover how the sound is prior to the tune, because a tune is
a formed sound; and a thing not formed may exist, but that which
existeth not cannot be formed? <span
id="fr_1159"></span>[1160](#fn_1159.md) So is the matter prior to that
which is made from it; not prior because it maketh it, since itself is
rather made, nor is it prior by an interval of time. For we do not as to
time first utter formless sounds without singing, and then adapt or
fashion them into the form of a song, just as wood or silver from which
a chest or vessel is made. Because such materials do by <span
id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span id="vi.XII.XXIX-Page_188"></span>time
also precede the forms of the things which are made from them; but in
singing this is not so. For when it is sung, its sound is heard at the
same time; seeing there is not first a formless sound, which is
afterwards formed into a song. For as soon as it shall have first
sounded it passeth away; nor canst thou find anything of it, which being
recalled thou canst by art compose. And, therefore, the song is absorbed
in its own sound, which sound of it is its matter. Because this same is
formed that it may be a tune; and therefore, as I was saying, the matter
of the sound is prior to the form of the tune, not before through any
power of making it a tune; for neither is a sound the composer of the
tune, but is sent forth from the body and is subjected to the soul of
the singer, that from it he may form a tune. Nor is it first in time,
for it is given forth together with the tune; nor first in choice, for a
sound is not better than a tune, since a tune is not merely a sound, but
a beautiful sound. But it is first in origin, because the tune is not
formed that it may become a sound, but the sound is formed that it may
become a tune. By this example, let him who is able understand that the
matter of things was first made, and called heaven and earth, because
out of it heaven and earth were made. Not that it was made first in
time, because the forms of things give rise to time, <span
id="fr_1160"></span>[1161](#fn_1160.md) but that was formless; but now, in
time, it is perceived together with its form. Nor yet can anything be
related concerning that matter, unless as if it were prior in time,
while it is considered last (because things formed are assuredly
superior to things formless), and is preceded by the Eternity of the
Creator, so that there might be out of nothing that from which something
might be made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1159"></span>[187:1160](1010262.htm#fr_1159.md) <span
id="vi.XII.XXIX-p2.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXIX-p3"></span> See a similar argument in his *Con.
adv. Leg. et Proph.* i. 9; and sec. 29, and note, above.

<span id="fn_1160"></span>[188:1161](1010262.htm#fr_1160.md) <span
id="vi.XII.XXIX-p3.1"></span>

<span id="vi.XII.XXIX-p4"></span> See xi. sec. 29, above, and Gillies’
note thereon; and compare with it Augustin’s *De. Gen. ad Lit.* v. 5:
“In vain we inquire after time before the creation as though we could
find time before time, for if there were no motion of the spiritual or
corporeal creatures whereby through the present the future might succeed
the past, there would be no time at all. But the creature could not have
motion unless it were. Time, therefore, begins rather from the creation,
than creation from time, but both are from God.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXX](1010263.md)
