[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010319)  [Next](1010321) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p2"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XIII-p2.1"></span>Letter XIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p3"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XIII-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 389.)

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XIII-p4.1"></span>To Nebridius Augustin Sends Greeting.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p5"></span>1. I do not feel pleasure in writing of
the subjects which I was wont to discuss; I am not at liberty to write
of new themes. I see that the one would not suit you, and that for the
other I have no leisure. For, since I left you, neither opportunity nor
leisure has been given me for taking up and revolving the things which
we are accustomed to investigate together. The winter nights are indeed
too long, and they are not entirely spent in sleep by me; but when I
have leisure, other subjects \[than those which we used to discuss\]
present themselves as having a prior claim on my consideration. <span
id="fr_1463"></span>[1464](#fn_1463) What, then, am I to do? Am I to be
to you as one dumb, who cannot speak, or as one silent, who will not
speak? Neither of these things is desired, either by you or by me. Come,
then, and bear what the end of the night succeeded in eliciting from me
during the time in which it was devoted to following out the subject of
this letter.

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p7"></span>2. You cannot but remember that a
question often agitated between us, and which kept us agitated,
breathless, and excited, was one concerning a body or kind of body,
which belongs perpetually to the soul, and which, as you recollect, is
called by some its vehicle. It is manifest that this thing, if it moves
from place to place, is not cognisable by the understanding. But
whatever is not cognisable by the understanding cannot be understood. It
is not, however, utterly <span id="page_231">p. 231</span> <span
id="vii.1.XIII-Page_231"></span>impossible to form an opinion
approximating to the truth concerning a thing which is outside the
province of the intellect, if it lies within the province of the senses.
But when a thing is beyond the province of the intellect and of the
senses, the speculations to which it gives rise are too baseless and
trifling; and the thing of which we treat now is of this nature, if
indeed it exists. Why, then, I ask, do we not finally dismiss this
unimportant question, and with prayer to God raise ourselves to the
supreme serenity of the Highest existing nature?

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p8"></span>3. Perhaps you may here reply: “Although
bodies cannot be perceived by the understanding, we can perceive with
the understanding many things concerning material objects; *e.g.* we
know that matter exists. For who will deny this, or affirm that in this
we have to do with the probable rather than the true? Thus, though
matter itself lies among things probable, it is a most indisputable
truth that something like it exists in nature. Matter itself is
therefore pronounced to be an object cognisable by the senses; but the
assertion of its existence is pronounced to be a truth cognisable by the
intellect, for it cannot be perceived otherwise. And so this unknown
body, about which we inquire, upon which the soul depends for its power
to move from place to place, may possibly be cognisable by senses more
powerful than we possess, though not by ours; and at all events, the
question whether it exists is one which may be solved by our
understandings.”

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p9"></span>4. If you intend to say this, let me
remind you that the mental act we call understanding is done by us in
two ways: either by the mind and reason within itself, as when we
understand that the intellect itself exists; or by occasion of
suggestion from the senses, as in the case above mentioned, when we
understand that matter exists. In the first of these two kinds of acts
we understand through ourselves, *i.e.* by asking instruction of God
concerning that which is within us; but in the second we understand by
asking instruction of God regarding that of which intimation is given to
us by the body and the senses. If these things be found true, no one can
by his understanding discover whether that body of which you speak
exists or not, but the person to whom his senses have given some
intimation concerning it. If there be any living creature to which the
senses give such intimation, since we at least see plainly that we are
not among the number, I regard the conclusion established which I began
to state a little ago, that the question \[about the vehicle of the
soul\] is one which does not concern us. I wish you would consider this
over and over again, and take care to let me know the product of your
consideration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[230:1464](1010320.htm#fr_1463) <span
id="vii.1.XIII-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XIII-p6"></span> We leave untranslated the words “quæ
*diffirmando* sunt otio necessaria,” the text here being evidently
corrupt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XIV](1010321)
