[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010164)  [Next](1010166) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.X.VIII"></span>

<span id="vi.X.VIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vi.X.VIII-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.——Of the Nature and the Amazing
Power of Memory.</span>

<span id="vi.X.VIII-p2"></span>12. I will soar, then, beyond this power
of my nature also, ascending by degrees unto Him who made me. And I
enter the fields and roomy chambers of memory, where are the treasures
of countless images, imported into it from all manner of things by the
senses. There is treasured up whatsoever likewise we think, either by
enlarging or diminishing, or by varying in any way whatever those things
which the sense hath arrived at; yea, and whatever else hath been
entrusted to it and stored up, which oblivion hath not yet engulfed and
buried. When I am in this storehouse, I demand that what I wish should
be brought forth, and some things immediately appear; others require to
be longer sought after, and are dragged, as it were, out of some hidden
receptacle; others, again, hurry forth in crowds, and while another
thing is sought and inquired for, they leap into view, as if to say, “Is
it not we, perchance?” These I drive away with the hand of my heart from
before the face of my remembrance, until what I wish be discovered
making its appearance out of its secret cell. Other things suggest
themselves without effort, and in continuous order, just as they are
called for,—those in front giving place to those that follow, and in
giving place are treasured up again to be forthcoming when I wish it.
All of which takes place when I repeat a thing from memory.

<span id="vi.X.VIII-p3"></span>13. All these things, each of which
entered by its own avenue, are distinctly and under general heads there
laid up: as, for example, light, and all colours and forms of bodies, by
the eyes; sounds of all kinds by the ears; all smells by the passage of
the nostrils; all flavours by that of the mouth; and by the sensation of
the whole body is brought in what is hard or soft, hot or cold, smooth
or rough, heavy or light, whether external or internal to the body. All
these doth that great receptacle of memory, with its many and
indescribable departments, receive, to be recalled and brought forth
when required; each, entering by its own door, is hid up in it. And yet
the things themselves do not enter it, but only the images of the things
perceived are there ready at hand for thought to recall. And who can
tell how these images are formed, notwithstanding that it is evident by
which of the senses each has been fetched in and treasured up? For even
while I live in darkness and silence, I can bring out colours in memory
if I wish, and discern between black and white, and what others I wish;
nor yet do sounds break in and disturb what is drawn in by mine eyes,
and which I am considering, seeing that they also are there, and are
concealed, laid up, as it were, apart. For these too I can summon if I
please, and immediately they appear. And though my tongue be at rest,
and my throat silent, yet can I sing as much as I will; and those images
of colours, which not<span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="vi.X.VIII-Page_146"></span>withstanding are there, do not interpose
themselves and interrupt when another treasure is under consideration
which flowed in through the ears. So the remaining things carried in and
heaped up by the other senses, I recall at my pleasure. And I discern
the scent of lilies from that of violets while smelling nothing; and I
prefer honey to grape-syrup, a smooth thing to a rough, though then I
neither taste nor handle, but only remember.

<span id="vi.X.VIII-p4"></span>14. These things do I within, in that
vast chamber of my memory. For there are nigh me heaven, earth, sea, and
whatever I can think upon in them, besides those which I have forgotten.
There also do I meet with myself, and recall myself,—what, when, or
where I did a thing, and how I was affected when I did it. There are all
which I remember, either by personal experience or on the faith of
others. Out of the same supply do I myself with the past construct now
this, now that likeness of things, which either I have experienced, or,
from having experienced, have believed; and thence again future actions,
events, and hopes, and upon all these again do I meditate as if they
were present. “I will do this or that,” say I to myself in that vast
womb of my mind, filled with the images of things so many and so great,
“and this or that shall follow upon it.” “Oh that this or that might
come to pass!” “God avert this or that!” Thus speak I to myself; and
when I speak, the images of all I speak about are present, out of the
same treasury of memory; nor could I say anything at all about them were
the images absent.

<span id="vi.X.VIII-p5"></span>15. Great is this power of memory,
exceeding great, O my God,—an inner chamber large and boundless! Who has
plumbed the depths thereof? Yet it is a power of mine, and appertains
unto my nature; nor do I myself grasp all that I am. Therefore is the
mind too narrow to contain itself. And where should that be which it
doth not contain of itself? Is it outside and not in itself? How is it,
then, that it doth not grasp itself? A great admiration rises upon me;
astonishment seizes me. And men go forth to wonder at the heights of
mountains, the huge waves of the sea, the broad flow of the rivers, the
extent of the ocean, and the courses of the stars, and omit to wonder at
themselves; nor do they marvel that when I spoke of all these things, I
was not looking on them with my eyes, and yet could not speak of them
unless those mountains, and waves, and rivers, and stars which I saw,
and that ocean which I believe in, I saw inwardly in my memory, and with
the same vast spaces between as when I saw them abroad. But I did not by
seeing appropriate them when I looked on them with my eyes; nor are the
things themselves with me, but their images. And I knew by what
corporeal sense each made impression on me.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](1010166)
