[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010426)  [Next](1010428.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p1.1"></span>Letter CXXXVII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 412.)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p3.1"></span>To My Most Excellent Son, the Noble and
Justly Distinguished Lord Volusianus, Augustin Sends Greeting in the
Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p4"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p4.1"></span>Chap. I.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p5"></span>1. I have read your letter,
containing an abstract of a notable conversation given with praiseworthy
conciseness. I feel bound to reply to it, and to forbear from alleging
any excuse for delay; for it happens opportunely that I have a short
time of leisure from occupation with the affairs of other persons. I
have also put off in the meantime dictating to my amanuensis certain
things to which I had purposed to devote this leisure, for I think it
would be a grievous injustice to delay answering questions which I had
myself exhorted the questioner to propound. For which of us who are
administering, as we are able, the grace of Christ would wish to see you
instructed in Christian doctrine only so far as might suffice to secure
to yourself salvation—not salvation in this present life, which, as the
word of God is careful to remind us, is but a vapor appearing for a
little while and then vanishing away, but that salvation in order to the
obtaining and eternal possession of which we are Christians? It seems to
us too little that you should receive only so much instruction as
suffices to your own deliverance. For your gifted mind, and your
singularly able and lucid power of speaking, ought to be of <span
id="page_474">p. 474</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_474"></span>service to all others around you,
against whom, whether slowness or perversity be the cause, it is
necessary to defend in a competent way the dispensation of such
abounding grace, which small minds in their arrogance despise, boasting
that they can do very great things, while in fact they can do nothing to
cure or even to curb their own vices.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p6"></span>2. You ask: “Whether the Lord and
Ruler of the world did indeed fill the womb of a virgin? did His mother
endure the protracted fatigues of ten months, and, being yet a virgin,
in due season bring forth her child, and continue even after that with
her virginity intact? Was He whom the universe is supposed to be
scarcely able to contain concealed within the small body of a crying
infant? did He bear the years of childhood, and grow up and become
established in the rigour of manhood? Was this Governor so long an exile
from His own dwelling-place, and was the care of the whole world
transferred to a body of such insignificant dimensions? Did He sleep,
did He take food as nourishment, and was He subject to all the
sensations of mortal men?” You go on to say that “the proofs of His
great majesty do not shine forth with any adequate fulness of evidence;
for the casting out of devils, the curing of the sick, and the
restoration of the dead are, if we consider others who have performed
these wonders, but small works for God to do.” <span
id="fr_2514"></span>[2515](#fn_2514.md) This question, you say, was
introduced in a certain meeting of friends by one of the company, but
that the rest of you prevented him from bringing forward any further
questions, and, breaking up the meeting, deferred the consideration of
the matter till you should have the benefit of experience beyond your
own, lest, by too rashly intruding into hidden things, the error,
innocent thus far, should become blame-worthy.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p8"></span>3. Thereupon you appeal to me, and
request me to observe what is desired from me after this confession of
your ignorance. You add, that my reputation is concerned in your
obtaining an answer to these questions, because, though ignorance is
tolerated without injury to religion in other priests, when an inquiry
is addressed to me, who am a bishop, whatever is not known to me must be
no part of the Christian system.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p9"></span>I begin, therefore, by requesting you
to lay aside the opinion which you have too easily formed concerning me,
and dismiss those sentiments, though they are gratifying evidences of
your goodwill, and believe my testimony rather than any other’s
regarding myself, if you reciprocate my affection. For such is the depth
of the Christian Scriptures, that even if I were attempting to study
them and nothing else from early boyhood to decrepit old age, with the
utmost leisure, the most unwearied zeal, and talents greater than I
have, I would be still daily making progress in discovering their
treasures; not that there is so great difficulty in coming through them
to know the things necessary to salvation, but when any one has accepted
these truths with the faith that is indispensable as the foundation of a
life of piety and uprightness, so many things which are veiled under
manifold shadows of mystery remain to be inquired into by those who are
advancing in the study, and so great is the depth of wisdom not only in
the words in which these have been expressed, but also in the things
themselves, that the experience of the oldest, the ablest, and the most
zealous students of Scripture illustrates what Scripture itself has
said: “When a man hath done, then he beginneth.” <span
id="fr_2515"></span>[2516](#fn_2515.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p11"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p11.1"></span>Chap. II.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p12"></span>4. But why say more as to this? I
must rather address myself to the question which you propose. In the
first place, I wish you to understand that the Christian doctrine does
not hold that the Godhead was so blended with the human nature in which
He was born of the virgin that He either relinquished or lost the
administration of the universe, or transferred it to that body as a
small and limited material substance. Such an opinion is held only by
men who are incapable of conceiving of anything but material
substances—whether more dense, like water and earth, or more subtle,
like air and light; but all alike distinguished by this condition, that
none of them can be in its entirety everywhere, because, by reason of
its many parts, it cannot but have one part here, another there, and
however great or small the body may be, it must occupy some place, and
so fill it that in its entirety it is in no one part of the space
occupied. And hence it is the distinctive property of material bodies
that they can be condensed and rarefied, contracted and dilated, crushed
into small fragments and enlarged to great masses. The nature of the
soul is very far different from that of the body; and how much more
different must be the nature of God, who is the Creator of both soul and
body! God is not said to fill the world in the same way as water, air,
and even light occupy space, so that with a greater or smaller part of
Himself He occupies a greater or smaller part of the world. He is able
to be everywhere present in the entirety of His being: He cannot be
confined in any place: He can come without leaving the place where He
was: He can depart without forsaking the place to which He had come.

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_475"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p13"></span>5. The mind of man wonders at this,
and because it cannot comprehend it, refuses, perhaps, to believe it.
Let it, however, not go on to wonder incredulously at the attributes of
the Deity without first wondering in like manner at the mysteries within
itself; <span id="fr_2516"></span>[2517](#fn_2516.md) let it, if possible,
raise itself for a little above the body, and above those things which
it is accustomed to perceive by the bodily organs, and let it
contemplate what that is which uses the body as its instrument. Perhaps
it cannot do this, for it requires, as one has said, great power of mind
to call the mind aside from the senses, and to lead thought away from
its wonted track. <span id="fr_2517"></span>[2518](#fn_2517.md) Let the
mind, then, examine the bodily senses in this somewhat unusual manner,
and with the utmost attention. There are five distinct bodily senses,
which cannot exist either without the body or without the soul; because
perception by the senses is possible, on the one hand, only while a man
lives, and the body receives life from the soul; and on the other hand,
only by the instrumentality of the body vessels and organs, through
which we exercise sight, hearing, and the three other senses. Let the
reasoning soul concentrate attention upon this subject, and consider the
senses of the body not by these senses themselves, but by its own
intelligence and reason. A man cannot, of course, perceive by these
senses unless he lives; but up to the time when soul and body are
separated by death, he lives in the body. How, then, does his soul,which
lives nowhere else than in his body, perceive things which are beyond
the surface of that body? Are not the stars in heaven very remote from
his body? and yet does he not see the sun yonder? and is not seeing an
exercise of the bodily senses—nay, is it not the noblest of them all?
What, then? Does he live in heaven as well as in his body, because he
perceives by one of his senses what is in heaven, and perception by
sense cannot be in a place where there is no life of the person
perceiving? Or does he perceive even where he is not living—because
while he lives only in his own body, his perceptive sense is active also
in those places which, outside of his body and remote from it, contain
the objects with which he is in contact by sight? Do you see how great a
mystery there is even in a sense so open to our observation as that
which we call sight? Consider hearing also, and say whether the soul
diffuses itself in some way abroad beyond the body. For how do we say,
“Some one knocks at the door,” unless we exercise the sense of hearing
at the place where the knock is sounding? In this case also, therefore,
we live beyond the limits of our bodies. Or can we perceive by sense in
a place in which we are not living? But we know that sense cannot be in
exercise where life is not.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p16"></span>6. The other three senses are
exercised through immediate contact with their own organs. Perhaps this
may be reasonably disputed in regard to the sense of smell; but there is
no controversy as to the senses of taste and touch, that we perceive
nowhere else than by contact with our bodily organism the things which
we taste and touch. Let these three senses, therefore, be set aside from
present consideration. The senses of sight and hearing present to us a
wonderful question, requiring us to explain either how the soul can
perceive by these senses in a place where it does not live, or how it
can live in a place where it is not. For it is not anywhere but in its
own body, and yet it perceives by these senses in places beyond that
body. For in whatever place the soul sees anything, in that place it is
exercising the faculty of perception, because seeing is an act of
perception; and in whatever place the soul hears anything, in that place
it is exercising the faculty of perception, because hearing is an act of
perception. Wherefore the soul is either living in that place where it
sees or hears, and consequently is itself in that place, or it exercises
perception in a place where it is not living, or it is living in a place
and yet at the same moment is not there. All these things are
astonishing; not one of them can be stated without seeming absurdity;
and we are speaking only of senses which are mortal. What, then, is the
soul itself which is beyond the bodily senses, that is to say, which
resides in the understanding whereby it considers these mysteries? For
it is not by means of the senses that it forms a judgment concerning the
senses themselves. And do we suppose that something incredible is told
us regarding the omnipotence of God, when it is affirmed that the Word
of God, by whom all things were made, did so assume a body from the
Virgin, and manifest Himself with mortal senses, as neither to destroy
His own immortality, nor to change His eternity, nor to diminish His
power, nor to relinquish the government of the world, nor to withdraw
from the bosom of the Father, that is, from the secret place where He is
with Him and in Him?

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p17"></span>7. Understand the nature of the Word
of God, by whom all things were made, to be such that you cannot think
of any part of the Word as passing, and, from being future, becoming
past. He remains as He is, and He is everywhere in His entirety. He
comes when He is manifested, and departs when He is concealed. But
whether concealed or manifested, He is present with us as light is
present to the eyes both of the seeing and of the blind; but it is felt
to be present by the man who sees, and absent by him who is blind. In
like manner, the sound of the voice <span id="page_476">p. 476</span>
<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_476"></span>is near alike to the hearing
and to the deaf, but it makes its presence known to the former and is
hidden from the latter. But what is more wonderful than what happens in
connection with the sound of our voices and our words, a thing,
for-sooth, which passes away in a moment? For when we speak, there is no
place for even the next syllable till after the preceding one has ceased
to sound; nevertheless, if one hearer be present, he hears the whole of
what we say, and if two hearers be present, both hear the same, and to
each of them it is the whole; and if a multitude listen in silence, they
do not break up the sounds like loaves of bread, to be distributed among
them individually, but all that is uttered is imparted to all and to
each in its entirety. Consider this, and say if it is not more
incredible that the abiding word of God should not accomplish in the
universe what the passing word of man accomplishes in the ears of
listeners, namely, that as the word of man is present in its entirety to
each and all of the hearers, so the Word of God should be present in the
entirety of His being at the same moment everywhere.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p18"></span>8. There is, therefore, no reason to
fear in regard to the small body of the Lord in His infancy, lest in it
the Godhead should seem to have been straitened. For it is not in vast
size but in power that God is great: He has in His providence given to
ants and to bees senses superior to those given to asses and camels; He
forms the huge proportions of the fig-tree <span
id="fr_2518"></span>[2519](#fn_2518.md) from one of the minutest seeds,
although many smaller plants spring from much larger seeds; He also has
furnished the small pupil of the eye with the power which, by one
glance, sweeps over almost the half of heaven in a moment; He diffuses
the whole fivefold system of the nerves over the body from one centre
and point in the brain; He dispenses vital motion throughout the whole
body from the heart, a member comparatively small; and by these and
other similar things, He, who in small things is great, mysteriously
produces that which is great from things which are exceedingly little.
Such is the greatness of His power that He is conscious of no difficulty
in that which is difficult. It was this same power which originated, not
from without, but from within, the conception of a child in the Virgin’s
womb: this same power associated with Himself a human soul, and through
it also a human body—in short, the whole human nature to be elevated by
its union with Him—without His being thereby lowered in any degree;
justly assuming from it the name of humanity, while amply giving to it
the name of Godhead. The body of the infant Jesus was brought forth from
the womb of His mother, still a virgin, by the same power which
afterwards introduced His body when He was a man through the closed door
into the upper chamber. <span id="fr_2519"></span>[2520](#fn_2519.md) Here,
if the reason of the event is sought out, it will no longer be a
miracle; if an example of a precisely similar event is demanded, it will
no longer be unique. <span id="fr_2520"></span>[2521](#fn_2520.md) Let us
grant that God can do something which we must admit to be beyond our
comprehension. In such wonders the whole explanation of the work is the
power of Him by whom it is wrought.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p22"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p22.1"></span>Chap. III.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p23"></span>9. The fact that He took rest in
sleep, and was nourished by food, and experienced all the feelings of
humanity, is the evidence to men of the reality of that human nature
which He assumed but did not destroy. Behold, this was the fact; and yet
some heretics, by a perverted admiration and praise of His power, have
refused altogether to acknowledge the reality of His human nature, in
which is the guarantee of all that grace by which He saves those who
believe in Him, containing deep treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and
imparting faith to the minds which He raises to the eternal
contemplation of unchangeable truth. What if the Almighty had created
the human nature of Christ not by causing Him to be born of a mother,
but by some other way, and had presented Him suddenly to the eyes of
mankind? What if the Lord had not passed through the stages of progress
from infancy to manhood, and had taken neither food nor sleep? Would not
this have confirmed the erroneous impression above re<span
id="page_477">p. 477</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_477"></span>ferred to, and have made it
impossible to believe at all that He had taken to Himself true human
nature; and, while leaving what was marvellous, would eliminate the
element of mercy from His actions? But now He has so appeared as the
Mediator between God and men, that, uniting the two natures in one
person, He both exalted what was ordinary by what was extraordinary, and
tempered what was extraordinary by what was ordinary in Himself.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p24"></span>10. But where in all the varied
movements of creation is there any work of God which is not wonderful,
were it not that through familiarity these wonders have become small in
our esteem? Nay, how many common things are trodden under foot, which,
if examined carefully, awaken our astonishment! Take, for example, the
propertries of seeds: who can either comprehend or declare the variety
of species, the vitality, vigour, and secret power by which they from
within small compass evolve great things? Now the human body and soul
which He took to Himself was created without seed by Him who in the
natural world created originally seeds from no pre-existent seeds. In
the body which thus became His, he who, without any liability to change
in Himself, has woven according to His counsel the vicissitudes of all
past centuries, became subject to the succession of seasons and the
ordinary stages of the life of man. For His body, as it began to exist
at a point of time, became developed with the lapse of time. But the
Word of God, who was in the beginning, and to whom the ages of time owe
their existence, did not bow to time as bringing round the event of His
incarnation apart from His consent, but chose the point of time at which
He freely took our nature to Himself. The human nature was brought into
union with the divine; God did not withdraw from Himself. <span
id="fr_2521"></span>[2522](#fn_2521.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p26"></span>11. Some resist upon being furnished
with an explanation of the manner in which the Godhead was so united
with a human soul and body as to constitute the one person of Christ,
when it was necessary that this should be done once in the world’s
history, with as much boldness as if they were themselves able to
furnish an explanation of the manner in which the soul is so united to
the body as to constitute the one person of man, an event which is
occurring every day. For just as the soul is united to the body in one
person so as to constitute man, in the same way God united to man in one
person so as to constitute Christ. In the former personality there is a
combination of soul and body; in the latter there is a combination of
the Godhead and man. Let my reader, however, guard against borrowing his
idea of the combination from the properties of material bodies, by which
two fluids when combined are so mixed that neither preserves its
original character; although even among material bodies there are
exceptions, such as light, which sustains no change when combined with
the atmosphere. In the person of man, therefore, there is a combination
of soul and body; in the person of Christ there is a combination of the
Godhead with man; for when the Word of God was united to a soul having a
body, He took into union with Himself both the soul and the body. The
former event takes place daily in the beginning of life in individuals
of the human race; the latter took place once for the salvation of men.
And yet of the two events, the combination of two immaterial substances
ought to be more easily believed than a combination in which the one is
immaterial and the other material. For if the soul is not mistaken in
regard to its own nature, it understands itself to be immaterial. Much
more certainly does this attribute belong to the Word of God; and
consequently the combination of the Word with the human soul is a
combination which ought to be much more credible than that of soul and
body. The latter is realized by us in ourselves; the former we are
commanded to believe to have been realized in Christ. But if both of
them were alike foreign to our experience, and we were enjoined to
believe that both had taken place, which of the two would we more
readily believe to have occurred? Would we not admit that two immaterial
substances could be more easily combined than one immaterial and one
material; unless, perhaps, it be unsuitable to use the word combination
in connection with these things, because of the difference between their
nature and that of material substances, both in themselves and as known
to us?

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p27"></span>12. Wherefore the Word of God, who
is also the Son of God, co-eternal with the Father, the Power and the
Wisdom of God, <span id="fr_2522"></span>[2523](#fn_2522.md) mightily
pervading and harmoniously ordering all things, from the highest limit
of the intelligent to the lowest limit of the material creation, <span
id="fr_2523"></span>[2524](#fn_2523.md) revealed and concealed, nowhere
confined, nowhere divided, nowhere distended, but without dimensions,
everywhere present in His entirety,—this Word of God, I say, took to
Himself, in a manner entirely different from that in which He is present
to other creatures, the soul and body of a man, and made, by the union
of Himself therewith, the one person Jesus Christ, Mediator between God
and men, <span id="fr_2524"></span>[2525](#fn_2524.md) in His Deity equal
with the Father, in His flesh, *i.e.* in His human nature, inferior to
the Father,—unchangeably immortal in respect of the divine nature, in
which He is equal with <span id="page_478">p. 478</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_478"></span>the Father, and yet changeable and
mortal in respect of the infirmity which was His through participation
with our nature.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p31"></span>In this Christ there came to men, at
the time which He knew to be most fitting, and which He had fixed before
the world began, the *instruction* and the *help* necessary to the
obtaining of eternal salvation. *Instruction* came by Him, because those
truths which had been, for men’s advantage, spoken before that time on
earth not only by the holy prophets, all whose words were true, but also
by philosophers and even poets and authors in every department of
literature (for beyond question they mixed much truth with what was
false), might by the actual presentation of His authority in human
nature be confirmed as true for the sake of those who could not perceive
and distinguish them in the light of essential Truth, which Truth was,
even before He assumed human nature, present to all who were capable of
receiving truth. Moreover, by the fact of His incarnation, He taught
this above all other things for our benefit,—that whereas men longing
after the Divine Being supposed, from pride rather than piety, that they
must approach Him not directly, but through heavenly powers which they
regarded as gods, and through various forbidden rites which were holy
but profane,—in which worship devils succeed, through the bond which
pride forms between mankind and them in taking the place of holy
angels,—now men might understand that the God whom they were regarding
as far removed, and whom they approached not directly but through
mediating powers, is actually so very near to the pious longings of men
after Him, that He has condescended to take a human soul and body into
such union with Himself that this complete man is joined to Him in the
same way as the body is joined to the soul in man, excepting that
whereas both body and soul have a common progressive development, He
does not participate in this growth, because it implies mutability, a
property which God cannot assume. Again, in this Christ the *help*
necessary to salvation was brought to men, for without the grace of that
faith which is from Him, no one can either subdue vicious desires, or be
cleansed by pardon from the guilt of any power of sinful desire which he
may not have wholly vanquished. As to the effects produced by His
instruction, is there now even an imbecile, however weak, or a silly
woman, however low, that does not believe in the immortality of the soul
and the reality of a life after death? Yet these are truths which, when
Pherecydes <span id="fr_2525"></span>[2526](#fn_2525.md) the Assyrian for
the first time maintained them in discussion among the Greeks of old,
moved Pythagoras of Samos so deeply by their novelty, as to make him
turn from the exercises of the athlete to the studies of the
philosopher. But now what Virgil said we all behold: “The balsam of
Assyria grows everywhere.” <span id="fr_2526"></span>[2527](#fn_2526.md)
And as to the help given through the grace of Christ, in Him truly are
the words of the same poet fulfilled: “With Thee as our leader, the
obliteration of all the traces of our sin which remain shall deliver the
earth from perpetual alarm.” <span id="fr_2527"></span>[2528](#fn_2527.md)

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p35"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p35.1"></span>Chap. IV.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p36"></span>13. “But,” they say, “the proofs of
so great majesty did not shine forth with adequate fulness of evidence;
for the casting out of devils, the healing of the sick, and the
restoration of the dead to life are but small works for God to do, if
the others who have wrought similar wonders be borne in mind.” <span
id="fr_2528"></span>[2529](#fn_2528.md) We ourselves admit that the
prophets wrought some miracles like those performed by Christ. For among
these miracles what is more wonderful than the raising of the dead? Yet
both Elijah and Elisha did this. <span
id="fr_2529"></span>[2530](#fn_2529.md) As to the miracles of magicians,
and the question whether they also raised the dead, let those pronounce
an opinion who strive, not as accusers, but as panegyrists, to prove
Apuleius guilty of those charges of practising magical arts from which
he himself takes abundant pains to defend his reputation. We read that
the magicians of Egypt, the most skilled in these arts, were vanquished
by Moses, the servant of God, when they were working wonderfully by
impious enchantments, and he, by simply calling upon God in prayer,
overthrew all their machinations. <span
id="fr_2530"></span>[2531](#fn_2530.md) But this Moses himself and all the
other true prophets prophesied concerning the Lord Christ, and gave to
Him great glory; they predicted that He would come not as One merely
equal or superior to them in the same power of working miracles, but as
One who was truly God the Lord of all, and who became man for the
benefit of men. He was pleased to do also some miracles, such as they
had done, to prevent the incongruity of His not doing in person such
things as He had done by them. Nevertheless, He was to do also some
things peculiar to Himself, namely, to be born of a virgin, to rise from
the dead, to ascend to heaven. I know not what greater things he can
look for who thinks these too little for God to do.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p40"></span>14. For I think that such signs of
divine power are demanded by these objectors as were not suitable for
Him to do when wearing the nature of men. The Word was in the beginning,
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, and by Him all things
were made. <span id="fr_2531"></span>[2532](#fn_2531.md) Now, <span
id="page_479">p. 479</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_479"></span>when the Word became flesh, was it
necessary for Him to create another world, that we might believe Him to
be the person by whom the world was made? But within this world it would
have been impossible to make another greater than itself, or equal to
it. If, however, He were to make a world inferior to that which now
exists, this, too, would be considered too small a work to prove His
deity. Wherefore, since it was not necessary that He should make a new
world, He made new things in the world. For that a man should be born of
a virgin, and raised from the dead to eternal life, and exalted above
the heavens, is perchance a work involving a greater exertion of power
than the creating of a world. Here, probably, objectors may answer that
they do not believe that these things took place. What, then, can be
done for men who despise smaller evidences as inadequate, and reject
greater evidences as incredible? That life has been restored to the dead
is believed, because it has been accomplished by others, and is too
small a work to prove him who performs it to be God: that a true body
was created in a virgin, and being raised from death to eternal life,
was taken up to heaven, is not believed, because no one else has done
this, and it is what God alone could do. On this principle every man is
to accept with equanimity whatever he thinks easy for himself not indeed
to do, but to conceive, and is to reject as false and fictitious
whatever goes beyond that limit. I beseech you, do not be like these
men.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p42"></span>15. These topics are elsewhere more
amply discussed, and in fundamental questions of doctrine every
intricate point has been opened up by thorough investigation and debate;
but faith gives the understanding access to these things, unbelief
closes the door. What man might not be moved to faith in the doctrine of
Christ by such a remarkable chain of events from the beginning, and by
the manner in which the epochs of the world are linked together, so that
our faith in regard to present things is assisted by what happened in
the past, and the record of earlier and ancient things is attested by
later and more recent events? One is chosen from among the Chaldeans, a
man endowed with most eminent piety and faith, that to him may be given
divine promises, appointed to be fulfilled in the last times of the
world, after the lapse of so many centuries; and it is foretold that in
his seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed. <span
id="fr_2532"></span>[2533](#fn_2532.md) This man, worshipping the one true
God, the Creator of the universe, begets in his old age a son, when
sterility and advanced years had made his wife give up all expectation
of becoming a mother. The descendants of this son become a very numerous
tribe, being increased in Egypt, to which place they had been removed
from the East, by Divine Providence multiplying as time went on both the
promises given and the works wrought on their behalf. From Egypt they
come forth a mighty nation, being brought out with terrible signs and
wonders; and the wicked nations of the promised land being driven out
from before them, they are brought into it and settled there, and
exalted to the position of a kingdom. Thereafter, frequently provoking
by prevailing sin and idolatrous impieties the true God, who had
bestowed on them so many benefits, and experiencing alternately the
chastisements of calamity and the consolations of restored prosperity,
the history of the nation is brought down to the incarnation and the
manifestation of Christ. Predictions that this Christ, being the Word of
God, the Son of God, and God Himself, was to become incarnate, to die,
to rise again, to ascend into heaven, to have multitudes of all nations
through the power of His name surrendering themselves to Him, and that
by Him pardon of sins and eternal salvation would be given to all who
believe in Him,—these predictions, I say, have been published by all the
promises given to that nation, by all the prophecies, the institution of
the priesthood, the sacrifices, the temple, and, in short, by all their
sacred mysteries.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p44"></span>16. Accordingly Christ comes: in His
birth, life, words, deeds, sufferings, death, resurrection, ascension,
all which the prophets had foretold is fulfilled. <span
id="fr_2533"></span>[2534](#fn_2533.md) He sends the Holy Spirit; fills
with this Spirit the believers when they are assembled in one house, and
expecting with prayer and ardent desire this promised gift. Being thus
filled with the Holy Spirit, they speak immediately in the tongues of
all nations, they boldly confute errors, they preach the truth that is
most profitable for mankind, they exhort men to repent of their past
blameworthy lives, and promise pardon by the free grace of God. Signs
and miracles suitable for confirmation follow their preaching of piety
and of the true religion. The cruel enmity of unbelief is stirred up
against them; they bear predicted trials, they hope for promised
blessings, and teach that which they had been commanded to make known.
Few in number at first, they become scattered like seed throughout the
world; they convert nations with wondrous facility; they grow in number
in the midst of enemies; they become increased by persecutions; and,
under the severity of hardships, instead of being straitened, they
extend their influence to the utmost boundaries of the earth. From being
very ignorant, despised, and few, they become enlightened,
distinguished, and nu<span id="page_480">p. 480</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_480"></span>merous, men of illustrious talents
and of polished eloquence; they also bring under the yoke of Christ, and
attract to the work of preaching the way of holiness and salvation, the
marvellous attainments of men remarkable for genius, eloquence, and
erudition. Amid alternations of adversity and prosperity, they
watchfully practise patience and self-control; and when the world’s day
is drawing near its close, and the approaching consummation is heralded
by the calamities which exhaust its energies, they, seeing in this the
fulfilment of prophecy, only expect with increased. confidence the
everlasting blessedness of the heavenly city. Moreover, amidst all these
changes, the unbelief of the heathen nations continues to rage against
the Church of Christ; she gains the victory by patient endurance, and by
the maintenance of unshaken faith in the face of the cruelties of her
adversaries. The sacrifice of Him in whom the truth, long veiled under
mystic promises, is revealed, having been offered, those sacrifices by
which it was prefigured are finally abolished by the utter destruction
of the Jewish temple. The Jewish nation, itself rejected because of
unbelief, being now rooted out from its own land, is dispersed to every
region of the world, in order that it may carry everywhere the Holy
Scriptures, and that in this way our adversaries themselves may bring
before mankind the testimony furnished by the prophecies concerning
Christ and His Church, thus precluding the possibility of the
supposition that these predictions were forged by us to suit the time;
in which prophecies, also, the unbelief of these very Jews is foretold.
The temples, images, and impious worship of the heathen divinities are
overthrown gradually and in succession, according to the prophetic
intimations. Heresies bud forth against the name of Christ, though
veiling themselves under His name, as had been foretold, by which the
doctrine of the holy religion is tested and developed. All these things
are now seen to be accomplished, in exact fulfilment of the predictions
which we read in Scripture; and from these important and numerous
instances of fulfilled prophecy, the fulfilment of the predictions which
remain is confidently expected. Where, then, is the mind, having
aspirations after eternity, and moved by the shortness of this present
life, which can resist the clearness and perfection of these evidences
of the divine origin of our faith?

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p46"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p46.1"></span>Chap. V.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p47"></span>17. What discourses or writings of
philosophers, what laws of any commonwealth in any land or age, are
worthy for a moment to be compared with the two commandments on which
Christ saith that all the law and the prophets hang: “Thou shalt love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind, and thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself”? <span
id="fr_2534"></span>[2535](#fn_2534.md) All philosophy is here,—physics,
ethics, logic: the *first*, because in God the Creator are all the
causes of all existences in nature; the *second*, because a good and
honest life is not produced in any other way than by loving, in the
manner in which they should be loved, the proper objects of our love,
namely, God and our neighbour; and the *third*, because God alone is the
Truth and the Light of the rational soul. Here also is security for the
welfare and renown of a commonwealth; for no state is perfectly
established and preserved otherwise than on the foundation and by the
bond of faith and of firm concord, when the highest and truest common
good, namely, God, is loved by all, and men love each other in Him
without dissimulation, because they love one another for His sake from
whom they cannot disguise the real character of their love.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p49"></span>18. Consider, moreover, the style in
which Sacred Scripture is composed,—how accessible it is to all men,
though its deeper mysteries are penetrable to very few. The plain truths
which it contains it declares in the artless language of familiar
friendship to the hearts both of the unlearned and of the learned; but
even the truths which it veils in symbols it does not set forth in stiff
and stately sentences, which a mind somewhat sluggish and uneducated
might shrink from approaching, as a poor man shrinks from the presence
of the rich; but, by the condescension of its style, it invites all not
only to be fed with the truth which is plain, but also to be exercised
by the truth which is concealed, having both in its simple and in its
obscure portions the same truth. Lest what is easily understood should
beget satiety in the reader, the same truth being in another place more
obscurely expressed becomes again desired, and, being desired, is
somehow invested with a new attractiveness, and thus is received with
pleasure into the heart. By these means wayward minds are corrected,
weak minds are nourished, and strong minds are filled with pleasure, in
such a way as is profitable to all. This doctrine has no enemy but the
man who, being in error, is ignorant of its incomparable usefulness, or,
being spiritually diseased, is averse to its healing power.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p50"></span>19. You see what a long letter I
have written. If, therefore, anything perplexes you, and you regard it
of sufficient importance to be discussed between us, let not yourself be
straitened by keeping within the bounds of ordinary letters; for you
know as well as any one what long letters the ancients wrote when they
were treating of any subject which they were not able briefly to
explain. And even if the custom of authors in other departments of
literature had been differ<span id="page_481">p. 481</span> <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-Page_481"></span>ent, the authority of Christian
writers, whose example has a worthier claim upon our imitation, might be
set before us. Observe, therefore, the length of the apostolic epistles,
and of the commentaries written on these divine oracles, and do not
hesitate either to ask many questions if you have many difficulties, or
to handle more fully the questions which you propound, in order that, in
so far as it can be achieved with such abilities as we possess, there
may remain no cloud of doubt to obscure the light of truth.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p51"></span>20. For I am aware that your
Excellency has to encounter the most determined opposition from certain
persons, who think, or would have others think, that Christian doctrine
is incompatible with the welfare of the commonwealth, because they wish
to see the commonwealth established not by the stedfast practice of
virtue, but by granting impunity to vice. But with God the crimes in
which many are banded together do not pass unavenged, as is often the
case with a king, or any other magistrate who is only a man. Moreover,
His mercy and grace, published to men by Christ, who is Himself man, and
imparted to man by the same Christ, who is also God and the Son of God,
never fail those who live by faith in Him and piously worship Him, in
adversity patiently and bravely bearing the trials of this life, in
prosperity using with self-control and with compassion for others the
good things of this life; destined to receive, for faithfulness in both
conditions, an eternal recompense in that divine and heavenly city in
which there shall be no longer calamity to be painfully endured, nor
inordinate desire to be with laborious care controlled, where our only
work shall be to preserve, without any difficulty and with perfect
liberty, our love to God and to our neighbour.

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p52"></span>May the infinitely compassionate
omnipotence of God preserve you in safety and increase your happiness,
my noble and distinguished Lord, and my most excellent son. With
profound respect, as is due to your worth, I salute your pious and most
truly venerable mother, whose prayers on your behalf may God hear! My
pious brother and fellow bishop, Possidius, warmly salutes your Grace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2514"></span>[474:2515](1010427.htm#fr_2514.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p7"></span> Letter CXXXV. sec. 2, p. 472.

<span id="fn_2515"></span>[474:2516](1010427.htm#fr_2515.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p10"></span> [Ecclus.
18.6](../../../bib/apo/sir018.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2516"></span>[475:2517](1010427.htm#fr_2516.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p13.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p14"></span> We follow the reading of nine <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p14.1"></span> Mss.</span>, *mirata*,
instead of that of the text, *ingrata.*

<span id="fn_2517"></span>[475:2518](1010427.htm#fr_2517.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p14.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p15"></span> Cicero, *Quæst. Tuscul.* i.

<span id="fn_2518"></span>[476:2519](1010427.htm#fr_2518.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p19"></span> See Pliny. *Nat. Hist.* Book vii.
2: “In India sub una ficu turmæ conduntur equitum.” See also Book xii.
c. 5.

<span id="fn_2519"></span>[476:2520](1010427.htm#fr_2519.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p20"></span> [John
20.26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2520"></span>[476:2521](1010427.htm#fr_2520.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p21"></span> This sentence having been
misunderstood by Bishop Evodius, who quotes and comments upon it in
Letter CLXI.. Augustin, in replying in Letter CLXII., writes a few
sentences, which, as the letters then exchanged with Evodius have been
omitted in this selection, we here insert:—“Our sense of wonder is
excited when either the reason of a thing is hidden from us, or the
thing itself is extraordinary, that is, either unique or rare. It was in
reference to the former cause of wonder, namely, the reason of a thing
being undiscovered, that, when answering those who declare it to be
incredible that Christ was born of a virgin, and that she remained a
virgin notwithstanding, I said in the letter which you refer to as read
by you, ‘If the reason of this event is sought out, it will be no longer
a miracle,’ for I said this not because the event was without a reason,
but because the reason of it is hidden from those to whom it has pleased
God that it should be a miracle.… For all the works of God, both
ordinary and extraordinary, proceed from causes and reasons which are
right and faultless. When the causes and reasons of any of His
operations are hidden from us, we are filled with wonder at the event;
but when the causes and reasons of events are seen by us, we say that
they take place in ordinary course and in harmony with our experience,
and that they are not to be wondered at since they occur, because they
are only what reason required to be done.… As to the latter cause of
wonder, namely, that an event is unusual, we have an example of this
when we read concerning the Lord that He marvelled at the faith of the
centurion: for the reason of no event whatever could be concealed from
Him, but His wonder has been recorded here for the commendation of one
whose equal had not appeared among the Jews, and accordingly the Lord’s
wondering is sufficiently explained by His words: ‘I have not found so
great faith, no, not in Israel’ ([Luke
7.9](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p21.1"></span>). As to examples of events similar to
the miraculous birth of Christ, you are wholly mistaken in supposing
that you have found such in the production of a worm within an apple,
and other examples which you mention. For instances of a certain degree
of resemblance, more or less remote, have been with considerable
ingenuity alleged: but Christ alone was born of a virgin; whence you may
understand why I said that this was an event without parallel, adding in
the letter already referred to the words: ‘If an example of a precisely
similar event is demanded, it will no longer be unique’” (Letter CLXII.
sec. 6, 7).

<span id="fn_2521"></span>[477:2522](1010427.htm#fr_2521.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p25"></span> *Homo quippe Deo accessit, non Deus
a se recessit.*

<span id="fn_2522"></span>[477:2523](1010427.htm#fr_2522.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p28"></span> [1 Cor.
1.24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2523"></span>[477:2524](1010427.htm#fr_2523.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p28.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p29"></span> [Wisd.
8.1](../../../bib/apo/wis008.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2524"></span>[477:2525](1010427.htm#fr_2524.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p29.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p30"></span> [1 Tim.
2.5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#005.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2525"></span>[478:2526](1010427.htm#fr_2525.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p31.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p32"></span> Pherecydes, a native not of
Assyria, but of Syros, one of the Cyclades, was a disciple of Pittacus
of Mitylene, and teacher of Pythagoras. He flourished <span
class="c9"><span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p32.1"></span>B.C.</span> 544.

<span id="fn_2526"></span>[478:2527](1010427.htm#fr_2526.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p32.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p33"></span> “Assyrium vulgo nascetur
amomum.”—Eclogue iv.

<span id="fn_2527"></span>[478:2528](1010427.htm#fr_2527.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p34"></span> *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_2528"></span>[478:2529](1010427.htm#fr_2528.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p36.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p37"></span> Letter CXXXV. sec. 2, p. 472.

<span id="fn_2529"></span>[478:2530](1010427.htm#fr_2529.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p38"></span> [1 Kings
17.22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#022.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p38.1"></span>; [2 Kings
4.35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#035.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p38.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_2530"></span>[478:2531](1010427.htm#fr_2530.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p38.3"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p39"></span> [Exod.
7:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#000.md), [Exod.
8:0](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2531"></span>[478:2532](1010427.htm#fr_2531.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p40.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p41"></span> [John
1.1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2532"></span>[479:2533](1010427.htm#fr_2532.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p42.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p43"></span> [Gen.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#000.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2533"></span>[479:2534](1010427.htm#fr_2533.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p44.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p45"></span> [Matt.
1.22](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#022.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2534"></span>[480:2535](1010427.htm#fr_2534.md) <span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p47.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p48"></span> [Matt.
22.37-39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037.md)<span
id="vii.1.CXXXVII-p48.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CXXXVIII](1010428.md)
