[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010455)  [Next](1010457.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p1.1"></span>Letter CCVIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 423.)

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p3.1"></span>To the Lady Felicia, His Daughter in the
Faith, and Worthy of Honour Among the Members of Christ, Augustin Sends
Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p4"></span>1. I do not doubt, when I consider
both your faith and the weakness or wickedness of others, that your mind
has been disturbed, for even a holy apostle, full of compassionate love,
confesses a similiar experience, saying, “Who is weak, and I am not
weak? who is offended, and I burn not?” <span
id="fr_2893"></span>[2894](#fn_2893.md) Wherefore, as I myself share your
pain, and am solicitous for your welfare in Christ, I have thought it my
duty to address this letter, partly consolatory, partly hortatory, to
your Holiness, because in the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, in which
all His members are one, you are very closely related to us, being loved
as an honourable member in that body, and partaking with us of life in
His Holy Spirit.

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p6"></span>2. I exhort you, therefore, not to be
too much troubled by those offences which for this very reason were
foretold as destined to come, that when they came we might remember that
they had been foretold, and not be greatly disconcerted by them. For the
Lord Himself in His gospel foretold them, saying, “Woe unto the world
because of offences! for it must needs be that offences come; but woe
unto that man by whom the offence cometh!” <span
id="fr_2894"></span>[2895](#fn_2894.md) These are the men of whom the
apostle said, “They seek their own, not the things that are Jesus
Christ’s.” <span id="fr_2895"></span>[2896](#fn_2895.md) There are,
therefore, some who hold the honourable office of shepherds in order
that they may provide for the flock of Christ; others occupy that
position that they may enjoy the temporal honours and secular advantages
connected with the office. It must needs happen that these two kinds of
pastors, some dying, others succeeding them, should continue in the
Catholic Church even to the end of time, and the judgment of the Lord.
If, then, in the times of the apostles there were men such that Paul,
grieved by their conduct, enumerates among his trials, “perils among
false brethren,” <span id="fr_2896"></span>[2897](#fn_2896.md) and yet he
did not haughtily cast them out, but patiently bore with them, how much
more must such arise in our times, since the Lord most plainly says
concerning this age which is drawing to a close, “that because iniquity
shall abound the love of many shall wax cold.” <span
id="fr_2897"></span>[2898](#fn_2897.md) The word which follows, however,
ought to console and exhort us, for He adds, “He that shall endure to
the end, the same shall be saved.”

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p11"></span>3. Moreover, as there are good
shepherds and bad shepherds, so also in flocks there are good and bad.
The good are represented by the name of sheep, but the bad are called
goats: they feed, nevertheless, side by side in the same pastures, until
the Chief Shepherd, who is called the One Shepherd, shall come and
separate them one from another according to His promise, “as a shepherd
divideth the sheep from the goats.” On us He has laid the duty of
gathering the flock; to Himself He has reserved the work of final
separation, because it pertains properly to Him who cannot err. For
those presumptuous servants, who have lightly ventured to separate
before the time which the Lord has reserved in His own hand, have,
instead of <span id="page_559">p. 559</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-Page_559"></span>separating others, only been separated
themselves from Catholic unity; for how could those have a clean flock
who have by schism become unclean?

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p12"></span>4. In order, therefore, that we may
remain in the unity of the faith, and not, stumbling at the offences
occasioned by the chaff, desert the threshing-floor of the Lord, but
rather remain as wheat till the final winnowing, <span
id="fr_2898"></span>[2899](#fn_2898.md) and by the love which imparts
stability to us bear with the beaten straw, our great Shepherd in the
gospel admonishes us concerning the good shepherds, that we should not,
on account of their good works, place our hope in them, but glorify our
heavenly Father for making them such; and concerning the bad shepherds
(whom He designed to point out under the name of Scribes and Pharisees),
He reminds us that they teach that which is good though they do that
which is evil. <span id="fr_2899"></span>[2900](#fn_2899.md)

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p15"></span>5. Concerning the good shepherds He
thus speaks: “Ye are the light of the world. A city that is set on an
hill cannot be hid. Neither do men light a candle, and put it under a
bushel, but on a candlestick; and it giveth light unto all that are in
the house. Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your
good works, and glorify your Father who is in heaven.” <span
id="fr_2900"></span>[2901](#fn_2900.md) Concerning the bad shepherds He
admonishes the sheep in these words: “The Scribes and the Pharisees sit
in Moses’ seat: all, therefore, whatsoever they bid you observe, that
observe and do; but do not ye after their works: for they say, and do
not.” <span id="fr_2901"></span>[2902](#fn_2901.md) When these are listened
to, the sheep of Christ, even through evil teachers, hear His voice, and
do not forsake the unity of His flock, because the good which they hear
them teach belongs not to the shepherds but to Him, and therefore the
sheep are safely fed, since even under bad shepherds they are nourished
in the Lord’s pastures. They do not, however, imitate the actions of the
bad shepherds, because such actions belong not to the world but to the
shepherds themselves. In regard, however, to those whom they see to be
good shepherds, they not only hear the good things which they teach, but
also imitate the good actions which they perform. Of this number was the
apostle, who said: “Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of
Christ.” <span id="fr_2902"></span>[2903](#fn_2902.md) He was a light
kindled by the Eternal Light, the Lord Jesus Christ Himself, and was
placed on a candlestick because He gloried in His cross, concerning
which he said: “God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our
Lord Jesus Christ.” <span id="fr_2903"></span>[2904](#fn_2903.md) Moreover,
since he sought not his own things, but the things which are Jesus
Christ’s, whilst he exhorts to the imitation of his own life those whom
he had “begotten through the gospel,” <span
id="fr_2904"></span>[2905](#fn_2904.md) he yet severely reproved those who,
by the names of apostles, introduced schisms, and he chides those who
said, “I am of Paul; was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in
the name of Paul?” <span id="fr_2905"></span>[2906](#fn_2905.md)

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p22"></span>6. Hence we understand both that the
good shepherds are those who seek not their own, but the things of Jesus
Christ, and that the good sheep, though imitating the works of the good
shepherds by whose ministry they have been gathered together, do not
place their hope in them, but rather in the Lord, by Whose blood they
are redeemed; so that when they may happen to be placed under bad
shepherds, preaching Christ’s doctrine and doing their own evil works,
they will do what they teach, but will not do what they do, and will
not, on account of these sons of wickedness, forsake the pastures of the
one true Church. For there are both good and bad in the Catholic Church,
which, unlike the Donatist sect, is extended and spread abroad, not in
Africa only, but through all nations; as the apostle expresses it,
“bringing forth fruit, and increasing in the whole world.” <span
id="fr_2906"></span>[2907](#fn_2906.md) But those who are separated from
the Church, as long as they are opposed to it cannot be good; although
an apparently praiseworthy conversation seems to prove some of them to
be good, their separation from the Church itself renders them bad,
according to the saying of the Lord: “He that is not with me is against
me; and he that gathereth not with me scattereth.” <span
id="fr_2907"></span>[2908](#fn_2907.md)

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p25"></span>7. Therefore, my daughter, worthy of
all welcome and honour among the members of Christ, I exhort you to hold
faithfully that which the Lord has committed to you, and love with all
your heart Him and His Church who suffered you not, by joining yourself
with the lost, to lose the recompense of your virginity, or perish with
them. For if you should depart out of this world separated from the
unity of the body of Christ, it will avail you nothing to have preserved
inviolate your virginity. But God, who is rich in mercy, has done in
regard to you that which is written in the gospel: when the invited
guests excused themselves to the master of the feast, he said to the
servants, “Go ye, therefore, into the highways and hedges, and as many
as ye shall find compel them to come in.” <span
id="fr_2908"></span>[2909](#fn_2908.md) Although, however, you owe
sincerest affection to those good servants of His through whose
instrumentality you were compelled to come in, yet it is your duty,
<span id="page_560">p. 560</span> <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-Page_560"></span>nevertheless, to place your hope on
Him who prepared the banquet, by whom also you have been persuaded to
come to eternal and blessed life. Committing to Him your heart, your
vow, and your sacred virginity, and your faith, hope, and charity, you
will not be moved by offences, which shall abound even to the end; but,
by the unshaken strength of piety, shall be safe and shall triumph in
the Lord, continuing in the unity of His body even to the end. Let me
know, by your answer, with what sentiments you regard my anxiety for
you, to which I have to the best of my ability given expression in this
letter. May the grace and mercy of God ever protect you!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2893"></span>[558:2894](1010456.htm#fr_2893.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p5"></span> [2 Cor.
11.29](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#029.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2894"></span>[558:2895](1010456.htm#fr_2894.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p6.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p7"></span> [Matt.
18.7](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#007.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2895"></span>[558:2896](1010456.htm#fr_2895.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p8"></span> [Phil.
2.21](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#021.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2896"></span>[558:2897](1010456.htm#fr_2896.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p8.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p9"></span> [1 Cor.
11.26](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#026.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2897"></span>[558:2898](1010456.htm#fr_2897.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p9.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p10"></span> [Matt.
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2898"></span>[559:2899](1010456.htm#fr_2898.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p13"></span> [Matt.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2899"></span>[559:2900](1010456.htm#fr_2899.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p14"></span> [Matt.
3.12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2900"></span>[559:2901](1010456.htm#fr_2900.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p15.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p16"></span> [Matt.
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2901"></span>[559:2902](1010456.htm#fr_2901.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p16.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p17"></span> [Matt.
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#003.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2902"></span>[559:2903](1010456.htm#fr_2902.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p17.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p18"></span> [1 Cor.
11.1](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#001.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2903"></span>[559:2904](1010456.htm#fr_2903.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p18.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p19"></span> [Gal.
6.14](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#014.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2904"></span>[559:2905](1010456.htm#fr_2904.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p19.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p20"></span> [1 Cor.
4.15](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#015.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2905"></span>[559:2906](1010456.htm#fr_2905.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p20.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p21"></span> [1 Cor.
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012.md),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2906"></span>[559:2907](1010456.htm#fr_2906.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p23"></span> [Col.
1.6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p23.1"></span>. The words “<span class="Greek"><span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p23.2"></span>καὶ αὐξανόμενον</span>,” here translated
by Augustin, are found in some <span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p23.3"></span>Mss.</span> but omitted in the *Textus
Receptus*.

<span id="fn_2907"></span>[559:2908](1010456.htm#fr_2907.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p23.4"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p24"></span> [Matt.
12.30](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#030.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_2908"></span>[559:2909](1010456.htm#fr_2908.md) <span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.CCVIII-p26"></span> [Matt.
22.9](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#009.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p26.1"></span>; [Luke
14.23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023.md)<span
id="vii.1.CCVIII-p26.2"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter CCIX](1010457.md)
