[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](1010329)  [Next](1010331) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.1.XXIII"></span><span id="page_242">p. 242</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-Page_242"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p1"></span><span class="c2"><span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p1.1"></span>Letter XXIII.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p2"></span>(<span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p2.1"></span>a.d.</span> 392.)

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p3"></span><span class="c9"><span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p3.1"></span>To Maximin, My Well-Beloved Lord and
Brother, Worthy of Honour, Augustin, Presbyter of the Catholic Church,
Sends Greeting in the Lord.</span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p4"></span>1. Before entering on the subject on
which I have resolved to write to your Grace, I shall briefly state my
reasons for the terms used in the title of this letter, lest these
should surprise either yourself or any other person. I have written “to
my lord,” because it is written: “Brethren, ye have been called unto
liberty; only use not liberty for an occasion to the flesh, but by love
serve one another.” <span id="fr_1492"></span>[1493](#fn_1492) Seeing,
therefore, that in this duty of writing to you I am actually by love
serving you, I do only what is reasonable in calling you “my lord,” for
the sake of that one true Lord who gave us this command. Again, as to my
having written “well-beloved,” God knoweth that I not only love you, but
love you as I love myself; for I am well aware that I desire for you the
very blessings which I am fain to make my own. As to my adding the words
“worthy of honour,” I did not mean, by adding this, to say that I honour
your episcopal office, for to me you are not a bishop; and this I trust
you will take as spoken with no intention to give offence, but from the
conviction that in our mouth Yea should be Yea, and Nay, Nay: for
neither you nor any one who knows us can fail to know that you are not
my bishop, and, I am not your presbyter. “Worthy of honour” I therefore
willingly call you on this ground, that I know you to be a man; and I
know that man was made in the image and likeness of God, and is placed
in honour by the very order and law of nature, if by understanding the
things which he ought to understand he retain his honour. For it is
written, “Man being placed in honour did not understand: he is compared
to the brutes devoid of reason, and is made like unto them.” <span
id="fr_1493"></span>[1494](#fn_1493) Why then may I not address you as
worthy of honour, inasmuch as you are a man, especially since I dare not
despair of your repentance and salvation so long as you are in this
life? Moreover, as to my calling you “brother,” you are well acquainted
with the precept divinely given to us, according to which we are to say,
“Ye are our brethren,” even to those who deny that they are our
brethren; and this has much to do with the reason which has made me
resolve to write to you, my brother. Now that the reason for my making
such an introduction to my letter has been given, I bespeak your calm
attention to what follows.

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p7"></span>2. When I was in your district, and was
with all my power expressing my abhorrence of the sad and deplorable
custom followed by men who, though they boast of the name of Christians,
do not hesitate to rebaptize Christians, there were not wanting some who
said in praise of you, that you do not conform to this custom. I confess
that at first I did not believe them; but afterwards, considering that
it was possible for the fear of God to take possession of a human soul
exercised in meditation upon the life to come, in such a way as to
restrain a man from most manifest wickedness, I believed their
statement, rejoicing that by holding such a resolution you showed
yourself averse to complete alienation from the Catholic Church. I was
even on the outlook for an opportunity of conversing with you, in order
that, if it were possible, the small difference which still remained
between us might be taken away, when, behold, a few days ago it was
reported to me that you had rebaptized a deacon of ours belonging to
Mutugenna! I was deeply grieved both for his melancholy fall and for
your sin, my brother, which surprised and disappointed me. For I know
what the Catholic Church is. The nations are Christ’s inheritance, and
the ends of the earth are His possession. You also know what the
Catholic Church is; or if you do not know it, apply your attention to
discern it, for it may be very easily known by those who are willing to
be taught. Therefore, to rebaptize even a heretic who has received in
baptism the seal of holiness which the practice <span
id="fr_1494"></span>[1495](#fn_1494) of the Christian Church has
transmitted to us, is unquestionably a sin; but to rebaptize a Catholic
is one of the worst of crimes. As I did not, however, believe the
report, because I still retained my favourable impression of you, I went
in person to Mutugenna. The miserable man himself I did not succeed in
finding, but I learned from his parents that he had been made one of
your deacons. Nevertheless I still think so favourably of you, that I
will not believe that he has been rebaptized.

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p9"></span>3. Wherefore, my beloved brother, I
beseech you, by the divine and human natures of our Lord Jesus Christ,
have the kindness to reply to this letter, telling me what has been
done, and so to write as knowing that I intend to read your letter aloud
to our brethren in the church. This I have written, lest, by afterwards
doing that which you did not expect me to do, I should give offence to
your Charity, and give you occasion for making a just complaint against
me to our common friends. What can reasonably prevent you from answering
this letter I do not see. For if you do rebaptize, you have nothing to
apprehend from your colleagues when you write <span id="page_243">p.
243</span> <span id="vii.1.XXIII-Page_243"></span>that you are doing
that which they would command you to do even if you were unwilling; and
if you, moreover, defend this by the best arguments known to you, as a
thing which ought to be done, your colleagues, so far from being
displeased on this account, will praise you. But if you do not
rebaptize, hold fast your Christian liberty, my brother Maximin; hold it
fast, I implore you: fixing your eye on Christ, fear not the censure,
tremble not before the power of any man. Fleeting is the honour of this
world, and fleeting are all the objects to which earthly ambition
aspires. Neither thrones ascended by flights of steps, <span
id="fr_1495"></span>[1496](#fn_1495) nor canopied pulpits, <span
id="fr_1496"></span>[1497](#fn_1496) nor processions and chantings of
crowds of consecrated virgins, shall be admitted as available for the
defence of those who have now these honours, when at the judgment-seat
of Christ conscience shall begin to lift its accusing voice, and He who
is the Judge of the consciences of men shall pronounce the final
sentence. What is here esteemed an honour shall then be a burden: what
uplifts men here, shall weigh heavily on them in that day. Those things
which meanwhile are done for the Church’s welfare as tokens of respect
to us, shall then be vindicated, it may be, by a conscience void of
offence; but they will avail nothing as a screen for a guilty
conscience.

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p12"></span>4. If, then, it be indeed the case
that, under the promptings of a devout and pious mind, you abstain from
dispensing a second baptism, and rather accept the baptism of the
Catholic Church as the act of the one true Mother, who to all nations
both offers a welcome to her bosom, that they may be regenerated, and
gives a mother’s nourishment to them when they are regenerated, and as
the token of admission into Christ’s one possession, which reaches to
the ends of the earth; if, I say, you indeed do this, why do you not
break forth into a joyful and independent confession of your sentiments?
Why do you hide under a bushel the lamp which might so profitably shine?
Why do you not rend and cast from you the old sordid livery of your
craven-hearted bondage, and go forth clad in the panoply of Christian
boldness, saying, “I know but one baptism consecrated and sealed with
the name of the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost: this sacrament,
wherever I find it, I am bound to acknowledge and approve; I do not
destroy what I discern to be my Lord’s; I do not treat with dishonour
the banner of my King”? Even the men who parted the raiment of Christ
among them did not rudely rend in pieces the seamless robe; <span
id="fr_1497"></span>[1498](#fn_1497) and they were men who had not then
any faith in Christ’s resurrection; nay, they were witnessing His death.
If, then, persecutors forbore from rending the vesture of Christ when He
was hanging upon the cross, why should Christians destroy the sacrament
of His institution now when He is sitting in heaven upon His throne? Had
I been a Jew in the time of that ancient people, when there was nothing
better that I could be, I would undoubtedly have received circumcision.
That “seal of the righteousness which is by faith” was of so great
importance in that dispensation before it was abrogated <span
id="fr_1498"></span>[1499](#fn_1498) by the Lord’s coming, that the
angel would have strangled the infant-child of Moses, had not the
child’s mother, seizing a stone, circumcised the child, and by this
sacrament averted impending death. <span
id="fr_1499"></span>[1500](#fn_1499) This sacrament also arrested the
waters of the Jordan, and made them flow back towards their source. This
sacrament the Lord Himself received in infancy, although He abrogated it
when He was crucified. For these signs of spiritual blessings were not
condemned, but gave place to others which were more suitable to the
later dispensation. For as circumcision was abolished by the first
coming of the Lord, so baptism shall be abolished by His second coming.
For as now, since the liberty of faith has come, and the yoke of bondage
has been removed, no Christian receives circumcision in the flesh; so
then, when the just are reigning with the Lord, and the wicked have been
condemned, no one shall be baptized, but the reality which both
ordinances prefigure—namely, circumcision of the heart and cleansing of
the conscience—shall be eternally abiding. If, therefore, I had been a
Jew in the time of the former dispensation, and there had come to me a
Samaritan who was willing to become a Jew, abandoning the error which
the Lord Himself condemned when He said, “Ye worship ye know not what;
we know what we worship, for salvation is of the Jews;” <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[1501](#fn_1500) —if, I say, a Samaritan whom
Samaritans had circumcised had expressed his willingness to become a
Jew, there would have been no scope for the boldness which would have
insisted on the repetition of the rite; and instead of this, we would
have been compelled to approve of that which God had commanded, although
it had been done by heretics. But if, in the flesh of a circumcised man,
I could not find place for the repetition of the circumcision, because
there is but one member which is circumcised, much less is place found
in the one heart of man for the repetition of the baptism of Christ. Ye,
therefore, who wish to baptize twice, must seek as subjects of such
double baptism men who have double hearts.

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p17"></span><span id="page_244">p. 244</span>
<span id="vii.1.XXIII-Page_244"></span>5. Publish frankly, therefore,
that you are doing what is right, if it be the case that you do not
rebaptize; and write me to that effect, not only without fear, but with
joy. Let no Councils of your party deter you, my brother, from this
step: for if this displease them, they are not worthy to have you among
them; but if it please them, we trust that there shall soon be peace
between you and us, through the mercy of our Lord, who never forsakes
those who fear to displease Him, and who labour to do what is acceptable
in His sight; and let not our honours—a dangerous burden, of which an
account must yet be given—be a hindrance, making it unhappily impossible
for our people who believe in Christ, and who share with one another in
daily bread at home, to sit down at the same table of Christ. Do we not
grievously lament that husband and wife do in most cases, when marriage
makes them one flesh, vow mutual fidelity in the name of Christ, and yet
rend asunder Christ’s own body by belonging to separate communions? If,
by your moderate measures and wisdom, and by your exercise of that love
which we all owe to Him who shed His blood for us, this schism, which is
such a grievous scandal, causing Satan to triumph and many souls to
perish, be taken out of the way in these parts, who can adequately
express how illustrious is the reward which the Lord prepares for you,
in that from you should proceed an example which, if imitated, as it may
so easily be, would bring health to all His other members, which
throughout the whole of Africa are lying now miserably exhausted? How
much I fear lest, since you cannot see my heart, I appear to you to
speak rather in irony than in the sincerity of love! But what more can I
do than present my words before your eye, and my heart before God?

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p18"></span>6. Let us put away from between us
those vain objections which are wont to be thrown at each other by the
ignorant on either side. Do not on your part cast up to me the
persecutions of Macarius. I, on mine, will not reproach you with the
excesses of the Circumcelliones. If you are not to blame for the latter,
neither am I for the former; they pertain not to us. The Lord’s floor is
not yet purged—it cannot be without chaff; be it ours to pray, and to do
what in us lies that we may be good grain. I could not pass over in
silence the rebaptizing of our deacon; for I know how much harm my
silence might do to myself. For I do not propose to spend my time in the
empty enjoyment of ecclesiastical dignity; but I propose to act as
mindful of this, that to the one Chief Shepherd I must give account of
the sheep committed unto me. If you would rather that I should not thus
write to you, you must, my brother, excuse me on the ground of my fears;
for I do fear greatly, lest, if I were silent and concealed my
sentiments, others might be rebaptized by you. I have resolved,
therefore, with such strength and opportunity as the Lord may grant, so
to manage this discussion, that by our peaceful conferences, all who
belong to our communion may know how far apart from heresy and schism is
the position of the Catholic Church, and with what care they should
guard against the destruction which awaits the tares and the branches
cut off from the Lord’s vine. If you willingly accede to such conference
with me, by consenting to the public reading of the letters of both, I
shall unspeakably rejoice. If this proposal is displeasing to you, what
can I do, my brother, but read our letters, even without your consent,
to the Catholic congregation, with a view to its instruction? But if you
do not condescend to write me a reply, I am resolved at least to read my
own letter, that, when your misgivings as to your procedure are known,
others may be ashamed to be rebaptized.

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p19"></span>7. I shall not, however, do this in
the presence of the soldiery, lest any of you should think that I wish
to act in a violent way, rather than as the interests of peace demand;
but only after their departure, that all who hear me may understand,
that I do not propose to compel men to embrace the communion of any
party, but desire the truth to be made known to persons who, in their
search for it, are free from disquieting apprehensions. On our side
there shall be no appeal to men’s fear of the civil power; on your side,
let there be no intimidation by a mob of Circumcelliones. Let us attend
to the real matter in debate, and let our arguments appeal to reason and
to the authoritative teaching of the Divine Scriptures, dispassionately
and calmly, so far as we are able; let us ask, seek, and knock, that we
may receive and find, and that to us the door may be opened, and thereby
may be achieved, by God’s blessing on our united efforts and prayers,
the first towards the entire removal from our district of that impiety
which is such a disgrace to Africa. If you do not believe that I am
willing to postpone the discussion until after the soldiery have left,
you may delay your answer until they have gone; and if, while they are
still here, I should wish to read my own letter to the people, the
production of the letter will of itself convict me of breaking my word.
May the Lord in His mercy prevent me from acting in a way so contrary to
morality, and to the good resolutions with which, by laying His yoke on
me, He has been pleased to inspire me!

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p20"></span>8. My bishop would perhaps have
preferred to send a letter himself to your Grace, if he had been here;
or my letter would have been written, if not by his order, at least with
his sanction. <span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-Page_245"></span>But in his absence, seeing that the
rebaptizing of this deacon is said to have occurred recently, I have not
by delay allowed the feelings caused by the action to cool down, being
moved by the promptings of the keenest anguish on account of what I
regard as really the death of a brother. This my grief the compensating
joy of reconciliation between us and you may perhaps be appointed to
heal, through the help of the mercy and providence of our Lord. May the
Lord our God grant thee a calm and conciliatory spirit, my dearly
beloved lord and brother!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[242:1493](1010330.htm#fr_1492) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p5"></span> [Gal.
5.13](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#013)<span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[242:1494](1010330.htm#fr_1493) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p5.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p6"></span> [Ps.
49.12](../../../bib/sep/psa049.htm#012)<span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p6.1"></span>, version of the LXX.

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[242:1495](1010330.htm#fr_1494) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p7.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p8"></span> *Disciplina.*

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[243:1496](1010330.htm#fr_1495) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p10"></span> *Absidæ gradatæ.*

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[243:1497](1010330.htm#fr_1496) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p10.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p11"></span> *Cathedræ velatæ*.

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[243:1498](1010330.htm#fr_1497) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p13"></span> [John
19.24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024)<span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[243:1499](1010330.htm#fr_1498) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p13.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p14"></span> *Evacuaretur*.

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[243:1500](1010330.htm#fr_1499) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p14.1"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p15"></span> [Exod.
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)<span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p15.1"></span>. Augustin believes that the angel sought
to slay, not Moses, but the child, for which he gives reasons in his
*Quæstiones in Exodum*. See Rosenmüller, *Scholia*.

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[243:1501](1010330.htm#fr_1500) <span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p15.2"></span>

<span id="vii.1.XXIII-p16"></span> [John
4.22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span
id="vii.1.XXIII-p16.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXIV](1010331)
