[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toah23)  [Next](toah25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

# NOTES

CHAPTER TAIL-PIECES. These little drawings represent the clan symbols of
the various groups of clans mentioned in this book There are also
several petroglyphic drawings introduced.

The symbols found at the end of each chapter can be identified as
follows:

THE TRUTH OF A HOPI:

Chapter I The Migration (petroglyph).

Chapter II. Masauwu Clan symbol.

Chapter III. People and birds (petroglyphs).

Chapter IV. The Bear, Strap, Bluebird, Spider, Gopher, and Greasy Eye
Cavities of the Skull clans.

Chapter V. Bear and Strap clans

Chapter VI. Crow or Kachina clans

Chapter VII. Bear Clan.

Chapter VIII. Crow Clan

Chapter IX. Crane Clan.

Chapter X. Hopi star and rainbow symbol. (Appears on [p.
120](toah22.htm#page_120).)

Chapter XI. The Tobacco, Cloud or Water, Badger, Rabbit and Coyote
clans.

Chapter XII. Crane and Bear Clans.

Chapter XIII. Bear and Masauwu Clans.

HOW CROW CLAN BECAME KACHINA CLAN:

Crow or Kachina Clan symbols.

PALOTQUOPI:

The Corn, [Cloud](errata.htm#10) or Water, Eagle, Sun Forehead, Tobacco,
[Bamboo](errata.htm#11) or Reed, Badger, Rabbit, Sand or Lizard, and Sun
Clans. (Appears on [p. 123](toah23.htm#page_123).)

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span id="xref_1">1</span>. First Class, Mong-cinum--Leaders of kivas,
priests and High Priests.

Middle Class, Pavun-cinum--Hold no office but belong to societies and
take part in ceremonies.

Low Class, Sukavung-cinum--Do not belong to any societies nor take part
in ceremonies.

These classes refer only to the men. When a woman marries, she is
classed with her husband. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_2">2</span>. If a Hopi woman wishes to terminate her
marriage she places the personal belongings of her husband outside the
door of their home. The house and all the household equipment are the
property of the Hopi wife. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_3">3</span>. Four is the sacred number of the Hopi. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_4">4</span>. The smoking of tobacco among the Hopi, as
among many other Indian tribes, is strictly ceremonial. The sacred smoke
carries the prayers of the Hopi to their Gods.

The Hopi are known to use three varieties of native tobacco in their
ceremonies. There are several other plants which they sometimes
substitute, when unable to procure tobacco. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_5">5</span>. There are many kinds of pahos, or prayer
offerings-as many as there are prayers, and there are prayers for every
occasion in life and death. They are reverently fashioned of various
types of feathers, carved and painted sticks and hand-spun cotton yarn.
Up to very recent times, the Hopi grew a special type of cotton, which
is named for them, *Gossypium Hopi*. Their paints are derived from
native plants, earths and minerals. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_6">6</span>. In the telling of this story, the Hopi have
in mind today the following birds, which have been identified by L. L
Hargrave, as follows:

<span id="xref_6a">6a</span>--Mocking bird--Western Mocking Bird, *Mimus
polyglottos leucopterus*.

<span id="xref_6b">6b</span>--Canary bird--Yellow Warbler, *Dendroica
aestiva*.

<span id="xref_6c">6c</span>--Eagle Golden Eagle, *Aquila chrysaetos
canadensis*.

<span id="xref_6d">6d</span>--Hawk--Cooper's Hawk, *Accipiter cooperi*.

<span id="xref_6e">6e</span>--Swallow--White Throated Swift, *Aeronautes
saxatalis saxatalis*.

<span id="xref_6f">6f</span>--Cat bird--Shrike (White-rumped Shrike)
*Lanius ludovicianus excubitorides*. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_7">7</span>. The good old "Spider Grandmother" has five
grandsons, "The Two Little War Gods," who help the people in case of
trouble, or if there is any fighting to do. They are cunning, brave and
mischievous, and always go about together. Then there are Kochoilaftiyo
(the Poker Boy), Pe-chinsi-vastio (the Cotton-seed Boy), and Pivitomni
(Patches), which refers to the fact that his little fellow wears a robe
made of mouse skins of many colors and sizes which has been fashioned
for him by his Spider Grandmother.

While all these boys are supernatural beings they are considered to
belong to the "common people." The last three are often called into
consultation when the people need advice. They are very humble folk and
therefore considered pure of heart and they bring with them the wisdom
of their good Grandmother, the Spider Woman, Kokingwuuti, who is
everywhere at once and is ever ready to help the Hopi. These beings are
the familiar household gods of the Hopi and are regarded with a strange
mixture of affection and tolerance.

The Pantheon of the Hopi might be roughly classed as follows:

Sotukeu-nangwi, the Supreme Being, or Heavenly God, who is served by all
other gods.

Powerful deified heavenly bodies, such as the Sun, Tawa, etc.

Mui-aingwa, the Great Germ God of the Underworld, creator of life; and
his servitors.

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

Masauwu, the Giant God of the Upper World, God of Fire and guardian of
Death.

The Kachinas, or spirits of the ancestors and of the animals and plants.

The Ancient Monsters and the familiar household gods. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_8">8</span>. Spruce, *Douglas Fir*. Fir Pine, *White
Fir*. Pine, *Western Yellow Pine*. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_9">9</span>. The use of the word "bamboo," coupled with
the idea that it was a plant comparable with a tree, makes one feel that
this origin myth has come a long way and represents a mingling of many
habitats. Witness the literal translation of the words for the Bamboo
Clan--Wukobacabi (meaning "a large, or larger reed"). A native bamboo
grows in southern Arizona; it attains a height of 15 to 20 feet. No
bamboo grows on the plateau, although there are several varieties of
tall reeds and grasses called "bakabi" by the Hopi. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_10">10</span>. The One Horn Society is the most powerful
of all Hopi sacred societies or fraternities and is regarded with great
awe by the Hopi, for it is the duty of these priests to look after the
dead. They are in charge of the spirit upon its journey from this world
into Muski, the underworld or spirit world of the Hopi. These priests
serve Muiaingwa, the Germ God, owner of the underworld, and Masauwu, God
of the earth and of death. When they die, their spirits cannot return to
visit the living in the form of white clouds as is the privilege of most
spirits, but must forever remain in the underworld.

It is the duty of the Two Horned Society to act as guards at the
Wuwuchime Ceremony, and to protect those who have become involved in
trouble. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_11">11</span>. Masauwu, God of the earth and guardian of
the dead, is very terrible and very sacred. In form he is a great giant.
The Hopis say [he](errata.htm#12) is really a very handsome man with
dark complexion, but he always wears a terrible bloody mask and an old
rabbit skin robe. He walks at night and carries a fiery torch. He is the
controller of fire.

Masauwu is the owner of all the Hopi world. He also represents death,
for he controls the fate of the departed spirit in Muski, the
underworld. The One Horned Priests serve Masauwu, as well as Muiaingwa,
the Germ God, and they mete out punishment or reward, according to the
life which the spirit has led in the upper world. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_12">12</span>. The legends of many Hopi Clans seem to
indicate that the people came from the southwest and that the ocean
referred to is the Gulf of California. First Mesa legends frequently
refer to an ocean; in the Snake Legend, the youth descends to this ocean
through the Grand Canyon. The Grand Canyon is "Muski," the place of the
dead. It is thought of as a long passageway, through which a painful
progress must be made by the "spirit," like the entrance through which
the people came up from the underworld; in other words, a part of
Sipapu, which was covered by the ocean. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_13">13</span>. The Sun God is Tawa He carries out the
commands of Sotukeu-nangwi the Heavenly God. Mui-aingwa, the Germ God
(giver of life) is controlled by the Heavenly God, but he is above
Masauwu, the Earth God. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_14">14</span>. The legend of the Bahana, white brother,
or white savior of the Hopi, is firmly established in all the villages.
He came up with the people from the underworld and was accredited with
great wisdom and he set out on the journey to the rising sun--promising
to return with many benefits for the people. Ever since, his coming has
been anticipated and it is said that when he returns there will be no
more fighting and trouble and he will bring much knowledge and wisdom
with him. The Spanish Priests were allowed to establish their Missions
in the Hopi country because of this legend, for the people

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

thought that at last the Bahana had come. Since that time they have
suffered many similar disappointments, but they are still expecting the
arrival of the "true Bahana."

The origin of the word Bahana is unknown, though there are several
theories. Today, this word is a term used to designate the coming of the
Spaniards.

The belief that a powerful white Savior is expected is common to all the
pueblos of New Mexico as well as those of Arizona.

The main features of this story bear a strong resemblance to the ancient
legend of Quetzalcoatl, Mexican Culture-God of the Mayas and Toltecs. He
is also associated with the Sun and being originally a Mayan God he did
not require human sacrifice. Quetzalcoatl was the God of arts and
crafts, of the calendar, and of general culture.

"There was an ancient legend that the Great Culture God, Quetzalcoatl,
after instructing the people in the useful arts, departed eastward over
the sea, promising to return in a year of a certain date. According to
tradition, Quetzalcoatl was white skinned and bearded, and the arrival
of the Spaniards in the appropriate year, led Montecuzoma II, who had
been trained as a priest, to adopt a fatally hesitating policy toward
them." Cortez landed in Mexico in 1519. *Encyclopaedia Britannica*, Vol.
5, pp. 134-135.

This belief of the Hopi in the return of a white god can be classed as
one of the general "theories" of the people. The Hopi word for a
"theory" is *tutavo*. (My Theory--*i-tutavo*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_15">15</span>. The legend of the Burro and the Spider
Woman is probably an addition to the more ancient legend. Such legends
must have developed by accretion and become considerably distorted and
expanded as they were passed down by "word of mouth" from generation to
generation. Many such inconsistencies occur in this story. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_16">16</span>. Hopi pueblos are composed of several
groups of related clans. Smaller clan groups, hearing of an established
pueblo and for some reason dissatisfied with their own location (perhaps
because of a clan "theory" that they had not yet reached their final
destination) would leave their home and journey to this larger pueblo.
They would temporarily settle nearby while their chief would negotiate
for admittance to the pueblo. These negotiations would sometimes occupy
years, for the strangers would be requested to demonstrate that they
would prove a desirable addition to the village. Some could show that
they possessed potent ceremonies to produce rain or mighty warriors and
could offer protection to their hosts in return for their hospitality.
In this way the pueblos grew and today many interesting physical types
may be observed. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_17">17</span>. Parrot Clan (Gash-wungwa)--These people
were part Zuni. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_18">18</span>. This was because they were originally from
Palotquopi. The Water, Cloud, and Snow Clans had separated at Homolovi,
part going off to the Rio Grande country, and part on to Hopi. Later,
the Rio Grande group, hearing of the others settled in the Hopi country,
came over and joined Awatovi. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_19">19</span>. The Hopi were first visited by the
Spaniards in 1540. Coronado, who had arrived in Zuni, sent a small party
of soldiers under Pedro de Tobar and Fray Juan Padillo into Hopi
Country. Kawaiokuh offered resistance and the town was promptly
destroyed by the Spaniards.

The other villages sued for peace and never again offered resistance to
the many Spanish expeditions. (*Winship, p. 488; and Hammond and Rey,
1929, p. 96*.) In the same year, Captain Cardenas was sent to seek the
Great River of which the first expedition had been told and on the way
passed through the Hopi villages where he was furnished

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

with guides. Cardenas was the first white man to look upon the Colorado
River. (*Winship, p. 488*.)

In 1583 Antonio de Espejo, seeking the rich mines reported in the west
and accompanied by a few soldiers and Zuni Indians, passed through the
Hopi towns. He visited all the villages and when he left four Hopi
guides went with his party. At this time Sikyatki was abandoned.
(*Hammond and Rey, 1929, pp. 94-104*.)

In 1598 Juan de Oñate came to the Province of Moqui and in the name of
the King of Spain received the formal submission of the Hopi Chieftains.
(*Bancroft, p. 139*.)

In 1604-5 Oñate set out in October to seek the "South Sea." He passed
through Zuni and the Hopi towns and returned again in April. (*Bancroft,
p. 154*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_20">20</span>. Ash Hill Terrace (Kuchaptuvela) on west
side, Ladder House (Kisakovi) on south side (*Hargrave, 1931*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_21">21</span>. The Shung-opovi Mission was called San
Bartolome.

The Oraibi Mission was called San Francisco.

The Awatobi Mission was called San Bernardino.

There were two Visitas, one at Walpi, and one at Mishongnovi.

(*Bancroft, pp. 173-179*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_22">22</span>. A few years ago a small carved beam from
the Mission could still be seen in the village of Shipaulovi. (*Museum
Notes, Vol. 2, No. 10*.) The editor searched for it in 1933 but could
not find it. It had probably been destroyed. (See also *Hargrave,
1930*.)

There is also a large carved beam in the Mong Kiva at Shung-opovi. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_23">23</span>. Jose Trujillo, a Spaniard who came to San
Bartolome at Shung-opovi, from Awatobi, in 1667. He had a Visita at
Mishongnovi. (*Bancroft, p. 179*). *Ed*.

<span id="xref_24">24</span>. "Pueblo uprising" August 13, 1680.
Organized by Popé, an Indian from San Juan Pueblo on the Rio Grande.
When the date was decided upon, swift runners carried knotted cords to
all the pueblos. The Spaniards were driven out of New Mexico and did not
return for ten years. (*Bancroft, p. 174*) Though this story does not
recognize the general "Pueblo Uprising," this account evidently
represents the Hopi phase of that event. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_25">25</span>. In 1701 Governor Cubero came with a party
to the Hopi villages and killed and captured a few people. But it was
deemed good policy to release the captives. The Spaniards returned
without accomplishing anything. This was just 21 years after the
destruction of the Missions. Nine years before, the Hopi had been
visited by de Vargas, but he did not go as far as Shung-opovi.
(*Bancroft, p. 225*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_26">26</span>. This cemetery was excavated by J. C.
Owens, of the Field Museum, about 1902. It lies at the foot of the hill,
about 3/4 of a mile from the Shung-opovi Day School. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_27">27</span>. The end of the mesa now occupied by
Mishongnovi, was at that time called "Hukovi," Windy Point. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_28">28</span>. This might have been the expedition sent
out sometime between the years 1707-1712 by Governor Jose Chacon to try
to arrange for a peaceful submission of the Hopi to Spanish rule.
(*Bancroft, 1888, p. 229*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_29">29</span>. Pikami is an exceedingly sticky mixture
and often figures in legends as being used for cement. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_30">30</span>. Fort Defiance was established in 1852 by
Colonel E. V. Sumner. (*Farish, Vol. 1, p. 308*.)

<span id="xref_31">31</span>. Hopi philosophy has an Oriental
suggestion. The Hopi in many of his beliefs is a fatalist and believes
that be and his clan are predestined to do certain things. This idea, or
philosophy of life, he calls

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

his "theory" or Hopi-navoti. This "theory" is usually handed down to a
leading man by his uncles or great uncles on the maternal side, and
there is also one clan woman who tells her grandsons of this "theory."
The people in general are not supposed to know of these things. During
his life this man is supposed to carry forward his clan "theory"
faithfully.

Each clan has its "theory" as to its final destination. Only the
witches" know what will be the ultimate fate of an individual. There are
also general "theories" which are held by all the people. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_32">32</span>. The Hopi idea of committing suicide, or
"sacrificing themselves" is difficult for a white man to understand, for
it is very Oriental.

If a Hopi has enemies, or there is someone who is causing him great
misery, he becomes so unhappy that he wishes to destroy himself. But he
cannot do away with himself without "losing face" as the Chinese say, or
in other words, losing his reputation as a brave man. Therefore, he
looks about for someone, or some other tribe, who may be bribed to make
a sham attack upon him or upon his village during which he will be
killed. It is arranged with the enemy that he will be the first to rush
out against them and as soon as he is killed the enemy will promptly
retreat. Of course, a few innocent people may suffer in the melee, but
this seems to be regarded only as a regrettable necessity.

A man desiring to make arrangements for his suicide will meet secretly
with the "enemy," taking him gifts and between them all the details of
the affair will be arranged. It is agreed upon at this time that the
victim shall wear all his valuables, such as strings of turquoise, etc.,
so that the hired assassins may thus receive the remainder of their pay
from the body of the "victim." And so it is that the Hopi suicide makes
a glorious end!

I am told that many of the Navajo and Ute raids upon the Hopi villages
were just such pre-arranged affairs.

These two rivals were making their bargain with the Navajo, as
previously described in note on suicide ( See also, *Voth, pp. 255 and
258*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_33">33</span>. These are the names of the men who went on
the trip to Fort Defiance:

1\. Masale (feathers crossed), father of the boy, Hani.

2\. Tawupu (rabbit skin blanket), Masale's rival for the woman,
Wupa-wuti (tall woman).

3\. Tohchi (the moccasin), who ran ahead and carried the news to Walpi.

4\. Mai-yaro (a bird), the man who helped Hani and became his
"godfather."

5\. Chihi (has reference to ear), a Navajo adopted by the Hopis.

6\. Chong-o (pipe).

7\. Tavaco (Spanish chewing tobacco).

8\. Tamoa (hail).

The Hopis killed in the battle were: Masale, Tawupu, Chihi, and one
other Hopi-adopted Navajo. The Hopis saved were: Chong-oh (pipe), Tavaco
(Spanish chewing tobacco), Tamoa (hail), Tohchi and Mai-yaro.

For years it is said that the skulls of the victims of this foray were
visible near the roadside between Ganado and Keams Canyon.

The relatives of Tawupu had at one time taken refuge with the Navajo
during a famine and were then considered Navajo. These people, together
with the relatives of the two Hopi-adopted Navajo, determined to be
revenged upon the Navajo who had plotted with the two Hopi and then
murdered their relatives. While the victorious Navajo were holding a
dance over the scalps of the slain, these other

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Navajo, the relatives of the slain, surrounded
the dancers and attacked and slew them.

Edmund Nequatewa relates that in 1904 he passed along the old trail in
the red hills near Ganado where the battle occurred. At that time one of
the two Hopi skulls placed there to mark the boundary after the battle,
was still in place on top of a small hill.

It was the custom of both Navajo and Hopi who happened to be passing on
the old trail, to pause and place a daub of red paint on the skulls, as
a mark of respect to the departed heroes. He said further, that the spot
where the skulls rested was somewhat northeast of the boundary as
claimed by the Hopi.

After a man is wounded or injured he has to choose a "godfather." The
first man that finds him has to be his "godfather" and it is his duty to
take charge of the injured man and nurse him back to health. First he
takes him to a vacant house somewhere, where he administers first aid.
Then the sick man is closed up and left alone for four days to fast.
After that the godfather returns and gives the patient anew name. When
this ceremony has been accomplished the injured man is at liberty to
return to his home. If the patient has been bitten by a rattlesnake it
is the Snake Priest who takes charge of his or her treatment. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_34">34</span>. An Agent was appointed for the Hopi in
1869. He lived at Fort Defiance until 1875 when buildings were erected
in Keams Canyon. (*Bancroft, p. 547*.)

Keams Canyon was formerly called Poongo-sikia. It was named for a weed
with a round leaf, used at that time for greens. This weed was called
Poongo. Informant--Sich-tima of Sichomovi, husband of Edmund Nequatewa's
aunt. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_35">35</span>. After 1875 a Missionary established a
school at Keams Canyon. (*Bancroft, p. 547*.) *Ed*.

<span id="xref_36">36</span>. His name was said to be Coat, and he
established the Sunlight Mission at Mishongnovi. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_37">37</span>. Edmund Nequatewa's grandfather, his
mother's father, Peuheu (New) would take him out into the rocks and hide
him. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_38">38</span>. Honani (badger) who was an influential man
at Shung-opovi had the Shung-opovi children sent to school and the Chief
of the village approved of this. Honani was called the "Bahana Mongwi"
or White Chief, because he acted for the Government. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_39">39</span>. About 1894 the Mishongnovi chief died and
Edmund Nequatewa's grandfather took his place. His name was
Quoitsvintiwa and he also was a "Bahana Mongwi." *E.N*.

<span id="xref_40">40</span>. The High Priest would bring in their
Tiponi, which represents the "mother" or "grandmother" of the race and
is the most sacred emblem of a Priest. Each clan, of course, has its own
Tiponi. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_41">41</span>. Lololama died sometime after the smallpox
epidemic about 1901. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_42">42</span>. The Fire Clan took its name from the torch
which the powerful god of the Upper World, Masauwu, carries on his
rounds about the edge of the world each night. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_43">43</span>. Tewaquoptiwa did not wish the people from
Shung-opovi to settle in Oraibi for this was not a part of his "theory."
*E.N*.

<span id="xref_44">44</span>. It was Youkioma's "theory" that his clan
originally came from Navajo Mountain and eventually, after many
wanderings, were to return there, stopping first at a place below Old
Oraibi, and then at Hotevilla. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_45">45</span>. Moenkopi had been established as a colony
of Oraibi sometime previous to 1871, for at that date the Mormon church
sent a missionary to live and work among the Hopi there. (*McClintock,
p. 157*.) *Ed*.

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

<span id="xref_46">46</span>. This line, cut in the rock, may still be
seen on the rocks back of the village of Oraibi. Also, close by, the
following inscription:

Well it have to be this way now, that when you pass me over this LINE it
will be DONE. Sept. 8, 1906.

It is said that this inscription was cut into the rock by Silena, one of
Youkioma's men. The "line" must have been drawn on the rocks by Youkioma
before the day of the battle. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_47">47</span>. The story of the founding of Hotevilla
given above, is the one related in the Kiva of the One Horned Society at
Shung-opovi and is the one believed by most of the Hopi. However, the
true story is supposed to be as follows:

Lololama, uncle of Tewaquoptiwa, then Chief of Oraibi, was taken to
Washington to see the "Great White Father." He went with a group of
Chiefs and influential men from the other villages and a Tewa
interpreter who also spoke Spanish. They were taken by Thomas Keam, the
first trader to establish himself in Keams Canyon. This was in the early
1880's. It is known that Keam spoke Hopi and it is possible that he was
a "special agent" to the Hopi at that time, as the "Agency" had not yet
been established in Keams Canyon.

This group of men from the Hopi villages consisted of the following:
Lololama, Chief of Oraibi; Honani, influential citizen of Shung-opovi,
who also acted for Mishongnovi and Shipaulovi; Sima, Chief of Walpi and
Sichomovi and over the Tewa village of Hano; and Abnawita, a Walpi man.
Tom Polacca, a Tewa man, acted as interpreter for the group. When they
reached Washington, they were asked to try to bring their people down
off their mesas and advised to get them to spread about and form other
small communities in the country nearby. At this time the Navajo were
beginning to press into Hopi country and occupy their lands and it was
thought that if the Hopi could be induced to spread out they could lay
claim to more land and check the Navajo advance. It is not known whose
idea this was, but it is unlikely that it had its origin in Washington.

Each Chief, or representative, was asked to choose sites for the
proposed colonies. Lololama selected Meu-haklie, which is a place back
of Monument Point in the Red Hills. He also bad Moencopi in mind,
although at this time there were already gardens established there by
people from various towns.

Honani selected Coma-a Springs, which is over in the Moqui Buttes, for
Mishongnovi. For Shipaulovi he selected Sakapa, which lies in the cedar
lands on Black Mesa, northeast of Second Mesa; and for Shung-opovi he
chose Burro Springs which lies southwest of this village.

Sima selected the canyons east of First Mesa for his people, such as the
canyon of Polacca Wash and those opening into it, and for the Tewa
people of Hano he chose the Wepo. Now all these men promised the
Government to do what they could to move their people off the mesas.
When they returned to their homes they told their people what the "Great
White Father" in Washington had said and urged them to move out off the
mesas. But, of course, no one wished to be the first
[ones](errata.htm#13) to start, so nothing was done about this. Some of
the people were afraid, for the Navajo were already settling around them
and had reached Coma-a Springs by this time.

Lololama was the only one of the party to think out a plan to move his
people and he worked this out in his mind on the way home. Of course, he
knew very well that just asking his people to move out

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

would not be enough to get them started. They would have to have some
strong reason, like a quarrel or disagreement among themselves. Now
Lololama knew that this was a traditional plan or "theory" among his
people and that it always had worked. When the leaders found that for
some reason it was desirable for their people, either the whole village,
or a part thereof, to move away and found a new establishment, they
would deliberately get together and plan to foment a quarrel. This would
be invariably carried out in such a clever way by the leaders that the
people themselves would never suspect the plot and eventually the
separation or move would occur just as it had been planned.

However, after such a conspiracy these leaders always considered
themselves guilty because of the trouble and distress they had brought
upon their people in the process of working out a plan which was to
benefit these same people eventually. They often "sacrificed" themselves
deliberately, in atonement for the distress caused their people in this
process and any misfortune befalling them after such an act, even though
for the good of their people, was considered right and just punishment.
The Hopi say that this is one of the reasons why there are so many ruins
all over the country.

Now Youkioma, who was of the Fire or Masauwu Clan, lived with his people
for a long time at the foot of Oraibi, while he was asking to be taken
in to that village. It is his clan's "theory" that this place (Oraibi)
is not their final destination, but that they still have to move on to
the place from which they originally came, one of the canyons near
Navajo Mountain. So Lololama picked out Youkioma because he know of his
"clan theory" and this just fitted in with his plans. The two men talked
over this plan and they thought that it would work out well for them
both. So Lololama and Youkioma made an agreement and Youkioma was to
lead his people just a little way off from the village "Just to take
them a few steps away from Oraibi," as the Hopi say. Then he was to ask
them whether they were really his faithful followers, or whether they
were doubtful about following him wherever he might lead them. If they
felt doubtful he would say that they could go back to Oraibi, or make up
with the Chief there, or do whatever they wished. By doing this Youkioma
thought that he would "start an argument" which would result in breaking
up the people into still smaller groups. It would seem that he actually
tried this.

Later Lomahungeoma and Kiwanimptiwa (whom it is believed were in the
conspiracy with the two chiefs, and who were related to each other)
broke away from Youkeoma's people and Lomahungioma started out to lead a
group of people away to found another home. On the way, it is said, he
lost his nerve (for he was thinking of the Navajo that were now pressing
in around the Hopi and of what might happen to his people) so
Kiwanimptiwa stepped in and took over the leadership and they finally
settled at Bakabi.

Informants--Sech-tima of Sichomovi, and Lalo of Walpi. *E.N*.

The Hotevilla people would have become Christians if they had reached
Kawish-tima, a canyon near Navajo Mountain. This right-about-face would
have been considered a Hopi "joke" on Tewaquoptiwa's people.

The early missionaries must have had something to do with the idea of
becoming Christians, for the hostiles were always the friends of the
missionaries. The original hostile at Shipaulovi, Tawahonganiwa,
promised the missionary at Toreva whoever followed him would end up as a
Christian. So one of his nephews, a wise man, Steve of Toreva got the
idea into his mind, "Why wait so long?" so he went back Shipaulovi and
became a Christian.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

One clan from Mishongnovi is still at Shung-opovi. They expected that
when they reached Moenavi (Mowie-avie) that they would become
Christians. Tawahunganiwa had the "theory" that his clan was to go to
Moenavi.

One old man at Mishongnovi, a cripple, went to the Toreva
Mission--Loman-akioma. His clan was also the one that was to go to
Moenavi. This was a Snow Clan "theory." *E.N*.

<span id="xref_48">48</span>. Youkioma, before the break, at a meeting
(meetings were held every other night) said he wanted to hold his people
together. He said that he was willing for them to take their altars and
emblems with them wherever they went , if they were in a bundle well
wrapped up. He said, "If the fight gets too serious, drop your bundles
rather than lose your life." When they dropped their bundles they were
to turn over a new leaf and be converted into Christianity and give
themselves up to the missionaries. If any of the other party opened a
bundle they would worship it. In other words, he said if people picked
them up and worshiped them, sickness and famine would fall on Oraibi.
*E.N*.

<span id="xref_49">49</span>. There were four sons of Tawahonganiwa at
Shung-opovi until recently; a silversmith, Washington Talaiumptiwa;
Silas (recently deceased) ; and Rutherford. These man were all sent to
Carlyle. One went to Isleta, the eldest, his name was Joshua. Later he
returned to Shung-opovi. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_50">50</span>. Troops H and K--5th Cavalry, under command
of Capt. L. R. Holbrook and First Lieutenant J. H. Lewis.

(*Entries for October and November, 1906, on Returns of the
Headquarters, Department of Colorado, Denver, under command of Brigadier
General Constant Williams*.)

(*Letter of January 6, 1934, from Major E. H. Maguire, Secretary,
Historical Section, Army War College, Washington, D. C*.)

<span id="xref_51">51</span>. Coin Heumiventewa of Lower Oraibi
contributes this portion of the story. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_52">52</span>. Youkioma had been in prison about 1901
because he was leader of the hostile group. Talangainiwa was Youkioma's
right-hand man. He was a little comical fellow. He made fun of
everybody, even the Chief. In 1906 Tewaquoptiwa was sent to Riverside
again, and made more trouble when he came back. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_53">53</span>. All the young men sent to Carlysle were
married. When they returned five years later they found that all their
wives had remarried. It was a great injustice to remove these young men
from their families. On their returning, they were compelled to start
life over again. Their women, who were left without support, were
compelled to take other men, Most of these men are living today. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_54">54</span>. The women and children and the very old,
were deprived of all the able-bodied men for six months, over a hard
winter. They built little dugouts in the sand, and brush shelters as
best they could. All their men were taken away and sent either to prison
or to Carlysle Indian School. It is unbelievable that the Government
authorities could be so cruel. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_55">55</span>. The actual location of Palotquopi is
extremely uncertain. The legend has been attached to Casa Grande and the
ruins of the Salt and Gila valleys, and later has even been located in
Mexico. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_56">56</span>. This same theme occurs often in Hopi
literature and is used to account for the beginning of trouble in a
pueblo. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_57">57</span>. See Note  [4](toah24.htm#xref_4).

<span id="xref_58">58</span>. See Note  [31](toah24.htm#xref_31).

<span id="xref_59">59</span>. To the Hopi all life is one--it is the
same. This world where he lives is the human world and in it all the
animals, birds, insects, and every living creature, as well as the trees
and plants which also have life, appear only in masquerade, or in the
forms in which we

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

ordinarily see them. But it is said that all these creatures and these
living things that share the spark of life with us humans, surely have
other homes where they live in human forms like ourselves. Therefore,
all these living things are thought of as human and they may sometimes
be seen in their own forms even on earth. If they are killed, then the
soul of this creature may return to its own world which it may never
leave again, but the descendants of this creature will take its place in
the human world, generation after generation.

The Hopi hunter always prepares pahos, or [prayer](errata.htm#14)
offerings, for the particular kind of game animal he is going to hunt,
or for the plant clan for which he is searching. He prays, begging the
animal or plant to forgive him, and explains that it is only his
necessity that causes him to ask the creature to sacrifice his animal
life to the Hopi. *Jim Kewanwytewa*.

<span id="xref_60">60</span>. In Hopi literature the "ghost" figures
prominently. They usually come bringing warning of some impending
catastrophe. The Ghost people must return each morning to their home in
the underworld (now thought of as the Grand [Canyon](errata.htm#15).)
*Ed*.

<span id="xref_61">61</span>. See Note  [7](toah24.htm#xref_7).

<span id="xref_62">62</span>. The Hopi say that the Spider Woman would
always make a paho that would be a little different from those made by
others, therefore, she used the sumac branch. From then on pahos made
for the dead are of sumac or the paho feather may be tied to a sumac
bush. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_63">63</span>. A Hopi digging stick is a stick about a
yard long and two inches in circumference, flattened and pointed at one
end. It is used for planting, to make the holes in the earth in which
the seeds are deposited. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_64">64</span>. Masauwu, God of the Earth (the Upper
World). See Note  [11](toah24.htm#xref_11).

<span id="xref_65">65</span>. The Water Serpent is generally referred to
as Balulukong, but this particular serpent is always known as
Siwiyistiwa. Balulukkong appears in many Hopi legends. (*See various
stories in Voth, and Stephen, 1929, No. 163*.)

<span id="xref_66">66</span>. Tiponi. See Note
 [40](toah24.htm#xref_40).

<span id="xref_67">67</span>. The participants in a sacred ceremony are
supposed to be in a "charmed" state. After the ceremony is over they
will be "discharmed" with a buzzard's feather used by a member of the
Honani, or Badger Clan. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_68">68</span>. Sotukeunangwi, the Heavenly God. He is
all-powerful and it seems that he stands above all others. Even
Muiaingwa, the Germ God, cannot [succeed](errata.htm#16) without his
help. (*See Stephen, p. 5d*.) See Note  [7](toah24.htm#xref_7).

<span id="xref_69">69</span>. The brother and sister are always spoken
of as Nasiwum. They are inseparable. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_70">70</span>. See Note  [18](toah24.htm#xref_18).

<span id="xref_71">71</span>. The Nasiwum, discouraged, decide to return
to Sotukeunangwi, and they disappeared forever. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_72">72</span>. It is said that Masauwu walks all around
the edge of the world every night. He carries a great flaming torch. One
night some Hopi met him on his rounds and ever since then this Clan has
been known as the Fire Clan. It is Masauwu's own clan. *E.N*.

<span id="xref_73">73</span>. The Clans from Palotquopi. The original
clan at Palotquopi was the Corn Clan. This had an allied clan, the
Rabbit Bush Clan. After the destruction by flood of Palotquopi this clan
was re-named the Cloud Clan, and is also called the Water Clan and
nicknamed the Flood Clan. The Cloud Clan eventually split into two other
clans. As the people from Palotquopi were traveling northward the Chief
and his two brothers decided to have a test of their wisdom to see who
could bring the people the greatest benefit, so they performed their

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

magic ceremonies and one brother of the Chief produced snow, so from
that time on this brother with his followers became known as the Snow
Clan. After awhile some of these people made a settlement at Giants
Chair and here again the two brothers decided to try their strength and
held another test and this time it was on the crops or corn that they
were to test their wisdom to see which one could produce the greatest
prosperity in the way of a fine crop of corn for the people. Now, the
younger brother went into his magic ceremonies and planted his corn and
then he prayed for the rain to come and make it grow and the showers
came and the corn began to grow and it did quite well for awhile, but
pretty soon this brother could not produce any more rain and the sun was
hot and the corn began to wilt. Now the oldest brother had also planted
his crop and it came good and there were showers and it grew up and
matured. Now from that time on the younger brother and his followers
received the derisive name of the Wilted Corn Clan, whereas the older
brother and his followers held the name of the Water Clan, although
today they also consider themselves the Corn Clan. Therefore, the Cloud
or Water Clan is considered to have two branches-the Snow Clan and the
Wilted Corn Clan.

The clans that came from Palotquopi in the south are the following:
Cloud, Water, or Flood Clan (Omow-wungwa) which was originally the Corn
(Ka-en-wungwa) and allied Rabbit Bush (Sivaf-wungwa) Clans; the Snow
(Nuva-wungwa) and Wilted Corn Clans (Pikas-wungwa) which were formed
from the Cloud or Waiter Clan; the allied Tobacco (Bif-wung-wa) and
Rabbit Clans; the Bamboo (Wuko-bacab-wungwa) or Reed Clan; the Sun Clan
(Tawa-wungwa); the Sand Clan (Teu-wungwa); the Eagle Clan (Kwa-wungwa);
and the Sun Forehead Clan (Kala-wungwa). When this last clan arrived at
Shung-opovi and came to the Chief of this village to ask for admittance,
he arrived at the village just as the sun was appearing over the
horizon. From that time on this clan was known as the Sun Forehead Clan.
It is also sometimes called the Morning Clan, or the Evening Clan, on
account of the time of day when they were admitted to the village. *Ed*.

<span id="xref_74">74</span>. See Story of the Destruction of
Palotquopi, *Voth, page 48, No. 12*.

Reference to the God, Sotukeunangwi, or Shotuk-inunwa, *Stephen, p.
51--also on page 50, No. 19*.

<span id="xref_75">75</span>. The two little War Gods are the grandsons
of the good or old Spider Woman (No-okiang or Sowuti, Spider
Grandmother). When the Hopi are in trouble they always turn to her or
the "little fellows" for assistance and advice. They live together in a
kiva near the villages.

<span id="xref_76">76</span>. The hair whorls of Hopi maidens have been
misnamed squash blossoms.

<span id="xref_77">77</span>. B.A.E. 20th An. Rpt., Washington, 1903, p.
X.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography](toah25)
