[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toah14)  [Next](toah16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

# CHAPTER XIII

### HOW HOTEVILLA AND BAKABI WERE FOUNDED

WHILE the Shipaulovi hostiles were living over at Shung-opovi they were
very much stronger against the school. The agent would send out
policemen every once in awhile to try to get their leader,
Tawahonganiwa. [39](toah24.htm#xref_39) Of course those policemen did
not have much authority, so they could not take him. He would put up a
big fight and his sons were the ones who would do the fighting. These
policemen were mostly Navajos.

The move to Shung-opovi occurred after the people had the smallpox and
the government was fumigating all the villages. The government people
were trying to get these hostiles over to the Toreva school to give them
a good cleaning up, so they could give them clean clothes and burn up
what they were wearing, but these hostiles did not want to go there,
because they did not want to put on what the government would issue to
them. So finally the Agent had to send out a regiment, composed of
colored soldiers from Fort Wingate. When these soldiers arrived the
hostile women made up a lot of piki and took it over to the soldiers to
feed them, thinking that the soldiers might recognize them when they
came up to the Mesa. The next morning the captain sent over a soldier to
warn the people that they must be ready to come right along, otherwise
there would be some shooting. But Tawahonganiwa refused to do as he was
bid and said he would not go. He said if they wanted to take him they
would have to kill him, so he called all his followers, women and all,
to one house. Whoever was an officer or priest of some kind in some of
the societies would take in an image or emblem to put in the
house. [40](toah24.htm#xref_40) One of these families happened to have
the image of the war god, Piakonghoya. This little image was put up by
the door, for they thought he might have some power to help them. When
the soldiers came up on top of the mesa they were lined up about
one-fourth mile outside the village and from there the captain sent in
policemen to ask these hostiles to surrender. They were asked four
times, but they refused every time. So the captain thought it was time
to march up. When they got there, they surrounded this house and the
captain went to the house himself and asked them if they were ready to

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

surrender and they refused again, so then it was time to take them by
force, so he gave orders to the soldiers to take picks and dig around
the walls and on the housetops. There must have been about seventy-five
or a hundred people in this house. Just as soon as the picks were seen
coming through the roofs they all started to run out and as they did
this they were taken hold of by the soldiers. The leader was the last
one to come out and just as soon as he was outside the door he was
grabbed by the soldiers and his five sons piled up on them and the fight
began.

They fought there for quite awhile. All the hostile people were fighting
with the soldiers, hand to hand. Finally the old chief was knocked out
and all the sons had their hands tied up behind their backs. Their
father was strapped on to a horse and they were all taken to the Toreva
School and there they were given baths and clean clothes and what
clothes they had on were taken away and burned.

The smallpox epidemic had not yet spread to Oraibi which was well
guarded so that nobody could go there. (The agent's name was Migle and
the man in charge of the fumigation, etc., was Sam Shoemaker.) Most of
the leading men of the hostiles were put under arrest and taken to Keams
Canyon the next day and then on to Fort Defiance. They were kept at Fort
Defiance for about 90 days and after that they were sent home, on their
agreement that they would behave, themselves. When they got home they
turned back and were just as hostile as before they were taken. They
said the white man was a fool to let them go, for he was just fooled by
them.

They didn't make very much trouble from then on, though their ideas
against the schools were just as strong as ever and the two factions
would be saying all kinds of things about one another. They were quiet
from then on, but, of course, many of their followers began to fall away
from the hostiles because they thought that the chief at Shung-opovi had
not recognized them, so some of these people went back to Shipaulovi.

The trouble started again in the year 1906, and this was between the
same two factions. It started in Shung-opovi and this was during the
time of the Bean Dance. The hostiles did not plant their crop of beans
with the others and eight days later they came into the kiva to plant
their crop. One kiva was divided up--part hostiles and part friendlies.
The night of the dance they asked these hostiles to get their plants out
of the kiva because some young children who were not initiated into the
Kachina ceremony

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

would see the plants. But these men refused to take their plants away
because it was against their law to take plants out of the kiva before
their time. So in order to have a dance they brought in several wedding
robes so as to hide the plants from the children. From then on those
people were always fighting one another. So again the hostile leader
decided to leave. From there Tawahonganiwa and twenty-five to thirty men
and women moved to Oraibi. By this time Lololama was dead and his
nephew, Tewaquoptiwa was then chief of Oraibi, but Youkioma was stronger
at this time. [41](toah24.htm#xref_41) When they got to the mesa top at
Oraibi, Youkioma's men met them. These men sprinkled sacred cornmeal on
the path that the Shung-opovi people followed to the village. Of course
this was not the proper thing to do, for Youkioma was usurping the
chief's function and Chief Tewaquoptiwa did not like it.

The leading men from both sides held council every once in a while
trying to see what must be done with these people who were being taken
in by Youkioma, and Youkioma always said that he had as much right to do
this as the chief. It was his "theory" that he was going to follow out
what his great-uncles had taught him of their traditions. This tradition
told him that he was to destroy Oraibi or be destroyed himself. He
belonged to the Fire or Masauwu Clan. [42](toah24.htm#xref_42) This gave
him the idea that his clan ancestor had the power to do almost anything.
This clan has the idea that Masauwu can hypnotize people, so he always
had said that if any expedition is sent against him all he has to do is
to take out a handful of ashes and blow them on the army and they would
fall to pieces. Chief Tewaquoptiwa wanted to send these people back to
Shung-opovi, but Youkioma, of course, was standing up for them and if
Tewaquoptiwa wanted to move them he would have had to move him
too. [43](toah24.htm#xref_43) He said that he had already had a site
picked out somewhere in the north called Kawishtima (a ruin in a canyon
near Navajo Mountain). [44](toah24.htm#xref_44)

As long as he had this site already picked out Tewaquoptiwa wanted to
send him there, but Tewaquoptiwa was in doubt that Youkioma would go
there. Finally this trouble got so bad that if the two parties should
happen to meet out in the street they would start an argument and
whoever was passing would stop too and it would get worse and worse.

The people of Oraibi got so that they were very much troubled and
impatient and at last they decided to move

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

them out. Right at this time they were having a Snake Dance and Youkioma
insisted he would like to be moved away on this day, but Tewaquoptiwa
refused to do anything with him on that day because of the ceremony, for
he did not want to trouble this religious party. So he set the day for
the fourth day after the dance. From the many arguments that all the
people had had in the streets both sides had the idea that there would
be a fight, so they tried to collect as many weapons as possible-bows
and arrows and guns, and to get them ready. Come to find out,
Tewaquoptiwa did not have enough men and the hostiles were about three
or four times as many as his people. So he called on the
Moenkopi [45](toah24.htm#xref_45) people for help and all the other
villages of Second Mesa.

The night before the fight both parties stayed up all night for their
luck, because this was rather a ceremony. They smoked all night long.
When morning came Tewaquoptiwa went to the house where the hostile party
was and asked them if they were ready for the day and were willing to
put up a fight against his people. He also asked them if any of them
would be ready to surrender and follow him. But none would surrender,
because of the good sayings of Youkioma and how he was going to take
them to a prosperous land.

During these hours of the morning, the men on both sides had rather a
creepy feeling about what was going to be the outcome, and the men out
in the streets gathered here and there listening to the many arguments.
The Oraibi chief made his request four times of the hostile party. Each
time he asked them if they would be willing to take the step and leave
of their own free will, and that if they would, they would not be
bothered or hunted. But each time Youkioma said he would have to be
forced to move out. Come to find out, Tewaquoptiwa was a little afraid
and he did not have nerve enough to go in and put Youkioma out of the
house. So one of the men on the Chief's side was rather tired of all
this foolishness that they were going through, so he called the chief,
Tewaquoptiwa, a coward and jumped into the house. When he did that the
rest of the men followed. When they got in there they got hold of
Youkioma and just slung him out of the door. When he landed outside
another party picked him up. By this time the men in the street had
formed a double line and the men in the house just kept throwing men out
and passing them down the line. It seemed as though they were handed out
and as if they were unloading sacks of flour or watermelons and passing
them on

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

down the line. Every now and then someone would put up a fight but he
was pretty well beaten. Now this was kept up until they had emptied the
house. When Tewaquoptiwa's men were through they went through the
village and got all the hostile women out and drove them to the outside
of the village.

On that morning the missionaries had come up and they made the people on
both sides give up their weapons and they took them all away. They said
it would not be fair for them to have weapons, but they could fight all
they wanted, hand to hand.

They passed all the hostiles out of the village and it was something
awful on both sides--women and children crying. It might be sisters, it
might be brothers, mothers and daughters that were separated. Just about
this time one old man, a hostile, came up from his field. The day before
he had baked some corn in his ground oven and he had eight burros loaded
with sacks of corn, each sack holding about 100 to 150 pounds. When he
came to his house no one was at home. Then someone came and drove him
out with his burros and when he got out there the hostile people ripped
up the sacks and helped themselves. Again Chief Tewaquoptiwa went out
and asked them if they were ready to move on. Youkioma said he would not
move unless Tewaquoptiwa could push him across the line which he had
drawn on the flat rock of the mesa top. [46](toah24.htm#xref_46) So here
they had to put up another fight again, to put Youkioma across the line.
When the chief was ready to go against them, the hostile men gathered
about Youkioma, intending to hold him so that the other side could not
move him across the line. Then the fight began, one party pushing toward
the village and another pushing away from the village. Tewaquoptiwa had
about one hundred men and Youkioma about two hundred. There they pushed
back and forth for two hours and a half. When they got out of breath
they stopped and then began again. Every once in awhile the pressure
would be so great that old Youkioma would rise up in the air. Being
quite a bunch of men they were hard to move.

One of the men from Shung-opovi, a friendly who was looking on from a
housetop, could not stand it, he was so excited, and seeing one of his
relations in the crowd, he dragged him away and threw him up in the air
and did it again and again.

Tewaquoptiwa's men found they could pull away their relatives too. They
did not like to fight other clans and all this time they had a hard
feeling against their relatives

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

who had gone over to the hostiles. By doing this they reduced the
hostiles quite a bit, but no one knew why Youkioma was in the midst of
the crowd. He must have had some object on either side that he was
looking out for. Just as soon as he was pushed over the line, he said,
"It is done, I have passed my mark," and all at once they dropped him.
When this was done Chief Tewaquoptiwa asked them if they would like to
take anything along, food and bedding. He told them they could go back
to the village for it, so they did. The men went back and got their
bedding and the women got piki and food. All this time the children were
crying for something to eat and they were very thirsty. Well, that
evening the whole village was like a disturbed anthill. People were
everywhere, coming and going and people from other villages were there
to see what was going on. You would see a woman with a bundle on her
back crying and other people would be making fun of them because they
were crying.

Just about sundown they were already to move on-all their burros were
loaded and they were pretty well packed themselves. Youkioma took the
lead and off they went to the north. They got to Hotevilla just about
dark and there they made camp. [47](toah24.htm#xref_47),
 [48](toah24.htm#xref_48),  [49](toah24.htm#xref_49)

<span id="img_06800"></span> ![](img/06800.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Youkioma](toah16)
