[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toah17)  [Next](toah19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

### THE LEGEND OF PALOTQUOPI [55](toah24.htm#xref_55)

MANY years ago when the Hopis were living down at Palotquopi they were
very progressive and prosperous, on account of having water, and having
an irrigating system from the river which flows through that country.
There they had taxation by means of doing some donation work on the
canals and ditches at certain times of the year. They did not have so
many ceremonies then and their most sacred one was Laconti (Basket
Dance). In this dance baskets were used, like the ones of Second Mesa
today. This ceremony always took place late in the fall and it had
always brought them rain and heavy snow up in the mountains. And also
their Jejellti (social dances) were not many, the most joyous one was
the Butterfly Dance. Being prosperous in their way of living everything
was plenty, and why shouldn't they be happy and amuse themselves in some
way? So, from one of the kivas, they held a Butterfly Dance with which
the spectators were very much pleased. Everybody was talking about it,
so the dancers again put it on for two more days, then they thought they
would pass it on to the next kiva. So they asked the men of the other
kiva to carry on the same dance, and when they had danced, these men
passed it on to the next kiva, and so it went around like that until it
came back to the kiva from where it was started. In this kind of a dance
only the young maidens are supposed to dance, but by this time some of
the young married women were taking part and instead of putting it on
during the day time in the plaza, they were dancing in the kiva at
nights, so they were having a great time of their lives, and it went on
from bad to worse. Nobody cared who was whose wife or husband, and
finally they got the wife of their chief. [56](toah24.htm#xref_56) In
those days the chief or any high priest was not supposed to take part in
social dances or was not to be seen in the kiva with the rest of the
people. As it was their general rule that they must have patience, and
above all must bear in mind peace, and think and pray for prosperity in
the years to come, for they knew that the people of any race must have
good supplies of food and water to keep their bodies in strong physical
condition to defend themselves against an enemy attack. They were good
fathers and watched over their people carefully. They were patient and
neither heard nor spoke evil. No matter what the people would do or how
bad they might

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

be, they were always comforted. But as this dancing went on, it was
carried too far and all the rest of the priests had gone crazy except
Chief Tawayistiwa, himself. This chief they had, was quite a young man;
he had only two small children, and these babies being neglected they
would cry at night when they woke up, so the father would take them to
the kiva to get the mother to nurse the younger one. When they were
quieted down the father would take them back to bed again. On these
trips to the kiva at night his wife would sometimes ask him to come down
into the kiva and look on while they danced, and of course knowing the
law and his duty he always had refused. All these things got so heavy on
him that he could bear it no longer, so one evening he went and called
on his nephew, Siwiyistiwa, who had grown up to be a good strong young
man. While this madness was with the people, men and women of mature age
had pleaded with their sons and daughters, telling them of the wrong and
crime that they were doing against their father, the chief, and
themselves. But it was of no use, it only caused the younger people to
lose respect for them, and then the old people were ill-treated, spit
upon and fed on the leftovers, which were not very much, for the house
duties were neglected by the young women. All this was unbearable for
the aged people and for the Chief. So he called at the house of his
nephew. He was welcome and seated himself by the fireplace. Siwiyistiwa
got up from his seat and handed his uncle a bag of tobacco which hung on
the wall near by, and this the uncle smoked. After finishing his
smoking, the youth asked him what he had come for.

"Yes," said Tawayistiwa, "after long wanderings in my mind about our
children (people) it seems like I am forced to come and have to depend
on you to 'sacrifice' yourself, not for the good of any one, but for
all--everybody here in my town."

"Yes, you certainly have a lot of patience," said the youth, "to hold
out this way, what with all I have seen and know of your wife. I did not
want to tell you because I did not wish to be the cause of the weight of
your wrath. Because of the sympathy that I have for you I am willing to
do what you have come to ask of me."

"I thank you, my nephew," said the Chief. "Thank you. First of all I
would like to know if you are strong on your running."

"Yes," said Siwiyistiwa, "I am quite strong."

"All right," said the Chief. "Of course you may be, but I still want you
to gain some more strength and speed. So

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

from tomorrow on, you will start to do your running to the foot of the
mountain ridge and back. That is quite a distance away, so the best way
to time yourself would be by the rising of the sun. For a few mornings
the sun will rise before you get back here, but if you are gaining by
and by you will get back here away before sunrise, so be sure to get up
at the same time in the mornings and be off. I will call again in a few
days and will tell you what we will do next."

After the Chief had gone Siwiyistiwa was rather a little worried, but of
course, with the Hopi in those days the uncle was over the nephews and
nieces. Whenever he asked anything of them it had to be done. While the
boy was preparing himself, he didn't know for what, his uncle too was
getting things ready for him. The youth was gaining strength and speed
and was very light on his feet and he was getting back to the village
away before the sun would come up over the horizon. Then Tawayistiwa
again went to see his nephew and when he got there he found the youth
was waiting for him.

"Come right in and have a seat," said his nephew, getting up and handing
him a bag of tobacco as usual. After smoking a pipe he said to the boy,
"Again I am here, hoping to find you with more strength and speed."

"Yes," said his nephew, "I have gained some."

"Very well," said his uncle, "I have everything ready for you, so
tonight you can come over to my house and there I will tell what to do.
But be sure to come after everybody goes to the kiva."

Late that night Siwiyistiwa went to his uncle's house. Upon entering,
the Chief took him away into the back room. There they sat down and
there his uncle smoked his pipe solemnly over the pahos which he had
prepared. [57](toah24.htm#xref_57) Then he said, "Here I have these
things ready for you and tomorrow morning early you will take these
pahos out with you toward the same direction you have been going and up
over the mountain ridge. On the other side is an open range. There you
will come upon a herd of deer. Look them over carefully, then make your
selection of a young buck with a pair of good weapons (horns), but wait
for the sun to appear. Now watch very closely and just as it peeps over
the horizon run into the herd. It is those weapons that you are going to
get for me, so be sure to keep after your selected buck until you run
him down, then after cutting off his two front horns you will deliver to
him these pahos that I have here made ready for him, and also my
message."

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

The next morning Siwiyistiwa went out to where he was directed and when
he got there he went over the mountains and there in the open he saw a
herd of deer. He looked them over very carefully while he was waiting
for the sun to rise and just as the sun peeped over the horizon he ran
into them and how they made the dust fly! But he kept after them along
the side of the mountain range so as to keep them away from the rocky
hills. The deer kept falling away one by one, until at last his selected
buck was left alone. Now finally this deer gave out and lay down. The
boy jumped on him quickly and took hold of his horns and turned his head
over. But alas, the deer cried, "Mercy me, have a heart," in plain Hopi,
which was of course a very astonishing thing to the youth and he held
his breath for a moment. Then he said to the deer, "I am not going to
hurt you, I am not going to kill you, I only want your horns, your
weapons. My uncle, Tawayistiwa, would like to have them, so he has sent
me out here to get them but I don't know why."

"Mercy be upon us!" said the deer. "Has he lost his mind and forgot his
'theory' and law, [58](toah24.htm#xref_58) and is he angry with us all,
and will he use my weapons to destroy his town?" Then he sank down in
sorrow and in sympathy for all that were ignorant of the coming
calamity. Shedding quite a few drops of tears, he then looked up and
said, "Take my weapons, but please do not use your knife, because you
will hurt me. Just give them a little twist and they will slip off and
another pair will grow out again soon."

"Thank you," said the youth as he took off the horns. Then he brought
forth his bundle and said to the deer, "Here, I have some pahos which my
uncle, Chief Tawayistiwa, has made and sent them to you, hoping to make
you all happy. He also said that all you people (game
) [59](toah24.htm#xref_59) living down here in the lower country must
get to moving and drift over to the higher mountains to the northeast,
that you may be saved, so take these pahos to your people and tell them
what the Chief has said about moving."

The deer got up and went away with the bundle of pahos which he
distributed among his people and told them about the Chief's message,
which of course, was a great grief to them all.

The youth went on home taking the two horns which he had taken from the
young buck. When he got home Tawayistiwa was waiting for him and as he
entered the doorway, "Thanks," said the Chief. "Thanks that you have
come already. I did not quite expect you so soon, but you

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

have proved yourself strong and swift. All right, have a seat." As the
youth seated himself the Chief got out his bag of tobacco and pipe and
then he said to his nephew, "If you have anything that you have brought
me you may lay it here before me that I may give it a welcome smoke." So
the boy laid the two horns down on a plaque on the floor before the
Chief. He was very much [gratified](errata.htm#4) with the little horns
as though they were for some benefaction of his people. After smoking
his pipe, the Chief asked Siwiyistiwa about his trip and the boy told
him all about it.

After hearing his nephew's story of his trip, Tawayistiwa said, "You
have done well, but there is some more to be done and I have everything
ready, so tonight when you come again I will tell you what you will do
next."

Late that evening the boy went back to his uncle, and when he got there
his uncle was waiting for him. As he entered the house he was welcomed.
The Chief was already smoking and the boy seated himself by his uncle.
"The weight of all this worry is getting heavier every day as I am
preparing these things and I am sad to think that here I am working only
for the punishment of my children (people) but this will be the only way
out of the trouble and it is necessary to sacrifice you." As he said
this he could not help but cry. Tawayistiwa had made masks for him, each
one different--Kachina, Yaponcha, Masauwu, and one portion was of fat
meat. "Tonight you will wear these masks, one upon another, and carry
these weapons of the deer, and you will go the same direction where you
have been going for your running, up the mountain range where there is
some wood. Build your fire there and when you get enough live coals,
take one and put it in the mouth of the top mask and blow on it and this
will give the look of having eyes of fire and your fire will be seen
from the pueblo. Then come running and when you get here, come through
the small south alley and run up the ladder to the top floor of this
house. Up there you will find corn in metates. Start grinding for a few
moments and then go down again and out the same way. If the men in the
kiva be brave and big-hearted they will come out and try to catch you.

With these instructions Siwiyistiwa was dressed up in a dreadful and
fearful costume and he went out to where he was directed. He built a
fire and the people seeing it from the village wondered who or what it
was having a big bonfire, and by the reflected firelight the people
could see, even at that distance, something standing in the glow.

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

The fire went down lower and lower and finally it died out. Then they
saw a light coming toward the town, coming closer and closer. When it
came up they saw that this terrible being had eyes of fire and those who
saw him fell with fright in their doorways or wherever they happened to
be. He entered through the alley into the plaza and went to the Chief's
house, where he ascended to the top floor and could be heard grinding
corn. Then down he came and went out again toward the direction he had
come from. Now it happened that there was a little boy who was just
thought to be an outcast and he was with some other boys who were
looking down at the dance from the kiva top. This boy was not at all
frightened and saw everything. He called down into the kiva to the
dancers and told them that some dreadful ghost had come, but everybody
called him a liar and would not believe him. [60](toah24.htm#xref_60)

This boy, whose name was Kochoilaftiyo (Poker Boy) was just a poor boy
and was living with his old grandmother. [61](toah24.htm#xref_61)
Regardless of what Kochoilaftiyo had told the people in the kiva about
the ghost, the dancing went on with full force until morning. But that
day, everybody was telling about this terrible ghost and so the young
men declared that they could catch the ghost that night.

After dark the young men placed themselves in many hiding places from
where they might leap out at the ghost. But when he came, they all fell
down with fright and after coming to they ran for their lives.
Kochoilaftiyo was watching the dance from the kiva top, wrapped up in
his little mouse skin robe and he was not a bit scared. The young men
tried for two nights, but alas, the creature was so frightful that he
could not be caught.

The next day the little boy told his grandmother about the ghost.
"Grandma," Kochoilaftiyo said, "for three nights some frightful ghost
has been coming to the village and the young men have tried to catch him
but all have failed."

"It is time," said the old lady, "that we get our warning because of
what has been going on. This is a warning of punishment or some calamity
which will fall upon us all and it will be something that no one can
escape."

"Tonight," said the boy, "they will lay for him again and I would like
to be with them. If he is caught I would like to see what he is. It must
be something more than man who can handle this thing with magic or
witchcraft power."

"So go," said the grandmother, "and get me a sumac branch."

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

Kochoilaftiyo obeyed his grandma and went out after a little branch.
When he came back with it the old woman brought out from the back room
her materials of feathers and cotton yarns of which she made two prayer
plumes and put them on this sumac twig and with her little pipe she
smoked her earnest prayer over her offering to the
gods. [62](toah24.htm#xref_62) "Take this, my son," she said to the boy,
"to the Masauwu shrine and set it therein and pray for the best, but
before you leave look around carefully and if you find there Masauwu's
digging stick, pick it up and replace it with this one. This is the
exact duplicate of it." As she said this she handed him an old digging
stick pretty well weathered. [63](toah24.htm#xref_63) Kochoilaftiyo took
the stick and the prayer offering to the shrine. There he placed the
pahos, looked around carefully, and seeing the stick he picked it up and
replaced it with his grandmother's. Then he came back. The grandmother
was very thankful for the stick. "This stick of Masauwu's is a wand of
power and with it you might be able to knock down that ghost. So, my
dear child," said the old woman, "it may be best that you station
yourself in the narrow alley through which he comes and goes."

That evening after dark Kochoilaftiyo, instead of going to the kiva top
to look on the dance, went into the alley to wait for the ghost. As he
was sitting there in the dark someone came and the boy looked and alas,
there was Masauwu [64](toah24.htm#xref_64) himself, standing before him
and Kochoilaftiyo was stunned with fright for a moment and could not
speak. "[You](errata.htm#5) certainly did a wise thing," said Masauwu to
the boy, "by taking my stick, but here is something that will hide you
and keep you from being seen," and he handed him four grass brush
bristles and advised him what to do. Kochoilaftiyo was very thankful and
he sat down with the bristles in one hand, the stick in the other, and
waited for his chance on the ghost. Now; some of the strong young men
had also stationed themselves outside the village to await the coming of
the ghost. At the same time, the dancing was still going on in the kiva.
Toward midnight the ghost was seen coming and all the supposed
brave-hearted fell down with fright, but Kochoilaftiyo was still
himself. When the ghost passed him he got up and waited for his return
and got ready for the attack. The ghost jumped off the house, ran into
the alley, and with all his might Kochoilaftiyo struck him with
Masauwu's stick and knocked him down. As he fell, the boy was on top of
him and he held his breath for he was half scared then. Finally he
asked, "Who are you?"

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

"It is I," said the ghost, "but don't ask me more, but take me into the
kiva. In there you will see who I am."

As they walked over to the kiva the dancing was on with full force, and
when they got on top Kochoilaftiyo called in and he was not heard on
account of the beating of the drum and again he called at the very top
of his voice. This time he was heard, so he said, "Be courteous to this
guest who is my companion for I am not alone." Hearing Kochoilaftiyo's
voice, the whole kiva became silent and all held their breath. Finally a
voice called out, "Come in. Come right in."

The ghost started down the ladder first with Kochoilaftiyo following
him, and the people in the kiva were all looking up to see what was
coming in. When the ghost exposed himself to the firelight the people
were stricken with fright and fell to the floor. One by one, when they
came to, they crawled out of the kiva. Only a few old men were left and
the ghost and Kochoilaftiyo seated themselves in front of the firelight.
Seeing this frightful creature the old men hung their heads and were
silent.

Finally, one of them spoke and said, "For all our conduct of crime it is
already too late and we must suffer and who knows what will become of
us. Perhaps we may learn from this man, whoever he is, but we can do
nothing. Call our father, the Chief," and at this request Kochoilaftiyo
went out and called the Chief. He pretended to be very much surprised at
being called away in the night, but he took his bag of tobacco and his
pipe and went to the kiva with the boy. Coming, he seated himself on the
left side of Kochoilaftiyo and before anyone else, he lit his pipe of
tobacco and started smoking. Having taken four puffs of smoke out of his
pipe he passed it on to the rest of the old men. The pipe went around
and was finished up, and then the chief spoke and said, "My dear
fellowmen, I wondered why I was called at this time of the night, but I
see that you have someone with you."

"Yes," said one of the old men, "this ghost has been coming for the last
three nights and this being his fourth night he is caught. He has been
going up to your house to the top floor. Therefore, perhaps you might
explain to us the meaning of all this. Though we know that we have done
wrong against you, we are wondering now if this might not mean more than
just to stop this dancing, and worry is upon us now."

"Of all this I do not know," said the chief, "and also the meaning of it
I cannot explain. So without any further questions take the masks off
the man that we may see who

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

he is." Kochoilaftiyo was asked to take the masks off and as he came to
the piece of fat meat the Chief said to put it aside as it is food that
the men in the kiva may cook and eat. As the last mask was taken off
they saw that he was the Chief's nephew, Siwiyistiwa, his only nephew,
and alas he hung his head and wept.

"Being your own nephew," said the kiva chief (Kiva mongwi), "take him
and do what you want with him."

"No," said the Chief, "him I deliver unto you."

Said the kiva chief, "You being our chief, we cannot do otherwise from
your wishes, so we demand your advice."

"If you do," said the Chief, "I advise you to bury him alive in the
plaza in front of the shrine, with all his masks, before the day comes.
But be sure and make a good job of it that he may not escape."

At this command Kochoilaftiyo went out and dug a hole deep enough that
Siwiyistiwa's head would be covered under ground when he was sitting
down. When he had done this he went back to the kiva and brought
Siwiyistiwa out to the plaza and buried him, but before he had him all
covered up Siwiyistiwa asked him to come there for four mornings and to
take a look for signs of the approaching disaster.

That night the whole town was weary and the old men and women of good
mind were stricken with fear. The next morning Kochoilaftiyo went to
look at the grave, and behold, there was Siwiyistiwa's hand sticking up
out of the grave with four fingers open, which meant that something
would happen in four days. The second morning he went again and saw that
there were three fingers up and one finger down or closed. Now every
morning one more finger would be closed down, until on the fourth
morning all the fingers had been closed and his whole hand had
disappeared under the ground. The day was gloomy. Clouds were gathering
in the skies overhead and around the grave the earth was all wet and
boggy. Toward noon it began to rain, coming down heavier and heavier,
and then out of the grave a great water serpent of enormous size
appeared and stood swaying back and forth and also, at every corner of
the plaza others appeared but they were not quite of the size of the one
at the shrine, who had come up out of the
grave. [65](toah24.htm#xref_65) Now water came shooting up out of the
corners of the plaza where these serpents stood swaying, and soon there
was water everywhere. The rain kept up and the waters were raising
higher and higher. Now the people began to move to the higher ground,
taking

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

what they could in the way of food and bedding, and there was much
suffering and fear, and all this continued for four days. The only thing
they could do was to look at their village standing in the midst of the
water, where the great serpent was still swaying back and forth. Of
course, the people were in great trouble and hated to leave their homes
but still this serpent was so fearful and they wondered if it ever would
go away. With weary thoughts of sadness the men set to work making their
prayer offerings of many pahos, and when this was done the Chief asked
of the people who would be willing to sacrifice their children, because
they must make all this offering to the Great Serpent and ask him to
make peace. Now who would part with beloved children? There was a great
hesitation among the people, but being the request of the Chief a boy
and a girl of six years of age were chosen who were, of course, of clean
hearts and innocent. These two were given a tray of pahos and told to
walk out into the water toward the great serpent while the people
watched with sadness and tears in their eyes. When they had reached this
monster he sprang up and coiled himself around the two children and sank
with them into the water, which was of course a very terrible sight to
the people watching from the hills.

Now everybody was very much discouraged, and though they hated to leave
their homes and property they finally gave up all hope and decided to
leave the country, but before starting they called a council to select
their new chief or leader, because at this time the Chief considered
himself guilty of the disaster and no longer worthy to lead his people
and the people too felt the same way, but because of the wrong they had
done no one dared to say anything. So finally the Chief himself asked
the boy, Kochoilaftiyo, to be the chief and as he had been just an
outcast, but had done a brave act, he was now looked upon as more than
just a human being, on account of his wise Spider grandmother.

"I pray you," said Kochoilaftiyo, "I am not worthy to lead you. I am
only a Kocholabi (fire poker) and do not consider myself good enough to
take your authority, to be your chief and leader."

"It is not who you are, or what you are that I am considering. It is
because of your innocence and the simplicity of your heart that I wish
you to be our chief from now on."

"Well," said Kochoilaftiyo, "will you and the people ever forsake me?"

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

"No," said the Chief, "your wishes and footsteps will be our path and
here with my tiponi you shall lead our people." [66](toah24.htm#xref_66)

"I shall not take yours," said Kochoilaftiyo, "I and my grandmother have
our own in which we believe and trust and it is without stains of evil.
Therefore, we shall take no other in its place. So you shall keep yours.
Your kind request and offer of your highness and royalty unto us, we
shall not accept, because we will always be looked upon as who we are
and what we are and always will be considered as such and no other but
that. Why not ask your brother, Tawahongva? I think it is best that your
clan should keep this royalty and continue as our chiefs and leaders. As
it is today, on this very day we all feel guilty and not worthy to be
your children (people) so it is for you and your clan to consider
whether you will have mercy and forgive us. We are willing to follow you
again. Therefore, I, Kochoilaftiyo, demand for the people that this man,
Tawahongva, your brother, be our chief and leader from this day on, as
we feel that it is not right for any other clan to take the royalty away
from your clan."

"Very well," said Tawayistiwa, "I think you for your great and earnest
consideration for my clan, and so your demand for Tawahongva, my
brother, to be our chief, is fulfilled." After these last words,
Tawayistiwa picked up his tiponi and handing it to his brother,
Tawahongva, declared him chief and leader of the people.

When this was done, the people were somewhat relieved of their
weariness. Tawahongva set to work and made his pahos or prayer plumes.
With these and his sacred corn meal he drew his line or path over which
the people were to journey toward the northeastward.

Now, with all this worry and grief two parents had forgotten their
children, a brother and sister. These two little children had been
sleeping and wakened up while the water was still high. They cried for
their mother and father and not only that they were hungry too. So they
got up and searched about for something to eat, and finally they found
some piki which they ate. By this time the water had gone down a good
deal so the two children came down off their house and went around into
the plaza and alas! there they saw the great serpent swaying back and
forth and they were very much frightened. They stood still for awhile,
looking at the monster in great fear, and then suddenly the serpent
spoke to them, saying, "Come, be not afraid, I am not going to hurt you.
It is sad to see that you two children have been left behind, so be not

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

afraid and come." The serpent was being very sympathetic in asking the
children to come, so finally they came up to him. "Please, don't be
afraid of me. I am Siwiyistiwa and I am not going to hurt you. I called
you here to me to tell you where your parents and the rest of the people
have gone. They left here many, many days ago, going toward the
northeast, heading for a place called Situqui (Flower Butte) and it is
best for you to follow them. You cannot live here because very soon
there will not be anything more to eat. If you ever catch up with your
people it is likely that you will not recognize your father and mother,
so I will tell you their names. Your father's name is Koyoungnu, and
your mother's is Sackmunima, and they too will not recognize you and
they will ask you your names, so young man, you are Tiwahongva and you,
his sister, you are Tawiayisnima, so above all remember your parents'
names and your own. Now, you go up over there to the northeast corner
house of this plaza and climb the ladders to the very top floor. Up in
there you will find some big birds sitting upon the shelves. You must
bring them out and let them fly toward the same direction that your
people have gone. The feathers of those birds will be used for making
pahos of all kinds by your people."

The two children went up to the house as they were directed, and to
their surprise they found some odd looking birds with no feathers on
their heads, and the ends of their tail feathers were still covered with
the foam from the water which had turned them white, and away over in
one corner there sat still another bird looking [somewhat](errata.htm#6)
the same as the others, but the ends of his tail feathers were not
white. After letting these birds down from their roosts they spoke to
the children, saying, "We all thank you, [Tiwahongva](errata.htm#7) and
Tawiayisnima, for we are the innocent elderly people. We could not swim
and so here we had turned into birds and we are now the turkeys, and
from now on our feathers will be helpful to your people for making
prayer offerings to the gods."

"And I am the buzzard," said the other strange bird, and with my
feathers, after all the sacred ceremonies the members will be
'discharmed' and they will also be used for 'discharming' the sick and
evil among all the people. [67](toah24.htm#xref_67) And again we all
thank you for letting us down and out, so here we go, and good-bye." As
they flew away the buzzard went up and circled around overhead four
times to "discharm" the ruined town, then he followed the rest of the
birds away toward the northeast. After the birds were gone Tiwahongva
and his sister went back to Siwiyistiwa,

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

the serpent, for some more instructions.

"Now," he said to them, "you go up to the west corner and up at the very
top floor you will find some sweet corn meal and some piki and also a
small robe and gourd to carry your water in. Bundle all that up in the
little robe and come back here to me." So they went up there and got
what was there.

When they came back again, the serpent said to them, "Now you are ready
to go and if you catch up with your people tell them that I,
Siwiyistiwa, am now a supernatural being and have power and will do
anything for the people in the way of prosperity--I can send them rain
and in fact, anything like that will be yours for the asking, so tell
them to make pahos for me and set them out anywhere toward this
direction, but remember, they must call me by name at the very top of
their voices that I may hear and know. Now, like this, 'Siwiyistiwa,
here I have made pahos for you. We know and remember your message of
promise which was sent to us by Tiwahongva and Tawiayisnima, so please
fulfill now your promise of sending us rain for the benefit of our crops
and the people, and so forth.' Then the pahos and the message will
always be received. Now, I warn you not to look back till you get away
over on the other side of the hill. If you do, something might happen to
you, so be sure to remember not to look back. Farewell. Take good care
of your sister." Tiwahongva and his sister than started out on their
long journey and they didn't know where they were going but they were
traveling on their way. Being so young, it was hard for them to travel,
especially for the little sister, so Tiwahongva would carry her on his
back awhile and then let her down again and they would go on like that
all day. It was still daylight in the evening when they decided to make
camp and were just about opening their bundle of lunch when they heard a
loud roaring noise overhead and they were very much frightened and
wondered what it could be. Tiwahongva held his sister tightly to his
breast, and behold, someone had descended from the heavens all clothed
in a glittering costume of ice that sparkled like silver and his head
and face shone like a star. He spoke to them and said, "Do not fear, I
am So-tukeu-nangwi, [68](toah24.htm#xref_68) the heavenly God and
because of the sympathy I have for you I have come to help you, so come
get on this shield (Yo-vota) of mine and let us be on the way." When
they had climbed onto the shield, up they went into the heavens. The two
children had their eyes closed all the way up, until they got there and
when they opened their eyes they could see for many miles and everything
was grand.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

"Now," said So-tukeu-nangwi, "I know you are tired and hungry, so you
may now eat," and he cut up a nice ripe muskmelon and set it before them
and they ate very delightedly.

When the darkness had covered the earth again this God said to them,
"Look to the far north and you will see firelight. There is where your
people are now. It does not look so very far away, but that is many,
many days journey and you are too young and do not know that this is a
big undertaking for you. For this reason, I went to get you and brought
you up here, because I know you are too young, but you must understand
me and I know you will. I am the wisdom and knowledge and above all else
you must have faith in me--faith and trust, honesty and truth. Without
faith you shall know nothing. If you have faith your prayers for your
people will always be answered, and from now on my teachings will come
to you in dreams and there will be more and more as you grow older."

The next morning So-tukeu-nangwi had made everything ready for them to
take along upon their journey--seeds of all kinds for the coming season.
Said he, "When the spring comes, the warm weather, these seeds you will
broadcast outside around the village and they will grow and bear fruit
that everybody may eat and they may save the seeds for their own use. Be
like the others, play like the other children, but always together. When
you catch up and get to your people they will not know you. They have
already given you up and have forgotten all about you. Look carefully
among them. Your father has a mole under his eye on the right side of
his face and your mother has a bunch of gray hair in front on the left
side of her head. By these marks you will recognize your own father and
mother and you will run to them. These seeds and other things which I
have placed in this bundle of your robe must never be handled by anyone,
especially this little 'tiponi' (emblem) which needs your particular
care. It is this 'tiponi' that you will always set up when you perform
my ceremony for the benefit of your people. Now let us be on the way. I
will take you close up to your people, that you may camp just for one
night, then in the morning after all the meal is over you will be there.
They have got their town built now, so you will go straight into the
plaza."

The two children had a grand ride on Yovota (shield) and were landed
just about a quarter of a day's trip from the town. So-tukeu-nangwi then
said, "Farewell" to them and went back up into the heavens.

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

The next day Tiwahongva and his sister walked into the plaza of the new
town. There they stopped and the people stared at them and wondered who
they were and where they had come from, so they notified the crier to
call out and let the people know, so that they would come to the plaza
to see that somebody had come. When the people came, they surrounded
them.

Then Chief Tawahongva came forward with a heavy heart of sympathy, "Now,
you my people," he said, "is there anyone here that remembers or could
recognize these children and tell us who they are and whom they belong
to? Is there any parent here that had forgotten or had given them up as
dead at the time of the flood, back down at Palotquopi. They must belong
to somebody. Who shall claim them? If nobody will, I will now leave it
up to them and see if they, themselves, remember and can recognize their
own father and mother. Now look carefully among us and see if you know
anyone or remember anybody." So the brother and sister looked for the
mole on the faces of the men and for the gray hair on the women, by
which they were to detect their parents, and all at once they recognized
them and with tears in their eyes they ran up to their parents, saying,
"You are my father and you are my mother. We are your son and daughter.
My name is Tiwahongva and mine is Tawiayisnima."

"My dear children!" cried their parents with tears and they caught hold
of them and held them close to their breasts, which of course struck the
hearts of all the people and the whole town cried for joy. They were
taken to the home of their parents with their little bundle of sacred
things and of this they warned them that they must never touch it or
open it. To be sure of safe keeping they took it away into the back room
and hung it up in the corner.

Thereafter they lived very happily with their parents and the rest of
the people. Day after day the wisdom and knowledge was coming to them
clearer and clearer so that when the spring came and the days got warmer
they did everything that So-tukeu-nangwi had told them to do. They
broadcast the seeds and on them it rained and rained. Then the sun came
out and shown brightly on them and heated them and caused them to
germinate, and in a few days the little plants sprang up. While these
Nasiwum [69](toah24.htm#xref_69) (brother and sister) would play around
with the rest of the children they were always telling them not to pull
up the plants for they would bear fruit for the people. And every few
days it would rain, which kept the plants growing quite fast and all
about the town it was all green. Soon

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

the people were noticing the blossoms beginning to bloom on these plants
of many kinds and having all these fruitful plants around them they were
very happy and when these were ripe and mature everything was plentiful
and the people gathered them all in. They lived there happily for a
number of years but as they were really heading for Situqui they decided
to move on, and so again they were on the long journey and ahead of them
they would always send their scouts--men who were good runners and whose
duty it was to look for new sites. On their travels they were protected
because So-tukeu-nangwi was with them. This time their new location was
at Nuvaquayotaka (Chavez Pass--a butte with snow belt on). Here again
they lived very prosperously. But knowing that this was not to be their
destination they moved on up to Homolovi (east bank of the Little
Colorado river, near Winslow). There they were divided into many groups
and established their villages here and there. [70](toah24.htm#xref_70)

Their life here was miserable on account of many mosquitos. These
insects caused deaths, especially to the young children, so they moved
on still looking for Situqui, going through the country that is called
the Moqui Buttes, on to Paquaichomo (Water Dust Hill) which is within a
few miles of the present Hopi towns, around the First and Second Mesa
district. Southeast of them was Awatovi, which was a good sized town but
was now in ruins. From this place, Paquaichomo, they sent the scouts
back to find the rest of the people who also had left the Homolovi
district. It was thought that they might have gone in other directions
and sure enough they were found in many different places in small
groups. These scouts were sent back to tell them that the Chief and his
group were now in sight of Situqui (Walpi), so Chief Tawahongva was
calling all his people together. Finally, most of them came on but some
of them had already gone to Sioki (Zuni). Tawahongva then sent his
messengers to the chiefs of all the different towns asking for
permission to be admitted into their villages and to become a part of
their people. So to each town a message went, to Walpi, Mishongnovi,
Shung-opovi and Awatovi. When the messengers came back with. the news
none of the replies were satisfactory and they all felt sad and realized
that they were in a very difficult position, being as they were in
somebody else's territory. The only thing to do now was to divide
themselves equally into groups and go to these towns and try to enter,
so then each group had to select their leader or spokesman. In each
group was an equal number of each clan, as the Corn, Cloud, Tobacco,
Eagle, Sun-forehead, Sand and Bamboo

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

clans. With the group which went to Shung-opovi, Nasiwum (brother and
sister Tiwahongva and Tawiayisnima) and also Kochoilaftiyo and his
grandmother went. Each group was now hoping for the best, so they camped
within a short distance of these towns and then asked for mercy and to
be permitted to enter in and become their people, but the answers from
the chiefs were of no satisfaction. Four being the limit of time to do
anything or to ask for anything, these people were very much troubled
and discouraged on the third day of their request at all these places.
The chief at Shung-opovi did not know that he was discarding the best of
these groups who were coming to his people, the two Nasiwum who had the
wisdom and knowledge of So-tukeu-nangwi and also Ko-choi-laftiyo and his
wise old grandmother. Here at Shung-opovi each clan was admitted in, one
after another, the Sun-forehead clan was the last to enter. On this last
day Nasiwum were more than discouraged--they had given up all hope, and
said that they would stay just where they were and they refused to enter
into the town. But Kochoilaftiyo and his grandmother went in with the
rest. In a few days Nasiwum had disappeared and no one knew where they
had gone. [71](toah24.htm#xref_71) At Mishongnovi and over at Awatovi
these people had less trouble of being permitted to enter. But at Walpi
they had received the same kind of treatment, or even worse than at
Shung-opovi, so it was hopeless to try again and they decided to move on
to Siotuka (Onion Point).

By this time, old man Masauwu got anxious and excited, so he rushed up
to the town to see the people who had taken his name for their
clan. [72](toah24.htm#xref_72) He told them that these people whom the
chief of Walpi had refused were religious and were honest in their
ceremony and that it would bring rain. Said he, "You must not forget and
must remember that I am the one that owns this whole territory. The
chief here has no more right than just of his town. I am the man that
has all the right to say what I think, so hereafter, whoever comes shall
enter and stay. With compassionate feelings in my heart I ask for two of
your good runners to rush down there and head them off. They are leaving
right now."

When these two runners reached them at Tawapa (Sun Spring) their scouts
had already gone ahead. Tawahongva and his people had destroy all the
crops of the Walpi's because their people had received such disagreeable
treatment from the chief. While all this was going on, it was clouding
up very heavily overhead and the people had divided themselves--all the
women folk on one

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

side and the men on the other. The women had formed in a circle and were
singing and dancing the Basket Dance and while this was going on the
storm clouds had gathered so heavily that the day was growing very dark
and cold and then it started snowing and it kept coming on heavier and
heavier. All through the storm and the dancing the two Masauwu clansmen
had pleaded earnestly with Tawahongva and his people, telling them that
this chief who had refused them was only a sub-chief under Masauwu.

"To make you understand," said the two men, "we are telling you all,
Masauwu has all the right here and it is his earnest message of sympathy
that we have brought to ask you to come and live with us. We trust and
worship him. What the chief has done unto you by this he has only hurt
himself and lost his self respect. So trust that we, with all our
hearts, are telling you the truth and asking you all earnestly to come
with us."

"Well," said Tawahongva, "will it be that you will consider and respect
us as you do yourselves as a people? Otherwise we will not turn back to
go with you. My scouts have already gone."

"We honestly and truly say that you will have the same right as we have,
so over what land your scouts have trotted, this is given unto you. It
is yours forever."

During all these pleadings the dancing by the women was kept up and the
snow by this time had fallen over a foot deep. At last Tawahongva
consented for all his people to return to Walpi or Situqui and all at
once the snowstorm turned into rain--a real cloudburst which washed away
the snow in a very short while and now the waters were rushing down off
the hillsides from the Walpi Mesa. All this water had drained down into
the flats and that made nice fertile farming land for the people. Now
from that day on to this day, the descendants, generation after
generation, of these people from Palotquopi have been living here at
these different Hopi villages. But Situqui is no more. This Situqui was
where the present Walpi is now situated. There used to be a big sand
dune covering this whole mesa and the butte that you see there today was
covered, heaped up with sand, and every summer it would be covered with
flowers of many different varieties. Later all this sand was drifted
away off this mesa, by strong winds, and these sand dunes are now away
over above Wepo Spring and are still slowly [drifting](errata.htm#8)
on. [73](toah24.htm#xref_73),  [74](toah24.htm#xref_74)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Yaponcha, the Wind God](toah19)
