[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toah13)  [Next](toah15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

# CHAPTER XII

### HOW SOME HOPIS RESISTED SENDING THEIR CHILDREN TO SCHOOL AND THE TROUBLE THAT RESULTED

OUT this time the agency was established at Keams
Canyon [34](toah24.htm#xref_34) and of course the Hopis knew that this
meant peace. So all the chiefs from every village went there and told
the white man that they were his friends and brothers and they told him
that they would like to be protected by him from all their other
enemies. For this reason they thought the agent ought to settle all
their troubles which they had been having right along.

Later, a school was established there [35](toah24.htm#xref_35) and all
the Hopis were willing to send their children to school. Everything was
going all right until they had an initiation ceremony (*Wuwuchime*) at
Shung-opovi and the young men at old Shung-opovi and Shipaulovi were to
be initiated. So they were not sent back to school that year and of
course, at that time, these ceremonies were not very well understood by
the white man, so the agent sent out policemen (two First Mesa men and
three Navajos) to fetch the young boys. When they got to Shipaulovi they
found the young men in the kiva and they asked the chief to give them up
so that they could take them back to school. The chief said he would not
let them go until the ceremony was over and he told them that he would
be quite willing to let them go then. But the policemen insisted that
they must take them at once because they had orders to bring them in.
But the chief just flatly refused.

So the policeman said that they would take the chief instead. He said he
would be willing to go with them after he had seen his friend, the
missionary. [36](toah24.htm#xref_36) So he went off and as he was
leaving, he asked the policeman to stay on top of the mesa and wait for
him until he came back.

He started off for the Sunlight Mission by way of Mishongnovi. The
policemen thought that he was going to fool them, so they followed him
and caught up with him as he was going around the village. They took
hold of him and dragged him off the mesa, so he did not get to see the
chief at Mishongnovi either. He intended that they would both go down to
the mission to see what information they could get from the missionary.
In both villages there was much excitement and all the people were on
the [housetops](errata.htm#2) as they

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

were very much troubled to see the chief dragged off the mesa by the
policemen.

The three sons of the chief ran out after them and they caught up with
them just as they were at the bottom of the mesa, and, of course, they
could not help but fight these men to defend their father. But finally
they all got to the mission. When they got there, the missionary took
the side of the chief and told the policeman to let him go. Then he
wrote a letter to the agent asking him to let him know what orders he
had given these policemen to come out to do. While he was writing this
letter the chief asked him to put in this message to the agent, that he
was through with the school and that he would not be his friend any
more. And he said that he was a friend of the missionary only and that
he would do anything for him. So he said that if the agent were man
enough he could come and get his scalp. Then he said, "I am the man,
Tawahonganiwa. If you ever want to come out, get no one else but
Tawahonganiwa. I am not your friend."

When this was written the missionary enclosed the letter in an envelope
and gave it to the policeman to take into the agency. This was how the
two factions and all the trouble over sending the children to school was
started among the Hopi.

From then on, Chief Tawahonganiwa had many followers in both Mishongnovi
and Shipaulovi and every now and then he would hold a council with his
fellowmen. Then later, many people of the other villages took up his
side, excepting First Mesa.

When they split those that wanted to go to school went right on; but the
Chief's relatives had to take his side and held their children back.
This was about 1888 or 1889. Every once in a while the agent would send
out the policemen. If they were expecting them, the parents would have
to go out early with their children to the hiding places under the
cliffs. Not finding any children, the policemen would go
back. [37](toah24.htm#xref_37)

Finally the policemen thought of the scheme of coming into the villages
at night. In that way they got quite a few children and they took them
off to Keams Canyon to boarding school. Of course, this was very
unpleasant for the Hopis, for they never before had parted with any of
their children. So the Chief at Mishongnovi thought that it would be
best to let their children be sent to school with their own consent.

About this time, the army (a troop of negro soldiers)

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

was sent out to the Hopi villages to see if they could make the old
chief at Shipaulovi change his mind about sending his children to
school. They did not stop at Shipaulovi very long, but went on to Oraibi
where there were more people. There they were met by the chief,
Lololama, and he was very friendly to them and said he was willing to
send his children to school. He wanted to take advantage of what the
outcome would be of sending the children to school. After he made this
agreement Youkioma jumped on him and they quarreled. This was the first
time that Lololama had found out that Youkioma was the leader of this
other faction. But Lololama, being the chief, said that the children who
were old enough to go to the Keams Canyon School could be taken. Now
from then on these two men were against each other and each man wanted
to see how many followers he could have. These hostile leaders would
have meetings at every other village ever so often and they would
lecture to the people, telling them that the ones who were sending their
children to school would be in worse trouble because the Bahana who
established the school was not their true brother who had come up from
the underworld with them. If he was, he would have shown the Hopis his
written tradition to compare with their tradition. So this faction felt
that they would rather wait for their Bahana brother to come with this
written story of their ancestors.

This sort of trouble got very bad among the people themselves and the
leaders of each faction of course, were working against one another to
see who would have the most followers. On account of many good useful
things, like tools, such as axes and hoes, clothing and sugar and coffee
some of the hostile faction people began falling off, thinking that the
idea of being a hostile was just the idea of preventing the people from
having these things. Finally it got so there were very few hostiles left
at Shipaulovi and Mishongnovi, but there were quite a number at
Shung-opovi, so the ones at Shipaulovi moved over to Shung-opovi. This
move occurred in 1899. [38](toah24.htm#xref_38)

<span id="img_06200"></span> ![](img/06200.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. How Hotevilla And Bakabi Were Founded](toah15)
