[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ttg00)  [Next](ttg02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Introduction

On the bank of the Godavari River is a kingdom called the Abiding
Kingdom. There lived the son of King Victory, the famous King
Triple-victory, mighty as the king of the gods. As this king sat in
judgment, a monk called Patience brought him every day one piece of
fruit as an expression of homage. And the king took it and gave it each
day to the treasurer who stood near. Thus twelve years passed.

Now one day the monk came to court, gave the king a piece of fruit as
usual, and went away. But on this day the king gave the fruit to a pet
baby monkey that had escaped from his keepers, and happened to wander
in. And as the monkey ate the fruit, he split it open, and a priceless,
magnificent gem came out. When the king saw this, he took it and asked
the treasurer: "Where have you been keeping the fruits which the monk
brought? I gave them to you."

When the treasurer heard this, he was frightened and said: "Your
Majesty, I have thrown them all through the window. If your Majesty
desires, I will look for them now." And when the king had dismissed him,
he went, but returned in a moment, and said again: "Your Majesty, they
were all smashed in the treasury, and in them I see heaps of dazzling
gems."

When he heard this, the king was delighted, and gave the jewels to the
treasurer. And when the monk came the next day, he asked him: "Monk, why
do you keep honouring me in such an expensive way? Unless I know the
reason, I will not take your fruit."

Then the monk took the king aside and said: "O hero, there is a business
in which I need help. So I ask for your help in it, because you are a
brave man." And the king promised his assistance. Then the monk was
pleased, and said again: "O King, on the last night of the waning moon,
you must go to the great cemetery at nightfall, and come to me under the
fig-tree."

Then the king said: "Certainly," and Patience, the monk, went home well
pleased.

So when the night came, the mighty king remembered his promise to the
monk, and at dusk he wrapped his head in a black veil, took his sword in
his hand, and went to the great cemetery without being seen. When he got
there, he looked about, and saw the monk standing under the fig-tree and
making a magic circle.

So he went up and said: "Monk, here I am. Tell me what I am to do for
you."

And when the monk saw the king, he was delighted and said: "O King, if
you wish to do me a favour, go south from here some distance all alone,
and you will see a sissoo tree and a dead body hanging from it. Be so
kind as to bring that here."

When the brave king heard this, he agreed, and, true to his promise,
turned south and started. And as he walked with difficulty along the
cemetery road, he came upon the sissoo tree at some distance, and saw a
body hanging on it. So he climbed the tree, cut the rope, and let it
fall to the ground. And as it fell, it unexpectedly cried aloud, as if
alive. Then the king climbed down, and thinking it was alive, he
mercifully rubbed its limbs. Then the body gave a loud laugh.

So the king knew that a goblin lived in it, and said without fear: "What
are you laughing about? Come, let us be off."

But then he did not see the goblin on the ground any longer. And when he
looked up, there he was, hanging in the tree as before. So the king
climbed the tree again, and carefully carried the body down. A brave
man's heart is harder than a diamond, and nothing makes it tremble.

Then he put the body with the goblin in it on his shoulder, and started
off in silence. And as he walked along, the goblin in the body said: "O
King, to amuse the journey, I will tell you a story. Listen."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: First Goblin: The Prince's Elopement. Whose fault was the
resulting death of his parents-in-law?](ttg02)
