[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ttg09)  [Next](ttg11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NINTH GOBLIN

The Four Scientific Suitors.  
To which should the girl be given?

Then the king went back to the sissoo tree, put the goblin on his
shoulder, and started. And the goblin spoke to him again: "O King, why
do you go to such pains in this cemetery at night? Do you not see the
home of the ghosts, full of dreadful creatures, terrible in the night,
wrapped in darkness as in smoke? Why do you work so hard and grow weary
for the sake of that monk? Well, to amuse the journey, listen to a
puzzle which I will tell you."

 

In the Avanti country is a city built by the gods at the beginning of
time, adorned with wonderful wealth and opportunities for enjoyment. In
the earliest age it was called Lotus City, then Pleasure City, then
Golden City, and now it is called Ujjain. There lived a king named
Heroic. And his queen was named Lotus.

One day the king went with her to the sacred Ganges river and prayed to
Shiva that he might have children. And after long prayer he heard a
voice from heaven, for Shiva was at last pleased with his devotion: "O
King, there shall be born to you a brave son to continue your dynasty,
and a daughter more beautiful than the nymphs of heaven."

When he heard the heavenly voice, the king was delighted at the
fulfilment of his wishes, and went back to his city with the queen. And
first Queen Lotus bore a son called Brave, and then a daughter named
Grace who put the god of love to shame.

When the girl grew up, the king sought for a suitable husband for her,
and invited all the neighbouring princes by letter, but not one of them
seemed good enough for her. So the king tenderly said to his daughter:
"My dear, I do not see a husband worthy of you, so I will summon all the
kings hither, and you shall choose." But the princess said: "My dear
father, such a choice would be very embarrassing. I would rather not.
Just marry me to any good-looking young man, who understands a single
science from beginning to end. I wish nothing more nor less than that."

Now while the king was looking for such a husband, four brave,
good-looking, scientific men from the south heard of the matter and came
to him. And when they had been hospitably received, each explained his
own science to the king.

The first said: "I am a working-man, and my name is Five-cloth. I make
five splendid suits of clothes a day. One I give to some god and one to
a Brahman. One I wear myself, and one I shall give to my wife when I
have one. The fifth I sell, to buy food and things. This is my science.
Pray give me Grace."

The second said: "I am a farmer, and my name is Linguist. I understand
the cries of all beasts and birds. Pray give me the princess."

The third said: "I am a strong-armed soldier, and my name is Swordsman.
I have no rival on earth in the science of swordsmanship. O King, pray
give me your daughter." 

The fourth said: "O King, I am a Brahman, and my name is Life. I possess
a wonderful science. For if dead creatures are brought to me, I can
quickly restore them to life. Let your daughter find a husband in a man
who has such heroic skill."

When they had spoken, and the king had seen that they all had wonderful
garments and personal beauty, he and his daughter swung in doubt.

When the goblin had told this story, he said to the king: "Remember the
curse I mentioned, and tell me to which of them the girl should be
given."

And the king said to the goblin: "Sir, you are merely trying to gain
time by making me break silence. There is no puzzle about that. How
could a warrior's daughter be given to a working-man, a weaver? Or to a
farmer, either? And as to his knowledge of the speech of beasts and
birds, of what practical use is it? And what good is a Brahman who
neglects his own affairs and turns magician, despising real courage? Of
course she should be given to the warrior Swordsman who had some manhood
with his science."

When the goblin heard this, he escaped by magic from the king's
shoulder, and disappeared. And the king followed him as before.
Discouragement never enters the brave heart of a resolute man.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tenth Goblin: The Three Delicate Wives of King Virtue-banner.
Which is the most delicate?](ttg11)
