[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ttg16)  [Next](ttg18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SIXTEENTH GOBLIN

The King who died for Love of his General's Wife;  
the General follows him in Death.  
Which is the more worthy?

Then the king went back under the sissoo tree, put the goblin on his
shoulder as before, and started. And the goblin said to him: "O King, I
will tell you another little story to relieve your weariness. Listen."

 

Long ago there was a city named Golden City on the bank of the Ganges,
where a quarter of the old perfect virtue still lingers in these evil
days. There was a king named Glorious, and he deserved the name. His
bravery kept the world from being overflowed, like the shore of the sea.

In this king's city lived a great merchant, who had a daughter named
Passion. Everyone who saw her fell in love and went mad with passion.

When she grew to be a young woman, the virtuous merchant went to King
Glorious and said: "Your Majesty, I have a daughter, the gem of the
three worlds, and she is old enough to marry. I could not give her to
anyone without consulting your Majesty. For you are the master of all
gems in the world. Pray marry her and thus lay me under obligations."

So the king sent his own Brahmans to examine her qualities. But when the
Brahmans saw her supreme loveliness, they were troubled and thought: "If
the king should marry her, his kingdom would be ruined. He would think
only of her, and would doubtless neglect his kingdom. Therefore we must
not report her good qualities to the king."

So they returned to the king and said: "Your Majesty, she has bad
qualities." So the king did not marry the merchant's daughter. But he
bade the merchant give his daughter to a general named Force. And she
lived happily with her husband in his house.

After a time the lion of spring came dancing through the forest and slew
the elephant of winter. And King Glorious went forth on the back of an
elephant to see the spring festival. And the drum was beaten to warn
virtuous women to stay within doors. Otherwise they would have fallen in
love with his beauty, and love-sickness might be expected.

But when Passion heard the drum, she did not like to be left alone. She
went out on the balcony, that the king might see her. She seemed like
the flame of love which the spring-time was fanning with southern
breezes. And the king saw her, and his whole being was shaken. He felt
her beauty sinking deep in his heart like a victorious arrow of Love,
and he fainted.

His servants brought him back to consciousness, and he returned to the
city. There he made inquiries and learned that this was Passion whom he
had rejected before. So he banished from the country the Brahmans who
had said that she had bad qualities, and he thought longingly of her
every day.

And as he thought of her, he burned over the flame of love, and wasted
away day and night. And though from shame he tried to conceal it, he
finally told the reason of his anguish to responsible people who asked
him.

They said: "Do not suffer. Why do you not seize her?" But the virtuous
king would not do it.

Then General Force heard the story. He came and bowed at the feet of the
king and said: "Your Majesty, she is the wife of your slave, therefore
she is your slave. I give her to you of my own accord. Pray take my
wife. Or better yet, I will leave her here in the palace. Then you
cannot be blamed if you marry her." And the general begged and insisted.

But the king became angry and said: "I am a king. How can I do such a
wicked thing? If I should transgress, who would be virtuous? You are
devoted to me. Why do you urge me to a sin which is pleasant for the
moment, but causes great sorrow in the next world? If you abandon your
wedded wife, I shall not pardon you. How could a man in my position
overlook such a transgression? It is better to die." Thus the king
argued against it. For the truly great throw away life rather than
virtue. And when all the citizens came together and urged him, he was
steadfast and refused.

So he slowly shrivelled away over the fever-flame of love and died.
There was nothing left of King Glorious except his glory. And the
general could not endure the death of his king. He burned himself alive.
The actions of devoted men are blameless.

 

When the goblin on the king's shoulder had told this story, he asked the
king: "O King, which of these two, the king and the general, was the
more deserving? Remember the curse before you answer."

The king said: "I think the king was the more deserving."

And the goblin said reproachfully: "O King, why was not the general
better? He offered the king a wife like that, whose charms he knew from
a long married life. And when his king died, he burned himself like a
faithful man. But the king gave her up without really knowing her
attractions."

Then the king laughed and said: "True enough, but not surprising. The
general was a gentleman born, and acted as he did from devotion to his
superior. For servants must protect their masters even at the cost of
their own lives. But kings are like mad elephants who cannot be goaded
into obedience, who break the binding-chain of virtue. They are
insolent, and their judgment trickles from them with the holy water of
consecration. Their eyes are blinded by the hurricane of power, and they
do not see the road. From the most ancient times, even the kings who
conquered the world have been maddened by love and have fallen into
misfortune. But this king, though he ruled the whole world, though he
was maddened by the girl Passion, preferred to die rather than set his
foot on the path of iniquity. He was a hero. He was the better of the
two."

Then the goblin escaped by magic from the king's shoulder and went back.
And the king pursued him, undiscouraged. No great man stops in the
middle of the hardest undertaking.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seventeenth Goblin: The Youth who went through the Proper
Ceremonies. Why did he fail to win the magic spell?](ttg18.md)
