[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch03.md) 
[Next](pch05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxi">p. xxi</span>

### INTRODUCTION

<span class="smallcaps">My</span> purpose in grouping the four ensuing
studies is to complement and complete the undertaking of a previous
volume, entitled *Christianity and Mythology*. That was substantially a
mythological analysis of the Christian system, introduced by a
discussion of mythological principles in that particular connection and
in general. The bulk of the present volume is substantially a synthesis
of Christian origins, introduced by a discussion of the principles of
hierology. Such discussion is still forced on sociology by the special
pleaders of the prevailing religion. But the central matter of the book
is its attempt to trace and synthesise the real lines of growth of the
Christian cultus; and it challenges criticism above all by its
theses—(1) that the gospel story of the Last Supper, Passion, Betrayal,
Trial, Crucifixion, and Resurrection, is visibly a transcript of a
Mystery Drama, and not originally a narrative; and (2) that that drama
is demonstrably (as historic demonstration goes) a symbolic modification
of an original rite of human sacrifice, of which it preserves certain
verifiable details.

That the exact point of historic connection between the early
eucharistic rite and the late drama-story has still to be traced, it is
needless to remark. Had direct evidence on this head been forthcoming,
the problem could not so long have been ignored. But it is here
contended that the lines of evolution are established by the details of
the record and the institution, in the light of the data of
anthropology; and that we have thus at last a scientific basis for a
history of Christianity. As was explained in the introduction to
*Christianity and Mythology*, these studies originated some twenty-five
years back in an attempt to realise and explain "The Rise of
Christianity Sociologically Considered"; and it is as a beginning of
such an exposition that the two books are meant to be taken. In *A Short
History of Christianity* the general historic conception is outlined;
and the present volume offers the detailed justification of the views
there summarily put as to Christian origins, insofar as they were not
fully developed in the earlier volume. On one point, the origins of
Manichæism, the present work departs from the

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

ordinary historic view, which was accepted in the *Short History;* the
proposed rectification here being a result of the main investigation. In
this connection it may be noted that Schwegler had already denied the
historicity of Montanus—a thesis which I have not sought to incorporate,
though I somewhat incline to accept it.

Whether or not I am able to carry out the original scheme in full, I am
fain to hope that these inquiries will be of some small use towards
meeting the need which motived them. Mythology has permanently
interested me only as throwing light on hierology; and hierology has
permanently interested me only as throwing light on sociology. The third
and fourth sections of this book, accordingly, are so placed with a view
to the comparative elucidation of the growth of Christianity. If it be
objected that they are thus "tendency" writings, the answer is that they
were independently done, and are as complete as I could make them in the
space. Both are revisions and expansions of lectures formerly published
in "The *Religious Systems of the World*," that on Mithraism being now
nearly thrice its original length. Undertaken and expanded without the
aid of Professor Cumont's great work, *Textes et Monuments Figurés
relatifs aux Mystéres de Mithra* (1896-9), it has been revised in the
welcome light of that magistral performance. To M. Cumont I owe much
fresh knowledge, and the correction of some errors, as well as the
confirmation of several of my conclusions; and if I have ventured here
and there to dissent from him, and above all to maintain a thesis not
recognised by him—that Mithra in the legend made a "Descent into Hell"—I
do so only after due hesitation.

The non-appearance of any other study of Mithraism in English may serve
as my excuse for having carried my paper into some detail, especially by
way of showing how much the dead cult had in common with the living.
Christian origins cannot be understood without making this comparison.
It is significant, however, of our British avoidance of comparative
hierology wherever it bears on current beliefs, that while Germany has
contributed to the study of Mithraism, among many others, the learned
treatise of Windischmann and that in Roscher's *Lexikon*, France the
zealous researches of Lajard, and Belgium the encyclopædic and decisive
work of Professor Cumont, England has produced not a single independent
book on the subject. In compensation for such neglect, we have developed
a signal devotion to Folklore. If some of the favour shown to that
expansive study be turned on serious attempts to understand the

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

actual process of growth of world-religions, the present line of
research may be extended to advantage.

The lecture on the religions of Ancient America has in turn been
carefully revised and much enlarged, not because this subject is equally
ignored among us—for there is a sufficiency of information upon it in
English, notably in one of the too-little utilised collections of
"*Descriptive Sociology*" compiled for Mr. Spencer—but because again the
comparative bearing of the study of the dead cults on that of the living
has not been duly considered. In particular I have entered into some
detail tending to support the theory—not yet to be put otherwise than as
a disputed hypothesis—that certain forms and cults of human sacrifice,
first evolved anciently in Central Asia, passed to America on the east,
and to the Semitic peoples on the west, resulting in the latter case in
the central "mystery" of Christianity, and in the former in the Mexican
system of human sacrifices. But the psychological importance of the
study does not, I trust, solely stand or fall with that theory. On the
general sociological problem, I may say, a closer study of the Mexican
civilisation has dissolved an opinion I formerly held—that it might have
evolved from within past the stage of human sacrifice had it been left
to itself.

Whatever view be taken of the scope of religious heredity, there will
remain in the established historic facts sufficient justification for
the general title of "Pagan Christs," which best indicates in one phrase
the kinship of all cults of human sacrifice and theophagous sacrament,
as well as of all cults of which the founder figures as an inspired
teacher. That principle has already been broadly made good on the first
side by the incomparable research of Dr. J. G. Frazer, to whose "*Golden
Bough*" I owe both theoretic light and detail knowledge. I ask,
therefore, that when I make bold to reject Dr. Frazer's suggested
solution (ed. 1900) of the historic problem raised by the parallel
between certain Christian and non-Christian *sacra*, I shall not be
supposed to undervalue his great treasury of ordered knowledge. On the
question of the historicity of Founders, I have made answer in the
second edition of *Christianity and Mythology* to certain strictures of
his which seem to me very ill-considered. What I claim for my own
solution is that it best satisfies the ruling principles of his own
hierology.

In this connection, however, I feel it a duty to avow that the right
direction had previously been pointed out by the late Grant Allen in his
*Evolution of the Idea of God* (1897), though at the outset of his work
he obscured it for many of us by insisting on the

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

absolute historicity of Jesus, a position which later-on he in effect
abandons. It is after ostensibly setting out with the actuality of
"Jesus the son of the carpenter" as an "unassailable Rock of solid
historical fact" (p. 16) that he incidentally (p. 285) pronounces "the
Christian legend to have been mainly constructed out of the details of
such early god-making sacrifices" as that practised by the Khonds.
Finally (p. 391) he writes that "at the outset of our inquiry we had to
accept crudely the bare fact" that the cult arose at a certain period,
and that "we can now see that it was but one more example of a universal
god-making tendency in human nature." Returning to Allen's book after
having independently worked out in detail precisely such a derivation
and such a theory, I was surprised to find that where he had thus thrown
out the clue I had not on a first reading been at all impressed by it.
The reason probably was that for me the problem had been primarily one
of historical derivation, and that Allen offered no historical solution,
being satisfied to indicate analogies. And it was probably the still
completer disregard of historical difficulties that brought oblivion
upon the essay of Herr Kulischer, *Das Leben Jesu eine Sage von dem
Schicksale and Erlebnissen der Bodenfrucht, insbesondere der sogenannten
palästinensischen Erstlingsgarbe, die am Passahfeste im Tempel
dargebracht wurde* (Leipzig, 1876), in which Dr. Frazer's thesis of the
vegetal character of the typical slain and rearising deity is put forth
without evidence, but with entire confidence.

Kulischer had simply posited the analogy of the Vegetation-God and the
vegetation-cult as previous students had done that of the Sun-God and
the sun-myth, not only without tracing any process of transmutation, but
with a far more arbitrary interpretation of symbols than they had
ventured on. His essay thus remains only a remarkable piece of
pioneering, which went broadly in the right direction, but missed the
true path.

It is not indeed to be assumed that if he had made out a clear
historical case it would have been listened to by his generation. The
generation before him had paid little heed to the massive and learned
treatise of Ghillany, *Die Menschenopfer der alten Hebräer* (1842),
wherein the derivation of the Passover from a rite of human sacrifice is
well made out, and that of the Christian eucharist from a modified
Jewish sacrament of theophagy is at least strikingly argued for.
Ghillany had further noted some of the decisive analogies of sacrificial
ritual and gospel narrative which are founded on in the following pages;
and was substantially on the right historic track, though he missed some
of the archæological proofs of the

<span id="page_xxv">p. xxv</span>

prevalence of human sacrifice in pre-exilic Judaism. Daumer, too, went
far towards a right historical solution in his work *Der Feuer and
Molochdienst der alten Hebräer*, which was synchronous with that of his
friend Ghillany, and again in his treatise *Die Geheimnisse des
christlichen Alterthums* (1847). His later proclamation of *Meine
Conversion* (1859) would naturally discredit his earlier theses; but the
disregard of the whole argument in the hierology of that day is probably
to be explained as due to the fact that the conception of a "science of
religions"—specified by Vinet in 1856 as beginning to grow up alongside
of theology—had not then been constituted for educated men. The works of
Ghillany and Daumer have been so far forgotten that not till my own
research had been independently made and elaborated did I meet with
them.

To-day, the conditions of hierological research are very different. A
generation of students is now steeped in the anthropological lore of
which Ghillany, failing to profit by the lead of Constant, noted only
the details preserved in the classics and European histories; and the
scientific significance of his and Daumer's and Kulischer's theories is
clear in the light of the studies of Tylor, Spencer, and Frazer. Grant
Allen, with the ample materials of recent anthropology to draw upon,
made a vital advance by connecting the central Christian legend with the
whole process of religious evolution, in terms not of à priori theology
but of anthropological fact. If, however, the lack of historical
demonstration, and the uncorrected premiss of a conventional historical
view, made his theory at first lack significance for a reader like
myself, it has probably caused it to miss its mark with others. That is
no deduction from its scientific merit; but it may be that the
historical method will assist to its appreciation. It was by way of
concrete recognition of structural parallelism that I reached the
theory, having entirely forgotten, if I had ever noted, Allen's passing
mention of one of the vital details in question—that of the breaking of
the legs of victims in primitive human sacrifice. In 1842 Ghillany had
laid similar stress on the detail of the lance-thrust in the fourth
gospel, to which he adduced the classic parallel noted hereinafter. And
when independent researches thus yield a variety of particular
corroborations of a theory reached otherwise by a broad generalisation,
the reciprocal confirmation is, I think, tolerably strong. The
recognition of the Gospel Mystery-Play, it is here submitted, is the
final historical validation of the whole thesis, which might otherwise
fail to escape the fate of disregard which has thus far befallen the
most brilliant speculation of the à priori mythologists in regard to the
Christian legend, from the

<span id="page_xxvi">p. xxvi</span>

once famous works of Dupuis and Volney down to the little noticed
*Letture sopra la mitologia vedica* of Professor de Gubernatis.

However that may be, Grant Allen's service in the matter is now from my
point of view unquestionable. Of less importance, but still noteworthy,
is Professor Huxley's sketch of "The Evolution of Theology," with which,
while demurring to some of what I regard as its uncritical assumptions
(accepted, I regret to say, by Allen, in his otherwise scientific ninth
chapter), I find myself in considerable agreement on Judaic origins.
Professor Huxley's essay points to the need for a combination of the
studies of hierology and anthropology in the name of sociology, and on
that side it would be unpardonable to omit acknowledgment of the great
work that has actually been done for sociological synthesis. I am
specially bound to make it in view of my occasional dissent on
anthropological matters from Spencer. Such dissent is apt to suggest
difference of principle in a disproportionate degree; and Spencer's own
iconoclasm has latterly evoked a kind of criticism that is little
concerned to avow his services. It is the more fitting that such a
treatise as the present should be accompanied by a tribute to them.
However his anthropology may have to be modified in detail, it remains
clear to some of us, whom it has enlightened, that his elucidations are
of fundamental importance, all later attempts being related to them, and
that his main method is permanently valid.

In regard to matters less habitually contested, it is perhaps needless
to add that I am as little lacking in gratitude for the great scholarly
services rendered to all students of hierology by Professor Rhys Davids,
when I venture to withstand his weighty opinion on Buddhist origins. My
contrary view would be ill-accredited indeed if I were not able to
support it with much evidence yielded by his scholarship and his
candour. And it is perhaps not unfitting that, by way of final word of
preface to a treatise which sets out with a systematic opposition to the
general doctrine of Dr. F. B. Jevons, I acknowledge that I have profited
by his survey of the field, and even by the suggestiveness of some of
his arguments that seem to me to go astray.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 1. Origin of the Gods from Fear](pch05.md)
