[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch04) 
[Next](pch06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# PART I.

# THE RATIONALE OF RELIGION

### CHAPTER I.

### THE NATURALNESS OF ALL BELIEF

#### § 1.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> seems probable, despite theological
cavils, that Petronius was right in his signal saying, *Fear first made
the Gods*. In the words of a recent hierologist, "we may be sure that
primitive man took to himself the credit of his successful attempts to
work the mechanism of nature for his own advantage, but when the
machinery did not work he ascribed the fault to some over-ruling
*super*natural power.....It was the violation of \[previously
exploited\] sequences, and the frustration of his expectations, by which
the belief in supernatural power was, not created, but first called
forth." <span id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10)

The fact that this writer proceeds to repudiate his own doctrine <span
id="fr_11"></span>[2](#fn_11) is no reason why we should, save to the
extent of noting the temerity of his use of the term "supernatural."
There are some very strong reasons, apart from the à priori one cited
above, for thinking that the earliest human notions of superhuman beings
were framed in terms of fear. Perhaps the strongest of all is the fact
that savages and barbarians in nearly all parts of the world appear to
regard disease and death as invariably due to purposive hostile action,
whether normal, magical, or "spiritual." <span
id="fr_12"></span>[3](#fn_12) Not even old age is for

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

many of these primitive thinkers a probable natural cause of
death. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) If then the life of early man
was not much less troublous than that of contemporary primitives, he is
likely to have been moved as much as they to conceive of the unseen
powers as malevolent. "On the Gold Coast," says a close student, "the
majority of these spirits are malignant......I believe that originally
all were conceived as malignant." <span id="fr_14"></span>[2](#fn_14)

And how, indeed, could it be otherwise? Those who will not assent have
forgotten, as indeed most anthropologists strangely forget when they are
discussing the beginnings of religion, that man as we know him is
descended from something less human, more brute, something nearer the
predatory beast life of fear and foray.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> When in the period
of upward movement which we term civilisation, as distinct from animal
savagery, there could arise thrills of yearning or gratitude towards
unknown powers, we are æons off from the stage of subterhuman growth in
which the germs of conceptual religion must have stirred. If the
argument is to be that there is no religion until man loves his Gods,
let it be plainly put, and let not a verbal definition become a *petitio
principii*. If, again, no *numina* are to be termed Gods but those who
are loved, let that proposition too be put as a simple definition of
term. But if we are to look for the beginnings of the human notion of
*numina*, of unseen spirits who operate in Nature and interfere with
man, let it be as plainly put that they presumably occurred when fear of
*the* unknown was normal, and gratitude to *an* Unknown impossible.

But in saying that fear first made the Gods, or made the first Gods, we
imply that other God-making forces came into play later; and no dispute
arises when this is affirmed of the process of making the Gods of the
higher religions, in their later forms. Even here, at the outset, the
play of gratitude is no such ennobling exercise as to involve much
lifting of the moral standpoint; and even in the higher religions
gratitude to the God is often correlative with fear of the evil spirits
whom he wards off. This factor is constantly present in the gospels and
in the polemic of the early Fathers; <span id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15)
and has never disappeared from religious life. The pietist who in our
own day pours out thanks to "Providence" for saving him in the
earthquake in which myriads have perished is no more ethically
attractive than philosophically persuasive; and the gratitude of savages
and barbarians for favours received and expected can hardly have been
more refined. It might even be said that a cruder egoism presides over
the making of Good Gods than over the birth of the Gods of Fear; <span
id="fr_16"></span>[2](#fn_16) the former having their probable origin in
an individualistic as against a tribal instinct. But it may be granted
that the God who ostensibly begins as a private guardian angel or family
spirit may become the germ of a more ethical cultus than that of the God
generically feared. And the process chronically recurs. There is,
indeed, no generic severance between the Gods of fear and the Gods of
love, most deities of the more advanced races having both aspects:
nevertheless, certain specified deities are so largely shaped by men's
affections that they might recognisably be termed the Beloved Gods.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

It will on the whole be helpful to an understanding of the subject if we
name such Gods, in terms of current conceptions, the Christs of the
world's pantheon. That title, indeed, no less fitly includes figures
which do not strictly rank as Gods; but in thus widely relating it we
shall be rather elucidating than obscuring religious history. Only by
some such collocation of ideas can the inquirer surmount his
presuppositions and take the decisive step towards seeing the religions
of mankind as alike man-made. On the other hand, he is not thereby
committed to any one view in the field of history proper; he is left
free to argue for a historical Christ as for a historical Buddha.

Even on the ground of the concept of evolution, however, scientific
agreement is still hindered by persistence in the old classifications.
The trouble meets us on one line in arbitrary fundamental separations
between mythology and religion, early religion and early ethics,
religion and magic, genuine myths and non-genuine myths. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) On another line it meets us in the shape
of a sudden and local reopening of the problem of theistic intervention
in a quasi-philosophical form, or a wilful repudiation of naturalistic
method when the inquiry reaches current beliefs. Thus results which were
reached by disinterested scholarship a generation ago are sought to be
subverted, not by a more thorough scholarship, but by keeping away from
the scholarly problem and suggesting a new standard of values, open to
no rational tests. It may be well, therefore, to clear the ground so far
as may be of such dispute at the outset by stating and vindicating the
naturalistic position in regard to it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[1:1](pch05.htm#fr_10) F. B. Jevons,
*Introduction, to the History of Religion*, 1896, p. 19; cp. p. 23, p.
137, and p. 177. Cp. Adam Smith, essay on *The History of Astronomy*,
sect. iii.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[1:2](pch05.htm#fr_11) Jevons, as cited pp. 106,
233, 410. Exactly the same self-contradiction is committed by Professor
Robertson Smith, on the same provocation of the phrase, *Primus in orbe
deos fecit timor*. See his *Religion of the Semites*, pp. 27, 35, 55,
88, 129.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[1:3](pch05.htm#fr_12) Cp. John Mathew,
*Eaglehawk and Crow*, 1899, pp. 91, 123, 144; Sir A. B. Ellis, *The
Tshi-speaking Peoples of the Gold Coast*, 1887, pp. 13-14; Livingstone,
*Travels and Researches in South Africa*, ed. 1905, p. 409;
Schweinfurth, *The Heart of Africa*, 3rd ed. i, 144-5; Major Glyn
Leonard, *The Lower Niger and its Tribes*, 1906, pp. 171-*sq*., 361;
Mary H. Kingsley, *West African Studies*, ed. 1901, pp. 98-100, 105-9,
178; Spencer and Gillen, *Native Tribes of Central Australia*, 1899, p.
48; *Northern Tribes of Central Australia*, 1904, p. 479; Rev. R.
Taylor, *Te Ika a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants*, 1870, p.
137; w. w. Skeat, *Malay Magic*, 1900, pp. 56-57, 94, 410, 533 *sq*.; J.
Chalmers, *Pioneer Life and Work in New Guinea*, 1895, p. 199; Thurston,
*Castes and Tribes of Southern India*, 1909, iii. 275; iv, 53, p. 19,
160; vii, 350, etc.; Admiral Lindesay Brine, *Travels amongst American
Indians*, 1894, pp 184-5 363; A. R. Wallace, *Travels on the Amazon and
Rio Negro*, 2nd ed. 1889, pp. 347-8; A. F. Calvert, *The Aborigines of
Western Australia*, 1894, p. 20; G. Taplin, *The Narrinyeri: An Account
of the Tribes of South Australian Aborigines*, 2nd ed. Adelaide, <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> 1878, pp. 19, 25; Perceval Landon, *Lhasa*, 2nd
ed. 1905, p. 39; W. A. Pickering, *Pioneering in Formosa*, 1898, pp. 73,
75; Turner, *Samoa a Hundred Years Ago*, 1884, pp. 21, 321; A. E. Pratt,
*Two Years among the New Guinea Cannibals*, 1906, p. 312; Paul Kollmann,
*The Victoria Nyanza*, 1899, p. 166; Lionel Decle, *Three Years in
Savage Africa*, 1900, pp. 75, 152; Dobrizhoffer, *An Account of the
Abipones*, Eng. tr. 1821, ii, 84; W. Ellis, *Polynesian Researches*, 2nd
ed. 1831, i, 395-6; iv, 293, 315; Batchelor, *The Ainu of Japan*, 1892,
pp. 195, 199; B. Douglas Howard, *Life with Trans-Siberian Savages*,
1893, p. 193; Adolf Bastian, *Der Mensch in der Geschichte*, 1860, ii,
106 *sq*., 116 *sq*.; Tylor, *Primitive Culture*, 3rd ed. i, 138; E.
Clodd, *Tom Tit Tot*, 1898, pp. 133-4; E. Crawley, *The Mystic Rose*,
1902. pp. 18-22, 26-28; Ross, *Pansebeia*, 4th ed. 1672, p. 100; N. W.
Thomas, art. in *Journal of the African Society*, October, 1908, p. 24;
D. M. Kranz, *Natur- and Kulturleben der Zulus*, 1880, p. 106; S. P.
Oliver, *Madagascar*, 1886, ii, 39.

At a higher stage of civilisation, or among tribes who have had some
contact with white men, we find a differentiation in which medical
treatment is recognised, and only the obscurer maladies or dangerous
wounds are magically dealt with. Cp. Schrader, *Prehistoric Antiquities
of the Aryan Peoples*, Eng. tr. 1890, p. 420, with Miss Kingsley, *West
African Studies*, p. 153, and Brine, as cited, p. 174.

It cannot be said that this view of disease was transcended among the
most civilised nations of antiquity, the scientific views of the Greek
physicians being accepted only by the few. Under Christianity there was
a nearly complete reversion to the savage view, which subsisted until
the assimilation of Saracen science in the Middle Ages. Cp. Mosheim's
notes to Cudworth's *Intellectual System*, Harrison's trans. 1845, ii,
284-6; A. D. White, *History of the Warfare of Science with Theology*,
1897, ii, i, 3, 25, and refs.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[2:1](pch05.htm#fr_13) In some cases old age is
recognised as a sufficient cause. Cp. Rev. J. Macdonald, *Light in
Africa*, 1890, p. 164; Gill, *Myths and Songs of the South Pacific*,
1876, p. 35; Decle, as cited, pp. 489, 491; Crawley, as cited, p. 26.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[2:2](pch05.htm#fr_14) A. B. Ellis, as cited, p.
12. Cp. Schweinfurth, as cited, and Major Mockler-Ferryman, *British
West Africa*, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 384: Beneficent spirits are almost
unknown to the pessimistic African, to whom existence must seem a
veritable struggle." "Their \[the Matabele's\] idea of power, known or
unknown, is always associated with evil" (Decle, as cited, p. 165: cp.
pp. 153, 343). To the same effect W. Ellis, *Polynesian Researches*, i,
336; Rev. R. Taylor, *Te Ika a Maui*, as cited, and p. 104; Livingstone,
*Travels and Researches*, ed. 1905, pp. 405, 409-10; Calvert, as cited,
p. 38; Perceval Landon, *Lhasa*, 2nd ed. 1905, ii, 36-38, 40; Hyades and
Deniker, *Mission Scientif. du Cap Horn*, 1891, cited by Hobhouse,
*Morals in Evolution*, 1906, i, 46; T. Williams, *Fiji and the Fijians*,
ed. 1870, pp. 189, 155; H. Cayley Webster, *Through New Guinea and the
Cannibal Countries*, 1898, p. 357; Lawes, cited in C. Lennox's *James
Chalmers of New Guinea*, 1903, p. 76; Joh. Warneck, *Die Religion der
Batak*, 1909, pp. 2-3. The last-cited writer is particularly emphatic as
to the overwhelming predominance of the factor of fear in the religion
which he presents: "Diese Furcht, nicht die Pietät, nicht das
Abhängigkeitsgefühl von der Gottheit, ist die treibende Kraft......" Of
the ancient Roman, again, it can be said that "he was beset on all sides
by imaginary foes" (Professor Granger, *The Worship of the Romans*,
1895, p. 75). The same statement can be made with nearly the same
emphasis concerning the population of *Christian* Greece. See J. C.
Lawson, *Modern Greek Folklore and Ancient Greek Religion*, 1910, pp.
9-25, 47, 256, and *passim*. And as the common folk of Christian Greece
are very much on the pagan plane of thought (*id*. p. 51), the inference
as to pagan Greece is clear. Cp. G. Roskoff, *Geschichte des Teufels*,
1869, i, 20, and *Das Religionswesen der rohesten Naturvölker*, 1880,
pp. 34, 171; Sir H. Johnston, *George Grenfell and the Congo*, 1908, ii,
635-6; K. Rasmussen, *The People of the Polar North*, 1908, pp. 123-5;
Miss J. E. Harrison, *Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion*, 2nd
ed. 1908, pp. 7, 9; Thurston, *Castes and Tribes*, as cited, ii, 86,
180, 215, 427; vii, 354. Mr. Decle notes one or two African exceptions;
*e.g.*, a tribe on the Tanganika plateau "have a vague sort of Supreme
Being called Lesa, who has good and evil passions" (p. 293); the Wakamba
have a similar conception, and are further notable for not believing
that death is caused by witchcraft (p. 489); and the Wanyamwezi have
"the idea of a superior being whose help might be invoked" (p. 316). The
exceptions all occur in the lake region. Cp. Kollmann, *The Victoria
Nyanza*, 1899, p. 169.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[3:1](pch05.htm#fr_15) Cp. Arnobius, *Adv.
Gentes*, L. 48-52, ii, 11; Lactantius, *Div. Inst.* iv, 15; Tertullian,
*Apol*. 23, 40; Augustine, *De Civ. Dei*, B. *passim*.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[3:2](pch05.htm#fr_16) This is said in a
different sense from that of the proposition of Miss Harrison
(*Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion*, 2nd ed, pp, xii and 6)
that the religion of fear of evil has ethical value as recognising the
"mystery" thereof.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[4:1](pch05.htm#fr_17) Cp. the author's
*Christianity and Mythology*, 2nd ed. p. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 2. All Belief Results of Reasoning](pch06)
