[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch16.md) 
[Next](pch18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 13.

Tribal ethic, then, would progressively mould tribal religion and be
moulded by it—that is to say, a moral step enforced by political
circumstances would be reflected more or less clearly in religion, as in
the case of the blood covenant with the God, or in the reduction of the
pantheon to monarchic or familial order; while on the other hand the
established ethical view of the God would prime the ethical view of the
political system. It was not that man was primarily, as it were,
incapable of moral ideas as such, or that his notion of mutual duty
could arise only, as Dr. Jevons seems to suppose, in the sheath of the
idea of taboo. Thus to credit men's ethic wholly to their religion,
while claiming for their religion a separate root in a separate order of
consciousness, is merely to beg the question in the interests of
occultism. What happened was a habitual interaction of the norms of
conduct. Theism would help the king; and monarchy would help theism. The
outcome was that the entire ethic of the community had as it were a
religious shape, <span id="fr_214"></span>[1](#fn_214.md) from which
rational criticism could only gradually deliver it. When, then,
religious reformers arose whose end and aim was the moral life, they
would carry into their ethic the psychology of their religion, were it
only because that had been the matrix, so to speak, of the most serious
reflection—this even if they did not state their moral doctrine in terms
of a recasting of the current religious belief. For Dr. Jevons, such a
recasting would be irreligious unless the reformer professed to have
direct intercourse with deity; <span id="fr_215"></span>[2](#fn_215.md) but
we have seen that line of distinction to be untenable, and we cannot
consistently deny either religious spirit or religious form to the
argument: "God must be good: how then could he have ordained a cruelty
or an injustice?"

Inasmuch, however, as all such reforms of morals took effect in
modifying the current code for action, the very conception of such a
code is historically a religious growth; <span
id="fr_216"></span>[3](#fn_216.md) and while the concept of public law
would quite early differentiate from that of morality as

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

standing for What-is compared with What-ought-to-be, the idea of a code
which had a superior moral authority as coming from a God through a Good
Teacher remains so nearly homogeneous with that of a code framed by a
new Teaching-God *or* a Good Teacher that they have far more in common
than of incompatible. The essential structural continuity rests on the
conception of spiritual authority, of "religious" obedience. Where that
is present, the religious temper is substantially conserved even if the
cosmological premisses of religion are disregarded or dismissed. Thus it
is that such a system as that of Buddhism is not merely à posteriori but
à priori to be regarded as a religion. To refuse so to regard it is once
more to embrace the anomaly of the decision that what serves for
religion to half the human race is non-religion.

Where ethics decisively diverges from the religious norm is the point at
which it is freed from the concept of external authority. This point,
indeed, is slow to become clear; and Kant, who is definitely
anti-religious in his repudiation of all forms of ritual of
propitiation, but finds his moral authority in a transcendental
imperative, is still partly on the religious plane. Fichte, who brushed
aside Kant's identification of religion with ethic, and insisted that
religion is knowledge in the sense of philosophy—Fichte will be
pronounced by others than Dr. Jevons to be nonreligious as regards his
ethic, though he is still religious in respect of his pantheism. It is
only when both are divested of apriorism that religion is done with.
Then, though some may still claim to apply to their independent
philosophy of life the name of religion, on the score that it is at
least as seriously framed and held as ever a religion was, the
anthropologist may reasonably grant that a real force of differentiation
has emerged. When every man consciously shapes his own "religion" out of
his conceptions of social utility, the term is of no descriptive value;
and when many do so and many more still cleave to religious cosmology
and to the ethic of specified authority, the description as applied to
the former is misleading. In any case, it is a historical fact that only
slowly do ethical schools lose the religious cast. *Jurare in verba
magistri* is their note in all save vigorously progressive periods; and
the philosophical schools of the Middle Ages all strike it. That those
of to-day have wholly abandoned it, perhaps few would considerately
assert; but it is at least obvious that it belongs as essentially to
Buddhism as to Christianity, whether or not the individual Buddhist
accepts, as most do, a mass of religious beliefs alien to the alleged
doctrine of the Master.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[55:1](pch17.htm#fr_214.md) Cp. Exodus xv, 16-23;
Deut. i, 17.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[55:2](pch17.htm#fr_215.md) Cp. p. 24.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[55:3](pch17.htm#fr_216.md) Cp. Exod. and Deut. as
above cited; Ex. xxi, 6; xxii, 8, Heb.; Kuenen, *The Hexateuch*, Eng.
tr. p, 272. Tiele, *Egypt. Relig.* Eng. tr. pp. 73, 93; *Hist.
comparée*, p. 247; Letourneau, *Sociology:* Eng. tr. iv, c. viii, p.
345.; Maine, *Ancient Law*, pp. 4-5; Pulszky, *Theory of Law and Civil
Society*, § 38; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 368; Oettli, *Das Gesetz
Hammurabis und die Thora Israels*, 1903, p. 84. And see below, Part II,
ch. ii, § 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 14. Definition of Religion](pch18.md)
