[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch13) 
[Next](pch15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 10.

To say this, however, is certainly not to endorse the surprising thesis
latterly put forth by Dr. Frazer, to the effect that magic-mongering,
after all, has been a great factor in human progress. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[2](#fn_126) His first suggestion was, as we have
seen, that a recognition of the inherent falsehood and barrenness of
magic set the saner men seeking for a truer insight into nature. But
after suggesting this "with all due diffidence," he has latterly come to
hold with confidence that it was the clever impostors who, by obtaining
monarchic power, were the means of breaking up savage conservatism, and
so of making progress possible. It is a singular argument. The public
sorcerer "may readily acquire the rank and authority of a chief or
king"; and the ablest and most ambitious men of the tribe accordingly
follow the profession. The most sagacious are the most likely to see
through its fallacies, and, becoming conscious deceivers, will as such
"generally come to the top." <span id="fr_127"></span>[3](#fn_127) Only
the cleverest can survive: all sorcerers run a constant risk of being
killed for their failures; and the honest men are likely to be soonest
knocked on the head. "The general result is that at this stage of social
evolution the supreme power tends to fall into the hands of men of the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

keenest intelligence and the most unscrupulous character." <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128) Once supreme, the clever rogue "may, and
often does, turn his talents, his experience, his resources, to the
service of the public." <span id="fr_129"></span>[2](#fn_129) Being a
knave, he is not likely to miscarry: witness the contrasted careers of
Augustus and George III. Thus magic makes the monarch: "it shifted the
balance of power from the many to the one: it substituted a monarchy for
a democracy, or rather for an oligarchy of old men." The custom-ruled
savage in the free tribal state is utterly unprogressive, "and the
ablest man is dragged down by the weakest and dullest." But the rise of
one man to supreme power breaks the spell; and the tribe "enters on a
career of aggrandisement, which at an early stage of history is often
highly favourable to social, industrial, and intellectual progress."
"The great conquering races of the world have commonly done most to
advance and spread civilisation.....The Assyrians, the Greeks, the
Romans, the Arabs, are our witnesses in the past......All the first
great strides towards civilisation have been made under despotic and
theocratic governments." <span id="fr_130"></span>[3](#fn_130) Great,
therefore, was the service of the sorcerer.

Oddly enough, Dr. Frazer, whose outstanding merit is the fulness of his
proofs for his theses, offers us no evidence whatever in support of this
thesis beyond the perfunctory allusions to ancient civilisation just
cited, which are wholly beside the case. He is severe on à priori
theories of kingly origins, but his own argument here is almost wholly à
priori. True, some savage kings are magicians = priests; but many are
not; and the wide learning of Dr. Frazer evidently does not suggest to
him a single case in which the clever knave who has achieved kingship
performs the services he is supposed to be able to render. <span
id="fr_131"></span>[4](#fn_131) On the contrary, we have the
testimony <span id="fr_132"></span>[5](#fn_132) that "where the
chieftaincy and priesthood meet in the same person, both are of a low
order"—among the Fijians. There is really no reason to think that early
progress was made as Dr. Frazer suggests: his philosophic antinomianism
is gratuitous. And it is not persisted in; for once more we find him
reverting <span id="fr_133"></span>[6](#fn_133) to the view that, as the
fallacy of magic becomes more and more apparent, it is "slowly displaced
by religion: in other words, the magician gives way to the

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

priest." The two propositions refuse to quadrate. First, the great merit
of the magician king was to break up custom; now he does but pave the
way for the priest, who is custom incarnate; who, in point of fact,
pursues the very researches which Dr. Frazer credits to the magician;
and who, when the chief or king insists upon a humane innovation, makes
it his business to poison the innovator. <span
id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_134) It is time that the à priori method were
abandoned, in this as in other fields of science. It can but yield us a
crop of contradictions.

Looking in anthropology and history for the main factors of progress, we
find them in very different directions from those indicated by Dr.
Frazer. Our first traces of "civilisation," strictly speaking, are in
towns—*civitates;* and their civilisation consists largely in the
development of the useful arts by division of labour. The primary
determinants are physical—conditions of regular food-supply, as in the
valleys of the Nile, the Tigris, the Euphrates, and the Yang-tsze-Kiang;
and the widening of knowledge was a matter of manifold development in
which men of all classes must have taken part. To say, as does Dr.
Frazer, <span id="fr_135"></span>[2](#fn_135) that the magicians "were
the direct predecessors, not merely of our physicians and surgeons, but
of our investigators and discoverers in every branch of natural
science," is to impose a false symmetry on a vast, irregular process,
and is an unwarrantable negation of faculty in all but one fraction of
the human race. There is positively no ground for supposing that it was
professed magicians or magician-chiefs who invented ploughs and bows and
arrows, or tamed cattle, or developed agriculture, or began spinning and
weaving and metallurgy. Neither is there reason to think that it was the
"rain-makers" who developed irrigation, or the "medicine-men" who
oftenest discovered the uses of herbs, whether or not they were the
first regular observers of the stars. Neither positively nor negatively
can they be shown to be the leaders in vital innovation. <span
id="fr_136"></span>[3](#fn_136)

The spell of custom, where broken at all, has been dissolved by the
compulsions of need or the lure of gain: hunters and shepherds are
turned into agriculturists by the bait of food or the goad of hunger.
The masterful savage knave who breaks through primitive convention and
gives a free run to genius is a creature of Dr. Frazer's speculative
faculty, suddenly permitted to expatiate in an unwonted vacancy.
Masterful primitive chiefs and kings we do indeed find at

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

times breaking down evil usages; <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137)
but this very service is by way of fighting the priest who (we are told)
has supervened on the magician; and in no case, I think, can such a
reforming chief or king be shown to have won his power as a sorcerer. As
we have seen, the superseding of so-called magic by so-called religion
is immeasurably slow; and the idea of taboo subsists in the historic
religions to this day.

The things wherein men validly change in the savage state, if we can
draw any conclusions from their remains, are the ways and means of
living and fighting. Conditions of food-supply determine implements and
methods. Weapons are slowly perfected; and if we may reason from the
instance of the Romans, the primitive savage was most open to new ideas
on that side. There, at least, *fas erat ab hoste doceri*. But the lift
of the race is secular; not a matter of sudden impulsions and
emancipations by clever chiefs, rascally or otherwise. Dr. Frazer
appears to think concerning the rise of culture as so many theologians
still think concerning moral progress. He seeks a "founder" as they seek
a Moses, a Buddha, a Zoroaster, a Jesus, for the instauration of morals
and of creeds. Whatever magicians might do, only with a vast inertia did
the stone ages lapse on, from palæolithic to neolithic, from neolithic
to bronze and to iron; and in savage Africa, pullulating with sorcerers,
the trivial tribal cultures have exhibited but a futile fluctuation in
five thousand years. *Non quis sed quid*.

The question of the political conditions of the *spread* of civilisation
is another issue; and the conjoining of it with the first is a fresh
proof of the fallacy of Dr. Frazer's new method. These à priori
arguments for despotism are products not of induction but of
presupposition. If we apply the inductive method which Dr. Frazer
professes to follow, we find, for one case in which despotism evokes
genius or progress, ten in which it paralyses the first and stifles the
second. Under the imperialisms and theocracies of Mesopotamia and Egypt,
mayhap, there were laid or retained the foundations of astronomy and
mathematics and the beginnings of philosophy; and Greece came into the
heritage. The mathematics and the philosophy were developed in
democratic Greece as they never had been under the empires; and one of
the few cases in which despotism did anything for science was at the
later stage when the Ptolemies simply gave astronomy an economic
endowment. On the other hand, great literature and great art, great
poetry and drama, medicine and biology, were the creations of
pre-Alexandrian Greece; and in

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

every one of those fields the human achievement sinks and dwindles after
free Greece falls before organised militarism. As to religious
literature, Dr. Frazer is not wont to represent the Bible of little
Jewry as inferior to those of Assyria and Egypt. The whole Roman empire,
finally, stands for one brief florescence of the secondary Roman genius,
followed by the ruin of the whole antique civilisation which it
absorbed; and the later cultures of the Saracens and the Renaissance
were growths from the found seeds of Greek science, and from the
assimilation of the remains of Roman culture in a turbulent world of
free Italian cities, akin to that of dead Greece.

This digression, forced upon us by Dr. Frazer's resort to apriorism in
sociology, may not be useless if it serves to put us on our guard
against the risks of reactionary method within the proper limits of our
problem. Away from induction there is no safety; and Dr. Frazer
miscarries even as does Dr. Jevons when he neglects observation and
gives the rein to presupposition. It is by reason of this swerving from
his own principles that he finally fails to solve the problem of
Christian origins, and remains stranded in a compromise between
tradition and criticism. Vindications of despotism and primitive
charlatanism are psychologically and logically on all fours with
vindications of incredible creeds, cruel churches, and the
sentimentalism of reaction. The business and the duty of the
anthropologist as of the sociologist is to note determinants and trace
sequences, neither letting his ethic obscure for him the natural
processes, nor letting the recognition of that obscure his ethic, which
is an act of discrimination and judgment, or nothing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[35:2](pch14.htm#fr_126) In his great work on
*Totemism and Exogamy* (iv, 25 *sq*.) Dr. Frazer has recently argued,
without any reference to the wider thesis here under criticism, that
magic may be reckoned the nursing-mother of art, inasmuch as it moved
early man to copy objects—a more plausible theory than the one here
criticised. But it also is open to much objection.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[35:3](pch14.htm#fr_127) *Lectures on the Early
History of the Kingship*, 1905, p. 82.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[36:1](pch14.htm#fr_128) *Id*. p. 83.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[36:2](pch14.htm#fr_129) *Id*. p. 84.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[36:3](pch14.htm#fr_130) *Id*. pp. 84-87.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[36:4](pch14.htm#fr_131) Dr. Frazer does cite a
story of a Masai magician chief who "actually discovered a mode of
inoculation which protected the cattle against lung disease" (p. 114).
"If this statement is correct," he adds, "we have here a striking
instance......which illustrates what I have said." It will really not
do. In this connection we may note the recorded fact that "The Masai at
one time formed an immense and compact nation.....Their cohesion was due
to the influence of a very celebrated sorcerer named Battiani. His death
was *followed* by the epidemic of rinderpest which came from the north
in 1891. Nearly all the cattle of the Masai perished......Finally,
small-pox added its ravages......and, the nation was irretrievably
broken" (Decle, *Three Years in Savage Africa*, 1900, p. 476, We here
learn what the sorcerer can and what he cannot do.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[36:5](pch14.htm#fr_132) T. Williams, *Fiji and
the Fijians*, ed. 1870, p. 192.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[36:6](pch14.htm#fr_133) p. 127.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[37:1](pch14.htm#fr_134) Cp. Sir A. B. Ellis,
*The Ewe-speaking Peoples of the Slave Coast*, 1890, pp. 145-147.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[37:2](pch14.htm#fr_135) *Lectures* cited, p.
92.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[37:3](pch14.htm#fr_136) It is noteworthy that
in his comprehensive and valuable survey of *Totemism and Exogamy* (iv,
17 *sq*.) Dr. Frazer expressly negates and confutes the theory that the
rise of culture, animal-taming, and metallurgy is due to early totemism.
Here he is carefully Inductive as against the loose speculation of
others.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[38:1](pch14.htm#fr_137) See below, ch. ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 11. The Beginning of the End of Religion](pch15)
