[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch14) 
[Next](pch16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 11.

Returning to our immediate problem, the evolution of religious ideas, we
note that, all error being but incomplete or illicit induction,
"irrational" and relatively "rational" ideas are alike products of the
general mental process. The recoil from adventurous magic to precatory
ritual is no more a renunciation of reason than the contrary
progression; and all changes in religion are but better or worse
applications of judgment under varying conditions of psychic suggestion
and economic pressure. It is indeed true—and be the truth clearly
envisaged—that with the conscious resort to critical reason there begins
potentially a process which may end in the negation of all the primary
religious conceptions and propositions, even in their most purified
philosophical form. When that end is reached, we may well say that
philosophy and religion are differentiated, even as science is
differentiated at once from magical and from precatory

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

religion, at the point at which it either repudiates or abandons their
premisses, and consciously proceeds on tested induction. But even this
reaction is never instantaneously complete: witness the sociology of
many physicists, and the meteorology of some sociologising historians;
and, on the other hand, there is an aspect or function of religion in
respect of which it is structurally continuous with systems of doctrine
which either abandon or repudiate its premisses.

From the first, it belonged to his nature that man should connect his
ethic with his cosmology, since the one like the other grew out of his
instincts and perceptions and his effort to harmonise them. Precisely as
he animised Nature, so did he moralise it: that is, he conceived of it
in terms of what moral ideas he had. Thus it was that he could
alternately resort to propitiation and to magic, and alternately feel
fear and gratitude. Granting that his religious conceptions first
crystallised on the lines of his fears, it was inevitable that they
should in time crystallise also in terms of his satisfactions: the one
involved the other, and made it not only possible but probable that he
should at times thank the very power he feared. Fear would involve
propitiation, and propitiation was the door to gratitude. And thus it
was that his Gods were in the long run ethically like unto himself,
neither wholly beneficent nor wholly maleficent.

Such an evolution would seem inevitable, even if we do not posit as part
of the process his direct deification of his own image in that of his
ancestors. But that ancestor-worship is a main factor in the growth of
religion is proved both à priori and à posteriori. Once the ancestor was
recognised as subsisting spirit-wise, he was only in degree, not in
kind, distinguishable from the Gods; and there is evidence that in some
cases he was conceived as the God *par excellence*.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">See the evidence (of which Dr. Jevons makes no
account) collected by Spencer, *Principles of Sociology*, vol. i, chaps.
xx and xxv; and op. F. W. Christian, *The Caroline Islands*, 1899, p.
75; Rev. D. Macdonald, *Oceania*, 1889, p. 161; Basil Thomson, *The
Fijians*, 1908, pp. 5, 57, 111; Glyn Leonard, *The Lower Niger and its
Tribes*, 1906, pp. 67, 89, 98 *sq*., 104-9, etc.; C. Partridge, *Cross
River Natives*, 1905, pp. 283-4; W. Crooke, *Religion and Folklore of
Northern India*, ed. 1895, vol. i, ch. iv; Sir H. Johnston, *The Uganda
Protectorate*, 1902, ii, 553, 555, 587, 588, 589, 631, 752. "The essence
of true negro-religion," says the writer last-named, "is
ancestor-worship" (*Liberia*, 1906, ii, 1062). It is true that some
observers (cp. Mary Kingsley, *West African Studies*, 2nd ed. 1901, pp.
111-114; Sir A. B. Ellis, *The Ewe-Speaking Peoples of the Slave
Coast*,</span>

</div>

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1890, p. 24 *sq*.)
deny that certain West Africans "worship their ancestors"; but this, as
Miss Kingsley admits, is a matter of culture-stage or variation. African
religion is notably impermanent by reason of the peculiar stresses of
life-conditions; and no one can trace far the history even of the
highest Gods of the indigenes. Cp. Partridge, as cited, pp. 271-3. The
higher Gods of a given moment may be ancestors whose ancestorhood has
been lost sight of.

Dr. Frazer, *Golden Bough*, i, 72, note, cites the testimony of Dr.
Fison in Australia: "The more I learn about savage tribes, the more I am
convinced that among them the ancestors grow into gods." The same
witness, again, tells of a great Fijian chief who "really believed
himself to be a god—*i.e.*, a reincarnation of an ancestor who had grown
into a god" (*Id*. i, 141, *note*). The Godhood of chiefs is a familiar
phenomenon. "The Gods being no more than deceased chiefs, the arikis
\[chiefs\] were regarded as living ones" (Taylor, *Te Ika a Maui: or,
New Zealand and its Inhabitants*, p. 173). Cp. Hazlewood's testimony
(Frazer, last cit.); also Mariner, *Tonga Islands*, ed. 1827, ii,
99-100; W. Ellis, *Polynesian Researches*, i, 111 *sq*.; T. Williams,
*Fiji and the Fijians*, ed. 1870, pp. 19, 197; Comm. V. L. Cameron,
*Across Africa*, 1885, p. 336; and Frazer, *Lectures on the History of
the Early Kingship*, 1905, p. 132 *sq*.

</div>

Among the early Aryan Hindus, the first man who died became Yama, the
God of the Shades; <span id="fr_138"></span>[1](#fn_138) and on another
view he and his wife were the first human pair, <span
id="fr_139"></span>[2](#fn_139) though sprung from deities of the
atmosphere. <span id="fr_140"></span>[3](#fn_140) But here, still, we
are dealing with late developments: it is still an open question how the
*first* Gods originated. And it is impossible to determine exactly the
primary psychic processes. The limitary theorem that all God-worship
originated in ancestor-worship has evoked the counter-theorem that
God-worship must in origin have preceded ancestor-worship; and Dr.
Jevons so reasons. But again his predilection recoils on one of his own
theses, for the ancestor is obviously likely to have been early regarded
as the friendly spirit; <span id="fr_141"></span>[4](#fn_141) and we are
thus led back to Dr. Jevons’s repudiated premiss that the religion of
fear had preceded that of gratitude. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[5](#fn_142)

His final view of ancestor-worship is that it was assimilated to that of
the Gods, but can never have preceded it. It may be true, he grants,
that certain ancestors are somehow raised to the ranks of Gods, but it
cannot be proved that they were originally ghosts. Then follows this
singular theorem:—

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">What then of these gods?......If they are believed
to be the ancestors of their worshippers, then they are *not believed to
have been human;* the worshipper's pride is that his ancestor was a god
and *no mere mortal*......If, on the other hand, a god is not believed
to be the ancestor of any of his worshippers, then to assert that he was
really a "deified ancestor" is to make a statement for which there is no
evidence; it is an inference from an assumption—namely, that the only
spirits which the savage originally knew were ghosts. That assumption,
however, is not true; *the savage believes the forces and phenomena of
nature to be personalities like himself*, he does not believe that they
are ghosts or worked by ghosts......The fact is that ancestors *known to
be human were not worshipped as gods*, and that ancestors *worshipped as
gods were not believed to have been human*. <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143)</span>

</div>

We might add, using Dr. Jevons’s own words concerning the theory he
rejects, "Which is simplicity itself." But though in a sense simple, it
is unhappily not consistent. For if the savage believed the forces of
nature to be "personalities like himself"; if, as Dr. Jevons insists,
the magic-monger believed himself on a par with the supernatural in his
power to control nature; and if, as Dr. Jevons has previously
argued, <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144) it was precisely out of
the notion of such personalities or "spirits" that he framed his idea of
"supernatural" forces or Gods, then either there is in the terms of the
case no contradiction whatever between his counting his ancestors
"human" and counting them Gods, or there is no meaning whatever in the
phrase "personalities like himself." Dr. Jevons really cannot have it
both ways, even for the purpose of confuting the theory of Spencer. All
the while he is but modifying Spencer's special theory that all
God-ideas began in the idea of quasi-human "spirits," merely refusing to
accept "ghosts" as the first form of spirit-idea.

Of course, if Dr. Jevons means that by *definition* the savage must be
held to regard a God-ancestor as "not *merely* human"—that the savage
cannot conceptually mean exactly the same thing by "God" and "man," else
there would be no double significance in the terms—he may claim our
assent; for in that case he is asserting a mere truism. But by his own
showing the question is whether or not in the opinion of the savage the
man could become a God; and so far is this from being doubtful that we
have many instances of savages regarding some of their contemporaries,
and priests regarding *themselves*, as Gods; <span
id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_145) to say nothing of the fact that for the
early Hebrews the title "Gods" was certainly applicable to judges or
chiefs. <span id="fr_146"></span>[4](#fn_146) In Sumatra, the human
species, "called

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

the Gods of the middle world, are conceived as a true copy of the
God-world. In heaven the same life goes on as on earth. Only gradually
are Gods and men distinguished. The Gods stand over men very much as a
powerful chief over the crowd. Therefore were such princes named Gods
(Debata) and the Gods in turn 'Grandfather,' with which title eminent
men are greeted." <span id="fr_147"></span>[1](#fn_147) For the people
of Mangaia in the Hervey Islands the three Gods Rangi, Mokoiro, and
Akatuira, grandsons of the great God Rongo, <span
id="fr_148"></span>[2](#fn_148) were the first inhabitants of the
islands, and the ancestors of all the tribes. <span
id="fr_149"></span>[3](#fn_149) And the idea is common. In the same
island, Vatea, father of Rongo, is the "father of Gods and men." <span
id="fr_150"></span>[4](#fn_150) The people of Efate in the New Hebrides,
down till the time of their conversion, habitually applied to all their
Gods the name of "Spirits of the dead"; <span
id="fr_151"></span>[5](#fn_151) and their "first man" is practically
identified with Maui, the Creator. <span id="fr_152"></span>[6](#fn_152)
So, among the Bushmen, ’Kaang or Cagn is at once Supreme God, "the Man"
or Master of all things, and the "first being," with Coti his
wife; <span id="fr_153"></span>[7](#fn_153) and among the Australian
Aborigines "the conception of a supreme being oscillated between a hero
and a deity." <span id="fr_154"></span>[8](#fn_154) Concerning the
ancestor spirits in general, a very studious missionary declares that
they are "regarded as *clothed with all the divine powers in
existence*." <span id="fr_155"></span>[9](#fn_155) Nay, the Japanese at
this moment regard themselves as universally descended from Gods; and
every dead relation becomes a God relatively to the particular
household. <span id="fr_156"></span>[10](#fn_156) Thus Dr. Jevons is
contradicted by the evidence as well as by his own earlier argument.

As before, he has fallen into contradiction by reason of having an
illicit doctrinal end to gain—this time, the discrediting of the

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

ghost theory of religion. In order to destroy that, he has in effect
committed himself to the proposition that the primitive savage clearly
discriminated between ghosts and spirits. Now there is neither à priori
nor à posteriori ground for this view; since all the evidence goes to
show that the dead ancestor was originally believed to eat and drink,
hunt and ride, like the living; and the same things were certainly
believed of the Gods. It is one of Dr. Jevons’s own reproaches against
the creed of the Egyptians that it regarded the ka or soul in the next
world as eating and drinking exactly like the living man. There is
really no pretext for believing that the early man ever thought the
"spirits" were "not ghosts" or *vice versa:* it is Dr. Jevons who is
here making an unproved assumption. This use of the word "ghost" as
representing to early man exactly what it means to us is not only
unwarrantable in itself; it is a misrepresentation of the so-called
"ghost theory"; for that has regard, among other things, to visions *in
dreams* of the dead as living. If the early savage did see a subjective
"apparition" he would doubtless hold it for a "person"; but as regards
dreams, peoples comparatively civilised have constantly taken the vision
for an objective reality. Of such cases there are several in the Bible.

On the other hand, we have Dr. Jevons’s express assurance first <span
id="fr_157"></span>[1](#fn_157) that the totem animal becomes the totem
ancestor, who is universally conceived to have been animal, not human,
yet quasi-human, yet is made a God; <span
id="fr_158"></span>[2](#fn_158) next, that "in virtue of the kinship
between the god and his worshippers, the killing of a fellow-clansman
comes to be regarded in a totem-clan as the same thing as killing the
totem-god"; <span id="fr_159"></span>[3](#fn_159) and, further, that
when totemism is no longer a living force, the mere altar-stone comes to
be identified with the God, who is "conceived as the ancestor of the
race." <span id="fr_160"></span>[4](#fn_160) If, then, a whole community
can be conceived as descending from one deified animal or from a stone,
it surely might be conceived as descending from one man. As to his
possible deification, we have Dr. Jevons’s own admission that
"*eventually*......the dead were......on a level with the gods." <span
id="fr_161"></span>[5](#fn_161) That is to say, he credits men with

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

superiority to such anthropomorphism at a time when they animised
everything, and when, later, they could believe in divine animal
ancestors or stone ancestors; and he dates ancestor-worship proper as a
still later practice arising in a state of comparatively advanced
civilisation, <span id="fr_162"></span>[1](#fn_162) on the ground that
"*the family* is a comparatively late institution in the history of
society."

Now, however, arises a fresh contradiction. The family, surely, was a
tolerably old institution among the Romans at the beginning of their
written history; but Dr. Jevons had previously committed himself to the
proposition that the Romans, down to the time of their assimilation of
Greek cults and deities, had not even attained to the stage of
polytheism, being at that of simple "animism." <span
id="fr_163"></span>[2](#fn_163) That is, they had no Gods, though they
had long been wont to sacrifice to the *manes* of their ancestors. The
mere statement of that thesis, in turn, involves new contradictions. In
denying that the deities of the early Romans were properly describable
as Gods until they had adopted Greek Gods or identified their own with
some of these, he speaks of the "genuine" and "great" Italian Gods,
"Janus, Jupiter, Mars, Diana, Venus, Hercules, etc." Then he proceeds to
show that the great and genuine Janus was indistinguishable in origin
and function from the "inferior, animistic powers to whom the title of
spirit is the highest that can be assigned." The general run of those
spirits, he contends (following Ihne, Schwegler, and others), "were
rather *numina* or forces than beings"; <span
id="fr_164"></span>[3](#fn_164) and he represents the early Italians as
not conceiving them in human form. Yet he admits that Janus was figured
as a human head with two faces. The whole theorem is indefensible. To
say that an ancient Italian peasant thought of the forces of Nature as
abstractions before he had attained to the conception of personal Gods,
when all the while he thought of Mars and Diana, Jupiter and Juno, as
males and females, is to affirm a countersense. The sole defence offered
is the impossible set of definitions by which Chantepie de la Saussaye
undertakes to draw a line between Gods proper and Nature powers. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[4](#fn_165) By that definition Gods are not evolved
till they have been sculptured—a countersense which at this stage of
hierology we might have been spared. The superposition of so many Greek
myths upon those of the Romans <span id="fr_166"></span>[5](#fn_166)
gives

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

considerable range for mystification; but no process of that kind can
save the theorem that the Gods were not anthropomorphised by imagination
before they were objectively imaged.

The thesis, finally, that the Romans before the period of Greek
influence were "mere" polydaimonists, and that at the same time they
thought even of their daimons as impersonal forces, destroys itself,
even apart from Dr. Jevons’s admission that all the while they had
"great Gods." An "inferior" spirit is cognisable as such only by
contrast with a superior; and the contention that Janus was evolved from
a simple "spirit of doorways," and remained such, is merely one more
rebuttal of Dr. Jevons’s own division of species. If the spirit of
doorways was anthropomorphised, it is idle to contend that the other
spirits were not. In the very act of maintaining this untenable thesis
Dr. Jevons recognises in the attitude of the Romans towards their
*manes*, "the good," a "worship of deceased ancestors *and* of spirits
which, like Genita Mana, are best explained as spirits of the
departed"; <span id="fr_167"></span>[1](#fn_167) and he decides,
further, that the Lares Præstites were conceived under the form of
dogs. <span id="fr_168"></span>[2](#fn_168) In the face of all this his
further account of the Italian Gods as "fetishes" reduces the theory to
chaos. We are now asked to combine the three conceptions: (1) that
ancestor-worship is *late;* (2) that the Romans had not even reached
polytheism long after they had practised ancestor-worship; (3) that they
did not anthropomorphise their "spirits," while they did their ancestors
and their "great Gods" (whom, all the while, they had not attained to
conceiving as such). And, as if this were not confusion enough, Dr.
Jevons pronounces that, at this pre-polytheistic stage, "in Rome, *as*
in China, Assyria, and Babylonia, the cult was nothing but organised
magic" <span id="fr_169"></span>[3](#fn_169)—that organised magic which
elsewhere he puts as a late degeneration, even as he does here by
associating it with the stage of full polytheism in Assyria and
Babylonia.

And still we have to note the crowning temerity of the assertion that an
imported polytheism was "forced by the State on a people not yet
prepared for anything higher than animism and ancestor-worship" <span
id="fr_170"></span>[4](#fn_170)—that very ancestor-worship which in his
larger treatise he describes as a late evolution, possible only after
Gods have been worshipped. The conception of a State *forcing*
"polytheism" on a people incapable of it—that is, forcing a belief in
Gods on a people who had never thought of Gods, and still less of
"God"—is really

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

fatal to the theorist's differentiation between belief in Gods and
belief in spirits. Of this dialectical ruin we can but brush the débris
aside.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_138"></span>[41:1](pch15.htm#fr_138) Muir, *Original
Sanskrit Texts*, v, 292.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[41:2](pch15.htm#fr_139) *Id*. p. 288.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[41:3](pch15.htm#fr_140) *Id*. p. 301.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[41:4](pch15.htm#fr_141) Cp. J. G. Müller,
*Amerikanische Urreligionen*, p. 72; and Leonard, as cited.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[41:5](pch15.htm#fr_142) It should be
acknowledged that there may be cases of retrogression. Thus the ’Kaang
or Cagn of the Bushmen "at first was very good and nice, but got spoilt
through fighting so many things" (Stow and Theal, *Native Races of South
Afric*a, 1905, p. 134).

<span id="fn_143"></span>[42:1](pch15.htm#fr_143) P. 197.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[42:2](pch15.htm#fr_144) P. 23.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[42:3](pch15.htm#fr_145) See refs. on previous
page and cp. Spencer's *Sociology*, ch. xxv, Il 195-197.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[42:4](pch15.htm#fr_146) Cp. Var. Bib. at Ex.
xxi, 6; xxii, 8, etc.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[43:1](pch15.htm#fr_147) Warneck, *Die Religion
der Batak*, 1909, pp. 4-5.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[43:2](pch15.htm#fr_148) Compare this with the
development of the Sumatran divine family, in which the earlier
"Grandfather" Creator God acquires, under Hindu influence, three divine
sons. These, in one myth, are men, made by him. Warneck, p. 28.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[43:3](pch15.htm#fr_149) Gill, *Myths and Songs
of the South Pacific*, 1876, p. 16.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[43:4](pch15.htm#fr_150) *Id*. pp. 3, 17. Mr.
Gill's account of the Mangaian notions of the "first things" is
interesting: "The heathen intellect has no conception of a Supreme Being
creating a universe out of nothing......Whenever the gods make anything,
the existence of the raw material, at least in part, is presupposed. The
primary conception of these islanders as to spiritual existence is a
point. Then something pulsating. Next of something greater,
*everlasting*. Now comes the Great Mother and Originator of
things......The Great Mother approximates nearest to the dignity of
creator; but when she makes a child, it is out of a bit of her own body.
*She herself is dependent on these prior existences*, destitute of human
form." *Id*. p. 21. (In all likelihood Adam in an early form of the
Semitic myth made Eve from his own body.)

<span id="fn_151"></span>[43:5](pch15.htm#fr_151) Rev. D. Macdonald,
*Oceania, Linguistic, and Anthropological*, 1889, pp. 161, 167.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[43:6](pch15.htm#fr_152) *Id*. pp. 172-173. Mr.
Macdonald remarks that though all the deities, including Maui (who
dies), are called spirits of the dead, "*perhaps* originally they were
not regarded as the spirits of dead men" (p. 202). But he goes no
further. Mr. Macdonald, it should be added, holds the old view that the
ancestors of all savages *once* had the knowledge of a Supreme God
ascribed to the first men in the Hebrew Bible.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[43:7](pch15.htm#fr_153) Stow and Theal,
*Native Races of South Afric*a, 1905, pp. 113, 134.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[43:8](pch15.htm#fr_154) J. Mathew, *Eaglehawk
and Crow*, 1899, p. 146.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[43:9](pch15.htm#fr_155) Macdonald, *Oceania*,
p. 202.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[43:10](pch15.htm#fr_156) Cp. Lafcadio Hearn,
*Japan*, 1904, pp. 34, 37, 131, 134, 141. Dr. Jevons, however, might
argue that the orthodox Japanese do not regard *themselves* as merely
human, since their religious teachers claim that in the matter of divine
descent they are unique among the nations,

<span id="fn_157"></span>[44:1](pch15.htm#fr_157) p. 104.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[44:2](pch15.htm#fr_158) The alleged
deification of the totem is latterly recognised not to take place while
totemism as such subsists. It occurs only when normal totemism is
disused. See Frazer, *Totemism and Exogamy*, 1910, iv, 5. But it is easy
to see how such a development could take place. "The aborigines of the
northern parts of Victoria believe that the beings who created all
things had severally the form of the crow and the eagle The following
legend was current on the Murray. Before the earth was inhabited by the
existing race of black men, birds had possession of it. These birds had
as much intelligence and wisdom as the blacks—nay, some say that they
were altogether wiser and more skilful" (Mathew, *Eaglehawk and Crow*,
1899, p. 15).

<span id="fn_159"></span>[44:3](pch15.htm#fr_159) P. 107.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[44:4](pch15.htm#fr_160) P. 138.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[44:5](pch15.htm#fr_161) P. 194. This seems to
be an adoption of the theory of Prof. Max Müller, *Introd. to Science of
Religion*, ed, 1882, p. 143.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[45:1](pch15.htm#fr_162) P. 195.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[45:2](pch15.htm#fr_163) Introduction to
Plutarch's *Roman Questions*, rep. of Holland's trans. 1892, pp. xviii,
xxiii.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[45:3](pch15.htm#fr_164) *Id*. p. lvi. See
*Christianity and Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 82-86 for a criticism of
Ihne's views. Cp. *A Short History of Freethought*, 2nd ed. i, as to
Schwegler.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[45:4](pch15.htm#fr_165) *Christianity and
Mythology*, as cited, pp. 75, 85.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[45:5](pch15.htm#fr_166) Cp. *Christianity and
Mythology*, as cited, pp. 78-80.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[46:1](pch15.htm#fr_167) Work cited, pp.
xliii-xliv.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[46:2](pch15.htm#fr_168) *Id*. p. xli.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[46:3](pch15.htm#fr_169) *Id*. p. xxviii.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[46:4](pch15.htm#fr_170) *Id*, p. xlvi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 12. Historic View of Ancestor Worship](pch16)
