[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch10) 
[Next](pch12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 7.

This contradiction naturally reiterates itself in Dr. Jevons’s treatise
at a hundred points: being fundamental, it strikes through the entire
argument. While premising that religion is "universally human," and
finally contending that man is "by nature religious," and therefore
"began by a religious explanation of nature," <span
id="fr_80"></span>[2](#fn_80) he pronounces <span
id="fr_81"></span>[3](#fn_81) that "four-fifths of mankind, probably,
believe in sympathetic magic," which, he declares, not only "does not
involve in itself the idea of the supernatural," <span
id="fr_82"></span>[4](#fn_82) but is "hostile from the

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

beginning" <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83) to religion, and is the
"negation" thereof. <span id="fr_84"></span>[2](#fn_84) While affirming
that the belief in the supernatural (= religion) was prior to magic, he
explains <span id="fr_85"></span>[3](#fn_85) that it was man's
"*intellectual* helplessness in grappling with the forces of nature
which led him into the way of religion" (*i.e.*, the way in which he
*began*, before he had tried his intellect), and, again, that religion
led certain men out of magic, though at the same time they were
converted by simply seeing that magic is inefficacious.

Again, reverting for one purpose to his original doctrine of the primacy
of fear, Dr. Jevons writes <span id="fr_86"></span>[4](#fn_86):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Magic is, in fact, a direct *relapse* into the state
of things in which man found himself when he was surrounded by
*supernatural beings*, none of which was bound to him by any tie of
goodwill, with none of which had he any stated relations, but all were
uncertain, capricious, and caused in him unreasoning terror. *This reign
of terror magic tends to re-establish, and does re-establish, wherever
the belief in magic prevails*. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[5](#fn_87)</span>

</div>

A few chapters further on, discussing fire-festivals and water rites,
without asking wherein they psychologically differ from sacramental
meals, he writes <span id="fr_88"></span>[6](#fn_88):—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">If we regard those fire-festivals and water rites as
pieces of sympathetic magic, they are clear instances in which man
imagines himself able to constrain the gods—in this case the god of
vegetation—to subserve his own ends. Now, this vain imagination is not
merely non-religious, but anti-religious; and it is difficult to see how
religion could have been developed out of it. *It is inconsistent with
the abject fear which the savage feels of the supernatural, and which is
sometimes supposed* to be the origin of religion; and it is inconsistent
with that sense of man's dependence on a superior being which is a real
element in religion.</span>

</div>

The contradiction is absolute. For one purpose, magic is declared to
*restore* the primary reign of terror; for another purpose it is
declared to be incompatible with a reign of terror, which is now at once
implied and denied to be the primary state. We are in fine told that the
savage does and does not fear a "supernatural."

Another series of contradictions is set up by the theorist's
determination at certain points so to define "religion" as to secure a
unique status for Judaism and Christianity—a breach of scientific method
on all fours with his dichotomy of religion and magic. Dealing with the
Egyptian conception of a future state, and noting how the first chapter
of the Book of the Dead promises a future life which simply repeats the
earthly, he declares that "no higher or

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

more spiritual ideal entered *or could enter* into the composition of
the Egyptian abode of bliss, *because its origin was essentially
nonreligious*." <span id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89) Such being, however,
the nature of the conception of the future life entertained by at least
nine-tenths of the human race, savage and civilised, we are here again
asked to associate the "universally human" influence with only a
fraction of ostensible religious doctrine on one of the most
specifically religious topics.

In the same fashion every modification of religious doctrine under the
influence of political and religious thought is classed as
non-religious. Thus, we are told <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90)
that "the eschatology of the Egyptian and Indian religions......was not
generated by the religious spirit, but was due to the incorporation of
early philosophical speculations into those religions."

Further (in flat defiance of Mr. Lang's doctrine as to the primary and
pious character of savage Supreme Gods), Dr. Jevons lays it down that
the idea of a Supreme God, at the head of a pantheon, "is scarcely a
religious idea at all; it is not drawn from the spiritual depths of
man's nature; it is a conception borrowed from politics"; <span
id="fr_91"></span>[3](#fn_91) and pantheism in turn "is a metaphysical
speculation, not a fact of which the religious consciousness has direct
intuition." <span id="fr_92"></span>[4](#fn_92) The upshot is that only
that idea is religious which "proceeds from an inner consciousness" of
connection with or perception of deity: there must be no process of
reasoning, no philosophy, no criticism. Dr. Frazer's view of religion as
beginning in criticism of magic is ruled out as Dr. Frazer ruled out
magic itself. And if it should be supposed that on this definition
primary animism is clearly religious, Dr. Jevons has his veto ready: "In
animism man projects his own personality on to external nature; in
religion he is increasingly \[why only increasingly?\] impressed by the
divine personality." <span id="fr_93"></span>[5](#fn_93)

Now, postponing for the moment the scientific answer—the answer of
elementary and ultimate psychology—to Dr. Jevons, we have only to turn
to the next chapter of his own treatise to find him nullifying this
stage of his definition as he has nullified every other. First we are
asked <span id="fr_94"></span>[6](#fn_94) to "note that faith is not
something peculiar or confined to religion, but is interwoven with every
act of reason," and that "the period of faith does not terminate when
the pupil has come to have immediate consciousness of the facts which he
could not see." Next, we are assured <span id="fr_95"></span>[7](#fn_95)
that "the religious mind believes that all facts of which we have
immediate consciousness can be reconciled with one another," and that
"the religious faith which

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

looks forward to the synthesis of all facts *in a manner satisfying to
the reason*......covers a much larger area than either science or moral
philosophy." Either, then, the religious person becomes utterly
irreligious when he thus reasons beyond the immediate "facts,"
so-called, of his consciousness, or Dr. Jevons’s definition of religion
is once more cancelled by himself.

If, again, we return to the chapter on "Taboo, Morality, and Religion,"
where it is argued that religion rationalised taboo, we read that "when
the taboos which receive the sanction of religion are regarded as
reasonable, as being the commands of a being possessing reason, then the
other taboos *also* may be *brought to the test of reason*."' <span
id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) On the later view, this is an essentially
irreligious process. It is true that Dr. Jevons hastens to say, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97) "Taboo has indeed been rationalised, but
not in all cases by reason," and to urge <span
id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98) that the prophets and other religious
reformers who discriminate between taboos "have usually considered
themselves in so doing to be speaking, not their own words or thoughts,
but those of their God"—that is, have spoken as do cannibal priests
among Polynesians and the impostor priests of the Slave Coast. <span
id="fr_99"></span>[4](#fn_99) This, however, does not save his thesis
from the fatal reproach of having explicitly admitted the element of
reason for a moment into the religious process. And the lapse recurs,
again with a contradiction. In the closing chapter we have from Dr.
Jevons successively these three propositions:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*A belief is an inference*, and as such is *the work of the reason*. The
reason endeavours to anticipate the movement of facts. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[5](#fn_100)

It is an established fact of psychology that *every* act, mental or
physical, requires the concurrence, not only of the *reason* and the
will, but of emotion. <span id="fr_101"></span>[6](#fn_101)

Indeed, the reason of primitive man was *ex hypothesi* undeveloped; and,
*in any case*, religious belief is *not* an inference reached by reason,
but is the *immediate consciousness* of certain facts. <span
id="fr_102"></span>[7](#fn_102)

</div>

These internecine dicta are offered without apology or apparent
misgiving as steps in a continuous process of argument. And just such
another series occurs in the chapter in which Dr. Jevons undertakes to
make out the characteristic thesis that "Mythology is not religion." In
passing, and apart from the scientific rebuttal, it may be well to note
that what Dr. Jevons calls "the extraordinary notion that mythology is
religion," <span id="fr_103"></span>[8](#fn_103) has never been
propounded by any writer in the only sense in which it would be either
false or

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

extraordinary—that is, that "mythology is the whole of religion." That
it is an element in religion and an aspect or function of "the religious
consciousness" is affirmed by Dr. Jevons himself in the very act of
denying it. As thus:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Mythology was primitive man's romance, as well as his history, his
science, his philosophy. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104)

The narratives in which primitive speculations \[*i.e.*, myths\] were
embodied were not merely intellectual exercises, nor the work of the
abstract imagination: they reflect or express *the mind of the author in
its totality*, for they are the work of a human being, not of a creature
possessing *reason and no morality, or imagination and no
feeling*......In the same way, then, as the moral tone and temper of the
author and his age makes itself felt in these primitive speculations,
*so will the religious spirit of the time*......Mythology is one of the
spheres of human activity in which religion may manifest itself: one of
the departments of *human reason* which religion may *penetrate,
suffuse, and inspire*. <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105)

Mythology *is* primitive science \[*etcetera*\], but it is *not*
primitive religion. It is not *necessarily* or *usually* even religious.
It is not the *proper* \[!\] or even the ordinary vehicle for the
religious spirit. Prayer, meditation, devotional poetry, are the
*chosen* vehicles in thought and word; ritual in outward deed and act.
Myths originate in a *totally different psychological quarter:* they are
the work of the *human reason*, acting in accordance with the laws of
primitive logic; *or* are the outcome of *the imagination*, playing with
the freedom of the poetic fancy. In neither case are they *primarily*
the product of religious *feeling:* <span class="smallcaps">it is not
the function of feeling to draw inferences</span>. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106)

</div>

It is here categorically asserted, first, that myths are *not* the work
of any one side of the human personality—neither of reason without moral
feeling nor of imagination without "feeling." Finally, it is asserted
that they *are* the work either of reason without feeling or of
imagination without feeling. After the express denial that any human
being can mythologise with one faculty only, and the necessary
implication that religious feeling may "penetrate" the other faculties
in the act of myth-making or myth-believing, we are told that myths
originate in a "totally different psychological quarter" from the
"religious spirit."

As to the other italicised propositions, it may suffice at this point to
note (1) that it is plainly wrong to say mythology *is* primitive
science, history, etcetera, in the sense in which it is not (*i.e.*, is
not the whole of) primitive religion; (2) that prayer and devotional
poetry are normally *full of myths;* (3) that ritual is in many cases
conceived (though clearly not originated) by the worshipper as an
imitation of an episode in the history of the God (*i.e.*, a myth); and
(4) that by explicitly reducing religion to

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "feeling" Dr.
Jevons, like Dr. Frazer, has eliminated *every belief as such* from
religious consciousness. *Tantum relligio!* 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[22:2](pch11.htm#fr_80) P. 410. Cp. pp. 7, 9.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[22:3](pch11.htm#fr_81) P. 33.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[22:4](pch11.htm#fr_82) P. 35.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[23:1](pch11.htm#fr_83) P. 38.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[23:2](pch11.htm#fr_84) P. 178. "Fundamentally
irreligious" is the expression in the Index.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[23:3](pch11.htm#fr_85) P. 21.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[23:4](pch11.htm#fr_86) P. 177.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[23:5](pch11.htm#fr_87) On p. 290 Dr. Jevons
notes how the Indians of Guiana *would* live in terror of wizards were
it not for the protection of other wizards. Here things are balanced! Is
magic, then, anti-magical?

<span id="fn_88"></span>[23:6](pch11.htm#fr_88) P. 233.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[24:1](pch11.htm#fr_89) P. 309.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[24:2](pch11.htm#fr_90) P. 331.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[24:3](pch11.htm#fr_91) P. 389.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[24:4](pch11.htm#fr_92) Pp. 389-390.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[24:5](pch11.htm#fr_93) P. 394.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[24:6](pch11.htm#fr_94) P. 406.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[24:7](pch11.htm#fr_95) P. 407.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[25:1](pch11.htm#fr_96) P. 92.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[25:2](pch11.htm#fr_97) P. 93.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[25:3](pch11.htm#fr_98) P. 94.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[25:4](pch11.htm#fr_99) See refs. in
*Christianity and Mythology*, 2nd ed. p. 84. Cp. Rev. R. Taylor, *Te Ika
a Maui: or, New Zealand and its Inhabitants*, 1870, p. 183, as to the
Maoris.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[25:5](pch11.htm#fr_100) P. 403.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[25:6](pch11.htm#fr_101) P. 409.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[25:7](pch11.htm#fr_102) P. 410.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[25:8](pch11.htm#fr_103) P. 266.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[26:1](pch11.htm#fr_104) P. 263.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[26:2](pch11.htm#fr_105) P. 264.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[26:3](pch11.htm#fr_106) Pp. 266-7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 8. His Contradictory Doctrine of the Conditions of the Survival
of Religion](pch12)
