[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch09.md) 
[Next](pch11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 6.

As thus. In terms of many observations, and of some of Dr. Jevons’s
admissions, we are led to realise that the idea of what we term "the
supernatural" not only does not mean for primitive man a consistent
distinction: it does not mean it for civilised man. Yet the logical
burden of Dr. Jevons’s as of Dr. Frazer's indictment against magic is
simply that it is inconsistent <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76.md) with
the admission of the "superiority"—the "super"-ness—of the "divine" to
the human. For the purpose of his plea, he necessarily ignores the
salient historical fact made clear by Dr. Frazer, that men have
abundantly practised magic towards the very Gods to whom they prayed,
and whose "supernaturalness" they not only avowed but believed in to the
extent of holding them "immortal." Assyrian, Egyptian, and Indian
religious literatures alike are full of cases of such practice. It may
be argued that that is still an imperfect conception of "the
supernatural": that the consistent conception requires the ascription of
eternity, of omnipotence, of uncreatedness, of never-having-begun. But
then men have also humbly prayed, without thought of magic, to Gods to
whom they were grateful and whom they believed to be suffering sons of
older Gods; and these attitudes of mind Dr. Jevons has fully
certificated as "religious." But, again, men have similarly prayed to
mere "saints." What degree, then, of recognition of superiority is to be
regarded as Constituting recognition of "the" supernatural? One is moved
to ask.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> What is the
theorist's own conception of "the supernatural"? and, What does he mean
by the term when he speaks of "supernatural terrors"?

When the critic is himself so far from a clear definition, it is very
obviously a mere rhetorical device to say that *for the magic-monger*
the conception of the supernatural "by definition" is inconsistent with
his practice. He had never given any definition; <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) neither had the "religious man" who is
alleged to have preceded him; and it was simply impossible that they
should. The à priori argument against him is thus irrelevant from the
start, no less than the à posteriori; and both are further negligible as
being inferribly motived by a non-scientific purpose. The right view is
to be reached on another line.

Proceeding on the clear lines of human psychology, we can be absolutely
certain of this, that a savage may alternately seek to propitiate and
seek to coerce or circumvent a human enemy whom he regards as normally
stronger than himself. As Dr. Jevons notes, savage hunters on killing a
bear will use a ritual to propitiate the bear clan. As he is well aware,
Brahmans and other priests have taught that an ascetic or a ritualist
can by his practices gain power to coerce or command the highest
Gods, <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78.md) to whom ordinary men can but
pray. Such a notion, he argues, is a negation of a supernatural in that
it assumes the Gods to be subject to an order of causation which man can
control. But, once more, is it not equally a negation of a supernatural
to assume, as the highest religions have done and do, that man can
*persuade* the God by prayer, or propitiate him by confession and
sacrifices, or keep him friendly by professing esteem and gratitude? Is
not every one of these acts an assumption that the God's moral and
mental processes are on a par with those of men, and that he is merely
stronger than they? So considered, in what sense is he supernatural? And
is not the inconsistency gross when men at once practise prayer and
ascribe to their deity fore-ordination of all things? It is not too much
to say that the procedure by which Dr. Jevons classifies magic as
anti-religious must logically end in so classing every historic
religion, and

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

leaving the title to the name vested solely in professed Agnostics and
Atheists. Some reasoners have actually so allotted the term; but that
conclusion will scarcely suit Dr. Jevons’s book, so to speak.

In view of the whole facts, the terms "belief in the supernatural" must
be recognised as signifying for practical purposes merely belief in a
personal power that is super*human*, or rather extra-human, yet
quasi-human. And such powers are the Gods alike of the earliest savage
and the contemporary Christian, the humble offerer of prayer and the
practiser of magic. The offerer of prayer, it is true, remains
substantially the original type, loyally prostrate before power;
civilisation having developed the original docility of the cowed savage
through the deadly discipline of great despotisms. On the other hand,
the magician of the past has either succumbed to that discipline or
developed into the man of science—a function which he finds the
worshipper of power often sharing with him. But just as they can so
coincide now in practice, they coincided at the start in psychology.
This view of the case finally follows from another of Dr. Jevons’s most
definite positions; for he repeatedly describes the primitive
"sacramental meal" as truly religious, in that it is a "higher" form of
sacrifice than the mere gift-sacrifice, being a means of communion with
the God, who actually joined in the meal. He does not deny it the title
of "religion" even when it involves the conception that in the
sacramental meal the God is actually eaten. <span
id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_79.md) In each of these cases the worshipper
certainly believed he had acquired a force not previously his own, even
as does the practiser of magic; while the eating of the God is the
*reductio ad absurdum* of his "superiority." Here, then, is even a more
complete stultification of the logical idea of the supernatural than is
committed by the magician, and it is actually made to validate the
"religion" of the sacrificer as against the anti-religion of the
magic-monger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[20:1](pch10.htm#fr_76.md) Dr. Jevons distinguishes
between "sympathetic magic" (exemplified in "killing the God" and other
devices to produce fertility, rain, etc.) and "art magic." The former,
he says, "does not involve in itself the idea of the supernatural, but
was simply the applied science of the savage." Art magic, he says, is
the exercise by man of powers which are supernatural—*i.e.*, of powers
which by their definition it is beyond man to exercise. Thus the very
conception of magic is one which is essentially inconsistent with
itself" (p. 35).

<span id="fn_77"></span>[21:1](pch10.htm#fr_77.md) In the Egyptian system,
magic was normally operated through a God or Goddess (usually Isis) who
"delivers the sick and suffering from the gods and goddesses who afflict
them" (Renouf, Hibbert Lectures, 2nd ed. p. 212). It was thus on the
same moral plane with not only the religion of the Homeric Greeks but
that of Catholic Christianity, in which the saints are separately
invoked and the will of Mary is practically omnipotent. So with the
virtue of the words of Thoth, and of the names of the Gods (Budge,
Introd. pp. cxlviii-ix, clxv): similar beliefs were held by the Jews and
by the Christian Father Origen.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[21:2](pch10.htm#fr_78.md) See Rhys David's
*Buddhism*, 10th ed., p. 34 and American Lectures on Buddhism, p. 103;
Frazer, as cited above; Granger, *The Worship of the Romans*, 1895, pp.
290-1; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, p. 335.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[22:1](pch10.htm#fr_79.md) Pp. 224, 295.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 7. Dr. Jevons’ Series of Self-Contradictions](pch11.md)
