[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch17.md) 
[Next](pch19.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

#### § 14.

We may now circumspectly sum up the constructive argument, and in so
doing we arrive at an inductive definition of religion.

1\. Religion consists *primarily* in a surmise or conception, reached by
way of simple animism, of the causation and control of Nature (including
human life) in terms of inferred quasi-human personalities, whether or
not defined as extra-Natural. On the belief proceed certain practices.
Beginning on the side of fear, it necessarily expands in time, with the
rise of culture, to the side of gratitude; and it expresses itself
accordingly. But its magical or strategical and its simply precatory or
propitiatory forms proceed on the same premisses, and are in origin
contemporary and correlative, being respectively the expression of the
more and the less self-confident sides of men's nature <span
id="fr_217"></span>[1](#fn_217.md) in the state of ignorance.

2\. The primary surmise or conception involves itself in a multitude of
beliefs, of which one of the most significant is that of kinship between
animal and man (making possible a religious development of totemism),
and the animal descent of the latter. From animism in general and this
belief in particular comes an endless diversity of mythic narratives,
all of which must be regarded as part of religion.

3\. On the basis of animism, and of primitive inference of causation in
all coincidence, arise a multitude of special practices, as taboo, which
are first and last religious, being invariably bound up with the
religious ideas aforesaid.

4\. In virtue of the inevitable correlation of moral with cosmological
thought in early man through animism, religion thus becomes
*secondarily* a rule for the human control of human life; and it remains
structurally recognisable on this side when the primary aspect has
partly faded away.

5\. Alike when such a rule for life is ascribed to a mythical
founder—whether God or demigod or supernormal man—or to a historical
personage credited only with moral genius, the special sanctity or
authority ascribed to his code partakes of the nature of religion. Thus
the religious element in Positivism consists as much in the reverence
given to the founder as in the elements of his teaching. \[There is a
varying measure of a common religious element in the kind of honour paid
to Zoroaster, Buddha, Moses, Jesus, the Hebrew prophets, Apollonius of
Tyana, Paul, Saint Augustine, Saint Francis, Luther, Calvin, Arminius,
Jansen, Glas,

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sandeman,
Muggleton, Auguste Comte, Mrs. Eddy, and Madame Blavatsky.\]

6\. Philosophic, scientific, and ethical thought may be defined as
specifically non-religious when, but not before, they have abandoned or
repudiated the cosmological premisses of religion, found their guiding
principle in tested induction, and, in the case of ethics, ceased to
found the rule of life on either alleged supernatural revelation or the
authority of an alleged supernormal or specially gifted teacher.

7\. Even after conceptual thought has thus repudiated religion, however,
what is termed "cosmic emotion" remains in the psychic line of religion.

 

In fine, religion is the sum (*a*) of men's ideas of their relation to
the imagined forces of the cosmos; (*b*) of their relation to each other
as determined by their views of that, or by teachers who authoritatively
recast those views; and (*c*) of the practices set up by those ideas.

Under this definition there is room for every religion ever historically
so-called, <span id="fr_218"></span>[1](#fn_218.md) from fetishism to
pantheism, and from Buddhism to Comtism, without implicit negation of
any claim made for any one religion to any moral attribute, save of
course that of objective truth or credibility.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_217"></span>[57:1](pch18.htm#fr_217.md) The point is not one
to be settled by authority, but for a competent affirmation of this view
see G. Roskoff, *Das Religionswesen der rohesten Naturvölker*, 1880, p.
144.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[58:1](pch18.htm#fr_218.md) None of the current
definitions, I think, is thus inclusive. Cp. the many cited by Chantepie
de la Saussaye, *Manual of the Science of Religion*, Eng. tr. pp. 56-58,
and those discussed in *Christianity and Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 42
*sq*., 70 *sq*., 74 *sq*. That proposed by M. Salomon Reinach: "A body
(ensemble) of scruples which put obstacles to the free exercise of our
faculties" (*Orpheus*, 6e. édit. p. 4), is obviously defective. As M.
Reinach goes on to avow, he has in view only a particular kind of
scruples—to wit, taboos. But this delimitation of religion, like that of
Dr. Frazer, excludes the main body of credences and myths. One of the
most symmetrical is that of Professor A. Réville:—"La religion est la
determination de la vie humaine par le sentiment d’un lien unissant
l’esprit humain à l’esprit mystérieux dont il reconnaît la domination
sur le monde et sur lui-même, et auquel il aime à se sentir uni"
(*Prolégomènes*, p. 34). But this is finally marked by theological
particularism, and is thus not truly inductive. Constant's was more
objective:—"Nous avons défini le sentiment religieux, le besoin que
l’homme éprouve de se mettre en communication avec la nature qui
l’entoure, et les forces inconnues qui lui semblent animer cette nature"
(*La Religion*, 1824, i, pt. ii, p. 1). But Constant extends his
definition in practice to simple cosmic emotion. Citing from Byron's
Island the passage beginning

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"How often we forget all time, when lone,"

</div>

he writes: "On nous assure que certains hommes accusent Lord Byron
d’athéisme et d’impiété. Il y a plus de religion dans ces douze vers que
dans les écrits passés, présents et futurs de tous ces dénonciateurs mis
ensemble" (pt. i, pp. 106-7).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 1. Early Forces of Reform](pch19.md)
