[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch11) 
[Next](pch13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 8.

One sample more may suffice to complete the justification of our
criticism that Dr. Jevons’s interesting and suggestive treatise is
flawed throughout by fatal contradiction. In discussing totemism, he
certifies, first, the primitive belief of men in their descent from a
totem animal as established or verified for them "in their inner
experience—*i.e.*, in the filial reverence and affection which they felt
towards him, <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107) thus salving as truly
religious the grossest possible "projection of man's own personality" on
Nature, while the spontaneous animism which early man shared with
animals is denied the status of "direct consciousness." Then, taking the
totemist's experience, thus highly classed, he writes:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Doubtless it was not all or most men who had this
experience, or rather it was but few who attended to the feeling; but
the *best* must have paid heed to it and have found satisfaction in
dwelling on it, *else the conception of the deity would never have
followed on the line on which as a matter of fact it was
developed*. <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108)</span>

</div>

Turning to the chapter on "The Evolution of Belief," we have this almost
flatly contrary deliverance:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">The perpetuation of any variety \[of belief\]
depends solely on the conditions under which it occurs: whatever
varieties of belief are not favoured by the conditions, by their
environment, will perish—the rest will survive (the surviving belief
will not necessarily be that of the keenest-sighted man, but *that which
accords with what the average sight can see of the facts*). <span
id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_109)</span>

</div>

In another chapter, yet again, we have still a third view of the process
of survival, and one which excludes both of the preceding. In order to
credit to the "truly" religious principle the rationalisation of taboo,
Dr. Jevons, as we said, claimed that the rationalisers considered
themselves to be propounding "not their own words or thoughts, but those
of their God"; and he thereupon notes that "this belief has been shared
by the community they addressed, otherwise the common man would not have
gained the courage to break an ancient taboo. Certainly no mere appeal
to reason would counterbalance that inveterate terror." <span
id="fr_110"></span>[4](#fn_110) On this view any dictum of any
accredited priest would be decisive, irrespective of the average sight";
and this despite of Dr. Jevons’s refusal to recognise priestcraft as a
factor in the creation of taboo in particular or religion in general.

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

A theory of religion which lands its framer in such a congeries of
contradictions as these, I submit, is fully convicted of vital fallacy.
And certainly the fallacy is not the result either of imperfect
knowledge of the ground or of speculative incompetence: it stands
visibly for the misguiding force of a false preconception or prejudice.
On much of Dr. Jevons’s book every student, I think, will put a very
high estimate: it is studious, well-informed, original, independent in
method and in doctrine, and, though deeply prejudiced, nearly always
temperate even when most fallacious. In places it reaches a really high
level of scholarly and critical efficiency, notably in the chapter on
"The Mysteries," where the tracing of the adoption and adaptation of the
primary Eleusinian cult to the purposes of Athens and the cults of
Dêmêtêr and Persephonê is as satisfying as it is ingenious. Dr. Jevons
is there thus successful, to my thinking, because he is on ground which
he has surveyed dispassionately and scientifically, unaffected by his
occultist predilections. It is when he has his eye on current religion
and its line of descent that, omitting much of the due scholarly
research and staking all on the vindication of his sympathies, he yields
us a series of logical miscarriages fully as striking as his measure of
success in his disinterested inquiry.

Howsoever this may be, his series of contradictions leaps to the eyes;
and unless consistency is to be a burden only for the naturalists,
unless the supernaturalist is to be let dogmatise in hierology as in
religion on the basis of his mere "inner consciousness," his main
argument must simply be removed from the scientific field.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[27:1](pch12.htm#fr_107) P. 108. Compare this
with the decision that a political mode of thought has no part in
religion.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[27:2](pch12.htm#fr_108) Pp. 108-109.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[27:3](pch12.htm#fr_109) P. 398.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[27:4](pch12.htm#fr_110) Pp. 94-95.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 9. The Continuity of Religious Phenomena](pch13)
