[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch25) 
[Next](pch27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 8. Revival and Disintegration.

Thus for a second time was a Yahwist remnant selected, the bulk of the
educated class passing over to the neighbouring polities, and their
place being taken by new popular material of a more zealous order.
Judaism was in fact the product not of a racial bias but of a
socio-political selection, such as might have taken place under similar
conditions in any race whatever; and ever since the Dispersion the same
selective process has continued, the unzealous Jews always tending to be
absorbed in the populations among whom they live. Something similar has
actually occurred among the Parsees. Even, however, if the Jewish
evolution were as unique as it is conventionally represented to have
been, the special case would no more be an exception to universal
sociological law than is the phenomenon of marsupials to biological law.
There has simply been survival in the Judaic case, chiefly in virtue of
the fact of Sacred Books, where similar creed-tendencies were usually
annihilated under the ancient regimen of tyrannous violence. One result
of the desperate frequency of bloodshed and massacre in the Jewish
sphere was a passion for fecundity, as against the need for restraint of
numbers that was felt in the City States of Greece in their progressive
period; and the Jews thus abounded, and carried their religion with
them, where other creeds died out.

Irresistible, however, is the law of strife among unenlightened men, and
no less so the law of change among all. In the stress of the Maccabean
struggle we find the doctrine of the Messiah already so far developed
that a secondary God is the due result. The Christ of the Book of Enoch
is substantially a deity: "before the sun and the signs were created,
before the stars of heaven were made, his name was called before the
Lord of the Spirits"; <span id="fr_344"></span>[1](#fn_344) he is at
once Chosen One, Son of God and Son of Man; he is judge at the Day of
Judgment; <span id="fr_345"></span>[2](#fn_345) and as "Son of the
Woman" <span id="fr_346"></span>[3](#fn_346) he clearly

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

relates to the Babylonian myth in the Book of Revelation. And seeing
that "in him dwells the Spirit of Wisdom" he is in effect at once the
*Sophia* and the *Logos* of the Apocrypha and of the Platonising Philo
Judæus.

But the evolution did not end there. Under the new Asmonean dynasty
there broke out in due course all the violences native to the hereditary
monarchy of the ancient world; and once again the play of outside
influences, which the feuds of competitors for the throne brought to
bear, affected the hereditary creed within its central sphere. The Greek
translation of the sacred books became the normal version; and to that
version were added books not admitted into the Hebrew canon, some of
them elaborating new theological conceptions. As the Jewish State came
more and more into the whirl of the battling empires of Seleucids and
Ptolemies, soon to be crushed by Rome, the dynasty of king-priests
passed away before the energy of new competitors; and once more kings,
not even Jewish by descent, subsisted beside high-priests of their own
choosing. At length, under the Idumean Herod the Great, a man born to
rule amid plots and feuds, to drown rebellions in blood and to outwit
enemies by outgoing them in audacity, Eastern craft exploited at once
Greek culture and Roman power with such address that Hellenism gained
ground against the utmost stress of organised conservatism; while among
the common people, conscious of an evil fate, movements of quietism and
asceticism and Mahdism undermined the ancient prestige of the
temple-cult. Once again the tribal faith was being disintegrated.

One of the movements emerging though not originating at this time is the
cult associated with the quasi-historic name of Jesus. As organised
Yahwism had been retrospectively fathered on the fictitious legislation
of Moses, so the Jesuine cult is in turn fathered on Jesus in a set of
narratives stamped with myth, and incapable of historical corroboration
even when stripped of their supernaturalism. To the eye of comparative
science the central feature in the cult as it appears in the oldest
documents is the eucharist, an institution common to many surrounding
religions, and known to have been in ancient and secret usage among
sections of the Jews. <span id="fr_347"></span>[1](#fn_347) Descending
perhaps from totemistic times, it invariably involved some rite or
symbolism of theophagy, or eating of a divine victim; and a sacrificed
God-man was the natural mythic complement of the ritual.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

In the case of the Jesuine cult, an actual historic person may or may
not have been connected with the doctrine; and for such a connection
there is a quasi-historic basis in an elusive figure of a Jesus who
appears to have been put to death by stoning and hanging about a century
before the death of Herod. <span id="fr_348"></span>[1](#fn_348) On the
other hand the name in its Hebrew and Aramaic forms had probably an
ancient divine status, being borne by the mythic Deliverer Joshua, and
again by the quasi-Messianic high-priest of the Restoration. It was thus
in every aspect fitted to be the name of a new Demigod who should
combine in himself the qualities of the Akkadian Deliverer-Messiah and
the Sacrificed God of the most popular cults of the Græco-Roman,
Egyptian, and west-Asiatic world. In this aspect only is it to be
historically understood. But before considering it in its type, we have
to consider it in its genetic relation to Judaism, and so complete our
estimate of the evolution of that cult to the moment of its definite
arrest.

That the cult of Jesus the Christ was being pushed in rivalry with that
of pure Judaism among the Jews of the Dispersion before the destruction
of the Temple appears from the nature of the oldest documents as well as
from the tradition. Such competition was the more easy because the life
of the synagogue was largely independent of that of the central temple,
and craved both rites and teaching which should make up for the
sacrificial usages which were the chief institutions at Jerusalem. But
that Jesuism could have successfully dispensed with the main cult among
either Jews or Gentiles while the Temple remained standing is
inconceivable. When it did begin to make substantial progress late in
the second century of its own era, its main prestige undoubtedly came
from the Jewish sacred books; and had the Temple been allowed to remain
in active existence, that prestige would have accrued to it as of old.
Conceivably, however, there might have happened a development of Jesuism
*under* Judaism, the new cult exploiting the old and being tolerated or
adopted by it. In that case there would have occurred yet once more a
disintegration of a quasi-monotheism in terms of a virtual polytheism.
And towards such disintegration marked progress had been made under the
ægis of Judaism.

Note has already been taken of the entrance of new and practically
polytheistic ideas into the cult at the very moment of its ostensible
purgation of polytheistic tendencies; and in the course of four
centuries these ideas had been much developed. To the "Good

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spirit" of
Nehemiah and the *Logos* or "Word" of intermediate writers had been
added the personified *Sophia* or "Wisdom" of the books of Proverbs and
Ecclesiasticus and Enoch; and while the Samaritans seem to have
conceived, on old Semitic lines, of a female Holy Spirit, symbolised
like several Gods and Goddesses by a dove, <span
id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_349) the Jews proper who came into contact
with Greek thought developed with the help of the Platonists the
originally eastern notion of the Logos into a new Jewish deity. <span
id="fr_350"></span>[2](#fn_350) In their anxiety to avoid
Goddess-worship, they even represented the Deity as generating the Son
out of himself (ἐκ γαστρὸς); <span id="fr_351"></span>[3](#fn_351) and
those who later made Jesus speak of "My Mother the Holy Spirit" <span
id="fr_352"></span>[4](#fn_352) were unable to prevail against the old
prejudice. It was thus on Judaically laid lines that Jesuism ultimately
completed its theology. But had not the Temple been overthrown, either
the Judaic evolution would have kept the Jewish Logos in organic
relation to the Yahwist worship and sacred books, or the movement would
have been overshadowed.

All would have depended on its economic sustenance. Had it promised a
useful reinforcement to the Jewish high-priest's powers of attracting
proselytes and revenue, <span id="fr_353"></span>[5](#fn_353) it would
doubtless have been exploited in the name of Judaism, very much as it
was by the early Christists; and in view of the historic facts it is
reasonable to say that had their system survived, the temple-priests
would so have exploited it. Inasmuch, finally, as the element of
Messianism, reduced to a form of purely theological Soterism, was
actually exploited by the Christists without specially calling forth the
wrath of Rome, the temple priesthood might have done as much. It was in
fact the catastrophe of the destruction of Jerusalem, provoked by the
desperate courage of the zealots of the old faith, that alone made
possible the separate rise of Christism and its ultimate erection into
the State religion of the declining Roman empire.

To say this, however, is to say that Jewish monotheism so-called—in
reality a tribal system using a monotheistic terminology—was

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

from first to last an unstable doctrine, always running risk of
dissolution into polytheism, avowed or sophisticated; that it was so

dissolving at the time of the destruction of its temple; and that its
offshoot, Christism, is a resultant of the process. If then monotheism
is as such intrinsically superior to other forms of religion,
Christianity is one of the inferior faiths, representing as it does the
dissolvent process in question. To the eye of science, of course, it is
neither inferior nor superior save in respect of its ethical and
intellectual reactions; and towards an estimate of these we proceed by a
comparative study of the religious principles on which Christism is
built up.

Meantime, while the Hebrew literature obviously plays a large part in
the intellectual colouring of the new Christist world, it would be
difficult to show that Judaism made for higher life in the post-Roman
world. So far as it made proselytes, it was by appealing to normal
superstition, to belief in the mysterious potency of a particular
God-name, and of the rites of his cult. <span
id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_354) To scientific and philosophical thought
it passed on no moralising and unifying conception of life, for it had
none such to give. Moslem monotheism, in furnishing a temporary habitat
for scientific thought, <span id="fr_355"></span>[2](#fn_355) did more
for civilisation both directly and indirectly; but Moslem thought had to
be fertilised by the re-discovered philosophy of Greece before it could
attain to anything. And insofar as a philosophical and scientific
monotheism arose in the medieval period, it inherits far more from Greek
thought—which indeed had early undergone Semitic influences—than from
Hebrew dogma.

As for the direct influence of Judaism on life, the most favourable view
is to be reached by noting that the most applauded moral teaching of the
Gospels is either Judaic or a Judaic adaptation of other codes. The
first Gospel-makers did but put in the mouth of the demigod sayings and
ideals long current in Jewry. But this again amounts to saying that men
with ideals in Jewry were glad to turn to a new movement in which their
ideals might have a place, finding the established cult sunk in
ceremonialism. And when we contemplate the mass of its ceremonial law,
the endless complex of taboo and sacrifice and traditionary custom and
superstition, we can but say that if men were good under such a regimen
it was in spite of and not in virtue of it. Moral reason is there
outraged at every turn; and the anti-sacrificial doctrines of the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

prophets were stedfastly disregarded to the end. If it be suggested that
in such a system religion has got rid of the irrational element in
taboo, and left only what is "essential to religion and morals," we can
but recall the classic case of the Briton's verdict on the folly of the
French nation in making the uniforms of its army "white, which is
absurd, and blue, which is only fit for the artillery and the
blue-horse."

We come within sight of the truth when we listen to Renan's dictum that
of the Jewish race we may say the very best and the very worst without
fear of error, since it presents both extremes. Therein the Jewish race
is simply on all fours with all others, as Renan might easily have
realised if he could once have got rid of the racial presupposition in
his moral estimates. Judaism, in short, wrought no abnormal development
in thought or life; and its very failure was on the lines of the
failures of the systems and civilisations around it. The champion of the
current creed, though an expert in Greek lore, resorts to the
conventional judgment <span id="fr_356"></span>[1](pch27.htm#fn_356)
that "the Greek with his joyous nature had no abiding sense of sin." It
is the dictum also of Renan: "A profound sentiment of human destiny was
always lacking to the Greeks": they had "no *arrière pensée* of social
disquietude or melancholy": their childlike serenity was "always
satisfied with itself": "gaiety has always characterised the true
Hellene." <span id="fr_357"></span>[2](pch27.htm#fn_357) A closer
student of Greek religion than Renan, and one perhaps more sympathetic
than Dr. Jevons, declares of this doctrine: "It is the absolute contrary
of the facts I seek to set forth." <span
id="fr_358"></span>[3](pch27.htm#fn_358) And two of the Germans who have
studied Greece most closely and most independently have agreed in the
verdict that "The Greeks were less happy than most men think." <span
id="fr_359"></span>[4](pch27.htm#fn_359) Their verdict is likely to
cancel the conventional formula for those who will weigh both in
critical balances. It was the Greeks, when all is said, who passed on to
Christianity its type of torturing fiend: <span
id="fr_360"></span>[5](pch27.htm#fn_360) it was the Greek adoption of
Christianity, "the religion of sorrow," that preserved to the world that
growth from a pagan germ on Judaic soil; and it was "the Greek,"
finally, who constructed the Christian creed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_344"></span>[89:1](pch26.htm#fr_344) Schodde's trans.
xlviii, 3, 6. As to the date of the book, see pp. 26, 41-43, 237, 239.

<span id="fn_345"></span>[89:2](pch26.htm#fr_345) Cp. Schodde's Introd.,
pp. 52, 54, 134.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[89:3](pch26.htm#fr_346) Enoch lxii, 4, 5.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[90:1](pch26.htm#fr_347) See below, Part II,
ch. i.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[91:1](pch26.htm#fr_348) Cp. *Christianity and
Mythology*, pp. 298, 345, 363 4, and *A Short History of Christianity*,
pp. 8, 14, 402-3. Also below, Part II, ch. i, § 10.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[92:1](pch26.htm#fr_349) As to the Samaritan
cultus of a sacred dove, see Reland, *Dissert. de Monte Garizim*, § 13
(*Diss. Misc.* 1706, i, 147). Schürer (*Hist. of the Jewish People in
the Time of Jesus Christ*, 2nd Div. Eng. tr. i, 8, note) says: "The
assertion that the Samaritans *worshipped* the image of a dove is a
slander first appearing in the Talmud"; but that it was for them a
divine symbol is another proposition. The Samaritan symbol may or may
not have been borrowed from Egypt, where Amun, as the spirit of life,
was represented as a bird hovering above the body of Osiris when he is
about to resume life. Being thus "the usual symbol of the soul and of
*new* life" (Tiele, *Egypt. Rel.* p. 150), it would readily apply to the
idea of the God's baptism (Matt. iii, 16). As to the ancient symbolism
of Dove, Wind, Life, and Holy Ghost, see Gubernatis, *Letture sopra la
mitologia vedica*, 1874, p. 145, *sq*.; and as to the belief that the
Gods entered into birds cp. Ellis, *Polynesian Researches*, 2nd ed. i,
323, 366.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[92:2](pch26.htm#fr_350) See below, Part II,
ch. ii.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[92:3](pch26.htm#fr_351) Septuagint version of
Ps. cx, 3 (cix in Sept.).

<span id="fn_352"></span>[92:4](pch26.htm#fr_352) Origen, Comm. on John
iii, § 63. Other heretics made the Holy Spirit the *Sister* of Jesus.
Epiphanius, *Haeres*. liii.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[92:5](pch26.htm#fr_353) Cp. *Christianity and
Mythology*, 2nd ed. p. 347.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[93:1](pch26.htm#fr_354) Cp. A *Short History
of Freethought*, i, 120.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[93:2](pch26.htm#fr_355) Réville
(*Prolégomènes*, p 313) admits the nullity of Judaism on the scientific
side. He seems to imply that it made an end of the notion of planetary
deities; but it really held by planetary angels all along, and passed on
the idea to Kepler.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 9. Conclusion](pch27)
