[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch23) 
[Next](pch25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 6. The Hebrew Evolution.

At this point the Mesopotamian succession is seen to mingle with that of
Judæa, which in turn falls to be conceived and appraised, as a total
evolution, in terms of the conditions. As has been briefly noted above,
Judaic monotheism was equally with Mesopotamian polytheism a result of
political circumstances. The Jewish national history as contained in the
sacred books is demonstrably a vast fiction to one half of its extent,
as tested by the admissions of the other; and the fiction was a gradual
construction of its priests and prophets in the interest of the cult
which finally triumphed.

From the more ancient memories or documents which are preserved among
the priestly fictions—records such as are included in the closing
chapters of the book of Judges—we realise that after the alleged
deliverance from Egypt and the fabulous Mosaic legislation in the
wilderness the religion of Israel in Canaan was one of local cults, with
no priesthood apart from the local functioning of single "Levites,"
presumably members of a previous race of inhabitants who knew "the
manner of the God of the land." <span id="fr_309"></span>[1](#fn_309)
These functionaries can best be realised as belonging to the lower types
of Indian fakirs and Moslem dervishes. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[2](#fn_310) And even in this primitive stage, when
the only general political organisation was an occasional confederation
of tribes for a given purpose, <span id="fr_311"></span>[3](#fn_311)
some had already developed the abnormal vices associated with corrupt
civilisations. <span id="fr_312"></span>[4](#fn_312) It is not unlikely
that the beginnings of a centralised system occurred at a shrine
answering to the description of that of Shiloh in the book of

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Samuel; but the
legend of that "prophet" is more likely to be an Evemerised version of
the fact that the God of the shrine was Samu-El, a form of the Sem or
Samos of the Samaritans and other Semites, who is further Evemerised as
Samson in the book of Judges. <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_313) At
this stage we find the priests of the shrine notoriously licentious, and
their methods primitively barbaric; <span
id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_314) and the only semblance of a national or
even tribal religion is the institution of the movable ark, a kind of
palladium, containing amulets or a sacred stone, which might be kept by
any chief or group strong enough to retain it <span
id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_315) and able to keep a Levite for its
service.

Even on the face of the official and myth-loaded history, it was by a
band of ferocious filibusters at this level of religion that an
Israelite kingdom or principality was first set up, and a shrine of Yah
or Yahweh instituted in the captured Jebusite stronghold of Zion, where
a going worship must already have existed. From such a point forward the
kingdom, waxing and shrinking by fortune of war, would tend to develop
commercially and otherwise on the general lines of Semitic culture,
assimilating the higher Syrian civilisation wherever it met with it. The
art of writing by means of the alphabet, received either from the
kindred Phœnicians or direct from Babylon, <span
id="fr_316"></span>[4](#fn_316) would be early acquired in the course of
the traffic between the coast cities and the inland States; and with
such culture would come the religious ideas of the neighbouring peoples.

It is impossible to construct any save a speculative narrative of the
religious evolution out of the mass of late pseudo-history, in which
names known to have been those of Gods are assigned to patriarchs, <span
id="fr_317"></span>[5](#fn_317) heroes, kings, and miracle-working
prophets, all in turn made subservient to Yahweh of Israel. But from the
long series of invectives against other cults in the pseudo-historical
and prophetic books, the contradictory fiats as to local worships in the
Pentateuch, <span id="fr_318"></span>[6](#fn_318) and the bare fact of
the existence of Yahweh's temple at Jerusalem, we can gather clearly
enough that that particular worship at that place was aggrandised by a
few kings of Israel or of Judah, and relatively slighted by many others;
that its priests did their utmost,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

but in vain, by vaticination, literary fraud, and malediction, to
terrorise kings and people into suppressing the rival shrines and cults;
that all the while their own had the degraded features of the
rest; <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_319) and that their "monotheism"
was merely of the kind ascribed by Flaubert to the sun-priests at
Carthage, who derided their own brethren of the cult of the moon—though
rage rather than derision is the normal note of the priests of Yahweh.
The main motives of their separatism are visibly their perquisites and
their monopoly.

There is a certain presumption that the story of the reforms of King
Josiah—a movement which compares with that of Akhunaton in Egypt—is
founded on fact, seeing that the record confesses Josiah to have died
miserably, where the general burden of the history required him to
prosper signally, as a reward for his Yahwism. It may well have been
that the hostility he evoked among his subjects wrought his ruin. In any
case it may be taken as certain that even had ho prospered, his effort
to abolish the multitude of cults would have failed as Akhunaton's did;
and there is finally no disguise of the fact of its failure. Neither in
Israel nor in Judah had even the merely monopolist monotheism of the
Yahwist priests made popular headway; and if at this stage there did
exist monotheists of a higher type, prophets whose aim was just
government, wise policy, and decent living, they stood not a better but
a worse chance of converting kings or commoners, rich or poor. The
popular religion was determined by the popular culture-stage and
life-conditions.

In Babylon, however, while many doubtless went over bodily to the native
cults, the stauncher Yahwists would tend to be made more zealous by
their very contact with the image-using systems; and the state of
critical consciousness thus set up <span id="fr_320"></span>[2](#fn_320)
would tend to give a certain new definiteness to the former
less-reasoned hostility to the rival worships. The conception of Yahweh
as incapable of being imaged would promote a kind of speculation such as
had already occurred among the "idolatrous" priesthoods themselves; and
that intercourse took place between the Yahwists and some Babylonian
teachers is proved by their now giving a new significance to the
Assyro-Babylonian institution of the Sabbath, <span
id="fr_321"></span>[3](#fn_321) and developing their whole ceremonial
and temple law on Mesopotamian lines. <span
id="fr_322"></span>[4](#fn_322) Indeed, the simple fact that from this
time forward the spoken language of Judæa became Aramaic or "Chaldee" is
evidence that their Babylonian sojourn affected their whole culture.

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

With the anti-idolatrous Persian conquerors of Babylon, again, a Jewish
sympathy would naturally subsist; and the favourable conditions provided
for the captives by Cyrus may explain the apparent feebleness of the
first Return movement. However that may be, it is probable that to the
intervention of Cyrus is due the very existence of the later historic
Judaism, and of the bulk of the Hebrew Bible. Had he not conquered
Babylon, Hebrew "monotheism" would in all likelihood have disappeared
like the other monotheisms of Palestine, absorbed by the mass of Semitic
polytheism in the Semitic empire; for even when the Return began, the
monotheistic ideal had no great force. It is true that the commercial
success which began to accrue to many of the Jews in Babylon would
dispose them afresh to magnify the name of Yahweh as the God of their
salvation; <span id="fr_323"></span>[1](#fn_323) but a merely Babylonian
Judaism, despite its Talmud, could have had no historic fruit. It is
clear that, despite the preliminary refusal to join hands with the
Samaritans and other populations around, <span
id="fr_324"></span>[2](#fn_324) the immigrants gradually mixed more and
more with the surrounding Semitic tribes, whose cults were singly of the
same order as the Yahwist; and the old polytheism would thus have
re-arisen but for the coming, a century later, of new zealots, whose
sense of racial and religious separateness may have been sharpened at
Babylon by competition, as well as by concourse, with the Mazdean cult.
The alternation of the Persian phrase "God of heaven" with "God of
Jerusalem" <span id="fr_325"></span>[3](#fn_325) in the books of Ezra
and Nehemiah, with the final predominance of the former title in the
latter book, suggests a new process of challenge and definition, which,
however, would concern the majority of Yahwists much less than it did
their theologians. What all could appreciate was the consideration that
if the cult were not kept separate it would lose its revenue-drawing
power.

When once the laxer elements had been eliminated, or at least
sacerdotally discountenanced, the social conditions were vitally
different from the pre-exilic. Gathered together on the traditional site
for the very purpose of instituting the cult of Yahweh and no other, the
recruited and purged remnant gave their priests such an opportunity for
building up a hierocracy as had never before been in that region; and
the need and the opportunity together wrought the evolution. To speak of
the doctrine thus instituted as the product of a unique order of
religious consciousness is to substitute occult

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

forces for natural laws. Insofar as it had any philosophic content, any
breadth of cosmic conception, it borrowed from the inductive monotheism
or pantheism (the conceptions constantly and inevitably shade into each
other) of the deeper thinkers of Babylon <span
id="fr_326"></span>[1](#fn_326) or its Persian conquerors; and such a
content was precisely that element in the creed which counted for least
in its institution. What drew or held the votaries together was the
concept of a God dwelling in the temple of Jerusalem, and there only;
and conferring special favours in the matters of rainfall and healing on
those who brought gifts to his shrine. The worshippers were no more
transcendentalist than their priests. They were but hypnotised by the
unexampled series of literary fabrications on which the creed was
refounded—a body of written sacrosanct lore such as had never before
been brought within the reach of any save priestly students.

We are in danger, perhaps, of unduly stigmatising the Hebrew forgers
when we consider their work by itself, keeping in mind the enormous
burden of delusion and deceit that it has so long laid upon mankind. In
their mode of procedure there was really nothing abnormal; they did but
exploit the art of writing—first acquired by the race for commercial
purposes—on the lines of immemorial priestly invention; and we must not
pass upon them a censure that is not laid on the mythologists and
scribes of Egypt or the theologers and poets of India and Greece. Our
business is to understand, not to blame, save insofar as a sophistic
praise still compels demur. And the historical processus may be
sufficiently realised in noting, without binding ourselves to, the
conclusions broadly reached by scholars a generation ago, to the effect
that the first collected edition of the pretended Mosaic law, comprised
in the Pentateuch and the book of Joshua, contained some eighty
chapters; and the second, over a century later, a hundred and twenty;
ninety more being added afterwards. <span
id="fr_327"></span>[2](#fn_327)

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

Such a literary usage, indeed, gave a unique opportunity to literary and
religious genius, and it was variously availed of. Lyrics of religious
emotion, commonly ascribed to the semi-mythic David, to whose legend
apparently accrued the lyric attributes of the God of that name; <span
id="fr_328"></span>[1](#fn_328) sententious and proverbial wisdom,
similarly fathered on Solomon; dramatic discussion of the ethical
dilemma of all theism, in the singularly isolated and foreign-seeming
book of Job; and express argumentation against the fanatical racial
separatism of the post-exilic theocracy, in the hardly less isolated
romances of Ruth and Jonah—all this goes with the mass of
pseudo-history, cosmology, and prophecy, to make up the library which we
call the Hebrew Bible. It may be taken as certain that a body of
students familiar with the whole range of such a literature had from it
an amount of intellectual stimulation not theretofore paralleled in the
Semitic world; and from the rabbinical life of centuries we might
reasonably expect some fine fruit of ethical and philosophic thought.
But again, on close inquiry, we become sadly aware of the fatality of
the evolutionary process, in little Jewry as in the great States that
decayed around.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_309"></span>[80:1](pch24.htm#fr_309) 2 Kings xvii, 26.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[80:2](pch24.htm#fr_310) Cp. Marti, *Gesch. der
isr. Relig.*, § 23, p. 96.

<span id="fn_311"></span>[80:3](pch24.htm#fr_311) Jud. xx.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[80:4](pch24.htm#fr_312) Jud. xix, 22.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[81:1](pch24.htm#fr_313) This circumstance
reminds us of the risk of assuming, with some critics, that Herkles had
been first deified among the Greeks between the time of the composition
of the Iliad and that of the Odyssey, because in the first poem he is a
mere human hero, in the second a demigod (H. N. Coleridge, *Introd. to
the Classic Poets*, Pt. I, 2nd ed. 1834, p. 278.) He may have been
Evemerised in Ionia at the time of the framing of the Iliad, though
previously of divine status; whereas the Odyssey may have been composed
in another environment, where his divine status was maintained (cp.
Samuel Butler, *On the Trapanese Origin of the Odyssey*, 1893, and *The
Authoress of the Odyssey*, 1897, chs. vii-x). Neither solution is
certain.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[81:2](pch24.htm#fr_314) 1 Sam. ii, 13-16, 22.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[81:3](pch24.htm#fr_315) 1 Sam. vii, 1-2.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[81:4](pch24.htm#fr_316) L. Geiger,
*Development of the Human Race*, Eng. tr. 1880, p. 67.

<span id="fn_317"></span>[81:5](pch24.htm#fr_317) Cp. Winckler, *Gesch.
Israels*, Th. II, 1900; E. Meyer, *Gesch. des Alterthums*, i, § 309.

<span id="fn_318"></span>[81:6](pch24.htm#fr_318) Cp. Deut. xii and xv,
20, with Ex. xx, 24-26.

<span id="fn_319"></span>[82:1](pch24.htm#fr_319) 2 Kings xxiii, 7.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[82:2](pch24.htm#fr_320) Cp. the special
denunciations of idols in Ezekiel xx.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[82:3](pch24.htm#fr_321) Cp. Sack, *Die
Altjüdische Religion im Uebergange vom Bibelthume zum Talmudismus*,
1889, p. 22; Sayce, Hibbert Lectures, pp. 76-77.

<span id="fn_322"></span>[82:4](pch24.htm#fr_322) Jastrow, pp. 610-611,
696-8; Sayce, pp. 77-78.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[83:1](pch24.htm#fr_323) Cp. E. Meyer, *Gesch.
des Alterthums* (1901), iii, 216.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[83:2](pch24.htm#fr_324) Cp. Robertson Smith,
*Old Test. in Jewish Church*, 2nd ed. p. 278.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[83:3](pch24.htm#fr_325) Ezra, i, 2, 3; iii, 1;
iv, 1; vii, 6, 12, 15-19, 21.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[84:1](pch24.htm#fr_326) As to these cp.
Hommel, *Semitischen Völker and Sprachen*, i, 315-316; Jastrow, *Relig.
of Bab. and Assyria*, pp. 147, 437-442; Sayce, Hib. Lect. pp. 108, 142,
191-2, 215, 305, 346 Baentsch, *Altorientalischer and israelitischer
Monotheismus*, 1906, pp. 5-35, 101-4. Marti (*Gesch. der isr. Rel.*
1907, pp. 25-26) throws doubt on the reality of the monotheising or
pantheising tendency seen by Baentsch in the higher Babylonian lore.
Akhunaton, he argues, is the only clear case of the kind in remote
antiquity. Akhunaton was really more of a sectarian than of a pantheist.
For the monotheism of the later prophets, finally, Prof. Marti falls
back devoutly on supernaturalism. Not the reflection of the prophets,
not logic, not philosophy, but "Jahwe selber, der sich seinen Propheten
kundgab" (§ 34. p. 168). *Solvuntur tabulæ*.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[84:2](pch24.htm#fr_327) Kuenen, Lecture on
*The Five Books of Moses*, Eng. tr. 1870, pp. 13-14. Later criticism
tends to date everything later. Cp. Kuenen's *Hexateuch*, Eng. tr. pp.
299, 307, 315; Wellhausen, *Prolegomena to the History of Israel*, Eng.
tr. p. 9. Prof. Marti, a conservative supernaturalist, dates the primary
Yahwist scroll before 800 B.C.: that of the Elohist about 750; their
combination between 650 and 600; the Kernel of Deuteronomy about 621;
the Law of Holiness (Lev. xvii-xxvi) between 540 and 520; the Priestly
Codex between 500 and 450; its combination with the Law of Holiness
before 450; and the final combinations b5' Ezra's successors about 400
(*Gesch. der isr. Rel.*, § 14). We are not here concerned, however, to
work out the details of the documentary problem.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[85:1](pch24.htm#fr_328) Cp. Winckler,
*Geschichte Israels*, ii, 170, *sq*.; and refs. in A *Short History of
Freethought*, i 101.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 7. Post-Exilic Phases](pch25)
