[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch24) 
[Next](pch26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 7. Post-Exilic Phases.

If we look first to the vogue of Biblical Judaism in Palestine, we have
to note that from the consummation of the Return the cult was jealously
closed not only to the people of Samaria, who presumed to worship a
Yahweh on their own sacred hill, but to the country people around who
had been left behind by the Assyrian conqueror. <span
id="fr_329"></span>[2](#fn_329) The sociological conditions were thus
such that, when the first force of the new conditions was spent,
intellectual anchylosis was bound to set in. The learned class,
devotedly absorbed in a literature regarded as divinely inspired, must
rapidly become in general incapable of new thought; and their religious
philosophy could of itself make no further progress. This is what is
seen to take place. But for their traditional rejection of images—a
principle in which they had been encouraged by the Mazdeans whom they
had met at Babylon—they would even have reverted by that path to normal
polytheism. As it was, remaining peculiar in this respect, they did but
think of their God as an imageless yet anthropomorphite being who made
his home in their temple and either ignored or detested the neighbour
nations which had idols.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Save for higher
speculations which could not appeal to the majority even of the student
class, they made no progress towards a consistent and comprehensive
monotheism.

What extension of speculative thought occurred was rather in the
direction of dualism. The doctrine of the Adversary, developed either
from the Persian Ahriman or the Babylonian figure of the Goat-God, <span
id="fr_330"></span>[1](#fn_330) or else from both, begins to figure in
the later writings; and, once dramatically installed in the brilliant
book of Job, was sure to figure more and more in the general
consciousness. All the while, the normal eastern ideas of multitudinous
angels and evil spirits had never been absent, though they were
denounced when associated with other cults; and in point of general
superstition there can have been little to choose between Jew and
Gentile. <span id="fr_331"></span>[2](#fn_331) On the side of the belief
in angels, again, the very desire to spiritualise and elevate the deity
of the older traditions led to the imagining of new divine beings. Among
the Samaritans, who, setting out with a Pentateuch, developed quite as
much zeal as had the Judeans for the God of Israel, the expression
"angel of God" or "angels of God" was frequently substituted for "God"
or "Gods" in Genesis; and the Chaldee paraphrasts did as much, at times
adding further "the word of the Lord" or "the Shekinah" as a compromise
where "angel" seemed inadequate. <span id="fr_332"></span>[3](#fn_332)
Similarly the later Jews read "angels of God" where their sacred books
inconveniently spoke of "Gods." <span id="fr_333"></span>[4](#fn_333) In
the book of Nehemiah, yet again, we have the mention of the "Good
Spirit" of God, <span id="fr_334"></span>[5](#fn_334) an idea apparently
derived from Mazdeism, <span id="fr_335"></span>[6](#fn_335) and sure to
set up a special divine concept. Such conceptions in all likelihood grew
up by way of analogy from the phenomena of monarchical government <span
id="fr_336"></span>[7](#fn_336) in which the "word" or "hands" or "eye"
of the autocrat became names for his chief functionaries or
representatives.

It would be hard to show that a "monotheism" which really accepted, as
absolutely as any polytheism, a vast plurality of divine beings, had any
moral or spiritual efficacy in virtue of merely setting forth a tyranny
of a Supreme God over hosts of angels, with a rebel party included,
rather than a kind of feudal family oligarchy like that of Olympus, in
which the Chief God is partially thwarted by

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

the others. The difference is much more one of political habit and
outlook than of either ethic or philosophy. The Jews derived from
Babylon the idea of a Creator-God; <span id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_337)
and if that be the valuable principle in monotheism their polytheistic
kindred are entitled to the credit. So with the idea of a
Supreme-God: <span id="fr_338"></span>[2](#fn_338) the Hebrew specialty
lay solely in putting a greater distance between God and Angels than did
the Mesopotamian, and in rejecting (for the time being) the notions of
triads and of a divine family. So little difference was there between
the two states of mind that the Christian Fathers freely applied the
term "Gods" to the Angels of the Judæo-Christian system. <span
id="fr_339"></span>[3](#fn_339) For the rest, it is significant that the
beginnings alike of rational science and of rational ethics were made,
not among the Hebrew monotheists, but among Babylonian and Greek
polytheists, who went far in cosmic and moral philosophy while the
post-exilic Jews were devotees of a God whose passionate and capricious
will took the place of both natural and moral law.

A "consistent, remorseless, naked monotheism," in short, never prevailed
among the Jews any more than in any other people. Such a concept, save
in the case of scattered thinkers, as often Gentiles as Jews, has never
doctrinally or conceptually flourished till the rise of modern Deism,
Islam having in turn capitulated to the notion of inferior good and evil
spirits. Some small and isolated communities in antiquity probably
approached nearer than the Jews ever did to the bare notion of a single
(tribal) God, without "sons," or angels, or a Chosen One, and without an
Adversary; and the ancient pantheists, tending as pantheism usually does
to repass into theism, at times reached in that way a far purer form of
monotheism <span id="fr_340"></span>[4](#fn_340) than that of the Hebrew
books.

While the creed, despite its rooted traditionalism, was thus of its own
nature lapsing into new indirect forms of polytheism, the secular
problem of political life was no more being solved in Jewry than
elsewhere. In the day of the Restoration we already find the rich taking
usury from the poor; <span id="fr_341"></span>[5](#fn_341) and in the
last of the canonical prophets we find crudely indicated the pressure of
that deep doubt as to the God's good government which makes the theme of
the book of Job. That the faithful deceive the deity and each other,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

and that many despair of Yahweh's rule <span
id="fr_342"></span>[1](#fn_342)—such are the testimonies of the closing
pages of the Old Testament. Only the cohesive power of ceremonialism,
the unchanging pressure of popular superstition, and—last, but certainly
not least—the economic success of the shrine, maintained the priestly
State. There had presumably now begun among the dispersed Jews the rule
of sending gifts to the temple, a practice which in a later age made an
economic basis for a whole order of rabbins and scribes; and on the same
basis there would be partly maintained a considerable population of
pauper devotees. Under such circumstances the high-priest, another
Babylonian adaptation, was practically what the king had been in the
past; and the post was intrigued for, and at a pinch murdered for, <span
id="fr_343"></span>[2](#fn_343) like any other eastern throne.

One indirect result of the priestly policy was the development of the
faculty of the Jews for prospering in other lands. Placed as they were,
a small community among great States, it behoved them, like the Dutch of
to-day, to be linguists for the sake of their commerce; and when the
post-exilic priesthood, like that of post-Reformation Scotland, found
their account in teaching their people to read the sacred books, they
were at once preparing them to succeed among the less-schooled
populations around and creating an abnormal tie between the dispersed
ones and the sacred city.

But, on the other hand, the surrounding cultures could not but affect
the Jewish. On the Persian overlordship followed the Macedonian; and
where the similar Persian creed had failed to do more than modify the
Jewish, the manifold Greek culture which spread under the Seleucids and
the Ptolemies penetrated Syrian life in all directions. In that world of
chronic strife and deteriorating character, where already all men had
attained the fatal temper, seen later at large in decadent Rome, of
acquiescence in the rule of the most successful commander as such, the
tranquil cynicism of Greek cosmopolitan culture was as appropriate in
Jewry as elsewhere. So far did the assimilation go that the hierarchy at
length was definitely faced by a Hellenising party, convinced of the
futility of the tribal religion, even as the pre-exilic Yahwists had
been; and high-priests were found to take the bribes and do the work of
heathenism. There was, as we have seen, no moral or philosophic
elevation in the Judaic cult to countervail intellectually such a
movement; and had not Antiochus Epiphanes, in a spirit of fanaticism
wholly alien to the general policy of the Diadochi, proceeded to coerce
and outrage

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the zealots of Jerusalem, their worship would have dwindled very much as
it did in the old time. But that act elicited the singular genius of the
Maccabean family, under whom the desperate tenacity of the most devoted
part of the race at length triumphed over its foes to the point of
re-establishing a State in which the king was priest, as previously the
priest had been king. In the face of such a consummation, all the
promises and pretensions of the old cult seemed newly justified; and a
newly exultant faith emerged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_329"></span>[85:2](pch25.htm#fr_329) 2 Kings xxiv, 14; xxv,
11-12.

<span id="fn_330"></span>[86:1](pch25.htm#fr_330) Cp. *Christianity and
Mythology*, Part III, Div. i, § 10. The vision of the high-priest Joshua
(Zech. iii, 1, 2) standing before "the angel of the Lord" (originally,
no doubt, "the Lord," as in v. 2) with "the Satan" (= the Accuser or
Adversary) on the right hand to accuse him, seems to me clearly
Babylonian and not Persian.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[86:2](pch25.htm#fr_331) See refs, in A *Short
History of Freethought*, i, 120.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[86:3](pch25.htm#fr_332) G. L. Bauer, *Theology
of the Old Testament*, Eng. tr. 1837, p. 5.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[86:4](pch25.htm#fr_333) Cp. Ps. xcvii, 7, 9,
and Heb. i, 6.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[86:5](pch25.htm#fr_334) Neh. ix, 20.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[86:6](pch25.htm#fr_335) See below, Part III, §
5.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[86:7](pch25.htm#fr_336) Cp. Jastrow, *Religion
of Babylonia and Assyria*, p. 433.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[87:1](pch25.htm#fr_337) Cp. Jastrow, pp.
433-4, 441-2; Sayce, pp. 142, 205. "The knowledge that there is a
supreme spiritual Being, unique in his nature, Creator and upholder of
all things, is wholly wanting to ancient Israel" (Stade, *Geschichte des
Volkes Israel*, p. 428).

<span id="fn_338"></span>[87:2](pch25.htm#fr_338) Sayce pp. 122-129, 187

<span id="fn_339"></span>[87:3](pch25.htm#fr_339) See the point full set
forth in J. A. Farrer's *Paganism and Christianity*, ch. i. Cp.
*Supernatural Religion*, ed. 1902, in 71-80.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[87:4](pch25.htm#fr_340) Le Page Renouf, while
pronouncing that the Egyptian doctrine of the one and only God "stopped
short in Pantheism" (Hibbert Lectures, p. 230), admits that Egyptian
doctrine better meets the definition of Cardinal Newman than any other
(*Id*. pp. 215-216).

<span id="fn_341"></span>[87:5](pch25.htm#fr_341) Neh, v, 6.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[88:1](pch25.htm#fr_342) Malachi i, 7-8. 14;
ii, 8-10, 17; iii, 5, 8-14.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[88:2](pch25.htm#fr_343) Josephus, 11 *Antiq.*
vii, 41.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 8. Revival and Disintegration](pch26)
