[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch28) 
[Next](pch30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 2. Theory and Ritual of Human Sacrifice.

The sacrifice of a Saviour-God is a specialisation of the general
practice of human sacrifice, which takes many forms. <span
id="fr_406"></span>[1](#fn_406) The most readily intelligible are those
in which (*a*), after a tribal war, captives are ritually slain to
appease or compensate the spirits of those killed in fighting; (*b*)
those in which, in time of pestilence or 1 danger, or by way of
precaution, victims are slain to propitiate the deities supposed to be
concerned; (*c*) those by way of thank-offerings to the Gods after a
victory; <span id="fr_407"></span>[2](#fn_407) and (*d*) those in which,
on the death of a savage chief, slaves and wives—and, it may be,
animals—are slain to accompany him in the "other" life, whatever it may
be. The victims in the last case are the analogues of the weapons and
the food placed in or on or near the grave in ordinary savage burial.

The fourth form of ritual slaying is sometimes differentiated from human
sacrifice "in the true sense" as being simply a provision, dictated by
filial piety, for the comfort and dignity of a savage aristocrat in the
other world. <span id="fr_408"></span>[3](#fn_408) It is well to note
the distinction; but it is no less important to realise how completely
the conception in this case fuses psychologically with that behind the
express sacrifice of a victim to appease a deity, and, further, how the
funeral sacrifice leads up to the "messenger" and "scapegoat"
sacrifices, which blend in that of the Saviour-God-Man. All three of the
forms specified are common in savage and barbaric life, and it is in the
psychic atmosphere of such conventional blood-shedding that there grows
up the whole body of the religious doctrine of sacrifice. Human
sacrifice, indeed, may be defined as one specialisation of ritual
slaughter and sacrament.

Strictly speaking, the "messenger" and "scapegoat" victims are also
outside the primary conception of sacrifice inasmuch as

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

they are not, or not necessarily, offered up to any God by way of
propitiation. The *pharmakos* or "magic-man" (literally "medicine-man,"
but not in the received sense of that term) who was ritually beaten and
put to death in the festival called Thargelia at Athens was strictly a
scapegoat, upon whom were put all evils, the people's sins included: he
took them away, and was killed to complete the process of riddance, but
was not "offered up" to any God. <span id="fr_409"></span>[1](#fn_409)
But in point of fact the Hebrew scapegoat *was* specifically a "sin
offering"; and of the two goats concerned one was "for the Lord" and the
other "for Azazel," the Goat-God. <span id="fr_410"></span>[2](#fn_410)
And even in the Greek case the act of ritual slaying is akin to the
others inasmuch as all alike are supposed to work either the salvation
or benefit of the community or the good of an eminent individual. As we
shall see, the slaying which it most concerns us to trace, that of the
Saviour-God, may in some cases be only in this general sense a
sacrifice, being conceivably rather an act of ritual magic, like the
slaying of the *pharmakos*, than a propitiation of a God, since the
victim (even in the case of the scapegoat) is a God. But, as we shall
see, the forms of the slaying assimilated, all being alike "religious,"
and the psychic connotations were very much the same. <span
id="fr_411"></span>[3](#fn_411)

Of the first of the four common forms above specified the typical
examples are those furnished by the practice of the North-American
Indians, <span id="fr_412"></span>[4](#fn_412) who commonly added
cannibalism <span id="fr_413"></span>[5](#fn_413) to their
torture-sacrifices, apparently combining the motives which led some
savages to eat their dead by way of symbolic "communion," and those
which suggested the eating of brave enemies, or animals, in the hope of
acquiring their courage. This last is still common in Africa; where,
again, we have instances of individual appeasement of the slain. "In
cases of murder or manslaughter a sacrifice is made to lay the spirit of
the victim"; <span id="fr_414"></span>[6](#fn_414) and among the Nilotic
negroes, when a warrior has killed a man, he must in propitiation shave
his head, catch a fowl, hang it round his neck by the beak, and cut away
the body, leaving the head hanging. <span
id="fr_415"></span>[7](#fn_415) Here the fowl is a surrogate for

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the man. In the case of funeral sacrifices also, we shall see, the
element of cannibalism enters; and here too the primary principle
appears to have been that which underlay "kin-eating," though a new
sacramental element begins to be involved. In any case the procedure is
clearly religious. A contemporary anthropologist tells that among the
Unyoro and other tribes of Uganda, before British rule, on the death of
a king,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"a circular pit was dug, not more than five feet in
diameter, and about twelve feet deep. The king's bodyguard seized the
first nine Unyoro men they met and threw them alive into the pit. Then
the dead body of the king was rolled in bark-cloth, and the skin of a
cow, newly killed, wrapped round it and sewn. This bundle was then
lowered in the midst of the nine men in the pit, no clay was filled in,
but another cowskin was stretched tightly across the opening and pegged
down all round. A covering of grass was then neatly laid over the skin,
and the multitude who were present at the funeral set to work at once to
build a temple over the grave. <span id="fr_416"></span>[1](#fn_416) A
headman was appointed as watcher, and very many of the personal servants
of the deceased were appointed to live in the temple, and their
descendants after them. It was the duty of the surrounding country to
see that they were supplied with food."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "How any beings
could hit on this method of honouring a dead king," he concludes,
"passes the range of the most morbid imagination." <span
id="fr_417"></span>[2](#fn_417) The really surprising thing is that a
professed anthropologist in the twentieth century should have been so
perplexed. The cruelly simple usage in question is one of the most
familiar types of human sacrifice; <span id="fr_418"></span>[3](#fn_418)
and even the further development of "messenger" sacrifices, which we
shall have to consider later, proceeds on the same primitive and
transparent reasoning. In the still later development of the Man-God
sacrifice, which partly involves the last-mentioned, the psychic
causation is more complicated, and, as we shall see, the variations of
practice set up a variety of problems. In some forms it is simple
enough. At Benin, for instance, hundreds of criminals were sacrificed
annually at one festival, at the rate of twenty-three a day. On these
occasions the king, regally attired, "addressed

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

the victims in a kind voice, telling them he was sending them with a
message <span id="fr_419"></span>[1](#fn_419) to his father. They were
to salute his father, and tell him that his son was not ready to join
him yet, but he sent them, the victims, to be with his father and salute
him." <span id="fr_420"></span>[2](#fn_420) In less primitive societies
we shall find the office of messenger doubled with that of the
sacrificed God-Man. He in turn appears at times to be doubled with the
Scapegoat, or remover of sins and evil spirits; and there are yet other
variants—*e.g.*, the simple sacrifices of victims slain in treaty-making
as "blood of reconciliation." <span id="fr_421"></span>[3](#fn_421) But
if each phase be handled in a scientific spirit, it will be found to
reveal in turn much if not all of its anthropological significance.

The most remarkable of the Man-God-slaying cults which have come under
what maybe termed scientific observation, while actually in force, is
that which prevailed till fifty or sixty years ago among the mountaineer
Khonds, <span id="fr_422"></span>[4](#fn_422) or Kui, of Orissa. The
first observer, Major Macpherson, was a man abnormally qualified in his
day both for the study of the sacrificial rite and for its peaceful
abolition; and science owes him on the former head nearly as much as
civilisation does on the latter. It would be hard to find an
anthropological research before his day more marked by the scientific
spirit.

On the face of his report, there are various reasons for regarding the
Khonds as a Dravidian race <span id="fr_423"></span>[5](#fn_423) driven
to the hills (where they subjugated other aborigines) by invading
Oriyas; and one of several grounds for surmising that their religion
derives from ancient Central-Asiatic sources is the fact that, like the
Chinese, they show great respect for parents and ancestors. One of their
boasts is, or was, "that they reverence their fathers and mothers, while
the Hindus treat theirs with contempt." <span
id="fr_424"></span>[6](#fn_424) Another reason is their rejection alike
of temples and images. "They regard the making, setting-up, and
worshipping of images of the Gods as the most signal proof of conscious
removal to a hopeless distance from communion with them; a confession of
utter despair of being permitted to make any

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

direct approach to the deity: a sense of debarment which they themselves
have never felt." <span id="fr_425"></span>[1](#fn_425) Yet another
reason is the fact that they had no official priesthood, the function
being open to anyone who felt called to assume it, and went through the
normal preliminary symptoms of a state of trance.

Politically the hill Khonds of Orissa were governed in general by
patriarchs, patriarchal councils, and popular assemblies; and there was
no trace of Christian influences—the very existence of the tribes having
been unknown to the Government before 1835. Their religious system was a
normal polytheism, with a Supreme Creator God, known as Boora Pennu or
Light God, at the head. Under him were Tari (or Bera) Pennu, <span
id="fr_426"></span>[2](#fn_426) the Earth-Goddess, and certain
second-class deities of natural or social forces, as rain, vegetation,
increase, hunting, war, and boundaries. Next came the deified sinless
men of the first age, who were the tutelary Gods of tribes and septs;
and under these ranked a multitude of local spirits, all named Gods, who
presided over villages, houses, hills, fountains, streams, forests, and
so forth. With the second order of Gods was ranked Dinga, the judge of
the dead and allotter of retribution, who has some appearance of being
taken over from another cult.

It was to Tari, the Earth-Goddess, that human sacrifices were offered;
and from the fact that they occurred only among certain tribes, who
theoretically admitted the inferiority of Tari to Boora, but gave her
their chief devotion and credited her as the Boora-worshippers did Boora
with raising fallen man from misery and introducing civilisation, it may
be inferred that the cults were originally independent. In the Māliahs
(hill districts) of Goomsur, the sacrifice was to "Thadha Pennu," the
Earth-Goddess, symbolised as a peacock. <span
id="fr_427"></span>[3](#fn_427) To the last, the sect of Boora regarded
human sacrifice "with the utmost abhorrence as the consummation of human
guilt, and believed it to have been adopted under monstrous delusions
devised by Tari as the mother of falsehood, with a view solely to the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

final destruction of her followers." <span
id="fr_428"></span>[1](#fn_428) It is told of Boora, too, that he
interfered, through a minor God, according to one myth, to substitute a
buffalo for a man as an oblation to Tari; and this miracle is
commemorated at an annual great festival of Boora, called the "jakri" or
"dragging," on account of the way in which the buffalo—previously
treated as a *meriah*—is finally handled. According to another account,
Boora sent four divine agents to prevent a human sacrifice for which
Tari had called. Afterwards, however, her worshippers relapsed. <span
id="fr_429"></span>[2](#fn_429)

The common relationship of exogamous tribes, who are constantly at war
yet habitually intermarry, <span id="fr_430"></span>[3](#fn_430) is the
apparent explanation of such a permanent schism. But it seems not
impossible that the sacrificial cult was originally that of a conquered
race, and that a section of the Khonds adopted it from them, as so often
happens where a primitive rite or mystery practised by aborigines is
able to appeal to later comers. <span id="fr_431"></span>[4](#fn_431) It
was from an apparently subject race who participated in the cult that
the Tari-worshipping Khonds purchased their human victims. <span
id="fr_432"></span>[5](#fn_432)

As normally practised, the rite was not totemistic, <span
id="fr_433"></span>[6](#fn_433) but of the nature of "sympathetic
magic," and the purpose was to promote agricultural fertility; but it
was also resorted to as a special means of propitiation in the case of a
pestilence or other sign of divine displeasure, such as a calamity in
the family of a chief; and individual families similarly made
propitiation for individual disaster. <span
id="fr_434"></span>[7](#fn_434) The victim, called the *meriah*, or
*tokki*, or *keddi*, <span id="fr_435"></span>[8](#fn_435) was in all
cases either purchased from the procuring caste (who at times kidnapped
children from the plains for the purpose) or bred as a hereditary
victim, a number of families being set apart and cherished for the
purpose, so that he—or she, for it was often a woman—was either
personally willing to be slain on religious grounds or was the property
of the sacrificers. As it was the universal conviction that

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

the *meriah* became a God by the act of sacrifice, there was no
difficulty in keeping up the supply; and in times of famine Khonds would
sell their own children as victims, considering the sacrificial death a
highly honourable one. And the Meriah, being consecrated from the
beginning, had unlimited sexual liberty, his intercourse with the wife
or daughter of any tribesman being welcomed as a boon from the deity.
Generally, however, he had assigned to him a wife, herself a destined
victim, and mother of victims to come. <span
id="fr_436"></span>[1](#fn_436)

The special religio-ethical feature of the rite was the universally
accepted doctrine that the victim, if not a volunteer, must be "bought
with a price," <span id="fr_437"></span>[2](#fn_437) and died "for all
mankind," not merely for the Khonds; <span
id="fr_438"></span>[3](#fn_438) and this view was set forth in the
ritual, though it also expressed distinctly the local demand for greater
wealth. An odd feature of it was that, although the flesh of the slain
victim was cut up into shreds so that a piece might be buried in every
field, the recited myth told that Tari demanded blood because when the
earth was soft mud she made it firm by the blood she dropped when she
cut her finger. <span id="fr_439"></span>[4](#fn_439) And there was put
in her mouth the injunction: "Behold the good change! *cut up my body to
complete it*." <span id="fr_440"></span>[5](#fn_440) It thus appears
that originally the victim had represented the Earth-Goddess herself;
and in a variant of the Khond legend in which two women, Karaboodi and
Thartaboodi, figure as the "only two females on the earth," each with a
male son, the former, finding that a drop of her blood hardens the wet
earth, tells her son to cut her up, which he does. Thereafter the God
"Boora Panoo" comes upon the scene, and the cult of human sacrifice is
methodically established, the spirit of Karaboodi insisting on its
continuance when her descendants offer a monkey as a substitute for a
man. <span id="fr_441"></span>[6](#fn_441) Obviously it is an
agricultural rite; and it may be that the pretence of drying up the soft
mud was a magical device to put the evil spirits of drought on a false
scent.

The sacrificial rite lasted three or five days. On the first, the
*meriah's* hair, previously kept long, was shaved off—save in cases
where it had been shorn ten or twelve days before—and the people

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

passed the night in a licentious revel. <span
id="fr_442"></span>[1](#fn_442) On the second, he was carefully bathed
and newly clothed, taken in procession to the sacred (or *taboo*) Meriah
grove, where he was fastened to a stake, <span
id="fr_443"></span>[2](#fn_443) seated, and anointed with ghee, oil, and
turmeric <span id="fr_444"></span>[3](#fn_444) (red dye), garlanded with
flowers, and worshipped during the day by the assembly, who again spent
the night in debauchery. On the third day he was given milk to drink,
and the final act of ritual and sacrifice began. At this stage we are
struck by the importance of the priest: "a great and fitly instructed
priest alone can officiate"; and it is to be gathered from the accounts
of the *Janni*, as well as from the ritual (1) that he was traditionally
a celibate and recluse, parading his austerities and securing sanctity
by personal uncleanness; (2) that it was primarily his function to brave
the curse of the sacrificed and deified victim; and (3) that it was thus
the priestly influence that maintained the sacrifice. Four days after
the sacrifice of the *meriah* there was sacrificed a buffalo, of which
the remains were left for the *meriah's* spirit <span
id="fr_445"></span>[4](#fn_445)—a safeguard against
blood-guiltiness. <span id="fr_446"></span>[5](#fn_446) The ritual,
however, was so framed to begin with as to distribute the responsibility
over the village headman or patriarch and the body of the people. On the
one hand, the victim reproached his slayers while avowing the belief
that he was made a God by the act; on the other hand, the priest and the
headman, pleading this, defended themselves by reciting the
circumstances under which he was purchased and dedicated, he consenting
as a child. The idea seems to have been to set forth thoroughly both
points of view, so that there should be no misunderstanding about the
religious nature of the act, and the responsibility of the entire
community for it; but whether by way of sympathetic imagination on the
part of some ritual-making priest, or by simple adoption of the actual
language of some past sufferer, the victim in one form of the ritual was
made to invoke a curse upon the priest, while the latter declared that
it was he, as minister of the Creator God, who gave the death its
virtue, and threatened to deprive the resisting one of a place among the
Gods. <span id="fr_447"></span>[6](#fn_447) Finally he was either
fastened to a cross of which the horizontal bar, pierced by the upright,
could be

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

raised or lowered at will, <span id="fr_448"></span>[1](#fn_448) or
placed in the cleft or split made in a long branch of a green tree,
which was made to grasp his neck or chest, the open ends being closed
and tightly tied so as to imprison him in the wood, and make as it were
a cross, of which he was the upright; and it appears to have been at
this stage that there occurred one of the most significant acts in the
entire ritual. It being essential that the victim should finally *not
resist*, his arms and legs, or, where the arms were sufficiently
secured, the legs only, were broken, save in cases where the end was
attained by drugging him with opium or datura. <span
id="fr_449"></span>[2](#fn_449) This accomplished, the priest slightly
wounded the victim with an axe, and the crowd instantly cut him to
pieces, leaving untouched the head and intestines. These, after being
carefully watched in the interim, were next day, in some cases, burned
to ashes with a whole sheep; and the ashes were spread over the fields,
or laid as a paste over the houses and granaries. In the same spirit,
the portions of flesh were solemnly carried to the participating
villages, religiously divided among the people, and buried in the
fields, each man placing his piece in the earth "behind his back without
looking."

Upon this ritual there were many local variations. Major-General
Campbell, who had followed Macpherson in the Khond agency, tells of a
form of the rite in which the victim was *first* drugged, then taken to
the place of execution, where his head and neck were placed in the cleft
of a strong split-bamboo, the ends of which were secured and held;
whereafter the priest with his axe broke the joints of the legs and
arms, and the sacrifice was consummated by the people in the usual
frightful way. <span id="fr_450"></span>[3](#fn_450) Among the Khonds of
the Māliahs of Goomsur there was much feasting and intoxication for a
month prior to the sacrifice; on the day before the rite the victim was
intoxicated with toddy, garlanded, bound to a post bearing the peacock
effigy of the Earth-Goddess, <span id="fr_451"></span>[4](#fn_451) and
ritually addressed as a God. On the next day he was again intoxicated
and anointed with oil, of which each one present sought to obtain a
touch for his own head. Finally a hog was sacrificed; and the

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

victim was stifled in the mud made with its blood, then cut in pieces. A
buffalo calf was afterwards maimed in front of the post, and on the
third day was killed and eaten, <span id="fr_452"></span>[1](#fn_452)
visibly as a surrogate. Among the hill tribe called Codooloo, as among
the Khonds, there were two sects, of which one offered human sacrifices
to the God "Jenkery." In this case the purchased victim had absolute
sexual liberty and the right to eat and drink whatever he would. From
the moment of seizure till the sacrifice he was kept intoxicated. The
signal for slaughter was a wound in the stomach, with the blood from
which the image of the God was besmeared. Then he was cut to pieces,
everyone trying to secure a morsel, to be presented to the God of his
own village. <span id="fr_453"></span>[2](#fn_453)

In yet other cases, according to M. Elie Reclus, the two methods of
preventing the victim's struggles were combined. "She must not die in
her bonds, since she dies voluntarily, of her own freewill, as they say.
He \[the priest\] loosens her from the stake, stupefies her by making
her gulp down a portion of opium and datura, then breaks her elbows and
knees with the back of the hatchet. <span
id="fr_454"></span>[3](#fn_454) Other variations are noted in the use of
the drug; <span id="fr_455"></span>[4](#fn_455) and in different
districts the entire sacrifice varied. Thus among the Kotaya hill tribes
the victim was taken before the image of the Earth-Goddess, and rice,
coloured (red) with turmeric, was thrown on his hair, <span
id="fr_456"></span>[5](#fn_456) while he was kept under the influence of
opium. In this case the victim had enjoyed special privileges for an
unspecified period, all his wishes being granted, and every woman in the
village being at his command as a concubine. <span
id="fr_457"></span>[6](#fn_457) No quasi-crucifixion is specified, the
victim being simply stabbed "in the stomach," and the blood used to
bathe the idol, whereafter he was cut to pieces by the crowd. <span
id="fr_458"></span>[7](#fn_458) In yet another case (at Ramgherry and
Lutchampore) the victim was placed in irons, new clothed, made drunk
with arrack, and forced into the "temple" of the Goddess, a hole three
feet deep. There his throat was cut and his head cut off; the remains
being

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

covered with earth and with a pile of stones. When the next victim was
to be sacrificed, the hole was cleared out afresh for the purpose.

In this district occurred yet another variation. Every third year two
victims were sacrificed in honour of the Goddess; and, whether thus
triennially or annually, at Bundair in Jeypore there were sacrificed to
the Sun-God at one festival *three* victims, "one at the east, one at
the west, and the third in the centre of the village." <span
id="fr_459"></span>[1](#fn_459) In this case each victim was tied by the
hair to a post near his grave, over which he was suspended horizontally
with the face downwards, his legs and arms being held outstretched by
the assistants. <span id="fr_460"></span>[2](#fn_460) He was then
beheaded, and the head, stuck on the stake, was there left to decay. A
further variation was in the direction of the principle that the
infliction of pain made the sacrifice specially efficacious. <span
id="fr_461"></span>[3](#fn_461) In some districts the victim, after
being exposed on a couch, and led in procession round the place of
sacrifice, was put to death by slow burning, or by applying hot brands
to the body on a sloping pyre, and tortured as long as possible, "it
being believed that the favour of the Earth-Goddess, especially in
respect of the supply of rain, will be in proportion to the quantity of
tears which may be extracted." <span id="fr_462"></span>[4](#fn_462) It
is needless to recapitulate the further variants at any length. "Victims
were stoned, beaten to death with tomahawks or heavy iron rings......;
they were strangled; they were crushed between two planks; <span
id="fr_463"></span>[5](#fn_463) they were drowned in a pool in the
jungle, or in a trough filled with pig's blood......Sometimes the victim
was slowly roasted......; sometimes he was despatched by a blow to the
heart, and the priest plunged a wooden image into the gaping wound, that
the mannikin might be gorged with blood." <span
id="fr_464"></span>[6](#fn_464)

All that is constant is the principle of a redemptory bloody sacrifice.
But by way of synopsis it may be noted that there prevail certain
principles of procedure and symbolism, especially (1) that of (2)
stupefying or laming the victim to secure apparent acquiescence; the
counter-principle of the need either for suffering as such or for such
suffering as shall cause the victim to weep much—a conception belonging
to sympathetic magic; (3) the anointing, and the

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

consequent sanctification of the oil; (4) the deification of the victim;
(5) the according to him of remarkable privileges, sexual and social;
and (6) a certain propensity to the symbol of the cross.

Seeing that the drinking of the *soma* was primordially a religious act
in the East, and that intoxicants play a similar part among modern
Polynesians, <span id="fr_465"></span>[1](#fn_465) it seems not
impossible that the drugging or intoxicating of the victim was a
development from a form of the rite in which he took part in a common
banquet; but of this no clear trace had been left, save among the Native
Americans of the past. <span id="fr_466"></span>[2](#fn_466) It is to be
noted, too, that while the destined child victim among the Khonds went
about freely, in some cases at least the adult victim was kept fettered,
though well fed, in the house of the village patriarch. <span
id="fr_467"></span>[3](#fn_467)

Very significant, further, is the horrible stratagem employed by the
Bataks of the Malay Peninsula to secure acquiescence from the boy victim
in their *Pangulabalang*, a sacrifice of one "to be sent out for the
overthrow of enemies." "A boy is taken from a stranger tribe, and for a
time well-fed with titbits, till he has grown quite trustful. Then one
day he is taken and blindfolded; a hole is dug, and he is put in it; and
the sorcerer comes and asks him: 'Wilt thou go where we send thee?'
'Wilt thou do only good to us, and evil to our enemies?' 'Wilt thou aid
us in war and overthrow our enemies?'—and so on. To all the questions
the trusting boy answers 'Yes.' Meanwhile lead has been melted on the
fire; it is thrown suddenly on his neck, whereof he dies. The corpse is
burned; but the ashes and fat are carefully preserved. These remains are
now precious magic-medicine, for through them the spirit of the dead may
be forced to do all he promised in life." <span
id="fr_468"></span>[4](#fn_468) Here too the victim is evidently
deified, and his ritual "willingness" is an essential element in the
efficacy of the sacrifice.

It is to be noted, finally, that when, by the persuasions of Macpherson
or the menaces of his successors, open human sacrifices were put an end
to among the Khonds, they treated the henceforth substituted buffalo
very much as they had treated the *meriah*. The ritual accosts him as a
human being, and commiserates him, as it

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

did the *meriah*, for being sold; he is frequently anointed; he is
implored to be a willing sacrifice; cakes are offered to him; he is
promised a happy immortality in the paradise of the Earth-Goddess; and
he is instantly cut to pieces, and the fragments buried in the fields,
as was done with the flesh of the human victim. A song preserves
(inaccurately) the memory of the work done by Macpherson and
Campbell. <span id="fr_469"></span>[1](#fn_469) Among the Koyis "a
langur monkey is frequently substituted" for the *human* victim, "and
called for occasion Ekuroma Potu—*i.e.*, a male with small breasts. This
name is given in the hope of persuading the Goddess \[Māmili or Pele\]
that she is receiving a human sacrifice." <span
id="fr_470"></span>[2](#fn_470) The sheep or goats offered by the same
tribe to the smallpox-Goddess are given toddy to drink; their acceptance
is regarded as of good omen; and when they are eaten the women are
excluded from the repast, <span id="fr_471"></span>[3](#fn_471) as
happens in so many cannibal banquets. <span
id="fr_472"></span>[4](#fn_472) And, again, there is record that it is
or was recently "the practice, a few years ago, at every Dassara
festival in Jeypore, Vizagapatam, to select a specially fine ram, wash
it, shave its head, affix thereto red and white bottu and nāman (sect
marks) between the eyes and down the nose, and gird it with a new white
cloth after the manner of a human being. The animal being then fastened
in a sitting posture, certain pūja (worship) was performed by a Brahman
priest, and it was decapitated." <span id="fr_473"></span>[5](#fn_473)

Here we have the plainest substitution of the animal for the man; and
the process entitles us to credit the old record in the Satapatha
Brāhmana that "in the beginning the sacrifice most acceptable to the
Gods was man," and that "for the man a horse was substituted, then an
ox, then a sheep, then a goat, until at length it was found that the
Gods were most pleased with offerings of rice and barley." <span
id="fr_474"></span>[6](#fn_474) What has happened under our own eyes is
very likely to have happened in progressive periods of ancient
civilisation. The progression from man to animals has repeatedly
occurred, <span id="fr_475"></span>[7](#fn_475) and it is impossible to
explain such cases as either survivals or revivals of totem sacrifices.
The victims are the

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

ordinary domestic animals; <span id="fr_476"></span>[1](#fn_476) and
they are ceremonially invested with the attributes and the divinity of
the human being. It is reasonable to assume that the same evolution as
is here traced took place in at least some of the ostensible surrogate
sacrifices in Greece <span id="fr_477"></span>[2](#fn_477) and
elsewhere, seeing that there are so many records or traditions of the
suppression of human sacrifices in the countries in question. And all
this is in keeping with the theory of the present inquiry.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_406"></span>[105:1](pch29.htm#fr_406) For lists of
instances in all times and countries see Adolf Bastian, *Der Mensch in
der Geschichte*, 1860, iii, 110-112; Constant, *De la religion*, liv.
xi, ch. ii (ed. 1833, vol. iv, p. 158 *sq*.); and Kalisch, *Comm. on
Leviticus*, 1867, i, 326 *sq*.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[105:2](pch29.htm#fr_407) "Those
thank-offerings are not as a rule spontaneous; the Gods demand them, as
their fruits of the victory, through the priests" (A. B. Ellis, *The
Ewe-speaking Peoples*, 1890, p. 119).

<span id="fn_408"></span>[105:3](pch29.htm#fr_408) Cp. Major
Mockler-Ferryman, *British West Africa*, 2nd ed. 1900, p. 389; Mary H.
Kingsley, *Travels in West Africa*, 1897, p. 442.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[106:1](pch29.htm#fr_409) See the argument of
Miss J. E. Harrison, *Prolegomena to the Study of Greek Religion*, 2nd
ed. 1908, pp. 95-109.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[106:2](pch29.htm#fr_410) Lev. xvi, 5-11. Marg.

<span id="fn_411"></span>[106:3](pch29.htm#fr_411) Miss Harrison (p.
109) begs the question when she says that "the ceremonials of sacrifice
and riddance express widely different conditions and sentiments in the
mind of the worshipper."

<span id="fn_412"></span>[106:4](pch29.htm#fr_412) Lafitau, *Mœurs des
sauvages ameriquains*, 1724, ii, 266 *sq*.; Waitz, *Anthropologie der
Naturvölker*, iii, 159.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[106:5](pch29.htm#fr_413) Not always. The Pani
and the Natchez are said not to have practised cannibalism, though the
latter at times and the former customarily offered human sacrifices
(waltz, iii, 159). But these tribes were among the least savage.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[106:6](pch29.htm#fr_414) Livingstone, *Popular
Account of Missionary Travels and Researches*, 1861, p. 292: ed. 1905,
p. 405. Compare the slaughter of Polixena on the grave of Achilles.
Euripides, Hecuba, 535 *sq*.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[106:7](pch29.htm#fr_415) Sir H. H. Johnston,
*The Uganda Protectorate*, 1002, ii, 794.

<span id="fn_416"></span>[107:1](pch29.htm#fr_416) There is here
suggested the interesting question whether the *adytum* or cave which
was the nucleus of Semitic and other ancient temples (see *Christianity
and Mythology*, 2nd ed. p. 306) was originally a victim-pit or grave. On
the other hand compare the usage as to "upper chambers," noted
hereinafter.

<span id="fn_417"></span>[107:2](pch29.htm#fr_417) *Uganda and its
Peoples: Notes on the Protectorate of Uganda*, especially the
*Anthropology and Ethnology of the Indigenous Races*, by J. F.
Cunningham, F.R.G.S., F.Z.S., 1905, 0. 31. Cp. pp. 56, 318.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[107:3](pch29.htm#fr_418) Mr. Cunningham notes
(pp. 32-33) that the nine victims must belong to the king's tribe. The
reason is obvious: they must be his friendly servants. This is quite
clear in the case of the Baganda kings, whose chief attendants were
sacrificed. Cp. Allen and Thomson, *Narrative of the British Expedition
to the Niger*, 1848, i, 328. In other parts of Africa the number of
twelve victims is common: see *Great Benin*, by H. Ling Roth, 1903, p.
70. It is hardly necessary to recall the sacrifices of twelves in the
Hebrew cult, or that of the twelve Trojans to the manes of Patroclus by
Achilles. In the latter case the theory would be that the slain would
serve as slaves to Patroclus in the Shades, an office for which, in the
circumstances, only enemies were available.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[108:1](pch29.htm#fr_419) "The slaying of
victims to convey messages is a later modification; and is seemingly at
variance with the accepted idea that the dead are cognizant of what is
taking place in the world." Sir A. B. Ellis, *Ewe-speaking Peoples*, p.
118.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[108:2](pch29.htm#fr_420) C. Punch, cited by H.
Ling Roth, *Great Benin*, 1903, p. 74.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[108:3](pch29.htm#fr_421) Major Glyn Leonard,
*The Lower Niger and its Tribes*, 1906, p. 444.

<span id="fn_422"></span>[108:4](pch29.htm#fr_422) The name is often
spelt Kandh or Khand, but it is officially declared that the proper
spelling is Kondh. See Thurston's *Castes and Tribes of Southern India*,
Madras, 1909, iii, 356. Kondh or Khond (from the Telugu word *Konda*, a
hill) is a name given by neighbouring peoples. Those so named call
themselves Kui. The race is found, in various stages of civilisation,
and with varying dialects, in other parts of southern India. *Id*. pp.
357, 367.

<span id="fn_423"></span>[108:5](pch29.htm#fr_423) Cp. Elie Reclus,
*Primitive Folk*, pp. 247-8; Tyler, *Primitive Culture*, 3rd ed. ii.
271. Dalton, *Ethnography of Bengal*, p. 243, classes the Khonds as
certainly Dravidian. So Grierson, in Thurston, iii, 357.

<span id="fn_424"></span>[108:6](pch29.htm#fr_424) *Memorials of Service
in India*. From the Correspondence of the late Major S. C. Macpherson,
C.B. Edited by his brother, William Macpherson. London, 1865, p. 67.

<span id="fn_425"></span>[109:1](pch29.htm#fr_425) *Id*. p. 103. It is
open to question whether the psychological analysis here does not partly
stand for the thought of the observer. Lack of art, and of permanent
dwellings, may be the true explanation. See above, Pt. I, ch. ii, p. 71
*note*, and cp. the *Memorials*, p. 106, n., as to similar phenomena
among mountaineers in Siam. See also Lubbock, *Origin of Civilisation*,
5th ed. p. 374, as to the lack of temples and images among the Malagasy,
the wild tribes of Cambodia, the Toorkmans, and other races of Siberia;
and Turner, *Nineteen Years in Polynesia*, 1861, p. 88, as to the
primitive Tannese, who "have no idols." Dapper, a seventeenth-century
Dutch traveller, who sojourned at Benin, describes the natives as
holding that it would be absurd to make images of "God" who is
invisible, though they have many images of their "idol-Gods." Here again
the psychology of the observer is suspect. (Roth, *Great Benin*, 190 t,
p. 50.)

<span id="fn_426"></span>[109:2](pch29.htm#fr_426) Dr. John Shortt,
"Contribn. to the Ethnology of Jeypore" in *Trans. of Ethnol. Soc. N.S.*
vol. vi (1868), p. 271, gives the names of the two deities in another
district as Bona Peimu and Tari Peimu.

<span id="fn_427"></span>[109:3](pch29.htm#fr_427) Report of Mr.
Russell, 1837, in *Selections from the Records*, Govt. of India, No. V.
*Human Sacrifice and Infanticide*, 1154, cited by E. Thurston,
*Ethnographic Notes in Southern India*, 1906, p. 511; also in *Castes
and Tribes of Southern India*, iii, 372.

<span id="fn_428"></span>[110:1](pch29.htm#fr_428) Macpherson, p. 98.
Cp. p. 131, and Shortt, as cited, p. 271.

<span id="fn_429"></span>[110:2](pch29.htm#fr_429) Macpherson, pp. 108.
109; Shortt, as cited.

<span id="fn_430"></span>[110:3](pch29.htm#fr_430) Macpherson, p. 69.

<span id="fn_431"></span>[110:4](pch29.htm#fr_431) See *Memorials*, p.
124; and cp. *Short History of Freethought*, 2nd ed. i, 43-44. The Sect
of Boora represent that the Tari-worshippers, debased by her tuition,
lived like savages "until by intercourse with us, as in receiving wives,
they became civilised" (p. 110). But tribes of the Boora-worshippers
practised female infanticide (p. 113).

<span id="fn_432"></span>[110:5](pch29.htm#fr_432) *Id*. pp. 65, 114,
115.

<span id="fn_433"></span>[110:6](pch29.htm#fr_433) In one case, where an
Elephant-God was worshipped, the victim was fastened to and swung by the
proboscis of a wooden elephant, and thus identified with the God
(Major-General Campbell, *Narrative of Thirteen Years’ Service among the
Wild Tribes of Khondistan*, 1864, pp. 51, 126). This rite may have been
totemistic; but where the Earth-Goddess was figured as a bird, and the
Earth-God as a peacock, these creatures were not sacrificed (*Id*. pp.
51. 54).

<span id="fn_434"></span>[110:7](pch29.htm#fr_434) So also in the
Māliahs of Goomsur. Russell, cited by Thurston, p. 511. Both motives
were acted on in the human sacrifices of the Pawnees and the Dakotas in
North America. Lindesay Brine, *Travels amongst American Indians*, 1894,
p. 132.

<span id="fn_435"></span>[110:8](pch29.htm#fr_435) *Meriah* is the Oriya
word; the others are Khond terms. The former probably means
"messenger"—the victim being a messenger to the deity. Dalton,
*Ethnography of Bengal*. 1872, p. 29.

<span id="fn_436"></span>[111:1](pch29.htm#fr_436) Macpherson, p. 116.

<span id="fn_437"></span>[111:2](pch29.htm#fr_437) Shortt, as cited, p.
273; Campbell, as cited, p. 52; Russell, as cited by Thurston. Among the
Khonds of the Māliahs of Goomsur, private families purchased children,
and reared them as future victims. "Criminals, or prisoners captured in
war," says Russell, "are not considered fitting subjects."

<span id="fn_438"></span>[111:3](pch29.htm#fr_438) Macpherson, pp. 98,
115, 116, 117, 122, 136.

<span id="fn_439"></span>[111:4](pch29.htm#fr_439) Shortt, p. 271;
Macpherson, pp. 121, 124.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[111:5](pch29.htm#fr_440) Macpherson, p. 121;
Shortt, p. 271. M. Elie Reclus (*Primitive Folk*, pp. 312-313, 316- 317)
makes the doctrine more explicit, saying that according to the Khond
legend "Tari had intended each time to submit to the sacrifice in her
own person," saying, "I am the meriah: I come to be immolated," and that
her worshippers in each case persuaded her to accept a proxy.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[111:6](pch29.htm#fr_441) Thurston, *Castes and
Tribes*, iii, 368-370, following the statement of Mr. A. B. Jayaram
Moodaliar.

<span id="fn_442"></span>[112:1](pch29.htm#fr_442) Macpherson, pp. 107,
117, 118; Shortt, as cited.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[112:2](pch29.htm#fr_443) Sometimes placed
between two shrubs. Macpherson, p. 118.

<span id="fn_444"></span>[112:3](pch29.htm#fr_444) Turmeric is a
principal crop with the Khonds, and part of their argument for a blood
sacrifice was that blood was needed to secure the deep red colour of the
plant.

<span id="fn_445"></span>[112:4](pch29.htm#fr_445) Macpherson, p. 130.
Cp. p. 108, as to the buffalo sacrifice to Boora Pennu. And see
hereinafter as to the buffalo sacrifice among the Bataks.

<span id="fn_446"></span>[112:5](pch29.htm#fr_446) The primitive sense
of the danger incurred by the sacrificer is often apparent in these
Dravidian rites. See Thurston, *Castes and Tribes*, iv, 313.

<span id="fn_447"></span>[112:6](pch29.htm#fr_447) Macpherson, pp.
120-7. An abbreviated account of the ritual is given in J. Ludlow's
*British India, its Races and its History*, 1858, i, 25-30.

<span id="fn_448"></span>[113:1](pch29.htm#fr_448) See the photograph of
a preserved "Meriah sacrifice post," given by Thurston, Notes, p. 510;
*Castes and Tribes*, iii, 377.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[113:2](pch29.htm#fr_449) Shortt, p. 274;
Macpherson, p. 119. The main details are confirmed by Major-General
Campbell (*Narrative of Thirteen Years' Service among the Wild Tribes of
Khondistan*, 1864), who, following the report of Mr. Russell, describes
the victims as being stupefied with toddy" (pp. 54-5). Similarly in the
human sacrifices formerly offered by the nomad tribe of Koravas, the
victim (tricked) was made drunk. Thurston, *Castes and Tribes*, iii,
464.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[113:3](pch29.htm#fr_450) *Narrative* cited,
pp. 112-113.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[113:4](pch29.htm#fr_451) There appears to be
some confusion, as the effigy was further associated with the village
deity Zakaree Pennu, represented by three stones. This deity appears to
be of the generic type elsewhere called "Jenkery," and propitiated in
the same fashion. Thurston, *Ethnographic Notes*, pp. 512-513; *Castes
and Tribes*, iii, 374-5.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[114:1](pch29.htm#fr_452) Russell, cited by
Thurston, *Notes*, pp. 511-13.

<span id="fn_453"></span>[114:2](pch29.htm#fr_453) Report of Mr.
Arbuthnot, 1837, cited by Thurston, *Notes*, pp. 513-514; *Castes*, iii,
375.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[114:3](pch29.htm#fr_454) Elie Reclus,
*Primitive Folk*, Eng. tr. p. 319. In the matter of references M. Reclus
is notably careless, and I have been unable to trace all of his
authorities. His own special studies, however, give his synopsis a
measure of authority. The inadequacy of our English works of reference
in regard to India is more surprising than the laxities of M. Reclus.
Even the valuable recent compilations of Mr. Thurston, a monument of
disinterested scientific devotion, does not give all the details; but he
appends a bibliography to his article on the Kondhs.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[114:4](pch29.htm#fr_455) H. B. Rowney (*Wild
Tribes of India*, 1882, p. 105) follows Russell's report (cited also by
Campbell, pp. 54-55).

<span id="fn_456"></span>[114:5](pch29.htm#fr_456) So among the
Coodooloo, who coloured the rice with saffron, and brought the victim
before the God. Arbuthnot, as cited. Among the hill Koyis (kin of the
Khonds) of the Godavari district, again, sheep sacrificed to the Goddess
of small-pox and cholera "have garlands hung round their necks, their
heads are adorned with turmeric, and pots of cold water are poured over
them." Thurston, iv, 59. 7

<span id="fn_457"></span>[114:6](pch29.htm#fr_457) Arbuthnot, as cited.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[114:7](pch29.htm#fr_458) Shortt. pp. 274 5.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[115:1](pch29.htm#fr_459) Shortt, p. 275.

<span id="fn_460"></span>[115:2](pch29.htm#fr_460) On this method cp.
Dalton, *Ethnography of Bengal*, 1872, p. 292.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[115:3](pch29.htm#fr_461) This concept is found
among the Ostiaks of Siberia, who used to sacrifice reindeer "in the
manner of a bloody atonement," killing them slowly by stabbing in
different parts, or suffocating by repeated immersion. Erman, *Travels
in Siberia*, Eng. tr. 1848, ii, 54.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[115:4](pch29.htm#fr_462) Macpherson, pp. 118,
130; Shortt, p. 274.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[115:5](pch29.htm#fr_463) For this see
Campbell, as cited. pp. 57-58.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[115:6](pch29.htm#fr_464) Reclus, *Primitive
Folk*, pp. 319-330. M. Reclus (in translation) always speaks of the
single victim as a woman, but either sex served.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[116:1](pch29.htm#fr_465) "There is no public
rite whatsoever, and scarcely any in private, at which the ceremony of
drinking cava does not form a usual and often most important part."
Mariner, *Tonga Islands*, 1827, ii, 150. Cp. p. 167, and Turner,
*Samoa*, 1884, pp. 20, 51, 334; also *Cook's Voyages*, iii (by King),
1785, p. 161.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[116:2](pch29.htm#fr_466) Cp. Lafitau, *Mœurs
des sauvages ameriquains*, 1724, ii, 295.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[116:3](pch29.htm#fr_467) Hunter, *Orissa*, ii,
97; Shortt, as cited, p. 273. Major-General Campbell, whose attempts to
discredit some of Macpherson's statements recoiled badly on himself,
states first (p. 53) that meriahs "are seldom subjected to any
restraint," and again that "when of age to understand for what purpose
they are intended *they are chained;* two had been years in chains; one
so long that he could not recollect ever having been at liberty" (p.
57).

<span id="fn_468"></span>[116:4](pch29.htm#fr_468) Wurm, *Handbuch der
Religionsgeschichte*, etc., Aufl. 1908, p. 70; Warneck, *Die Religion
der Batak*, 1909, pp. 64-65.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[117:1](pch29.htm#fr_469) Thurston, *Castes and
Tribes*, iii, 371, 378-9, 381-2-4-5.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[117:2](pch29.htm#fr_470) *Id*. iv, 58.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[117:3](pch29.htm#fr_471) *Id*. iv, 59.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[117:4](pch29.htm#fr_472) This is the probable
explanation of the throwing of clods by the women at the men in the
surrogate sacrifice of the buffalo among the Khonds of the Ganjam
Maliahs. *Id*. iii, 385.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[117:5](pch29.htm#fr_473) *Id*. iv, 379.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[117:6](pch29.htm#fr_474) R. W. Frazer, *Lit.
Hist. of India*, 1898, p. 43, citing the Satapatha Brāhmana, xii, 3, 5.
Cp. p. 85, citing the Aitareya Brāhmana, iii, 8.

<span id="fn_475"></span>[117:7](pch29.htm#fr_475) Among the natives of
the Gold Coast, where human sacrifices are a matter of simple killing
and use of blood, "a regularly descending scale of sacrifice, from human
victim to bullock, from bullock to sheep, and from sheep to fowl, may be
traced. The Chama god Prate, to which human victims were formerly
offered, has now a bullock sacrificed to him; and Behnya, the war-god of
Elmina, has descended from human victim to bullock, and from the latter
to sheep. Fohsu, at the Salt Pond at Cape Coast, has within a short
period descended from sheep to fowl," A. B. Ellis, *The Tshi-Speaking
Peoples*, p. 72,

<span id="fn_476"></span>[118:1](pch29.htm#fr_476) There are reasons,
hereinafter set forth, for seeing in the sacrifice of cocks, in certain
cases, an old substitution for human sacrifices; and the same surmise
arises in some sacrifices of goats. (See Thurston, *Castes and Tribes*,
i, 74; iv, 193; v, 235; vi, 76: as to cocks see v, 106, 392, 467, and as
to sacrifice of he-goat and three cocks, ii, 376.) But the point can be
made out in the case of other animals in recent times.

<span id="fn_477"></span>[118:2](pch29.htm#fr_477) Cp. Paul Stengel,
*Opfergebräuche der Griechen*, 1910, p. 93, citing his
*Kultusaltertümer*, 117 *sq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 3. The Christian Crucifixion](pch30)
