[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch22) 
[Next](pch24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 5. Forces of Religious Evolution.

The true judgment on the comparative merits of religions is to be
reached by noting the manner of their evolution; and when this is
impartially done the student is led, not to any racial palm-giving on
the score of "religious genius," but to a new sense of the significance
of social and political factors, and a compassionate realisation of the
ill-fortune of all high aspirations among men. Genius for moral and
philosophical thought as distinguished from literary expression is to be
recognised here and there in all the old religious literatures; and even
as regards literary genius there is little weight in estimates which
appreciate the Hebrew books on the one hand in an enthusiastically
eloquent rendering and on the other dimly divine the Gentile literatures
through the cerecloths of dead scripts, whereof the scrupulous
interpreters convey the very deadness as assiduously as the Elizabethans
sought for transfigurement in translation. What is common to all the
ancient literatures is the fatality by which the "general *deed* of man"
determines the general thought.

In ancient Babylonia, the scholars are now agreed, there was a highly
evolved yet not highly imperialised State, ruled by an enlightened
Akkado-Babylonian king named Hammurabi, <span
id="fr_306"></span>[5](#fn_306) two

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

thousand three hundred years before our era, and long ages before
historic Hellas was so named. This polity failed and fell, and on its
ruins there rose successively the terrible and tyrannous empires of
Assyria and later Babylon, wherein no doctrine of civil freedom could
survive, though the code of Hammurabi remained the code of his people.
Under such rule, whatever flower of moral genius might bloom in high or
cloistered places, men in the mass could not be aught but fixedly
superstitious, morally shortsighted, good only in virtue of their
temperaments and the varying pressure of crude law and cruder custom.
Whether they worshipped one God or many, a Most High or a Mediator, a
Mother Goddess or a Trinity, their ethic was unalterably narrow and
their usage stamped with primeval grossness; for wherever the life of
fortuitous peace bred a gentler humanity and a higher civilisation, the
Nemesis of empire and conquest hurled a new barbarism on its prey, only
to adopt anew the old cults, the old lore, the old delusions. So, on the
bases of civilisation laid by the old Sumer-Akkadians, the Babylonian
and the Assyrian wrestled and overthrew each other time and again till
the Persian overthrew the Babylonian; and all the while the nameless
mass from generation to generation dreamed the old dreams, with some
changes of God-names and usages, but no transformation of life, and no
transfiguration of its sinister battlefield.

In no ancient State, certainly not in pre-exilic Jewry, did men think
and brood more over religion, in theory and practice, than they did in
Babylon; <span id="fr_307"></span>[1](#fn_307) and in such a hotbed
"religious genius" must be presumed to have arisen. But while it could
leave its traces in higher doctrine, and join hands fruitfully with
nascent science, it could never restore the freer polity of
Sumer-Akkadia, though it could humbly cherish the Akkadian dream that
Hammurabi would come again, <span id="fr_308"></span>[2](#fn_308) as
Messiah, to begin a new age. On the broad fields of sword-ruled
ignorance there could thrive only such vain hopes and the rank growths
of superstition. Better Gods were not to be set up, save in unseen
shrines, on a worsening earth. As in Egypt and in Hindostan, religion
was of necessity determined in the main by the life-conditions of the
mass; and to the mass, or to powerful classes, priesthoods must always
minister.

What Mesopotamian civilisation finally yielded to the common stream of
human betterment was the impulse of its cosmogony and its esoteric
pantheism to science and philosophy in the new life of unlit perialised
Greece, and the concrete store of its astronomical

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

knowledge, alloyed with its astrology. Its current ethic was doubtless
abreast of the Ten Commandments and the Egyptian ritual of the judgment
day; and its commerce seems to have evolved an adequate working system
of law, besides a notable system of banking; but a civilisation which
itself failed to reach popular well-being and international equity could
pass on no important moral ideal to posterity. On the contrary, it
bequeathed the fatal lust of empire, so that on the new imperial growth
of Persia there followed, by way of emulation, that of Macedonia, to be
followed by that of Rome, which ended in the paralysis and prostration
of the whole civilisation of the Mediterranean world. And in the last
stages of that decadence we find arising a nominally new religion which
is but a fresh adaptation of practices and principles as old as Akkadia,
and which is beset by heresies of the same derivation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_306"></span>[78:5](pch23.htm#fr_306) Winckler, *Gesch.
Babyloniens and Assyriens*, 1892, pp. 64-65; Jastrow, *Relig. of Bab.
and Assyr.*, pp. 38-39. Cp. Miss Simcox's *Primitive Civilisations*,
1894, i, 282-3.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[79:1](pch23.htm#fr_307) Jastrow, pp. 245-8;
Tiele, *Hist. comp.*, Pp. 243-247.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[79:2](pch23.htm#fr_308) Jastrow, pp. 532-3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 6. The Hebrew Evolution](pch24)
