[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch48) 
[Next](pch50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 4. The Search for a Historical Jesus.

Thus far there is no difficulty in tracing a purely speculative process:
the doctrine of the Logos is indeed the first stumbling-block of those
who seek to reconcile the fourth gospel with the synoptics as a
biographical document. And the very abstractness of the conception moves
men at the first brush to turn with the more confidence to the concrete
teachings put in the God's mouth in the other books. But if they
continue critically to reflect, they find one cause after another to
regard this concreteness as illusory. <span
id="fr_1186"></span>[2](#fn_1186) Many

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

of the utterances of the God, when weighed, are seen to be of the same
order as those of the fourth gospel: hence the many vindications of that
document; and vigilant attention to the differences of content in the
synoptics sets up insoluble doubts as to their authority. Long ago it
was pointed out, with no very clear view of the inference to be drawn,
that the Sermon on the Mount is a patchwork from previous Jewish
literature. <span id="fr_1187"></span>[1](#fn_1187) And at length the
pressure of criticism has forced the more intelligent professional
students of the New Testament to admit the insecurity of the old
assumptions, and to attempt a restatement of the case for belief in the
historicity of Jesus. The present state of the argument can perhaps be
best set forth by way of criticism of the most important of these
attempts, the second section of the article "Gospels" in the
*Encyclopædia Biblica*, written by Professor Schmiedel, of Zurich. It is
a masterpiece of critical arrangement and expert knowledge, demanding
the attention of every serious student; so that our time could not be
better spent.

Passing in review all the main attempts to resolve the gospels into a
few mutually interactive primary "sources," Professor Schmiedel comes to
the conclusion that no such attempt will hold good. This verdict
disposes of an amount of laborious research grievous to think of. For a
full hundred years, German theologians by the score have been struggling
with this problem, toiling devotedly, trying hypothesis upon hypothesis,
refining upon refinements, always hoping to get to, or sure of having
reached, a solid textual and historical foundation, even as they so long
sought for one in the quicksands of the Pentateuch. At length, in the
name of professional exegesis, Professor Schmiedel sounds the retreat.
There are no true "sources," no really primary and trustworthy documents
in the gospel amalgam! There are only nine <span
id="fr_1188"></span>[2](#fn_1188) "entirely credible" texts! One thinks
of Meredith's figure of the hosts upon hosts of charging waves, whose
achievement is only

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">To throw that faint thin line upon the shore!</span>

</div>

And what are the entirely credible texts? With due care and respect let
us enumerate the forlorn handful of unwounded survivors:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. Mk. x, 17 ff. ("Why callest thou me good?" etc.).

</div>

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

2\. Mt. xii, 31 ff. (blasphemy against the Son of Man pardonable).

3\. Mk. iii, 21 ("He is beside himself").

4\. Mk. xiii, 32 ("of that day and hour knoweth no man," etc.).

5\. Mk. xv, 34; Mt. xxvii, 46 ("My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken
me?").

6\. Mk. viii, 12 ("No sign shall be given to this generation").

7\. Mk. vi, 5 ("he was able to do no mighty work").

8\. Mk. viii, 14-21 (rebuke to the disciples concerning bread and
leaven).

9\. Mt. xi, 5; Lk. vii, 22. (Passage to be taken in the sense of
*spiritual* healing, since it ends with mention of preaching—not a
miracle at all.)

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It will be seen on
what principles Professor Schmiedel proceeds. Where Jesus speaks simply
as a man, making no pretence to divinity, to miraculous powers, to
prophecy, or to a Messianic mission, and where he is represented as
failing to impress his relatives and neighbours with any sense of his
superiority—there the record is entirely credible. From this position
Dr. Schmiedel makes a leap to the conclusion that the entirely
credible—that is, the possible—is the demonstratively historical. Let us
take his own words (§ 139)

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">These......passages......might be called the
foundation-pillars for a truly scientific life of Jesus. Should the idea
suggest itself that they have been sought out with partial intent, as
proofs of the human as against the divine character of Jesus, the fact
at all events cannot be set aside that they exist in the Bible and
demand our attention. In reality, however, they prove not only that in
the person of Jesus we have to do with a completely human being, and
that the divine is to be sought in him only in the form in which it is
capable of being found in a man; *they also prove that he really did
exist*, and that the Gospels contain at least *some absolutely
trustworthy facts* concerning him. If passages of this kind were wholly
wanting in them, it would be impossible to prove to a sceptic that any
historical value whatever was to be assigned to the Gospels: he would be
in a position to declare the picture of Jesus contained in them to be
purely a work of phantasy, and could remove the person of Jesus from the
field of history.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This will shock
the believer without satisfying the scientific naturalist. The
proposition in the words I have italicised, I submit, is absolutely
untenable. On this point may be staked the whole dispute as to the
actuality of the Gospel Jesus. The merely credible is not the
trustworthy, the proved: if to be credited with plausible utterances be
a proof of the actuality of a personage in literature, then we must
believe in the historic actuality of half the characters in fiction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1186"></span>[228:2](pch49.htm#fr_1186) See *Christianity
and Mythology*, Part III, Div. ii.

<span id="fn_1187"></span>[229:1](pch49.htm#fr_1187) Cp. C. C. Hennell,
*Inquiry Concerning the Origin of Christianity* (1838 and later), ch.
xvii.

<span id="fn_1188"></span>[229:2](pch49.htm#fr_1188) At first the
Professor specifies five as "the foundation-pillars for a truly
scientific life of Jesus," but he afterwards adds four. It is noteworthy
that seven of the nine occur in Mark, six of them there only; and only
three in Matthew. Those of us who hold that Mark is late, and not
early—a redaction of the other gospels and not of an "Ur-Marcus" can
best appreciate the significance of such facts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 5. The Critical Problem](pch50)
