[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch50.md) 
[Next](pch52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 6. Collapse of the Constructive Case.

First, then, he has not recognised (1) the primary reason for doubting
the genuineness of every detail of teaching set forth in the
gospels—namely, the total ignorance of those teachings shown in the

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Pauline epistles.
He takes as genuine the plainly interpolated passage in 1 Cor. xi as to
the institution of the Eucharist, then concludes <span
id="fr_1194"></span>[1](#fn_1194.md) that "the details of the life of Jesus
had *so little interest* for Paul that" he fails to quote him when he
effectively might. To reason thus is to ignore a far greater difficulty
than many which the exegete admits to be insuperable. (2) He makes his
arguments at some points <span id="fr_1195"></span>[2](#fn_1195.md) turn on
the assumption of the general certainty of the whole narrative as to
Jesus being a teacher with disciples, who established his cult; whereas
the existence of the disciples is no better proved than many of the data
already surrendered. (3) He is evidently biassed to his illicit
inference (that Jesus really existed) by other inferences which, on his
own showing, he was not entitled to draw. For instance, he decides <span
id="fr_1196"></span>[3](#fn_1196.md) that Jesus probably accomplished
faith-healing as distinguished from miracles, because "this power is so
strongly attested throughout the first and second centuries that, *in
view of the spiritual greatness of Jesus and the imposing character of
his personality*, it would be indeed difficult to deny it to him." What
then proved the spiritual greatness and the imposing character of Jesus?
The nine credible texts? Clearly they amount to no such proof, even if
they were genuine: a thousand rabbis might have uttered them. What,
again, is the value of the "strong attestation" of the first and second
centuries in the face of the silence of Paul, ostensibly the first
witness? The first and second centuries, that is to say the gospels
(which certainly did not exist within thirty years of the date alleged
for Jesus’ death), and the people who believed them, equally attest the
prodigies which Professor Schmiedel rejects. Is a witness who solemnly
affirms twenty impossibilities to be believed whenever he happens to
assert something that might be true, while a more important witness, who
in the terms of the case ought to have heard of it if it happened, has
evidently never heard of it at all?

Such reasoning, we may say without hesitation, cannot stand: it is
negated by the tests on which Schmiedel has proceeded as against the
source-finders; and the latter might very well turn upon him with a
confident *tu* *quoque*. Take, for instance, the passage <span
id="fr_1197"></span>[4](#fn_1197.md) in which he presses the point of the
obvious untrustworthiness of the reports of Jesus’ discourses, and yet
lets pass the assumption that these reports may be genuine
condensations:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Even if the public ministry of Jesus had lasted for
a few months only, he must have uttered a thousand-fold more than all
that has been recorded in</span>

</div>

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">the Gospels. His longest discourse would, if
delivered in the form in which it has come down to us, not have taken
more than some five minutes in the delivery. However self-evident, this
has been constantly overlooked by the critics. They are constantly
assuming that we possess the several words of Jesus that have been
reported approximately in the same fulness in which they were
spoken.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the parables
and in one or two other utterances, the Professor admits, the reports
are more extended:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">In what remains, however, it can hardly be
sufficiently emphasised that we possess only an excessively meagre
*précis* of what Jesus said—namely, only so much as not only made an
immediate impression when first heard, but also continued to survive the
ordeal of frequent repetition In this process not only was an
extraordinary number of utterances completely lost, but a large number
of the sayings of Jesus now received for the first time that consecutive
and pointed form which made them seem worthy of further repetition.
*Without doubt* Jesus must very often have repeated himself, but what he
*assuredly* often repeated in many variations has been preserved to us
only in a single form.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Here again the
believer will be perturbed, while the scientific critic will not be
propitiated. If there are only nine texts that quite credibly indicate
the existence of a man Jesus who taught anything, how can we possibly
know "without doubt" that (1) he often repeated himself, and that (2)
the existing reports are abbreviations of any spoken discourses
whatever? The longest of all, the "Sermon on the Mount," is demonstrably
a pen-made compilation from Hebrew literature; and Professor Schmiedel's
previous argument has fully conceded that many of the reports,
*condensed in appearance* as they are, are inventions. That is to say, a
brief account of an alleged speech is not to be presumed an epitome of a
real speech. The gospel discourses are short, not because they are
records of remembered passages from long speeches, but because the
framers had no critical consciousness, and were not accustomed to
composing long documents. When we come to the fourth gospel we find
longer discourses, in the actuality of which Professor Schmiedel does
not believe. But if one gospel-maker could invent long discourses, his
less literary predecessors could invent short. Once more, if the
synoptic discourses are records of commonly remembered passages from
Jesuine discourses, how comes it that Paul never cites a word of them?
To miss that crux is to make as great an oversight as that of the
critics who regarded the so-called Sermon on the Mount as the full
report of a real sermon. The fact is that the higher criticism of the
New Testament has thus far missed the way just as the higher criticism
of the Old so long did, by taking for granted

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

the general truth of the tradition. <span
id="fr_1198"></span>[1](#fn_1198.md) It sought to found on the hollow
fiction of the Exodus and the Mosaic legislation of the desert, when one
intelligent glance at the Book of Judges might have shown that the
tabernacle of the desert was a myth. In a similar way it clings to the
conception of a preaching and cult-founding Jesus, when an intelligent
perusal of the epistles of Paul <span id="fr_1199"></span>[2](#fn_1199.md)
can suffice to show that the preaching Jesus was created after they wore
written.

It does not indeed follow that Paul's period was what the tradition
represents. The reasonable inference from his doctrine is that his Jesus
was either a mythic construction or a mere tradition, a remote figure
said to have been crucified, but no longer historically traceable. If
then Paul's Jesus, as is conceivable, be merely a nominal memory of the
slain Jesus ben Pandira of the Talmud (about 100 B.C.), Paul himself may
belong to an earlier period than that traditionally assigned to him.
Certainly the most genuine-looking epistles in themselves give no
decisive chronological clue. But such a shifting of his date would not
finally help the case for "Jesus of Nazareth." Escape the argument from
the silence of Paul by putting Paul a generation or more earlier, and
you are faced by the fresh incredibility of a second crucified Jesus, a
second sacrificed Son of God, vouched for by records for the most part
visibly false, and containing but a fraction of plausible narrative. The
only conclusion open is that the teaching Jesus of the gospels is wholly
a construction of the propagandists of the cult, even as is the
wonder-working God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[235:1](pch51.htm#fr_1194.md) § 147.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[235:2](pch51.htm#fr_1195.md) §1 138 *a*, *f;*
144 *a;* 145 *f*.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[235:3](pch51.htm#fr_1196.md) § 144.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[235:4](pch51.htm#fr_1197.md) § 145 a.

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[237:1](pch51.htm#fr_1198.md) An emphatic
exception, certainly, must be made as regards the Pauline epistles,
which by the late Professor van Manen and others are rejected as
entirely spurious.

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[237:2](pch51.htm#fr_1199.md) For the purpose of
this argument, it matters not whether any of these epistles be genuine
or not, since in any case they are early; and forgers would have used
gospel sayings if they had them to use. The point is that even
interpolations upon the originals yield but one gospel datum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 7. Parallel Problems](pch52.md)
