[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch51.md) 
[Next](pch53.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 7. Parallel Problems.

The natural impulse to reject this view with violence may be somewhat
modified when it is remembered that it does but place the Christ on a
historic level with all the other Teaching Gods of antiquity. All the
leading Gods, as we have seen, were in some measure regarded as
teachers; and for none of them do we surmise a historic original in the
sense of a real teacher and lawgiver. But it is not only the so-called
Gods who are thus dislimned by criticism; the sub-divine or
religion-founding and God-proclaiming institutors are found to be no
less fabulous, down to the historic period, than

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

the Gods they were held to have served. Menu, Lycurgus, Numa, Moses—a
whole series of revered founders of codes and creeds—are as such
dismissed by criticism to the realm of fable; for even those
hierologists who still speak of Moses as a historic person, <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1](#fn_1200.md) and treat the Exodus as a historic
event, concede to Kuenen that the liberator wrote nothing, and can no
more be supposed to have invented the Ten Commandments than did Romulus
or Numa the Twelve Tables.

Difficulty, indeed, is still made over the alleged personality of
Zarathustra; but few who closely consider the evidence will say that it
supports the claim. <span id="fr_1201"></span>[2](#fn_1201.md) If
Zarathustra was a historical character, the proposition is not to be
proved by the documents; and those who hold to the affirmative do so on
the strength not of the records but of the tradition, and of the
presumption in favour of a personal influence behind a notable
development. It is the same with the personalities of Orpheus and
Musæus: wherever the tradition tells of a founder of doctrines or
mysteries, criticism on search finds myth; and if we leave open the bare
surmise that there was an Orpheus who taught something, it must be with
the avowal that we know nothing of what he specially taught. If we take
the whole series of traditional teachers down to the Christian era, we
find them to be more or less clearly the products of the same tendency
as led to the conception of Teaching Gods—the habit of supposing that
every thing held to be good came from a specifically divine or
supernormal source.

Conservative opinion will naturally rally round the remaining
non-Christian cases that are either admitted or still claimed to be
historical—in particular, those of Mohammed and Buddha. What a man has
admittedly done, it may be argued, may have been earlier done by other
men. If Mohammed founded a new religion, why not Zoroaster; if Buddha
gave a virtually new and potent teaching, why may not a Jesus have done
so? The case may very well be tried over those points.

First let us note wherein consists the clear historicity of Mohammed.
(1) He is far down within the historic period. (2) His religion rose to
far-spread power and notoriety within a generation of his death—a far
swifter development than that of Christism, so often described as
miraculous. (3) He actually left written documents; and though these
were certainly redacted, most of them have none of the well-known marks
of late fabrication. (4) In virtue of the relation of Islam to
Christianity, which had a

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

body of sacred books and claimed a monopoly of truth, a fierce critical
light played upon the new cult from the first days of its expansion
beyond Arabia. (5) The accounts of the life of Mohammed are normally
biographical, and, though not quite certainly true in detail, at no
point typically mythical, save as regards the tales of marvels at his
birth and in his infancy, wherein the record conforms to the normal
mythopœic practice of antiquity, seen in the biographies of Plato and
Confucius as well as in those of Jesus, Moses, and the Gods and
demi-gods in general. Apart from these embellishments, and the tales of
his intercourse with angels, he is born and lives and dies normally at
known dates; works no miracles; makes no claims to divinity; is
traceable long before his period of notoriety; is, in short,
recognisable as a historic type of masterful fanatic. In every one of
these respects his record differentiates sharply from those of Buddha
and Jesus.

Absolute date, of course, is not a decisive consideration: we believe in
the historicity of certain Jews B.C., and disbelieve in the legend of
William Tell, who is placed thirteen hundred years later. But when we
consider the environments in which Jesus and Buddha are supposed to have
lived, it becomes clear that the possibilities of fable round such names
are boundless. Of neither is it now pretended that he left a written
word; for neither do critical scholars now claim that his immediate
associates have left written accounts of him; in regard to both it is
admitted that many sayings are falsely ascribed to them. Instead, then,
of letting the supposed historicity of Buddha plead for that of Jesus,
we are led to ask whether the one is not as problematic as the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[238:1](pch52.htm#fr_1200.md) So the late
Professor Tiele, *Outlines*, p. 85.

<span id="fn_1201"></span>[238:2](pch52.htm#fr_1201.md) See below, Part
III, § 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 8. The Problem of Buddhist Origins](pch53.md)
