[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch52) 
[Next](pch54) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 8. The Problem of Buddhist Origins.

At the first critical glance into Buddhistic origins, the student
becomes aware of a dilemma. The Buddha, we are told, delivered a
teaching which, though it did not directly repudiate, yet ignored and
treated as valueless the belief in deities; and the movement he set up
was thus practically atheistic; yet the legends of his own birth, and
many of the narratives concerning his life, are in terms of the
supernaturalist beliefs of both earlier and later times. As regards the
birth legends, they are found to quadrate in large measure with those of
the God Krishna, and at the same time to point to many of the myths of
the Vedas; <span id="fr_1202"></span>[1](#fn_1202) so that, whatever may
have been

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

the origin of the Buddhist movement, it must have been heavily overgrown
with supernaturalism when the life of the Founder was thus written.

The conservative student naturally answers that, though such overlaying
and perversion of the Master's teaching did take place, he remains none
the less a real person; and that the proof lies in the many narratives
which represent him as speaking like any other mortal teacher. A
critical study of the teaching, however, only doubles the dilemma. The
accomplished and devoted English scholar who has done so much during the
past thirty years to make known the documents of Buddhism to the western
world, has no misgivings as to either the historicity of Gotama or his
personal establishment of the Buddhist movement in the fashion set forth
by the narratives; but the expositor's own scholarly candour puts before
us a dozen grounds for doubt. Every cause for scepticism that exists in
the cases of Jesus and Moses exists here, with differences of degree.
Firstly, the Buddha wrote nothing. Secondly, none of his disciples or
contemporaries wrote of him. Thirdly, some of the documents that seem
nearest in time to the alleged period of Gotama, such as the Dialogues,
are thoroughly factitious, and strike a student as the reverse of
trustworthy; while others are admittedly literary creations, ascribing
to the Buddha extemporaneous verses of a highly finished quality.
Fourthly, much of the teaching put in his mouth is of a nature known to
be current before his period.

As to the nature of his teachings the obscurity is equally great. It is
not merely that they contain inconsistencies such as may be fallen into
by any teacher: they are so disparate, so discursive, so various in
their tone, purpose, and point of view, that a very short critical study
reveals difference of source, time, and aim; and when we contemplate
their metaphysic, their minuteness, their demand for leisurely attention
and assimilation, we are at a loss to conceive how they could have set
up a far-reaching popular movement in any country at any time. As little
do we realise why they should have set up any religious society
whatever. And the ordinary histories make the assertion without
explaining the case.

On the other hand, much of the earliest literature exhibits all the
marks of doctrinary myth—this by the implicit admission of the scholars
who stand critically but confidently for the historicity of the teaching
Buddha:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The books \[of the Sutta Pitaka\] profess to give,
not merely the belief itself, but the belief *as the Buddha uttered it*,
with an account of the time when, and the place at which, he uttered
it.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> The Buddha's new method of salvation, his new
doctrine of what salvation was, did not present itself to the
consciousness of the early Buddhist community as an idea, a doctrine,
standing alone, and merely on its own merits. In their minds it was
indissolubly bound up with the memory of the revered and striking
personality of him who had proclaimed it." <span
id="fr_1203"></span>[1](#fn_1203)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Thus it lies on
the face of the case that any narrative could find acceptance which was
put in circumstantial form; and that for any doctrine whatever a
narrative frame was invented as a matter of course. After the Dhamma, or
collection of short scriptures in verse, had come into vogue,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The members of the Order were no longer contented
to learn, and to understand the meaning of, the various Rules of the
Pâtimokkha \[part of the Vinaya or Rules of the Order\]. A desire sprang
up to have, for each of them also, a historical basis; to know the story
of how the Buddha himself came to lay down the Rule to his disciples.
And it was only the Brother who was properly acquainted with all this,
who was accounted a real 'Doctor of the Law.'" <span
id="fr_1204"></span>[2](#fn_1204)</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Now, the
Dhamma-pada is believed to be wholly compiled from previous books; and
some of its best doctrines are avowedly ancient, as thus: "Hatred does
not cease by hatred at any time: hatred ceases by love: *this is an old
rule*." <span id="fr_1205"></span>[3](#fn_1205) Here, then, we have the
cult *making its Teaching-God* on the ordinary lines, describing him as
supernaturally born, calling him the "Blessed One," and visibly creating
for the traditional Teacher a flatly fictitious biography. At this early
stage, then, Buddhism is seen making its Buddha; and in the act, instead
of yielding support by analogy to the belief in the historic Jesus, it
vividly suggests a similar process of construction in the case of
Christism. We are thus far merely left asking what primitive Buddhism
really was.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[239:1](pch53.htm#fr_1202) See E. Senart,
*Essai sur la légende de Buddha*, 2e édit. 1882; Prof. Kern, *Histoire
du Bouddhisme dans l’Inde*, Fr. tr. 1901, vol. i, liv. i, ch. ii.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[241:1](pch53.htm#fr_1203) Rhys Davids and
Oldenberg, *Vinaya Texts*, Part I, Introd. p. xvii ("Sacred Books of the
East," vol. xiii).

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[241:2](pch53.htm#fr_1204) *Ib*. p. xviii,
proceeding on the Kullavagga, ix, 5, 1.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[241:3](pch53.htm#fr_1205) *Dhamma-pada* i, 5.
Max Müller's trans. S.B.E. x. Professor Rhys Davids indeed translates
the last clause "this is always its nature" (*Buddhism*, p. 128); but he
notes (p. 126) other cases of avowed quotation; and the collection is
visibly a far-reaching compilation. See p. 20, *note*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 9. Buddhism and Buddhas](pch54)
