[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch56) 
[Next](pch58) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 12. Buddhism and Asoka.

When Buddhism first emerges in what may be termed the light of history,
it is as an established system highly favoured by the great king Asoka,
about 250 B.C. It is made clear by his edicts that only a small number
of scriptures, whose titles are only partially identifiable with known
extant writings, were then recognised as preserving the spoken
discourses of the Buddha. <span id="fr_1269"></span>[2](#fn_1269) And
among those named is "The Terrors of the Future," which "seems to be a
description of the different worlds of purgatory, one of which is
described in the Pettavatthu, the 7th Book of the 5th Division of the
2nd Pitaka." So that thus early in the known history of the Order it
figures as holding in Buddha's name one of the common superstitions
which Buddha is supposed to have repudiated. And Asoka, as we have seen,
called himself "the delight of the Gods," as did his friend the
contemporary Buddhist king of Ceylon.

The first sociological problem is to account for the favour shown by
such kings to such an Order. Constantine, we know, raised up
Christianity to be the State cultus because of its obvious political
uses as a far-reaching organisation, easily attachable to his interest.
Had the kings of Magadha a similar motive? Chandragupta, according to
both Greek and Hindu accounts, <span id="fr_1270"></span>[3](#fn_1270)
began his career as a robber-chief in the time of Alexander, whose camp
he had visited on the banks of the Hyphasis, as a defeated rebel; and
after seizing the throne of Nanda, the murdered rajah of Magadha, about
315 B.C., he defeated Seleukos, the Greek governor of the Indus
provinces, driving the Greek power out of India. If then "it is clear
that it was just when Chandragupta and his low-caste followers from the
Punjab came into power that the Buddhists, the party of reform, the
party who made light of caste distinctions, began to rise rapidly in
numbers and influence," <span id="fr_1271"></span>[4](#fn_1271) it is
quite intelligible that the upstart

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

dynasty found in the moral and didactic influence of such an Order a
useful political support, as Ajâtasatru may have done earlier, supposing
him to have attained power by killing his father. The record that
Ajâtasatru, after favouring the Buddhists, captured Srâvasti, their
headquarters, and totally destroyed Kapilavastu, their sacred
place, <span id="fr_1272"></span>[1](#fn_1272) tells further of friction
and complications, all presumably of a political character. Usurpers in
such cases would be apt to have arrayed against them the influence of
the Brahmans; and the midway position of the Buddhists, who at once paid
respect to Brahmanism and departed from its caste principles, would
place them in a certain imperfect measure of harmony with the
illegitimate monarch. <span id="fr_1273"></span>[2](#fn_1273)

But there is a further reason for ascribing to Chandragupta a decisive
influence on Buddhism in its relation to Brahmanism. If Weber is right,
the peoples of the Punjab "never submitted to the Brahmanical order of
things, but always retained their ancient Vedic standpoint, free and
independent, without either priestly domination *or system of caste*.
For this reason, too, they were the objects of a cordial hatred on the
part of their kinsmen, who had wandered further on; and on this account
also Buddhism gained an easy entrance among them." <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[3](#fn_1274) But if Chandragupta with his Punjabis
accepted Buddhism they would be strengthening the tendency existent in
Buddhism to ignore caste; and, again, we have it from the same authority
that "Buddha's teaching was mainly fostered in the district of Magadha,
which, as an extreme border province, was perhaps never completely
Brahmanised; <span id="fr_1275"></span>[4](#fn_1275) so that the native
inhabitants always retained a kind of influence, and now gladly seized
the opportunity to rid themselves of the Brahmanical hierarchy and the
system of caste." <span id="fr_1276"></span>[5](#fn_1276) This view, it
will be observed, diverges essentially from the other proposition, above
cited, that Buddha in person undermined the principle of caste in a
fashion "altogether novel and unwonted." If caste had never at all been
recognised in the Punjab, and had never triumphed in Magadha, there
would be nothing very

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

novel there in the teaching that personal salvation did not depend on
it. For such a teaching, Oldenberg avows, there was not only no
necessity in that age and environment, but there was no inclination.
"Any thought of any reformation of social conditions (*Staatsleben*),
any notion of the founding of an earthly ideal kingdom, a pious Utopia,
was wholly alien to these \[early Buddhistic\] circles. Anything like a
movement of social change was unknown in India." In short, the
conception of Buddha as a kind of popular liberator is rejected by one
of the leading scholars who still stand for the historicity of
Buddha. <span id="fr_1277"></span>[1](#fn_1277) And though Brahmanists
of Sankhya leanings were presumably not great sticklers for caste to
begin with, it may well have been the anti-caste bias of the Punjabis
that first gave the Buddhist Order a marked leaning of that kind, and
supplied the basis for the belief that the Founder had been a Kshatriya.
Such a state of things, too, would perfectly account for the fact that
the Buddhist scriptures were, and remain, composed not in Sanskrit but
in the popular idiom. <span id="fr_1278"></span>[2](#fn_1278) It only
needed that a beginning should be made, to stamp a given language as the
sacred tongue of Buddhism.

What Ajâtasatru presumably began and Chandragupta some generations later
carried further, the grandson of the latter, Asoka, consummated. He
found the Buddhist Order flourishing, and fully established it through
his extensive kingdom; not, however, in direct opposition to Brahmanism,
with which the now firmly seated dynasty would naturally make terms of
mutual accommodation. For him, it seems clear, Buddhism was an
organisation rather than a religion. It was compatible with Brahmanism
while capable of being used to keep Brahmanism in check; and the
"delight of the Gods" was not concerned with its atheistic
philosophy. <span id="fr_1279"></span>[3](#fn_1279) "Reverence towards
Brahmans and members of the Order" was impartially prescribed in his
edicts; and he repeatedly stipulates for an equal toleration of all
sects, and an abstention all round from detraction of others. <span
id="fr_1280"></span>[4](#fn_1280) He was thus a Buddhist only in the
sense that he made use of all organisations alike, and it is even
doubtful whether he assimilated with more than a section of the
Buddhists of his time. <span id="fr_1281"></span>[5](#fn_1281) Nor is
there any clear warrant for the conclusion that "Buddhism in the time of
Asoka was still comparatively pure" because in the edicts "we hear
nothing of metaphysical beings or hypothetical deities, nothing of
ritual, or ceremonies, or charms." <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[6](#fn_1282) Edicts were not the natural

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

place for such allusions; but the mention of the treatise on "The
Terrors of the Future" is surely significant enough. <span
id="fr_1283"></span>[1](#fn_1283) The Mahâvansa tells that under the sun
of royal favour "heretics assumed the yellow robe in order to share in
its advantages: whenever they had opinions of their own they gave them
forth as doctrines of the Buddha." <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[2](#fn_1284) In that case they were doing what
other Buddhists had done before them; and it is certain that most of
what Buddhists accept as Buddha's teaching was penned long after Asoka's
time.

We thus reach a critical conception of Buddhist origins. The Teaching
Buddha, considered as the wondrous sage who in his lifetime creates by
his own influence a great movement and establishes a great Order,
shrinks in the light of criticism to the vanishing point. The early
suspicion of a keen scholar <span id="fr_1285"></span>[3](#fn_1285) that
"after all, Sakya Muni is an unreal being," is justified on the closest
scrutiny. The Order, probably originating among ascetic Brahmans, who
may have been led to rationalism as a result of their primary
renunciation of the Vedas, <span id="fr_1286"></span>[4](#fn_1286)
becomes intelligible simply as a monastic or mendicant sect on the
ordinary Brahmanical bases, but tolerant on the subject of caste to
start with, and tending to diverge from Brahmanism in doctrine and
practice in the ratio of its numerical success, especially as regards
its rejection of caste distinctions—a course obviously conducive to its
expansion. On these lines, however, it could take many Brahmans with it;
and inasmuch as it was primarily an Order living under rules, rather
than a school of doctrine, it could all along include ordinary believers
in the Gods as well as rationalists who turned their backs on official
and popular Brahmanism because of its systematic exploitation of
superstition.

But to an energetic rationalism in such an Order there was a fatal
obstacle in the central principle or datum of the cult—the obtrusion of
the supernatural Buddha as the source of all true wisdom. The very
thinkers who framed the dialogues and discourses in which the Buddha
most rationally teaches by argument were there building up the belief in
a supernatural being in whom they themselves cannot have believed. To
change the familiar phrase, they literally builded worse than they knew.
On the popular craving for a Teaching God they relied for securing the
popularity of their Order; and they thus frustrated the higher aims

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

of their doctrine, inasmuch as superstition always drives out judgment.
By the admission of Professor Rhys Davids, the Northern Buddhists took a
step "far removed from Gotama's doctrines," "the step from polytheism to
monotheism." But, on the other hand, they built up, on Brahmanic lines,
a new Buddhistic polytheism, according to which there are five Dhyâni
Buddhas, mystical and divine beings, living in bliss; with five
Bodhisatvas, or Buddhas Elect, destined to be born; and five Mânushi or
human Buddhas, of whom Gotama is the fourth: the fifth, Maitreya, the
Buddha of love, being still to come; and for all such creations we have
the sufficient explanation that the dreamers "craved after Buddhist gods
to fill the place of the dead gods of the Hindu pantheon." And the
northern Buddhism, finally, is as completely given over to polytheistic
superstition as the southern. <span id="fr_1287"></span>[1](#fn_1287)

It may, indeed, have been the higher intelligence of the rationalising
Buddhists that secured the special success of their Order, as compared
with that of the Jainas, whose bias to systematic self-mortification, as
well as their greater superstition, accounts for the unintellectual
character of their literature. The less ascetic Buddhists would at once
be better able to propitiate kings and better able to attract recruits.
Among them would circulate such maxims as that in the Dhamma-pada:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Not nakedness, not platted hair, not dirt, not
fasting, or lying on the earth, not rubbing with dust, not sitting
motionless, can purify a mortal who has not overcome desires. He who,
*though dressed in fine apparel*, exercises tranquillity, is quiet,
subdued, restrained, chaste, and has ceased to find fault with all other
beings, he indeed is a Brahmana, an ascetic, a friar (*bhikshu*). <span
id="fr_1288"></span>[2](#fn_1288)</span>

</div>

But behind such sane maxims stood forever the fabulous figure of the
Buddha, the giver of all the wisdom in his Order, and the imposer of all
its artificial rules. Instead of the mass of myths concerning him being
a late accretion to a body of high ethical teaching purporting to come
from a normal human being, it is now seen to be probable that, as is
contended by M. Senart, the mythical figure was there first, <span
id="fr_1289"></span>[3](#fn_1289) and the ethical teaching grew up
fortuitously around it, even as the gospel teachings in all likelihood
grew up round the name of a sacrificed Jesus who for his earlier
worshippers was merely a name. To this, our initial problem, we now
finally return, prepared to appreciate aright the issues.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[253:2](pch57.htm#fr_1269) Cp. Rhys Davids,
*Buddhism*, pp. 224-6. \[In his last ed., 1910, Professor Davids
modifies this passage, and protests against the inference that Asoka's
list represents all the canonical writings known in his time.\]

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[253:3](pch57.htm#fr_1270) Cp. Elphinstone,
*History of India*, Cowell's ed. 1889, pp. 152-4; Rhys Davids,
*Buddhism*, pp. 220-1.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[253:4](pch57.htm#fr_1271) Rhys Davids,
*Buddhism*, pp. 221. Cp. Jacobi, as cited, p. xiv: "With the extension
<span id="page_254">p. 254</span> of the limits of the empire of Magadha
a new field was opened to both religions \[Jainism and Buddhism\], over
which they spread with great activity. It was probably this auspicious
political conjunction to which Jainism and Buddhism chiefly owed their
success, while many similar sects attained only a local and temporary
importance."

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[254:1](pch57.htm#fr_1272) *Id*. p. 77.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[254:2](pch57.htm#fr_1273) Mr. Lillie, while
recognising the success of Buddhism before Asoka (*Buddhism in
Christendom*, p. 188), raises a needless difficulty by supposing it to
have "struggled on in obscurity and perhaps in secrecy" till his advent
(*Id*. p. 215). The latter view is excluded by the former.

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[254:3](pch57.htm#fr_1274) *History of Indian
Literature*, p. 4.

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[254:4](pch57.htm#fr_1275) This view of the
matter is not considered by Mr. Lillie, who insists (*Buddhism in
Christendom*, pp. 187-8) that Asoka's stones declare Brahmanism to have
been the official creed all over India before his reign.

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[254:5](pch57.htm#fr_1276) Weber, *History*,
pp. 286-7. Cp. Davids, *Early Buddhism* (1908), p. 10.

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[255:1](pch57.htm#fr_1277) Oldenberg, *Der
Buddha*, pp. 173-5. Cp. Kuenen, Hibb. Lect. p. 246.

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[255:2](pch57.htm#fr_1278) Weber, *Ind. Lit.*,
p. 179.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[255:3](pch57.htm#fr_1279) But cp. Kern,
*Hist. du Bouddhisme*, i, 274.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[255:4](pch57.htm#fr_1280) Cp. Max Müller.
*Introd. to Sc. of Religion*, ed. 1882, pp. 5-6 23; Davids, *Buddhism*,
p. 223.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[255:5](pch57.htm#fr_1281) Cp. Kern, i, 261.,
Cp. T. Bloch, "Zur Asoka-Inschrift von Bairat," in *Z. D. M. G.* lxiii,
2 (1909), p. 325.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[255:6](pch57.htm#fr_1282) Davids, last cit.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[256:1](pch57.htm#fr_1283) One of the other
treatise-titles in Asoka's list appears in Max Müller's version as "The
Supernatural Powers of the Masters," where Prof. Davids reads it "The
State of the Just."

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[256:2](pch57.htm#fr_1284) Cited by Davids, p.
224.

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[256:3](pch57.htm#fr_1285) H. H. Wilson,
*Essays and Lectures*, ii, 346. Cp. pp. 8-9.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[256:4](pch57.htm#fr_1286) Cp. Barth, *The
Religions of India*, Eng. tr. 1882, p. 81; Max Müller, Hib. Lect. p.
357: Kuenen, Hib. Lect. p. 252; Wilson, *Essays and Lectures*, ii, 347.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[257:1](pch57.htm#fr_1287) *Buddhism*, pp.
199-211; Wilson, *Essays and Lectures*, ii, 25-39.

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[257:2](pch57.htm#fr_1288) *Dhamma-pada*, x,
141, 142, Max Müller's trans. Cp. Rhys Davids, *Buddhism*, p. 155.

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[257:3](pch57.htm#fr_1289) Cp. Kern, *Histoire
du Bouddhisme dans l’Inde*, i, *passim*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 13. The Buddha Myth](pch58)
