[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch54) 
[Next](pch56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 10. The Buddhist Cruces.

Looking, then, for a foothold among the shifting sands of Buddhist
tradition, we note the following clashing records:—

1\. The Buddha is represented alike in ostensibly early and in

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

late tradition as speaking of "the Gods" with full belief in their
existence. <span id="fr_1229"></span>[1](#fn_1229)

2\. He is represented on the one hand as discouraging sacrifices, <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[2](#fn_1230) and on the other hand as prescribing
for a whole tribe a strict adherence to ancient rites. <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[3](#fn_1231)

3\. King Asoka, who figured as a good Buddhist in the early vigour of
the movement (about 250 B.C.), habitually called himself "the delight of
the Gods," as did his contemporary the "pious Buddhist king of
Ceylon." <span id="fr_1232"></span>[4](#fn_1232)

4\. The Buddha is represented as throwing his Order open to all classes,
and at the same time as making the name "Brahman" a term of honour for
his Arahats or saints. Brahmans, too, are said to have been among his
most distinguished disciples; and the Dialogues represent his
conversations with them.

5\. Much teaching that certainly did not come from Buddha is admittedly
ascribed to him, the principle being that he delivered the whole canon.

6\. Much philosophic matter set forth as his teaching is nearly
identical with much of the Sankhya system, of which at least the germs
are admittedly pre-Buddhistic. <span id="fr_1233"></span>[5](#fn_1233)

The last two circumstances are fully acknowledged by our Buddhist
scholars. Oldenberg writes: "I have essentially modified my previous
scepticism in regard to the connection of the two systems, and seen
reason to place Buddhism considerably closer to the Sankhya than my
former researches suggested." <span id="fr_1234"></span>[6](#fn_1234)
And Professor Rhys Davids, enumerating the long list of advantages
claimed by the Buddha in one of the Dialogues for the life of a recluse,
concedes that "it is perfectly true that of these thirteen consecutive
propositions, or groups of propositions, it is only the last, No. 13,
which is exclusively Buddhist," <span id="fr_1235"></span>[7](#fn_1235)
the exception being "the realisation of the Four Truths, the destruction
of the Asavas \[lusts, errors, and ignorance\], and attainment of
Arahatship." Professor Davids goes

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

on to make the claim: "But the things omitted, the union of the whole of
those included into one system, the order in which the ideas are
arranged ......all this is also distinctively Buddhist." This claim,
however, does not affect the significance of the admission, and is
itself provocative of a new pressure of criticism. For if the
exclusively Buddhist section be the last of all, is not the fair
presumption this, that the Buddhist formula here has merely been added
to an existing doctrine, appropriated by Buddhists? Among the specified
rules of conduct admitted to be not exclusively Buddhist are many that
go far to constitute the content of the "Eightfold Path," which is thus
obviously but a separate classification of precepts or ideals common to
other schools.

The same question arises again over the admission <span
id="fr_1236"></span>[1](#fn_1236) that "the Eightfold path is not
mentioned in our Sutta" (the Sâmmana-Phala); and that, as regards three
of the four lines of ethical precept to be traced in the teaching under
notice, Buddhism in the first "goes very little beyond the current
ethics of the day"; in the second and third proceeds mainly on the
practice of pre-Buddhistic recluses and Orders; and only in the
fourth—specifying the Buddhistic program for Arahatship—takes up a
special stand. <span id="fr_1237"></span>[2](#fn_1237) But on analysis
it is found that this excepted doctrine is at most only verbally special
to Buddhism, since the other schools also certainly professed to put
down lust of life and physical pleasure, error, and ignorance; and it is
not pretended that the word "Arahat" was a Buddhist monopoly. The
further we go, the stronger becomes the stress of doubt. Where we are
not certainly dealing with pre-Buddhistic doctrine under the form of
dialogues held by the Buddha, we are reading, as in so many passages of
the Dhamma-pada, sayings of a literary construction, often in verse,
which in their present form come from Buddhistic writers long after the
alleged period of Gotama, though they too may derive from remote
antiquity. Among these, even as happens in the later sections of the
Christian gospels, are some of the noblest ethical teachings of Buddhist
literature.

What doctrines, then, were special to Buddhism? Not Karma: that was
common property, shared-in by Buddhism. <span
id="fr_1238"></span>[3](#fn_1238) Wherein did it ethically innovate? Not
in asserting the superiority of a right mind to sacrifice: that was a
primary doctrine of the Jainas, and admittedly pre-Buddhistic both
within and without the pale of Brahmanism. <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[4](#fn_1239) Not in seeking a way of Salvation
independently of the Vedas: that had been done by many teachers, in
various

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

sects. <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1](#fn_1240) Not in the doctrine that
defilement comes not from unclean meats, but from evil deeds and words
and thoughts: that is given by the Buddhist writers as pre-Buddhistic,
"being one of the few passages in which sayings of *previous Buddhas*
are recorded." <span id="fr_1241"></span>[2](#fn_1241) Not in the search
for peace through self-control and renunciation: that was the quest of a
myriad recluses, the goal of all previous Buddhas. Not in the view that
there is a wisdom higher than that attained by mere austerities: that
too is pre-Buddhistic. <span id="fr_1242"></span>[3](#fn_1242) Not in
the doctrine that non-Brahmans could join an order and attain religious
blessedness: the other Orders were equally open to men of low social
status or even slaves; <span id="fr_1243"></span>[4](#fn_1243) and
indeed the rigid ideal of caste separateness was not yet established in
the days or in the sphere of early Buddhism; <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[5](#fn_1244) for though Brahman claims had long
been exorbitantly high, it appears that there were many Brahmans who
rationally waived them, and as regards ascetics they were not raised, or
at least not pressed. <span id="fr_1245"></span>[6](#fn_1245) In
Buddhist practice, too, as in that of the early Christians, runaway
slaves were not received into the Order. <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[7](#fn_1246) As little was the admission of women
to the Order a Buddhist innovation: that too was practised by the
Jainas; and even the tradition makes the Buddha accept it reluctantly,
in the twenty-fifth year of his preaching. <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[8](#fn_1247) There seems, in short, to be nothing
on the face of the doctrine to account for the special expansion of the
Buddhist movement. <span id="fr_1248"></span>[9](#fn_1248)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[247:1](pch55.htm#fr_1229) Rhys Davids,
*Buddhism*, 18th ed. pp. 35, 55-56, 79, 99, 149, 154; American *Lectures
on Buddhism*, 1896, pp. 121, 138, 165; *Dialogues of the Buddha*, tr.
1899, p. 79, etc.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[247:2](pch55.htm#fr_1230) Davids, *Buddhism*,
p. 61; *Dialogues*, Sutta v.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[247:3](pch55.htm#fr_1231) Yet Oldenberg goes
so far as to see (*wir dürfen sagen*) a true utterance of Buddha in the
dialogue on sacrifices, when the other dialogue, giving the contrary
view, has equal authority (*Der Buddha*, 3te Aufl. p. 196).

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[247:4](pch55.htm#fr_1232) Davids, *Buddhism*,
p. 84. So, among the later princes of the Andhras, who were great
patrons of the Buddhists, we have one called Vedisiri, "he whose glory
is the Veda," and another Yanasiri, "he whose glory is the sacrifice"
(Bühler, Introd. to the Apastamba in "Sacred Laws of the Aryas" (S.B.E.
<span class="smallcaps">II</span>, Pt. i, 2nd ed. p, xxxix). On the
other hand, however, the Andhras are spoken of in the Aitareya-brâhmana
as degraded and barbarous. As to the laxity of the Buddhism of early
kings, cp. Bloch, *Zeitschr. d. deutsch. morgenländ. Gesellsch.* lxiii
(1909), Heft ii, note "Zur Asoka-Inschrift von Bairat," pp. 325-7.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[247:5](pch55.htm#fr_1233) Davids, *American
Lectures*, pp. 24-29.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[247:6](pch55.htm#fr_1234) *Der Buddha, sein
Leben, seine Lehre, seine Gemeinde*, 3te Aufl., 1897, Excurs, p. 441.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[247:7](pch55.htm#fr_1235) *Dialogues of the
Buddha*, as cited, p. 59.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[248:1](pch55.htm#fr_1236) *Id*. p. 62.

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[248:2](pch55.htm#fr_1237) *Id*. p. 63.

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[248:3](pch55.htm#fr_1238) *Id*. pp. 72, 105;
*Buddhism*, pp. 99-100.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[248:4](pch55.htm#fr_1239) *Dialogues*, pp.
164-5.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[249:1](pch55.htm#fr_1240) Oldenberg, *Der
Buddha*, 3te Aufl. p. 76.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[249:2](pch55.htm#fr_1241) *Dialogues*, p.
104.

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[249:3](pch55.htm#fr_1242) *Id*. p. 211.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[249:4](pch55.htm#fr_1243) *Id*. pp. 77, 103.

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[249:5](pch55.htm#fr_1244) *Id*. pp. 101, 103,
107, 285-7. Prof. Davids cites Fick, *Sociale Gliederung im
nordöstlichen Indien*, pp. 50, 51.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[249:6](pch55.htm#fr_1245) Oldenberg, *Der
Buddha*, pp. 71, 175.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[249:7](pch55.htm#fr_1246) Davids,
*Dialogues*, p, 103. citing *Vinaya Texts*, S.B.E. i. 199.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[249:8](pch55.htm#fr_1247) Koeppen, *Die
Religion des Buddha and ihre Entstehung*, 1857, i, 104; Rhys Davids,
*Buddhism*, p. 66.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[249:9](pch55.htm#fr_1248) Cp. Senart,
*Essai*, pp. 447-451.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 11. Sociological Clues](pch56)
