[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch55) 
[Next](pch57) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 11. Sociological Clues.

Seeking for sociological explanations, we first turn to the economic
conditions. As was to be expected, there are clear traces of an economic
pressure that drove men into the Order. In the Milinda Prashnaya
("Questions of Menander"), Nagasena, the founder of the Madhyamika
school of northern Buddhism, in answer to a question from Milinda, the
Greek King of Sagala in the Punjaub, <span
id="fr_1249"></span>[10](#fn_1249) as to whether all members join the
Order for the high end of renunciation, is represented as answering:
"Certainly not, sire. Some for these reasons; but some have left the
world in

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

terror at the tyranny of kings. Some have joined us to be safe from
being robbed; some harassed by debt; and some perhaps to gain a
livelihood." <span id="fr_1250"></span>[1](#fn_1250) Nagasena himself,
again, is made to say that he joined as a mere boy, seeking to be
taught. <span id="fr_1251"></span>[2](#fn_1251) This account would in
all likelihood hold good of the social conditions before the Greek
invasion; and on the face of the case there is no difficulty in
understanding that any Order which secured men a measure of peace and
security would find adherents, even as did the monasteries and monkish
orders of the Middle Ages in Europe. But the same pressure would send
applicants to other Orders as well as the Buddhist; and we have still to
ask why it was that the Buddhist was specially sought, and became
specially powerful, as well as how it began.

To begin with, there are strong reasons for regarding the Jainas and
Buddhists alike as having been originally either simple sects, or
sections of one sect, of Brahmanism; and as this view is held by two
leading authorities, Weber and Jacobi, and is, as we have seen, now
partially yielded to by Oldenberg, we may reasonably try it as a working
hypothesis. Weber goes so far as to assert categorically (1) that
Brahmanic speculation anciently sundered on two main lines, one finding
the First Cause in indiscrete matter, the other finding it in spirit;
(2) that the latter theory gradually became the orthodox one; and (3)
that "from among the adherents of the former view, which came by degrees
to be regarded as heterodox, there arose, as thought developed, enemies
still more dangerous to orthodoxy, who......before long threw themselves
into practical questions also, and eventually became the founders of the
form of belief known to us as Buddhism." <span
id="fr_1252"></span>[3](#fn_1252) On this view (which, it will be seen,
implicitly modifies all the ordinary assumptions as to the origin of
Buddhism in one man's teaching), the quasi-atheistic element in Buddhism
is primordial; and the popular development is a mere sequel of a
movement originally, as it were, academic. In Weber's opinion, the
Jainas in turn are only one of the oldest sects <span
id="fr_1253"></span>[4](#fn_1253) of Buddhism; Buddha being for him a
real personage who propounded to the people without distinction of caste
a teaching in which there was "absolutely nothing new," but which had
previously "been the possession of a few anchorites" and had "never
before been freely and publicly proclaimed to all." Hence "the enormous

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

success that attended his doctrine: the oppressed all turned to him as
their redeemer." <span id="fr_1254"></span>[1](#fn_1254)

Jacobi on the other hand, pointing to the ancient protest of the
Brahmanic writer Vasishtha <span id="fr_1255"></span>[2](#fn_1255)
against the neglect of the Veda by ascetics, concludes that "the germ of
dissenting sects like those of the Buddhists and the Jainas was
contained in the institute of the fourth Asrama (grade), and that the
latter was the model of the heretical sects; therefore Buddhism and
Jainism may be regarded as religions developed out of Brahmanism, not by
a sudden reformation, but prepared by a religious movement going on for
a long time." <span id="fr_1256"></span>[3](#fn_1256) For this view of
the two sects as merely cognate there are various grounds—for instance
this, that while both Buddhists and Jainas have adopted the five vows of
the Brahmanic ascetics, the Buddhists opposed the Brahmanic doctrine of
the Atman or personal soul, and the Jainas accepted it with
modifications, holding that all parts of the elements as well as animals
and plants have souls. This and various other details suggest rather an
original independence than a splitting-off. And Jacobi confidently
claims <span id="fr_1257"></span>[4](#fn_1257) that "we know for certain
that Buddha at least addressed himself chiefly to the members of the
aristocracy, and that the Jainas originally preferred the Kshatriyas
\[the warrior caste\] to the Brahmans." <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[5](#fn_1258)

Thus far, it will be seen, both forms of the theory accept broadly the
tradition as to Buddha's preaching, though that tradition, as apart from
the incidental revelations in the documents, says nothing of an
acceptance of a Brahmanic basis by Buddha for his Order; and Weber
leaves his conception far from clear, inasmuch as he speaks at one time
of a body of heretics as "the founders" of Buddhism, and at another of
Buddha as "one of its representatives," and as the first to publish
broadcast doctrines previously confined to "a few anchorites." And when
we come to compare the legend of Buddha with the Jaina legend of
Mahâvîra \["the great hero"\], our difficulty deepens. The Jaina legends
refer the preaching of Mahâvîra "exclusively to the same district which
Buddhism also recognises as its holy land"; and in Weber's opinion they
"display so close an affinity to the accounts of Buddha's ministry that
we cannot but recognise in the two groups of narratives merely varying
forms of common reminiscences." <span id="fr_1259"></span>[6](#fn_1259)
But, *if* reminiscences, why are they to be held as being primarily
Buddhistic? And why, above all, are

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

they to be certificated as reminiscences? Mahâvîra is actually described
as son of "Siddartha"—a name of Buddha—and husband of "Yasoda," the name
of the mythic nurse of Krishna. <span id="fr_1260"></span>[1](#fn_1260)
The Jainas, says Jacobi, "have reproduced the whole history of Krishna,
with small variations, in relating the life of the twenty-second
Tirthakara, Arishtanemi, who was a famous Yadava." <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[2](#fn_1261) In the same way the Buddhists have put
much of the history of Krishna into their stories of Buddha. Such
adaptation is, in fact, a normal religious practice, common to many
races and cults. <span id="fr_1262"></span>[3](#fn_1262)

A somewhat better reason than any Weber gives for regarding the Jaina
legends as the later is that according to them Mahâvîra did twelve
years’ penances as against Buddha's six, was convinced of their
necessity, and persevered in some of them after becoming a Tīrthakara or
prophet. <span id="fr_1263"></span>[4](#fn_1263) Such a comparison is
avowedly post-Buddhistic. But such a detail might be added to an
established Jaina legend just as the Buddhists undoubtedly added to
theirs. Granting, however, that the Jainas *may* represent a secession
from the Buddhist movement—their greater asceticism (involving a measure
of uncleanliness <span id="fr_1264"></span>[5](#fn_1264)) being on the
lines of the schism said by the Buddhist tradition to have been set up
by Gotama's cousin Dewadatta, <span id="fr_1265"></span>[6](#fn_1265)
identified by Jacobi with Mahâvîra—we have really no sound ground for
believing that on either side we are dealing with facts in the life of
any sect-founder. The Buddhist legend runs that Ajâtasatru, son of the
Buddhist rajah Bimbisâra, was induced by Dewadatta to kill his father,
Dewadatta at the same time causing three attempts to be made on the life
of Buddha. Such a tale is on all fours with the efforts of the early
Christians to make out that certain rival cults, such as that of "Simon
Magus," were set up by way of schism from Christianity, when in reality
those cults were the elder <span id="fr_1266"></span>[7](#fn_1266)
Jacobi puts it that Ajâtasatru killed his father and warred on his
grandfather, who was uncle of Mahâvîra and patron of the Jainas,
thereafter siding with their rivals the Buddhists, whom he had formerly
persecuted as friends of his father's. <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[8](#fn_1267) Here we have apparently one more
attempt to draw a truth of history from a bare tradition; and on the
principles followed in this inquiry

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

there is no scientific warrant for such extraction. But there is on the
other hand a clear scientific value in the suggestion that *monarchic or
other political forces* may have determined the success of a particular
Order at a particular time. <span id="fr_1268"></span>[1](#fn_1268)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[249:10](pch56.htm#fr_1249) Professor Davids
admits (Introd. to vol. cited, p. xx) that it is told alike of Milinda
and of Buddha that many cities sought their ashes, and agreed finally to
divide their relics and raise to them monuments—another light on the
Buddha legend. As to the identification of Menander, whose coins are
extant, with Milinda, see Weber, *History of Indian Literature*, Eng.
tr. p. 306, *note*.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[250:1](pch56.htm#fr_1250) *The Questions of
King Milinda* (S.B.E. xxxv), ii, 1, § 5. Trans. i, 50. Cp. Kern, as
cited by Kuenen, Hibbert Lect. pp. 277-8.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[250:2](pch56.htm#fr_1251) There would be
others, seeking light rather than shelter. Cp. Oldenberg, *Buddha*, p.
74.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[250:3](pch56.htm#fr_1252) *History of Indian
Literature*, Eng. tr. p. 27. Cp. pp. 284-5.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[250:4](pch56.htm#fr_1253) *Indische Studien*,
xvi, 210; *History of Indian Literature*, pp. 296-7, note.

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[251:1](pch56.htm#fr_1254) *History*, pp.
289-290.

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[251:2](pch56.htm#fr_1255) \[Ch. x, 4,
Bühler's trans.\]

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[251:3](pch56.htm#fr_1256) Hermann Jacobi,
Introd. to *Jaina Sutras* (S.B.E. xxii), Pt. i, p. xxxiii. Cp. Senart,
*Essai*. p. 453.

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[251:4](pch56.htm#fr_1257) Here following
Oldenberg, *Der Buddha*, Ste Aufl. pp. 176-9.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[251:5](pch56.htm#fr_1258) Jacobi, as cited,
p. xiii.

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[251:6](pch56.htm#fr_1259) Weber, *History*,
p. 296, note. Cp. Wilson, *Essays*, ii, 10-11.

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[252:1](pch56.htm#fr_1260) Guerinot, *Essai de
Bibliographie Jaina*, 1906, p. v-vi. On this fact no comment is made by
M. Guerinot, who insists on the historicity of both Buddha and Mahâvîra.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[252:2](pch56.htm#fr_1261) Jacobi, as cited,
p. xxxi, *note*. Cp. Senart, p. 453.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[252:3](pch56.htm#fr_1262) Senart notes
(*Essai*, Introd. pp. xxi-xxii) that the numerous sects of Buddhists
follow the same myth types in their legends, despite their other
differences, many of which date very far back.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[252:4](pch56.htm#fr_1263) Jacobi, as cited,
pp. xvii-xviii.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[252:5](pch56.htm#fr_1264) Jacobi, as cited,
p. xxvi.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[252:6](pch56.htm#fr_1265) Rhys Davids,
*Buddhism*, pp. 75-6.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[252:7](pch56.htm#fr_1266) Cp. the author's
*Christianity and Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 369, 435, and *Short History
of Christianity*, pp. 33-4.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[252:8](pch56.htm#fr_1267) As cited, p. xiv.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[253:1](pch56.htm#fr_1268) Jacobi's view to
this effect was accepted by Max Müller: "Take away the previous growth
of Brahmanism, and Buddha's work would have been impossible. Buddhism
might in fact have remained a mere sect of Brahmanism, unless political
circumstances had given it an importance and separate existence which
other rival sects did not attain" (*Natural Religion*, p. 555, citing
Jacobi as above).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 12. Buddhism and Asoka](pch57)
