[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch68) 
[Next](pch70) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 8. The Creed.

We have thus far briefly examined what may for the most part be termed
the skeleton or dry bones of the Mithraic religion, so far as we can
trace them, at the period when it seemed to be successfully competing
with Christianity. What of the inner life, the spiritual message and
attraction which there must have been to give the cult its hold over the
Roman Empire? Here it is that our ignorance becomes most sharply felt.
So far as Christian zeal could suppress all good report of Mithraism,
this was done, when Christianity—I will not say overthrew, but—absorbed
the Mithraic movement. There were in antiquity, we know from
Porphyry, <span id="fr_1579"></span>[3](#fn_1579) several elaborate
treatises setting forth the religion of Mithra; and every one of these
has been destroyed by the care of the Church. <span
id="fr_1580"></span>[4](#fn_1580) They doubtless included much narrative
as well as much didactic matter, the knowledge of which would colour the
whole religious consciousness of Mithra's worshippers. We shall see
later that clues still exist, one of which has been overlooked in
studies of Mithraism, to some of the myths of the cult; and we may
safely decide in general that just as the Brahmanas prove the currency
of myths concerning the Vedic Gods which are not mentioned in the Vedic
hymns, so there must have existed a Mithraic mythology which is not
contained in the Zendavesta, that being, though not a simple collection
of hymns, a compilation for purposes of worship. The reconstruction of
that mythology, however, is now hopeless. Too little attention, perhaps,
has been paid to Creuzer's theory that the name Perseus = Perses, "the
Persian," and that the Perseus myth is really an early adaptation of the
Mithra myth. <span id="fr_1581"></span>[5](#fn_1581) The story of
Perseus certainly has an amount of action and colour unusual in Greek
myth, and no less suggestive of Oriental origin than is the

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

legend of Herakles. But unless new evidence be forthcoming, such a
hypothesis can at most stand for a possibility.

And so with the didactic side of Mithraism: we must limit our inferences
to our positive data. These include the evidence of the Vendidâd ritual
that there was associated with the cult a teaching of happy immortality
for the righteous, very much on the lines of that of Christianity. An
extract <span id="fr_1582"></span>[1](#fn_1582) will make the point
clear <span id="fr_1583"></span>[2](#fn_1583):—

|     |         |                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            |
|-----|---------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| 27  | \(89\)  | "(Zarathustra asked) O Maker of the material world, thou Holy One! Where are the rewards given? Where does the rewarding take place? Where is the recompense fulfilled? Whereto do men come to take the reward that, during their life in the material world, they have won for their souls?                                                                                                               |
| 28  | \(90\)  | "Ahura Mazda answered: When the man is dead, when his time is past, then the wicked, evil-doing Dævas cut off his eyesight. On the third night, when the dawn appears and brightens, when Mithra, the God with beautiful weapons, reaches the all-happy mountains, and the sun is rising:                                                                                                                  |
| 29  | \(94\)  | "Then the fiend, named Vizaresha, O Spitama Zarathustra, carries off in bonds the souls of the wicked Dæva-worshippers who live in sin. The soul enters the way made by Time, and open both to the wicked and to the righteous. At the end of the Kinvad bridge, the holy bridge made by the Mazda, they ask for their spirits and souls the reward for the worldly goods which they gave away here below. |
| 30  | \(98\)  | "Then comes the beautiful, well-shapen, strong and graceful maid, with the dogs at her sides, one who can discern, who has many children, happy and of high understanding. She makes the soul of the righteous one go up above the Haraberezaiti; above the Kinvad bridge; she places it in the presence of the heavenly Gods themselves.                                                                  |
| 31  | \(102\) | "Uprises Vohu-manô from his golden seat; Vohu-manô exclaims: How hast thou come to us, thou Holy One, from that decaying world into this undecaying one?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
| 32  | \(105\) | "Gladly pass the souls of the righteous to the golden seat of Ahura-Mazda, to the golden seat of the Amesha-Spentas, to the Garôumânem \[house of songs\], the abode of Ahura-Mazda, the abode of the Amesha-Spentas, the abode of all the other holy beings.                                                                                                                                              |
| 33  | \(108\) | "As to the godly man that has been cleansed, the wicked <span id="page_312">p. 312</span> evil-doing Dævas tremble at the perfume of his soul after death, as doth a sheep on which a wolf is pouncing.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| 34  | \(110\) | "The souls of the righteous are gathered together there: Nairyô-Sangha is with them: a messenger of Ahura-Mazda is Nairyô-Sangha."                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         |

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is noteworthy,
further, that in some codices of the Avesta is found this formula: "He
has gained nothing who has not gained the soul: He shall gain nothing
who shall not gain the soul." The meaning is "gain a place in
Paradise," <span id="fr_1584"></span>[1](#fn_1584) and the passage looks
very like an original form of a well-known Christian text.

For the rest, the Zendavesta, like most other Sacred Books, insists on
the normal morals strenuously enough. It has strange special teachings
as to the sacro-sanctity of the dog; and its veto alike on the burning
and the burying of bodies <span id="fr_1585"></span>[2](#fn_1585) is
peculiar to Mazdeism; but these beliefs do not seem to have affected
later Mithraism; whereas probably its special stress on truthfulness—not
paralleled in the Ten Commandments—was maintained. We cannot, indeed,
tell how the Mithraic priests dealt with the special problems of the
life of the Roman Empire; but we are entitled none the less to protest
against the loose revival of unfounded and exploded charges against the
cult. To this day we find Christian scholars either saying or hinting
that Mithraism was signalised in the Roman period by human sacrifices.
For this there is no justification. <span
id="fr_1586"></span>[3](#fn_1586) The ecclesiastical historian
Sokrates <span id="fr_1587"></span>[4](#fn_1587) does indeed allege that
about the year 360 a temple of Mithra at Alexandria, long empty and
neglected, was granted by Constantius to the Christians; that they found
in it an *adytum* of vast depth, containing the skulls of many persons,
old and young, who had been sacrificed to Mithra; and that the
Christians paraded them through the city, whereupon there was a riot, in
which Bishop George and many others were slain. But this narrative is
unsupported even in ecclesiastical history, and is full of
incredibilities. The "Pagans" in general are represented as taking arms
to avenge an attack on the Mithraic sect, though the Mithraic temple is
expressly declared to have been long deserted; and the emperor Julian, a
Mithraist, is represented as writing a letter denouncing the
Alexandrians for their conduct. Yet he merely speaks of the killing of
George, where Sokrates alleges a wholesale massacre. The whole story
savours of mere *odium theologicum*, and will not consist with any other
accounts of Mithraic worship. We do know that during

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

the whole of the first three or four centuries it was charged against
the Christians, by Jews or Pagans, that they were wont to sacrifice a
child at their mysteries. <span id="fr_1588"></span>[1](#fn_1588) That
charge was doubtless false, but it was constantly made.

On the other hand, the only kind of record founded-on for the charge
against Mithraism is one which rebuts it. Sainte-Croix, accepting the
plainly worthless testimony of the ecclesiastical historian,
referred <span id="fr_1589"></span>[2](#fn_1589) to a passage in the
life of Commodus by Lampridius, in the Augustan history, in support of
his insinuation that Mithraism involved human sacrifice. But this
passage <span id="fr_1590"></span>[3](#fn_1590) explicitly says that
Commodus "*polluted* the rites of Mithras *by a real homicide*, where it
is usual for something to be said or done for the purpose of causing
terror" (*quum illic aliquid ad speciem timoris vel dici vel fingi
soleat*). The same scholar makes another reference which equally serves
to confute him; <span id="fr_1591"></span>[4](#fn_1591) yet an English
writer later speaks of "the dark and fearful mysteries" of Mithra,
repeating the old insinuation. <span id="fr_1592"></span>[5](#fn_1592)
Selden <span id="fr_1593"></span>[6](#fn_1593) quotes from Photius <span
id="fr_1594"></span>[7](#fn_1594) a statement that men, women, and boys
were sacrificed to Mithra; but that assertion also is plainly valueless,
coming as it does from a Christian writer of the tenth century, and
being absolutely without ancient corroboration. What seems to have
happened was a symbolical sacrifice, perhaps followed up by a symbolical
eating of the God's image—proceedings which, there is good reason to
suppose, occurred in the mysteries of the early Christians. <span
id="fr_1595"></span>[8](#fn_1595)

But there is far more testimony, such as it is, for the charge of
infamous procedure against the Christians than against the Mithraists.
The Mithraic mysteries, save for the fact that they involved real
austerities and a scenic representation of death, <span
id="fr_1596"></span>[9](#fn_1596) were no more dark and fearful than the
Christian mysteries are known to have been, not to speak of what these
are said to have been. There lies against them no such imputation of
licence as was constantly brought against

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

the midnight meetings of the Christians, or as is specifically brought
by Paul against his own converts at Corinth. Their purpose was
unquestionably moral as well as consolatory. <span
id="fr_1597"></span>[1](#fn_1597) In the words of Suidas, the worshipper
went through his trials in order that he should become holy and
passionless. In the course of the initiation, as we know from the
unwilling admiration of Tertullian, <span
id="fr_1598"></span>[2](#fn_1598) the devotee, called the soldier of
Mithra, was offered a crown, which it was his part to refuse, saying
that Mithra was his crown. And everything points to the enunciation of a
theory of expiation of and purification from sin, in which Mithra
figured as Mediator and Saviour, actually undergoing a symbolic
sacrifice, and certainly securing to his worshippers eternal life. <span
id="fr_1599"></span>[3](#fn_1599) As to the doctrine of immortality
being pre-Christian, it is now quite unnecessary to speak; and the whole
Mithraic symbolism implies such a teaching. On most of the bull
monuments, it will be remembered, there stand beside Mithra two figures,
one holding a raised and one a lowered torch. These signified primarily
sunrise and sunset, or rising spring sun and sinking autumn sun; but, as
Lessing <span id="fr_1600"></span>[4](#fn_1600) long ago showed, they
were also the ancient symbols for life and death, and would further
signify the fall and return of the soul. <span
id="fr_1601"></span>[5](#fn_1601)

Nor was this the only point at which Mithraism is known to have competed
with Christianity in what pass for its highest attractions. The doctrine
of the *Logos*, the Incarnate Word or Reason, which Christianity
absorbed through the Platonising Jews of Alexandria, was present in
Mithraism, and of prior derivation. That Mithra was connected with "the
Word" appears from the Avesta. <span id="fr_1602"></span>[6](#fn_1602)
In the Vendîdâd, further, <span id="fr_1603"></span>[7](#fn_1603)
Zarathustra is made to praise successively Mithra "of the most glorious
weapons," Sraosha, "the Holy One," and "the Holy Word, the most
glorious," thus joining and in part identifying Mithra with the Word as
well as joining him with the Holy Spirit. And Emanuel Deutsch <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[8](#fn_1604) was of opinion that the Metatron <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[9](#fn_1605) of the Talmud (whom he equates with
the Ideas of Plato,

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

the *Logos* of Philo, the "World of Aziluth" of the Kabbalists, the
*Sophia* or Power of the Gnostics and the *Nous* of Plotinus) <span
id="fr_1606"></span>[1](#fn_1606) was "most probably nothing but
Mithra." <span id="fr_1607"></span>[2](#fn_1607) As the Metatron is on
the Jewish side identified with the "Angel" promised as leader and
commander to the Hebrews in Palestine, <span
id="fr_1608"></span>[3](#fn_1608) and that angel is quasi-historically
represented by Joshua =Jesus, the chain of allusion from Mithra to the
Christ is thus curiously complete. In respect of the concept of a
Trinity, as we have already seen, the parallel continues. By the
admission of a Catholic theologian, the Gods Ahura-Mazda, Sraosha, and
Mithra constitute an ostensible trinity closely analogous to that of the
later Christists; <span id="fr_1609"></span>[4](#fn_1609) and yet again
Mithra, himself approaching to supreme status, rides to battle with
Sraosha at his right and Rashnu at his left hand; <span
id="fr_1610"></span>[5](#fn_1610) or else with Rashnu on his right, and
Kista, the holy one (female) white-clothed, on his left. <span
id="fr_1611"></span>[6](#fn_1611)

There seems no good reason for supposing that the doctrines of the
*Logos* and the Trinity reached the Persians through the Greeks: <span
id="fr_1612"></span>[7](#fn_1612) on the contrary, they probably
acquired them from Babylonian sources, on which the Greeks also drew;
and it was not improbably their version of the *Logos* idea that gave
the lead to the Philonic and Christian form, in which the Word is
explicitly "the light of the world."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[310:3](pch69.htm#fr_1579) *De Abstinentia*,
ii, 56; iv, 16.

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[310:4](pch69.htm#fr_1580) It is remarkable
that even the treatise of Firmicus is mutilated at a passage (v) where
he seems to be accusing Christians of following Mithraic usages, and at
the beginning. where he may have made a similar proposition.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[310:5](pch69.htm#fr_1581) See Guigniaut's
French ed. of Creuzer's *Symbolik*, i, 368, ii, 158. Cp. Cox, *Myth. of
Aryan Nations*, p. 303, as to the identity of the Perseus and Herakles
myths.

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[311:1](pch69.htm#fr_1582) *Vendidâd*, Fargard
xix. I have put synonyms in the place of one or two reiterated terms, to
give the passage some of the literary benefit that is constantly lent in
this way by the translators of the Bible.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[311:2](pch69.htm#fr_1583) For a recent study
on the Mazdean conception of a future state on somewhat pro-Christian
lines see the research of M. Nathan, *La vie future d’après le
Mazdéisme, à la lumière des croyances parallèles dans les autres
religions*. Annales du Musée Guimet. Paris, 1901.

<span id="fn_1584"></span>[312:1](pch69.htm#fr_1584) Darmesteter's
Zendavesta, i, 370, 2nd ed. (*Fragments*).

<span id="fn_1585"></span>[312:2](pch69.htm#fr_1585) Darmesteter,
Introd. p. lxxvii.

<span id="fn_1586"></span>[312:3](pch69.htm#fr_1586) Cp. Cumont, i, 69.

<span id="fn_1587"></span>[312:4](pch69.htm#fr_1587) *Eccles. Hist.* B.
iii, c. 2. Cp. B. v, c. 16.

<span id="fn_1588"></span>[313:1](pch69.htm#fr_1588) Cp. Origen,
*Against Celsus*, vi, 27; Minucius Felix, *Octavius*, c. 9; Tertullian,
*Apol.* c. 7.

<span id="fn_1589"></span>[313:2](pch69.htm#fr_1589) *Recherches*, ii,
135. This false suggestion is implicitly copied by Milman, *Hist. of
Chr*. B. I, e. 1, note.

<span id="fn_1590"></span>[313:3](pch69.htm#fr_1590) Cap. 9.
Sainte-Croix offers an extraordinary mistranslation of the passage.

<span id="fn_1591"></span>[313:4](pch69.htm#fr_1591) To Porphyry, *De
Abstin.* ii, 56; a passage which says only that down till the time of
Hadrian it was the custom to sacrifice a virgin to Athênê at Laodicea.
Sainte-Croix seems to have blundered over the context, in which the
detail as to the sacrifice at Laodicea is referred to a historian
Pallas, who had *written so well* on the mysteries of Mithra. This may
be the basis also of the assertion by Creuzer (*Symbolik*, i, 363: 3te
Ausg. p. 258) that Hadrian's edict was directed against Mithraism.
Preller (*Römische Mythologie*, ed. Kohler, p. 758, note 3) surprisingly
echoes Sainte-Croix.

<span id="fn_1592"></span>[313:5](pch69.htm#fr_1592) Wright, *The Celt,
the Roman, and the Saxon*, 4th ed. p. 328. The insinuation is found also
in the encyclopaedias.

<span id="fn_1593"></span>[313:6](pch69.htm#fr_1593) *De Diis Syris*,
Syntag. i, c. 6.

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[313:7](pch69.htm#fr_1594) *In Athanasii
vita*, cod. 258.

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[313:8](pch69.htm#fr_1595) Above, pp.
[143](pch33.htm#page_143)-4, [206](pch43.htm#page_206)-9. Cp.
*Christianity and Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 208-12, 355-61 Grant Allen,
*Evolution of the Idea of God*, p. 345. And see below, [p.
320](pch70.htm#page_320).

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[313:9](pch69.htm#fr_1596) Even this may have
been an early Christian usage. Note the force of Gal. iii, 1; vi, 17.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[314:1](pch69.htm#fr_1597) See Origen,
*Against Celsus*, iii, 59; Julian, *Cæsares*, end; Homerid. *Hymn to
Dêmêtêr*, end; K. O. Müller, *Introd. to Mythology*, ch. xii, § 23. Cp.
Preller, *Griechische Mythologie*. i, 497; and, as to the other Pagan
mysteries, the admissions of Mosheim, notes on Cudworth, Harrison's ed.
iii. 296-7.

<span id="fn_1598"></span>[314:2](pch69.htm#fr_1598) *De Corona*, c. 15.
This is corroborated by a scene on one of the monuments (reproduced in
Roscher's *Lexikon*) in which the initiate greets Mithra, and seems to
receive from him his solar nimbus. See it in Cumont, ii, 336.

<span id="fn_1599"></span>[314:3](pch69.htm#fr_1599) See Garucci, *Les
Mystères du Syncrétisme Phrygien*, *passim*. Cp. Windischmann (p. 53) as
to the older cultus; and Roscher, *s.v.* *Mithra*, 3055 (20-33), as to
the God's being a Saviour-Sacrifice.

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[314:4](pch69.htm#fr_1600) *Wie die Alten den
Tod gebildet*. See p. 51 in 1869 ed. of *Werke*, Bd. v, and figures.

<span id="fn_1601"></span>[314:5](pch69.htm#fr_1601) So Creuzer, *Das
Mithrēum von Neuenheim*, pp. 41-2.

<span id="fn_1602"></span>[314:6](pch69.htm#fr_1602) *Mihir Yasht*,
xxxii, 137 (quoted above, [p. 289](pch65.htm#page_289)). Cp. xxvii. 107.

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[314:7](pch69.htm#fr_1603) Fargard xix, 14, 15
(48, 54). Cp. *Srosh Yasht*, exordium, and i, 3; *Srosh Vaj;* and Frag.
of Nasks, ix. 2; xxxiv, 70.

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[314:8](pch69.htm#fr_1604) *Literary Remains*,
p. 50.

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[314:9](pch69.htm#fr_1605) As to whom see
Hershon, *Genesis with a Talmudical Commentary*, pp. 23-4.

<span id="fn_1606"></span>[315:1](pch69.htm#fr_1606) He is further the
"Angel of Great Counsel" (Isaiah, ix, 5, Sept.) and heavenly *judge*,
here again equating with Mithra. Cp. Oxlee, *Christ. Doct. on the
Principles of Judaism*, ii, 329. In one of the Jewish forms of
excommunication the formula "Mittraton cujus nomen est ut nomen magistri
sui" occurs twice. See the translation in Selden, *De jure nat. et
gent.* 1, iv, c. 7, ed. 1679, p. 524.

<span id="fn_1607"></span>[315:2](pch69.htm#fr_1607) Cp. Darmesteter,
*Introd. to Zendavesta*, 2nd ed. c. 5, as to Jewish and Persian
interactions. M. Darmesteter leant unwarrantably to the view that the
Persians were the borrowers, but finally pronounces (p. lxviii) Jew and
Persian alike to have borrowed from Platonism. See above, Part II, ch.
ii, § 2, for a criticism of this view.

<span id="fn_1608"></span>[315:3](pch69.htm#fr_1608) Cahen's *Bible*,
note on Exod. xxiii, 21; Hershon, as cited.

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[315:4](pch69.htm#fr_1609) E. L. Fischer,
*Heidenthum und Offenbarung*, 1878, pp. 121, 130, points to the presence
of both Logos and Trinity in the Mithraic system. As to the trinitarian
idea, cp. Cumont, i, 298, 331. 6

<span id="fn_1610"></span>[315:5](pch69.htm#fr_1610) *Mihir Yasht*, xxv,
100.

<span id="fn_1611"></span>[315:6](pch69.htm#fr_1611) *Id*. xxxi, 126.

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[315:7](pch69.htm#fr_1612) Above, [p.
218](pch46.htm#page_218) *sq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 9. Mithraism and Christianity](pch70)
