[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch65) 
[Next](pch67) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 5. The Process of Syncretism.

In the great polytheistic era, however, the habit of personifying all
the forces of nature led first to a universal recognition of the

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

actual existence of the deities of foreign peoples, and later on to the
idea that all the deities of the nations are but names of phases of one
central and omnipotent power. Even among the philosophers and
theologians, of course, this conception never really destroyed the habit
of thinking of the alleged phases or manifestations of the deity as
being really minor deities; <span id="fr_1477"></span>[1](#fn_1477) and
much more a matter of course was it that among the multitude the deity
or deities should, always be conceived in a quite concrete form. But the
synthesizing tendency early resulted in this, that different cults were
combined; different God-names identified as pointing to the same God;
and different Gods combined into unities of two, three, four, or more
members. Egypt is the great theological factory for such combinations;
but the law necessarily operated elsewhere. The conception of a Divine
Trinity is of unknown antiquity: it flourished in Mesopotamia, in
Hindostan, in the Platonic philosophy, in Egypt, long before
Christianity. <span id="fr_1478"></span>[2](#fn_1478) But the combining
process, among other variations, had to take account of the worship of
Goddesses as well as of Gods; and in regions where Goddess-worship was
deeply rooted it was inevitable that there should occur combinations of
sex. This actually took place in the worship of Mithra. From
Herodotus, <span id="fr_1479"></span>[3](#fn_1479) writing in the fifth
century B.C., we learn that in some way the God Mithra was identified
with a Goddess. The whole passage, though familiar to students, is worth
quoting here:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The Persians, according to my own knowledge,
observe the following customs. It is not their practice to erect
statues, or temples, or altars, but they charge those with folly who do
so; because, as I conjecture, they do not think the Gods have human
forms, as the Greeks do. They are accustomed to ascend the highest parts
of the mountains, and offer sacrifice to Zeus, and they call the whole
circle of the heavens by the name of Zeus. They sacrifice to the sun and
moon, to the earth, fire, water, and the winds. To these alone they have
sacrificed from the earliest times; but they have since learnt from the
Arabians and Assyrians to sacrifice to (Aphroditê) Urania, whom the
Assyrians call Mylitta, the Arabians Alitta, and the Persians
Mitra."</span>

</div>

This is one of the seemingly improbable statements in Herodotus

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

which research has partly confirmed. <span
id="fr_1480"></span>[1](#fn_1480) He is accused, indeed, of
blundering <span id="fr_1481"></span>[2](#fn_1481) in combining Mithra
with Mylitta, it being shown from monuments that the Goddess identified
with Mithra was Anaitis or Tanat. <span
id="fr_1482"></span>[3](#fn_1482) But that the Armenian Anaitis and
Mylitta were regarded as the same deity seems clear, <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[4](#fn_1483) and there are other clues.

It has not been commonly observed that Strabo twice explicitly brackets
Anaitis with a Persian God Omanus as being worshipped at a common altar.
He saw the statue of Omanus carried in procession. <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[5](#fn_1484) There is reason to suppose that Omanus
(or the Persian form of the word) was a name of Mithra, and that it is
an adaptation of Vohumano (Bahman)=Good Mind, a divine name with a very
fluctuating connotation. In one passage of the Zendavesta, <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[6](#fn_1485) Vohumano figures as the doorkeeper of
heaven; but he was also first of the Ameshaspentas or Amshaspands, of
whom Mithra too (making seven) was chief; and he ranks further in the
Avesta with Ahura-Mazda as judge of the dead; and again as the
first-born son of Ahura-Mazda, as was Mithra later. Yet again, he is
identified with the creative power; <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[7](#fn_1486) and it seems impossible that the
conception of the "Good Mind" should have been prevented from coalescing
either with that of Ahura-Mazda, who was not represented by a statue, or
with that of Mithra, so making him "the Word." In any case, the fact of
the combination of Mithra in a double personality with that of a Goddess
is made clear, not only by the statement of the Christian
controversialist Julius Firmicus, in the fourth century, and later
writers, that the Persians make Mithras both two-sexed and threefold or
three-formed, <span id="fr_1487"></span>[8](#fn_1487) but by innumerable
Mithraic monuments

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

on which appear the symbols of two deities, male and female, the sun and
the moon, or, it may be, male and female principles of the sun or of the
earth. And this epicene or double-sexed character is singularly
preserved to us in that Mithraic monument of the Græco-Roman period
which we possess in our own British Museum, in which the divine slayer
of the bull presents a face of perfect and sexless beauty, feminine in
its delicate loveliness of feature, masculine in its association with
the male form.

In such a combination there is reason to see a direct influence of the
old Akkado-Babylonian system on the later Mazdean. From the old
Akkadians the Semites received the conception of a trinity, the "divine
father and mother by the side of their son the Sun-God." <span
id="fr_1488"></span>[1](#fn_1488) But their own ruling tendency was to
give every God, up to the highest, a "colourless double or wife"; <span
id="fr_1489"></span>[2](#fn_1489) and in the final blending of these in
a double-sexed deity we have the consummation of the idea. It was not
special to Asia; for the Egyptians gave a double sex alike to moon,
earth, air, fire, and water, making the earth male as rock, female as
arable soil; fire masculine as heat, female as light, and so on; <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[3](#fn_1490) and the Greeks and Romans accepted the
notion; <span id="fr_1491"></span>[4](#fn_1491) but it was probably from
Chaldæa that it reached the Mithraists. Bel had been represented as both
father and mother of Enlil, and Belti as both father and mother of
Ninlil; and there are yet other instances of the Babylonian vogue of the
idea of a God combining the two sexes. <span
id="fr_1492"></span>[5](#fn_1492)

There is a further presumption that it was either from Babylonia or
through Mithraism as modified after the Persian conquest of Babylon that
the idea of a double-sexed deity reached the Greeks. In the Orphic
hymns, which probably represent the theosophy of several centuries
before our era, it is predicated of four deities, of whom two, the Moon
and Nature (Selenê and Physeos), are normally female, and two (Adonis
and Dionysos) normally male. <span id="fr_1493"></span>[6](#fn_1493)
Selenê is

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

further identified with Mên, the Moon-God, who, as being double-sexed
like Mithra, was finally identified with him in worship and on
coins. <span id="fr_1494"></span>[1](#fn_1494) As Dionysos and Adonis,
originally Vegetation Gods, have at this stage become identified with
the Sun, there arises a presumption that a solar cult has been imitated;
though at the same time the solar cult may have adopted features from
the others. The likelihood is that the notion of a double-sexed deity
was the outcome on the one hand of the concrete practice of bracketing a
male and a female deity together, and on the other hand of speculation
on the essence of "divinity." But the concrete process probably came
first, and the conjunction of the symbols or heads of a male and female
deity in one monument or sculpture would give the lead to a mystical
theory of a twy-sexed being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[295:1](pch66.htm#fr_1477) Compare the Gâthas,
*passim*. Mr. Mills (introd. p. xxiv) makes too much of "the wonderful
idea that God's attributes are his messengers." The messengers, as he
admits, are conceived as Gods or angels. They simply bear the names of
attributes, on the analogy of the titles of a king's functionaries. Thus
arose the idea of the *Logos* or Divine Word (Yasna, xxix, 7).

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[295:2](pch66.htm#fr_1478) See, in the Gâthas,
Yasna xxx, 7, and Mr. Mills’ comments, pp. 14-15, etc., for traces of an
early Zoroastrian trinity.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[295:3](pch66.htm#fr_1479) B. i, c. 131.

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[296:1](pch66.htm#fr_1480) Lenormant admits as
to the alleged blunder: "Perhaps it was not after all an error, and the
divine couple may have been sometimes designated as a double Mithra"
(*Chaldean Magic*, p. 236).

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[296:2](pch66.htm#fr_1481) Rawlinson's
Herodotus, i, 257, 416. Cp. Lenormant, *Manual of Anc. Hist. Eng.*
trans. ii, 46; and *Chaldean Magic*, as quoted.

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[296:3](pch66.htm#fr_1482) Cumont, *Textes et
Monuments*, i, 5; ii, 87-88. On the names of this Goddess, see G.
Diercks, *Entwickelungsgeschichte des Geistes der Menschheit*, Berlin,
1881, i, 242. She is held to have been the Goddess of the Oxus. Meyer,
*Geschichte des Alterthums*, i, 542. Cp. Tiele, *Outlines*, pp. 170-1,
where she is derived from the Semites, who in turn took her from the
Akkadians. See also Tiele's *Egyptian Religion*, Eng. tr. p. 135; and
Justi, *Gesch. des alten. Persiens*, pp. 93-5.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[296:4](pch66.htm#fr_1483) Creuzer-Guigniaut,
*Religions de l’Antiquité*, t. ii, ptie. i, pp. 76-82 (1829); Bahr,
*Symbolik des Mosaischen Cultus*, ii, 243.

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[296:5](pch66.htm#fr_1484) B. xi, c. 8, § 4;
B. xv, c. 3, § 15.

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[296:6](pch66.htm#fr_1485) *Vendidâd*, Farg.
31 (102).

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[296:7](pch66.htm#fr_1486) See Max Müller,
*Psychological Religion*, 1893, pp. 184, 186, 203; and the Avesta,
*Yasna*, xxx; and compare Darmesteter's Introd. 2nd ed. p. lvi, as to
Vohumano being the *Logos*. M. Darmesteter thinks the idea came through
the Greeks, but does not face the problem as to whence *they* derived
it. In the Bundahish, Vohumano is the first thing created by God—exactly
as is the Logos for Philo—and from him then proceeds "the light of the
world" (ii, 23, 25). Cp. the Pahlavi Yasna, xxxi, 8 (a). There is
considerable obscurity as to the original character of Vohumano. Cp.
Müller, as cited, pp. 54, 56, 57; Haug, *Essays on the Parsis*, 3rd ed.
p. 350; and Spiegel, Avesta (1852), i, 247-8 (Fargard xix of
*Vendidâd*). Tiele identifies Vohumano with Sraosha, who in turn,
however, was joined with Mithra. *Outlines*, pp. 171, 172, 176; Haug,
pp. 307-8. Below, § 10. Winckler (*Altorient. Forschungen*, xvi (1901),
p. 4) identifies the Omanus of Strabo with Haman; but the existence of a
deity so named is far from certain.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[296:8](pch66.htm#fr_1487) *De Errore
Profanarum Religionum*, v. Compare Dionysius the pseudo-Areopagite,
Foist. vii *ad Polycarp.*, cited in Selden, *De Diis Syris*, Proleg. c.
3; and in Cudworth, <span id="page_297">p. 297</span> *Intellectual
System*, Harrison's ed. i. 482. In a passage in the Yasna there is
mention of "the two divine Mithras" (Lenormant, as quoted, citing
Burnout). But cp. Mills' rendering of Yasna, i, 11, which appears to be
the passage in view.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[297:1](pch66.htm#fr_1488) Sayce, Hibbert
Lectures, p. 193.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[297:2](pch66.htm#fr_1489) *Id*. p. 215. Cp.
Genesis, i, 27; Donaldson, *Theatre of the Greeks*, 7th ed. p. 21; and
Lenormant, *Chaldean Magic*, pp. 129-130. In all likelihood, the Hebrew
"Holy Spirit" was originally held to be feminine. Cp. Justin Martyr, 1
Apol. c. 64.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[297:3](pch66.htm#fr_1490) Plutarch, *Isis and
Osiris*, c. 43; Seneca, *Quaest. Nat.* iii, 14.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[297:4](pch66.htm#fr_1491) See Servius on the
*Æneid*, ii, 632. Cp. Donaldson, as last cited. It was in this way that
Apollo and Dionysos came to be at times represented in feminine robes;
while Aphroditê was sometimes (as in Sparta) bearded. Cp. Macrobius.
*Saturnalia*, iii, 8, as to the double sex of Venus, which is abundantly
illustrated by Preller, *Römische Mythologie*, 2nd ed. p. 389, and
*Griechische Mythologie*, 2nd ed. i, 268. On other developments of the
Principle cp. Selden, *De Diis Syris*, Syntag. ii, c. 2; and Spencer,
*De legibus Hebræorum*, lib. ii, c. xvii, § 12. It has been discussed
with much suggestiveness, if with some fantasy of speculation, by Mr.
Gerald Massey in his *Natural Genesis*, 1883, i, 510-518.

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[297:5](pch66.htm#fr_1492) Anz, *Zur Frage
nach dem Ursprung des Gnosticismus*, 1897, p. 105, following Jensen,
*Kosmologie der Babylonier*, pp. 142 *sq*., 272 *sq*.

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[297:6](pch66.htm#fr_1493) *Orphica*, ix, 2,
3; x, 18; xliii, 4; lvi, 4.

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[298:1](pch66.htm#fr_1494) Cumont, ii,
189-190; i, 235, and *notes*. As we saw, Mithra was also identified with
Shamas, the Babylonian Sun-God. *Id*. i, 231.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 6. Symbols of Mithra](pch67)
