[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch78) 
[Next](pch80) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 5. Mexican Sacrifices and Cannibal Sacraments.

Of deeper interest is the moral aspect of the worship of Mexican Gods,
especially the most memorable feature of all, human sacrifice. Though
this, as we have seen, is primordial in religion, there can be no
question that its enormous development was the work of the organised
priesthood, and of the cultivated religious sentiment. The Roman War-God
remained subordinate, warlike though the Romans were; the Mexican became
one of the two leading deities, and received the more assiduous worship.
Whence the divergence? Mainly, we must conclude, from the multiplication
of the Mexican priesthood, which was primarily due to the absorption of
the priest-hoods of the conquered races; and from the prior development
of the rite of human sacrifice in the cult of the Gods or Goddesses of
Vegetation. Among the Aztecs the tradition went that human sacrifices
were of late introduction; <span id="fr_1874"></span>[3](#fn_1874) and
this view would no doubt be favoured by the priests, who would represent
that the latter-day power of the State was due to the sacrifices. But we
have seen that they were practised on a smaller scale by the American
peoples at much earlier stages of social evolution; and in the midway
stages they were also common. In northern South America, the chief God
of the Muyscas, Fomagata, was worshipped with many human sacrifices, as
he was also under the name Fomagazdad, with his wife Zipaltonal, in
Nicaragua, where he and she were held the progenitors of the human
race; <span id="fr_1875"></span>[4](#fn_1875) and similar usages, often
in connection with the Sun-God, sometimes with the God of Rain, were
common in Yucatan, Chiapa, Tobasco, Honduras, and elsewhere. <span
id="fr_1876"></span>[5](#fn_1876) The Mexican Otimias, also, who were
not conquered by the Aztecs, sacrificed children and ate their flesh,
carrying it with them, roasted, on their campaigns. <span
id="fr_1877"></span>[6](#fn_1877)

<span id="page_361">p. 361</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Such sacrifices
then were well-established in Mexico before the Aztecs came, being found
in some degree even among the relatively peaceful Toltecs. <span
id="fr_1878"></span>[1](#fn_1878) What the Aztec priesthood did was to
multiply them to a frightful extent. <span
id="fr_1879"></span>[2](#fn_1879)

The causes of expansion and restriction in such cases are no doubt
complex; but when we compare those of the Aztecs and the Greeks,
Egyptians, and Romans, we can trace certain decisive conditions.
Firstly, human sacrifices tend to multiply among peoples much given to
war, by way of offerings to the Gods; but where there is only a limited
priesthood the natural force of compassion leads men in time, as they
grow more civilised, to abandon such sacrifices; while a priesthood
tends to maintain them. Thus among the civilised peoples of the old
world they lasted longest with the priest-ridden Carthaginians; and the
reason that they did not continue late among the Jews was probably that
these did not possess a numerous priesthood till after the Captivity,
when their religion was recast in terms of the more civilised Oriental
systems. On the other hand, an expanding or expanded empire, powerfully
ruled by a warrior autocrat, like those of Babylon and Egypt, is led in
various ways to abandon human sacrifice even if the priesthoods be
numerous. Alien cults are absorbed for political reasons, and it is no
part of the ruler's policy to be habitually at war with small
neighbours, he having absorbed most of them: hence an irregular supply
of captives. The priesthoods, too, can be conveniently provided for
through other forms of sacrifice; and on those other lines they are less
powerful relatively to the king. Thus in the empire of the Incas the
practice of human sacrifice was well restrained. But where a warlike and
priest-ridden State is established among well-armed neighbours, with
cults of human sacrifice already well-established all round, the
sacrificing of captives is apt to serve as a motive to war, and the
priests tend to enforce it. The process is perfectly intelligible. The
stronghold of all priesthoods is the principle of intercession; whether
it be in the form of simple prayer and propitiatory worship, or a
mixture of that with a doctrine of mystic sacrifice, as among
Protestants; or in the constant repetition of a ceremony of mystic
sacrifice, as among Catholics; or in actual animal sacrifice, as among
ancient Jews and Pagans. In these cases we see that, the more stress is
laid on the act of sacrifice, the stronger is the priesthood—or we may
put it conversely. Strongest of all then must be the hold of the
priesthood whose

<span id="page_362">p. 362</span>

sacrifices are most terrible. And terrible was the prestige of the
priesthood of Mexico. The greater the State grew, the larger were the
hecatombs of human victims. Almost every God had to be propitiated in
the same way; but above all must the War-God be for ever glutted with
the smoking hearts of slain captives. Scarcely any historian, says
Prescott, <span id="fr_1880"></span>[1](#fn_1880) estimates the number
of human beings sacrificed yearly throughout the empire at less than
20,000, and some make it 50,000. <span id="fr_1881"></span>[2](#fn_1881)
Of this doomed host, Huitzilopochtli had the lion's share; and it is
recorded that at the dedication of his great new temple in 1486 there
were slain in his honour 70,000 prisoners of war, who had been reserved
for the purpose for years throughout the empire. They formed a train two
miles long, and the work of priestly butchery went on for several days.

At every festival of the God there was a new hecatomb of victims; and we
may conceive how the chronic spectacle burnt itself in on the
imagination of the people. The Mexican temples, as we have seen, were
great pointless pyramids, sometimes of four or five stories, and the
sacrifices were offered on the top. The stair was so made that it
mounted successively all four sides of the pyramid, and when the train
of torch-bearing priests wound their way up in the darkness, as was the
rule for certain sacrifices, <span id="fr_1882"></span>[3](#fn_1882) to
the topmost platform, with its ever-burning fires and its stone of
sacrifice, the whole city looked on. And then the horror of the
sacrificial act! In the great majority of the sacrifices the victim was
laid living on the convex stone and held by the limbs, while the slayer
cut open his breast with the sacred flint <span
id="fr_1883"></span>[4](#fn_1883) knife—the ancient knife, used before
men had the use of metals, and therefore most truly religious—and tore
out the palpitating heart, which was held on high to the absent but
all-seeing sun, before being set to burn in incense in front of the
idol, whose lips, and the walls of whose shrines, were devoutly daubed
with blood. <span id="fr_1884"></span>[5](#fn_1884)

Apart from the resort to holocausts, the religious principle underlying
many, if not all, of the American human sacrifices was that the victim
represented the God; and on this score slaves or children were as
readily sacrificed as captives. Among the Guatemalans, we are told,
captives or devoted slaves were regarded as becoming

<span id="page_363">p. 363</span>

divine beings in the home of the Sun; <span
id="fr_1885"></span>[1](#fn_1885) and the general principle that the
victim represented the God involved such a conception. <span
id="fr_1886"></span>[2](#fn_1886) And while this principle probably
originates in early rites, such as those so long preserved by the
Khonds, which aimed at the annual renewal of vegetation by propitiation
and "sympathetic magic," the practice became fixed in the general
rituals as a sacred thing in itself.

In connection with one annual festival of Tezcatlipoca, the Creator and
"soul of the world," who combined the attributes of perpetual youthful
beauty with the function of the God of justice and retribution, as
Winter Sun, there was selected for immolation a young male captive of
especial beauty, who was treated with great reverence for a whole year
before being sacrificed—almost exactly like the doomed captive among the
South American Tupinambos above described. He was gorgeously attired;
flowers were strewn before him; he went about followed by a retinue of
the king's pages; and the people prostrated themselves before him and
worshipped him as a God. He was in fact, according to rule, the God's
representative, and was described as his image. <span
id="fr_1887"></span>[3](#fn_1887) A month before the fatal day new
indulgences were heaped upon him. Four beautiful maidens, bearing the
names of the principal Goddesses, were given him as concubines. At
length came his death day. His honours and his joys were ended, and his
fine raiment taken away. Carried on a royal barge across the lake to a
particular temple, about a league from the city, whither all the people
thronged, he was led up the pyramid in procession, he taking part in the
ritual by throwing away his chaplets of flowers and breaking his guitar.
Then, at the top, the six black-robed slayers, the sacrificial stone,
and the horror of the end. And when all was over the priests piously
improved the occasion, preaching that all this had been typical of human
destiny, <span id="fr_1888"></span>[4](#fn_1888) while the aristocracy
sacramentally ate the victim's roasted limbs.

Along with the victim for Tezcatlipoca there was one for
Huitzilopochtli; and they roamed together all the year. The latter
victim was not adored: but he had the privilege of choosing the hour for

<span id="page_364">p. 364</span>

his sacrifice, though not the day. He was called the "Wise Lord of
Heaven," and he was slain, not on the altar, but in the arms of the
priests. <span id="fr_1889"></span>[1](#fn_1889)

The Goddesses, too, had their victims—women victims; and a maiden was
regularly prepared for one sacrifice to the Maize-Goddess Centeotl, the
Mexican Ceres, somewhat as was the representative of Tezcatlipoca.
Centeotl was the Mother-Goddess *par excellence*, being named
*Toucoyohua*, "the nourisher of men," and represented, like Dêmêtêr and
so many Goddesses of the same type, with a child in her arms. <span
id="fr_1890"></span>[2](#fn_1890) A tradition prevailed, too, that in
her cult there were anciently no human sacrifices. But this is doubtful;
and the explanation is as before, that anciently single victims were
sacrificed, while among the Aztecs there were many. The woman who
personated the Goddess was sacrificed with other victims, <span
id="fr_1891"></span>[3](#fn_1891) and the slaying was followed by a
ceremonial of an indescribably revolting character, the slayers flaying
the victims and donning their skins. <span
id="fr_1892"></span>[4](#fn_1892) This hideous act is in all likelihood
one of the oldest devices of religious symbolism; and it is a
distinguished theologian who suggests to us that it is lineally
connected, through the totemistic or other wearing of animal-skins, with
the Biblical conception of "the robe of righteousness." <span
id="fr_1893"></span>[5](#fn_1893) It is certainly akin to the practice
of the Babylonian priests, who wore imitation fish-skins as identifying
them with the Fish-God, <span id="fr_1894"></span>[6](#fn_1894) and to
that of the Egyptian and other priests who wore the dappled skins of
leopards or fawns as symbolising the starry heavens, or robes without
seam as symbolising the cosmos. <span id="fr_1895"></span>[7](#fn_1895)
At bottom all ritualism is the same thing, a reduction of righteousness,
in all sincerity, to make-believe.

But the special and habitual atrocity of the Mexican cultus was the act
of ritual cannibalism. This was strictly a matter of religion. After a
captive had been sacrificially slain in ordinary course, his body was
delivered to the warrior who captured him, and was by him made the
special dish at a formal and decorous public banquet to his friends. It
was part of the prescribed worship of the Gods. That the Mexicans were
not in the least cannibals by taste is shown by the fact that in the
great siege by Cortès they died of starvation by thousands. They never
ate fellow-citizens; <span id="fr_1896"></span>[8](#fn_1896) only the
sacrificially

<span id="page_365">p. 365</span>

slain captive. But only a great priesthood could have maintained even
that usage. We have seen that such ritual cannibalism has existed at one
time in all races; and obviously it must have originated in simple
cannibalism, for men would never have begun to offer to the Gods food
that was primordially abominable to themselves. <span
id="fr_1897"></span>[1](#fn_1897) On the other hand, however, we know
that cannibalism everywhere dies out naturally even among savages, apart
from religion, as soon as they reach some degree of peaceful life, and
even sooner. Among the native tribes of Lower California, though they
are among the most degraded savages in the world, and given to various
disgusting practices, the eating not only of human flesh but of that of
monkeys, as resembling men, is held abominable. <span
id="fr_1898"></span>[2](#fn_1898) The Tahitians, who in warfare were
murderous to the last degree, and practised hideous barbarities, had yet
evolved beyond the stage of public cannibal banquets, even the sacrifice
of a man to the God being followed only by the pretended eating of his
eye by the chief; <span id="fr_1899"></span>[3](#fn_1899) and it was the
priests who instigated what human sacrifices there were. So among the
similarly cruel Tongans, cannibal feasts were rare, occurring only after
battles, and being execrated by the women; child sacrifices were also
rare and special, and were being superseded by surrogates of amputated
fingers. <span id="fr_1900"></span>[4](#fn_1900) In each of these cases
the priesthoods were little organised: <span
id="fr_1901"></span>[5](#fn_1901) hence the upward evolution. Among the
Fijians, the Marquesans, and the Maoris, on the contrary, we find highly
organised and cannibalistic priesthoods; <span
id="fr_1902"></span>[6](#fn_1902) and

<span id="page_366">p. 366</span>

there we likewise find cannibalism and human sacrifices alike common.
So, among the Khonds, a specially "instructed" priest was essential to
the *meriah* sacrifice; and in China, where human scapegoat sacrifices
were discredited and abolished between the third and second centuries
B.C., we hear of them as being prescribed by priests and put down by
wise rulers. <span id="fr_1903"></span>[1](#fn_1903) And as in Peru we
shall see reason to regard the Incas as putting some check on human
sacrifice, so in the whole of Central America the only case of any
attempt at such reform, apart from the Toltec priesthood of
Quetzalcoatl, occurs in the history of the great Acolhuan king of
Tezcuco, Netzahualcoyotl, who died in 1472. Of him it is told that he
was the best poet of his country, which was the most highly civilised of
the New World; <span id="fr_1904"></span>[2](#fn_1904) and that he
worshipped, on a great altar-pyramid of nine stages, an "unknown God"
who had no image, and to whom he offered only perfume and incense, <span
id="fr_1905"></span>[3](#fn_1905) resisting the priests who pressed for
human sacrifice. But his example seems never to have affected his Aztec
allies, who gradually won supremacy over the Tezcucans; and even in his
own realm he could never suppress the human sacrifices which had there
been revived before his time under Aztec influence, and multiplied under
it later.

The Aztec religion, in fine, was working the ruin of the civilisation of
Central America, as similar religions may have done for the far older
civilisations that have left only ruins behind them. Sacerdotalism, it
is clear, tended as an institution to check the progress of humanity,
which even among slaughterous savages elsewhere brought anthropophagy
into discredit. No amount of passion for war could have kept the
civilised Aztecs complacently practising ritual cannibalism if an
austere and all-powerful priesthood had not fanatically enforced
it. <span id="fr_1906"></span>[4](#fn_1906) The great sanction for human
sacrifice, with the Mexicans as with the Semites, was the doctrine which
identified the God with the victim, and as it were sacrificed him to
himself. The principle was thus in a peculiar degree priest-made and
priest-preserved. <span id="fr_1907"></span>[5](#fn_1907)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1874"></span>[360:3](pch79.htm#fr_1874) J. G. Müller, pp.
502, 597, 600.

<span id="fn_1875"></span>[360:4](pch79.htm#fr_1875) *Id*. p. 437.

<span id="fn_1876"></span>[360:5](pch79.htm#fr_1876) *Id*. pp. 476-7,
492, 502, and see above, [p. 350](pch77.htm#page_350).

<span id="fn_1877"></span>[360:6](pch79.htm#fr_1877) *Id*. pp. 502-3.

<span id="fn_1878"></span>[361:1](pch79.htm#fr_1878) Prescott, p. 41,
*n*.; Müller, p. 664.

<span id="fn_1879"></span>[361:2](pch79.htm#fr_1879) Müller, pp. 492,
502.

<span id="fn_1880"></span>[362:1](pch79.htm#fr_1880) As cited, B. i, c.
3, p. 38.

<span id="fn_1881"></span>[362:2](pch79.htm#fr_1881) The Franciscan
monks computed that 2,500 victims were annually sacrificed in the town
and district of Mexico alone. Bernal Diaz, Memoirs, Eng. tr. ch. 208,
cited in Spencer's *Descriptive Sociology*, No. II, p. 20, col. 2. Cp.
Herrera, as there cited; and J. H. Müller, pp. 637-9.

<span id="fn_1882"></span>[362:3](pch79.htm#fr_1882) Bancroft, ii, 334.

<span id="fn_1883"></span>[362:4](pch79.htm#fr_1883) Or rather,
obsidian, a volcanic mineral.

<span id="fn_1884"></span>[362:5](pch79.htm#fr_1884) This was usual in
the human sacrifices of the other Central-American peoples.

<span id="fn_1885"></span>[363:1](pch79.htm#fr_1885) J. G. Müller, p.
476.

<span id="fn_1886"></span>[363:2](pch79.htm#fr_1886) As to the
customariness of this identification, see Bancroft, iii, 342; J. G.
Müller, pp. 477, 493, 501, 570, 599, 600, 604, 606, 636, 690; Gomara, as
before cited, p. 444, col. 2; and cp. Spencer's *Descriptive Sociology*,
No. II, p. 20, cols. 2 and 3, citing Duran, Herrera, and Sahagun. "Of
the human sacrifices of rude peoples, those of the Mexicans are perhaps
the most instructive, for in them the theanthropic character of the
victim comes out most clearly" (Prof. Robertson Smith, *Religion of the
Semites*, p. 347).

<span id="fn_1887"></span>[363:3](pch79.htm#fr_1887) Sahagun, p. 97 (B.
ii, c. 24). Cp. the old accounts cited by Dr. Frazer, *Golden Bough*,
and Herrera, cited by Spencer, *D.S.* ii, 20, col. 3.

<span id="fn_1888"></span>[363:4](pch79.htm#fr_1888) Sahagun, as last
cited.

<span id="fn_1889"></span>[364:1](pch79.htm#fr_1889) Clavigero, vi, § 32
(i, 302-3).

<span id="fn_1890"></span>[364:2](pch79.htm#fr_1890) J. G. Müller, p.
493.

<span id="fn_1891"></span>[364:3](pch79.htm#fr_1891) *Id*. p. 492.

<span id="fn_1892"></span>[364:4](pch79.htm#fr_1892) Cp. Bancroft, iii,
354-7; Sahagun, pp. 134-5 (b. ii, c. 30); Spencer, D. S. ii, 21, col. 3;
Müller, p. 599.

<span id="fn_1893"></span>[364:5](pch79.htm#fr_1893) Smith, *Religion of
the Semites*, pp. 416-18. Thus Dionysos’ robe of fawnskin is "holy."
Euripides, *Bacchæ*, 138.

<span id="fn_1894"></span>[364:6](pch79.htm#fr_1894) See the
illustrations in W. Simpson's *Jonah Legend*, 1899.

<span id="fn_1895"></span>[364:7](pch79.htm#fr_1895) *Christianity and
Mythology*, 2nd ed. pp. 379-81.

<span id="fn_1896"></span>[364:8](pch79.htm#fr_1896) It would perhaps be
accurate to say that the eating of a slain enemy was originally part of
a process of triumphing over him and appeasing one's own slain dead; and
that <span id="page_365">p. 365</span> early abstention from the flesh
of fellow-citizens meant not primary distaste for human flesh (which is
negatived by the ritual practice), but obedience to a moral veto on
domestic cannibalism, such as must have been set up early in all
civilisations. Cp. Bancroft, ii, 358.

<span id="fn_1897"></span>[365:1](pch79.htm#fr_1897) Réville, p. 87. See
above, [p. 134](pch32.htm#page_134), *note*, as to the counter theory
that cannibalism originated in the belief that the Gods ate men, and
that men should do likewise to commune with them. This theory is of old
standing. See it cited from an Italian essayist by Virey, *Hist.
Naturelle du genre humain*, 1801, ii, 53.

<span id="fn_1898"></span>[365:2](pch79.htm#fr_1898) Bancroft, i. 560.
But it is not certain whether this veto applies to enemies. Professor
Robertson Smith thinks the horror of human flesh arose in superstition
as to its "sacrosanct character," but does not fully explain. *Religion
of the Semites*, p. 348.

<span id="fn_1899"></span>[365:3](pch79.htm#fr_1899) W. Ellis,
*Polynesian Researches*, 2nd ed. i, 309, 357; iv, 150-2; Moerenhout,
*Voyage aux Iles du Grand Ocean*, 1837, i, 512.

<span id="fn_1900"></span>[365:4](pch79.htm#fr_1900) Mariner, *Account
of the Tonga Islands*, ed. 1827, i, 190. 300, ii, 22.

<span id="fn_1901"></span>[365:5](pch79.htm#fr_1901) In Tahiti. the
sorcerers were as powerful as the priests; and in the case of the great
national oracle no one was specially appointed to consult the God.
Priests, too, had a precarious prestige. (Ellis, i, 366, 371, 377, 379.)
Of the Tonga Islands Mariner relates that "the priests live
indiscriminately with the rest of the natives; are not respected on the
score of their being priests, unless when actually inspired; and hold no
known conferences together as an allied body" (ii, 129).

<span id="fn_1902"></span>[365:6](pch79.htm#fr_1902) Cp. J. White, *The
Ancient History of the Maori*, Wellington, 1887, i, 1, 2, 8-16, 17; W.
Ellis, *Polynesian Researches*, iii, 317-318; Moerenhout, *Voyage*
cited, i, 475; T. Williams, *Fiji and the Fijians*, i, 221, 223, 227.
"Cannibalism is part of Fijian religion; and the Gods are described as
delighting in human flesh" (last cit. p. 231). Mariner says that when
Cook visited the Tonga Islands "cannibalism was scarcely thought of
among them; but the Fiji people soon taught them this, as well as the
art of war; and a famine, which happened some time afterwards, rendered
the expedient for a time almost necessary" (ii. 108-9. Cp. 107). Yet, as
we have seen, human sacrifice was not making progress. King Finow,
albeit for personal reasons, was strongly against it, though the priests
stood for it (Mariner, ii, 178). So, in Fiji, where "at one time Ndengei
\[the Supreme God\] would constantly have human bodies for sacrifices,"
a disgusted chief stopped them, and ordered that pigs be substituted (T.
Williams, p. 231). In Tahiti, again, human sacrifices had either become
<span id="page_366">p. 366</span> obsolete, and so forgotten, and been
then revived, or else were originated, by a priest. (Ellis, i, 106. Cp.
J. Williams, *Narrative of Missionary Enterprise*s in the South Seas,
1837, pp. 550, 553). The high priest in each district was practically
the sovereign sacrificer (Moerenhout, i, 477). See above, p. 112, as to
the Khonds.

<span id="fn_1903"></span>[366:1](pch79.htm#fr_1903) Above, [p.
61](pch19.htm#page_61).

<span id="fn_1904"></span>[366:2](pch79.htm#fr_1904) Cp. Prescott, p.
81, *sq*., and p. 97.

<span id="fn_1905"></span>[366:3](pch79.htm#fr_1905) Bancroft, v, 427-9;
Clavigero, B. iv, §§ 4, 15; vii, § 42; Prescott, pp. 91-3.

<span id="fn_1906"></span>[366:4](pch79.htm#fr_1906) "Cannibalism in
general declined before human sacrifice: in heathenism, humanity. where
it triumphed, did so often against religion: humanity came into
religion, not out of it: religion withstood the benign change." J. G.
Müller, p. 632.

<span id="fn_1907"></span>[366:5](pch79.htm#fr_1907) Cp. Th. Parker,
*Discourse of Matters pertaining to Religion*, ed, 1877, pp. 34, 44, 93,
note.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 6. Mexican Ethics](pch80)
