[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch77) 
[Next](pch79) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 4. The Mexican Cultus.

When we turn from this stage of religious history to that of Aztec
Mexico, the first and most memorable difference that faces us is the
immense expansion of the power of the priests. If we can trust the
Spanish writers, <span id="fr_1846"></span>[2](#fn_1846) five thousand
priests were connected with the principal temple in the city of Mexico
alone, where there were in all some 600 temples, and where the total
population was perhaps about 300,000; <span
id="fr_1847"></span>[3](#fn_1847) and all the cities were divided into
districts placed under the charge of parochial clergy, who regulated all
acts of religion. In this enormous strength of the priestly class we
have the secret of that frightful development of religious delusion and
its attendant atrocity which marks off Mexico from the rest of the
world. The system was, of course, polytheistic, and, equally of course,
it exhibits the usual tendency towards pantheism or monotheism; but the
overwhelming priesthood necessarily perpetuated the separate cults.
There were at least thirteen principal deities, and more than two
hundred inferior. <span id="fr_1848"></span>[4](#fn_1848) Indeed, some
reckon as high as three thousand

<span id="page_356">p. 356</span>

the number of the minor spirits, <span id="fr_1849"></span>[1](#fn_1849)
who would answer to the genii and patron saints of Europe; and it is
obvious that in Mexico as in Christendom there must have been many
varieties of religious temper and attitude. <span
id="fr_1850"></span>[2](#fn_1850) In many of the forms of prayer and
admonition which have been preserved, <span
id="fr_1851"></span>[3](#fn_1851) we see a habit of alluding reverently
to "God" (*Teotl*) or "our Lord," without any specification of any one
deity, and with a general assumption that the Lord loves right conduct.
This universal God was in origin apparently the Sun, who was worshipped
in the temples of all the Gods alike, being prayed to four times each
day and four times each night. <span id="fr_1852"></span>[4](#fn_1852)

At the first glance it is plain that the Mexican pantheon represented
the myths of many tribes, myths which overlapped each other, as in the
case of the ancient and widely worshipped God of Rain and his wife the
Goddess of Water, and which survived separately by being adapted to the
different usages of life. In connection with the rite of infant baptism,
which the Mexicans practised most scrupulously, the officiating women
prayed to "Our Merciful Lady," Chalchiuhtlicue or Cioacoatl, the Goddess
of Water. <span id="fr_1853"></span>[5](#fn_1853) At the season when
rain was wanted for the harvest, again, prayer was made to the God or
Gods named Tlaloc <span id="fr_1854"></span>[6](#fn_1854)—for both the
singular and plural forms are used—who controlled the rain; and whereas
the Goddess of Water invoked at baptism was held merciful, the Tlaloc
had to be propitiated by the regular sacrifice of a number of sucking
infants, bought from poor parents or extorted from superstitious
ones. <span id="fr_1855"></span>[7](#fn_1855) There is no more awful
illustration of the capacity of the human mind for religious delusion
than the record of how the merciful people, believing in the efficacy of
the sacrifice, would yet keep out of the way of the sacred procession
which carried the doomed babes, because they could not bear to see them
weep and think of their fate; while others, weeping themselves, would
take comfort if the children wept freely, because that prognosticated
plenteous rains. <span id="fr_1856"></span>[8](#fn_1856)

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But even under the
spell of religion men could not sacrifice infants to the very deity
invoked at baptism: so the benign Water-Goddess was sundered from the
child-devouring Water-God. And by the same law of adaptation to social
function it came about that the most prominent of the worships of
Mexico, a state periodically at war, was that of the War-God
Huitzilopochtli, who figured as the patron God of the nation.

In Huitzilopochtli we have a very interesting case of mythological
evolution. <span id="fr_1857"></span>[1](#fn_1857) It has been argued
that he was originally a simple bird-God, the humming-bird, his early
name being the diminutive Huitziton, "the little humming-bird." <span
id="fr_1858"></span>[2](#fn_1858) An old legend tells that while the
Aztecs still dwelt in Aztlan, a man among them named Huitziton chirped
like a bird, "Tihui" = "Let us go," and that he thus persuaded them to
migrate and conquer for themselves a new country. As the later God
actually bears the symbol of a hummingbird on his left foot, and his
name Huitzilopochtli means "hummingbird on the left," there has
evidently occurred some process of assimilation; but it is not quite
certain that it was in this wise. If the humming-bird were originally a
totem-God, the hypothesis would seem sound; but this, I think, has not
been shown; and there remains open the possibility that the symbol was
not primary but secondary.

The singular fact that, even as the Mexican War-God has a humming-bird
for his symbol, so Mars, the Roman War-God, has a wood-pecker for his,
is in this regard worth a moment's attention. We can draw no certain
conclusion in the matter; but it seems likely that the evolution in the
two cases may have been similar. Now, there is no clear evidence that
the wood-pecker was a totem-God; and the whole question of Mars’s name
*Picumnus*, which he was held to have from *Picus*, the wood-pecker, is
obscure. <span id="fr_1859"></span>[3](#fn_1859) Oddly enough, the
Sabines had a legend that the wood-pecker led them to their
settling-place, which they consequently called Picenum. When we note
that a number of ancient communities similarly had legends of birds or
animals who guided them to their settling-place, <span
id="fr_1860"></span>[4](#fn_1860) and that the name of the place
sometimes accords with the name of the guide and sometimes does not, we
seem obliged to recognise three possibilities.

1\. The animal or bird was in some cases very likely a totem-God,

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

the legend of guidance being a late way of explaining its association
with the community.

2\. A place, however, might easily be named by newcomers because of the
number of birds or animals of a given kind seen there; and the
explanatory legend on that view is naught.

3\. A symbolic animal, connected with the worship or image of a God,
would also give rise to explanatory legends. One would prompt another.

If then the Sabines put the wood-pecker on their standard, the question
arises whether it may not have been because it was the symbol of the
War-God. It is noted concerning the humming-bird that he is
extraordinarily brave and pugnacious; <span
id="fr_1861"></span>[1](#fn_1861) and the same might readily be said of
the wood-pecker, who is as it were always attacking. Supposing the
symbol to be secondary, there is no difficulty in the matter: all the
legends would be intelligible on the usual lines of myth-making. In
regard to Huitzilopochtli, again, there is a symbolic source for his
curious epithet "on the left." In one legend he sits after death at the
left hand of his brother Tezcatlipoca, <span
id="fr_1862"></span>[2](#fn_1862) the Creator and Supreme God; and
whether or not this is the earliest form of the idea, it suggests that
the placing of the symbol on the left foot of the War-God may have
arisen from the previous currency of the phrase "Huitzlin on the left"
in another signification, though on this view the God had been already
named after his symbol.

Leaving open the problem of origins on this side, we come upon another
in the fact that neither Huitzilopochtli nor Mars was primarily a
War-God. The former, who was practically the national God of Mexico, was
also called Mexitli; <span id="fr_1863"></span>[3](#fn_1863) and it
seems likelier that this should have been his original name, and
Huitzilopochtli a sobriquet, than *vice versa*. And so with the
function. A War-God, specially known as such, is not a primary
conception: what happens is that a particular God comes to be the God of
War. Among the Native Americans, the "Great God" or Creator and Ruler,
or else the Heaven-or Sun-God, was the War-God; <span
id="fr_1864"></span>[4](#fn_1864) and we know that Mars was originally a
sylvan deity, <span id="fr_1865"></span>[5](#fn_1865) concerned with
vegetation and flocks and herds. How came he to preside over war? Simply
because, we may take it, he was the God of *the season at which war was
usually* 

<span id="page_359">p. 359</span>

*made*. Campaigns were begun in spring; and so the God of the Spring
season, who was specially invoked, became War-God. Mars was just
*Martius*, March; and he lent himself the better to the conception,
because March is a stormy and blusterous month. Mars strictly retains
these characteristics, being a blusterous rather than a great or
dignified God in both the Greek and Roman mythologies. But here suggests
itself another possible source for the symbol of the War-God. *Picus*
means speckled, <span id="fr_1866"></span>[1](#fn_1866) coloured; and
the speckled wood-pecker might figure the coming of speckled spring, as
the humming-bird would do the colour-time in Mexico. Perhaps there may
be a similar natural explanation for the further striking coincidence
that Huitzilopochtli is born of a virgin mother, Coatlicue, who is
abnormally impregnated by being touched by a ball of bright-coloured
feathers, <span id="fr_1867"></span>[2](#fn_1867) while Juno bears Mars
also virginally, being impregnated by the touch of a flower. <span
id="fr_1868"></span>[3](#fn_1868)

In both cases, certainly, we have a sufficiently marked primary type for
the myth of the Virgin-Birth, the idea in each being simply the birth of
vegetation in spring. Though the mythical Coatlicue, like Mary, is a
God-fearing woman, who frequents the temple and lives in a specified
village, Coatepec, near Tula, the Virgin Mother is simply the ancient
Mother of all, the Earth; and the concept of virginity is a verbally
made one, in virtue of the mere fact that the whole is a metaphor. But
if Huitzilopochtli be thus admittedly in origin a God of
Vegetation, <span id="fr_1869"></span>[4](#fn_1869) there arises a
stronger presumption that he too was originally symbolised by his bird
because of its seasonal relation to his worship. It is denied that in
his case the seasonal explanation of the choice of Mars as War-God can
hold good, <span id="fr_1870"></span>[5](#fn_1870) because the spring in
Mexico is a time of heavy rains, when campaigns are impossible. In his
case then the selection of the War-God is presumably a result on the one
hand of his symbol, which further seems to have been spontaneously made
a symbol of the sun, <span id="fr_1871"></span>[6](#fn_1871) and on the
other hand of his special popularity—a constant feature in the cult of
the Vegetation-Gods. And when we note further that the chief God of the
Caribs, Yuluca, was represented with a headdress of humming-bird
feathers, and that the Toltec

<span id="page_360">p. 360</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God Quetzalcoatl,
also a God of fruitfulness, was figured with the head of a sparrow,
which was the hieroglyph of the air, <span
id="fr_1872"></span>[1](#fn_1872) we are led to surmise, not that all of
these Gods were originally Bird-Gods, but that they were all originally
Spring-Gods or other Nature-Gods to whom the birds were given as
symbols, though the sparrow may have been originally a totem-God.
Throughout the whole of Polynesia, the red feather of one small bird,
and the tail feathers of the man-of-war bird, are "the ordinary medium
of extending or communicating supernatural power," and are regarded as
specially pleasing to the Gods. <span id="fr_1873"></span>[2](#fn_1873)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[355:2](pch78.htm#fr_1846) Clavigero, *History
of Mexico*, B. vi, § 14 (vol. i, p. 270).

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[355:3](pch78.htm#fr_1847) Prescott, at cited,
pp. 32, 283-4. Torquemada thought there might be 40,000 temples in all
Mexico, and Clavigero held there were many more. B, vi, § 12 (p. 269).

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[355:4](pch78.htm#fr_1848) Prescott, B. i, c.
3, p. 27. Cp. Spencer, as cited, p. 37.

<span id="fn_1849"></span>[356:1](pch78.htm#fr_1849) J. G. Müller, as
cited, p. 572.

<span id="fn_1850"></span>[356:2](pch78.htm#fr_1850) Cp. J. G. Müller,
p. 564.

<span id="fn_1851"></span>[356:3](pch78.htm#fr_1851) Sahagun, *Hist. of
the Affairs of New Spain*, French trans. 1880, *passim*.

<span id="fn_1852"></span>[356:4](pch78.htm#fr_1852) Clavigero, B. vi, §
15 (i, 272-3); J. G. Müller, as cited, pp. 473-4; Réville, as cited, p.
46. There is reason to infer that sun-worship is the oldest and most
general cult of the American races, and that it came with them from
Asia. Special deities of vegetation seem in their case to be a later
evolution.

<span id="fn_1853"></span>[356:5](pch78.htm#fr_1853) Sahagun, as cited,
p. 441 (l. ii, c. 32).

<span id="fn_1854"></span>[356:6](pch78.htm#fr_1854) Possibly "the
Tlalocs" were the clouds—children of the Rain-God. Cp. Réville. p. 72.
But they were Gods of mountains, like the chief Tlaloc, whose throne was
a mountain so named, though he had also a mountain-seat in heaven,
called Tlalocan. Tlaloc was one of the oldest deities. Müller, *Amerik.
Urrelig.* p. 500; Prescott, p. 41, n., citing Ramirez. On another view,
the Tlalocs may have stood for the four quarters. Among the Mayan
Zapotecs, there were four Chacs or Rain-Gods; and again five. Seler, in
Bulletin 28 of Amer. Bur. of Ethn. pp. 267-8.

<span id="fn_1855"></span>[356:7](pch78.htm#fr_1855) Sahagun, as cited,
p. 84 (l. ii, c. 20), speaks of purchase only. There seem, however, to
have been special dedications. In Carthage, we know, the aristocracy
came to substitute bought children for their own. Diodorus, xx, 14. The
same process would take place anywhere. See above, [p.
353](pch77.htm#page_353)-4.

<span id="fn_1856"></span>[356:8](pch78.htm#fr_1856) Sahagun, p. 58 (1.
ii, c. 1), and pp. 84-7.

<span id="fn_1857"></span>[357:1](pch78.htm#fr_1857) J. G. Müller, p.
591 *sq*.

<span id="fn_1858"></span>[357:2](pch78.htm#fr_1858) This seems a very
debatable point. "Huitzlin," the full name, seems as much of a
diminutive as "Huitziton."

<span id="fn_1859"></span>[357:3](pch78.htm#fr_1859) Preller, *Römische
Mythologie*, ed. 1865, pp. 297-8; Cox, *Mythology of the Aryan Nations*,
ed. 1882, pp. 523-4.

<span id="fn_1860"></span>[357:4](pch78.htm#fr_1860) Cp. J. G. Müller,
p. 595; K. O. Müller, *Introd. to Mythology*, Eng. trans. pp. 109, 172.

<span id="fn_1861"></span>[358:1](pch78.htm#fr_1861) J. G. Müller, p.
592, and refs.

<span id="fn_1862"></span>[358:2](pch78.htm#fr_1862) *Id*. p. 593.

<span id="fn_1863"></span>[358:3](pch78.htm#fr_1863) Prescott, p. 9;
Müller, p. 574, citing Acosta and Humboldt; Gomara, in *Historiadores
Primitivos de Indias*, i (1852), p. 347, col. 2.

<span id="fn_1864"></span>[358:4](pch78.htm#fr_1864) J. G. Müller, p.
141.

<span id="fn_1865"></span>[358:5](pch78.htm#fr_1865) Cato, *De re
rustica*, 141 (142); Virgil, *Aeneid*, iii, 35. Mars, too, was
identified with the sun. Macrobius, *Saturnalia*, i, 19. So was Arês,
according to Preller (*Griech. Myth.* ed. 1860, i, 257), who, however,
only cites the Homeridian hymn, which does not bear him out. That
identifies Arês with the planet Mars.

<span id="fn_1866"></span>[359:1](pch78.htm#fr_1866) So White. Bréal
derives it from a root meaning to strike. Cox, as cited.

<span id="fn_1867"></span>[359:2](pch78.htm#fr_1867) Clavigero, B. vi, §
6 (p. 254).

<span id="fn_1868"></span>[359:3](pch78.htm#fr_1868) Ovid, *Fasti*, v,
231-256.

<span id="fn_1869"></span>[359:4](pch78.htm#fr_1869) J. G. Müller, pp.
602, 607, 608, recognises that the God is himself symbolised by the
bunch of feathers. Like so many of the Egyptian and other Gods, he is
thus 'the husband of his mother."

<span id="fn_1870"></span>[359:5](pch78.htm#fr_1870) Müller (pp.
609-610) denies the explanation even for Mars, arguing that early wars
were made in harvest, for plunder. For this he gives no evidence; nor
does he meet the obvious answer that those plundered at harvest would
want to seek revenge as soon as winter was over. Spring campaigns have
in point of fact been normal in Europe; and the chief plunder sought by
the early Romans was not grain but cattle.

<span id="fn_1871"></span>[359:6](pch78.htm#fr_1871) Müller, p. 592. It
was called "sun's hair" = sunbeam.

<span id="fn_1872"></span>[360:1](pch78.htm#fr_1872) *Id*. pp. 583-4,
592, 594.

<span id="fn_1873"></span>[360:2](pch78.htm#fr_1873) Ellis. *Polynesian
Researches*, 2nd ed. i, 338; Moerenhout, *Voyage aux Iles du Grand
Ocean*, 1837, i, 472-3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 5. Mexican Sacrifices and Cannibal Sacraments](pch79)
