[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch76) 
[Next](pch78) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 3. Primitive Religion and Human Sacrifice.

Whatever may have been the variety of the stocks that immigrated from
Asia, it holds good that we may look in the less advanced American races
for traces of the steps in the religious and social evolution of Mexico
and Peru. The non-Aztec peoples of Central America, to begin with, had
developed religious systems which in their main features recall the
Goddess-worships of Semitic and

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hellenistic
antiquity; the most marked difference, as regards the historic period of
the latter, being the American proclivity to human sacrifice. The
summary given of some of them by Mr. H. H. Bancroft will serve to
illustrate the old process by which the human mind reached the same
essential results out of a superficial variety of materials:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The most prominent personage in the Isthmian
Pantheon was Dabaiba, a goddess who controlled the thunder and
lightning, and with their aid devastated the lands of those who
displeased her. In South America, thunder and lightning were held to be
the instruments used by the sun to inflict punishment upon its enemies,
which makes it probable that Dabaiba was a transformed sun-goddess.
Pilgrims resorted from afar to her temple at Urabâ, bringing costly
presents and human victims, who were first killed and then burned, <span
id="fr_1810"></span>[1](#fn_1810) that the savoury odours of roasting
flesh might be grateful in the nostrils of the goddess. Some describe
her as a native princess, whose reign was marked by great wisdom and
many miracles, and who was apotheosized after death. She was also
honoured as the mother of the Creator, the maker of the sun, the moon,
and all invisible things, and the sender of blessings, who seems to have
acted as mediator between the people and his mother, for their prayers
for rain were addressed to him, although she is described as controlling
the showers; and once, when her worship was neglected, she inflicted a
severe drought upon the country. When the needs of the people were very
urgent, the chiefs and priests remained in the temple, fasting and
praying with uplifted hands; the people meanwhile observed a four-days’
fast, lacerating their bodies and washing their faces, which were at
other times covered with paint. So strict was this fast, that no meat or
drink was to be touched until the fourth day, and then only a soup made
from maize-flour. The priests themselves were sworn to perpetual
chastity and abstinence, and those who went astray in these matters were
burned or stoned to death. Their temples were encompassed with walls,
and kept scrupulously clean; golden trumpets, and bells with stone
clappers, summoned the people to worship." <span
id="fr_1811"></span>[2](#fn_1811)</span>

</div>

At a lower stage of civilisation we find human sacrifice already well
established, on historic lines, where temples and priesthoods are still
insignificant. Thus among the Tupinambos of north-eastern Brazil there
was practised a form of sacrifice which recalls at once the rite among
the Indian Khonds and the better known one in Mexico, so often
described. Among the lower tribes the human

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

sacrifice here figures as primarily an act either of propitiation of
their own dead slain in war or of providing them with food in the other
world, they having become Gods in virtue of falling in battle; <span
id="fr_1812"></span>[1](#fn_1812) and, secondarily, as an act of
sacrament. <span id="fr_1813"></span>[2](#fn_1813) The Tupinambos and
their congeners sought in battle not to slay but to capture enemies; and
when they had a captive he was taken to their village in triumph and
received with fife-music, supplied by the bones of previous prisoners.
For a whole year he was carefully treated, well fed, and supplied with a
well-favoured maiden as wife and servant. At length, on the day of the
feast, he was adorned with feathers, and festally led to sacrifice, his
body being immediately cut in pieces and distributed among the heads of
houses or minor chiefs; or, otherwise, eaten in a general feast. <span
id="fr_1814"></span>[3](#fn_1814) If he had a child by his wife, it was
brought up, as among the Khonds, for the same fate. <span
id="fr_1815"></span>[4](#fn_1815)

Of the more general usage of sacrificing children, which we have seen to
be primordial in Central Asia, there are many traces among the
North-American Indians. Thus those of Florida at the time of the Spanish
conquest are recorded to have sacrificed first-born children to the
sun; <span id="fr_1816"></span>[5](#fn_1816) and in Virginia there was
at times offered up the sacrifice of the "only begotten son." More
general seems to have been the simple usage of sacrificing boys to the
God Oki and other deities. <span id="fr_1817"></span>[6](#fn_1817) Oki
was held to "suck the blood from the left breast"; and the theory of the
sacrifice seems to have been that it secured good fortune in war. But
there was practised in addition an annual spring sacrifice—an instance
of which is known to have occurred as late as 1837 or 1838—on the Khond
principle of ensuring a good harvest, the propitiated deity in this case
being the "great star" Venus. Prisoners were the usual victims; and the
last and best-known case is that of the sacrifice of a Sioux maiden, who
was bound to a stake and slain with arrows. Before she died, pieces of
her flesh were cut off in the horrible fashion of the Khonds, and the
blood made to fall on the young seed-corn. <span
id="fr_1818"></span>[7](#fn_1818)

Next to a human sacrifice seems to have ranked, among some tribes, that
of a white dog, the dog being for the Native American a valuable

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

possession, <span id="fr_1819"></span>[1](#fn_1819) and whiteness being
held by them, as among the Greeks and Romans, a mark of purity and
distinction in animals. Always it was something important or typically
desirable that must be offered to the God. And in all cases the act of
sacrifice seems to have lain near the act of sacrament, in which we know
the identification of the God with the victim, whether as totem or
otherwise, to have been a normal conception. The white dog, like the
victim in the ancient Dionysiak sacrifice among the Greeks, seems at
times to have been torn to pieces and so eaten. <span
id="fr_1820"></span>[2](#fn_1820) But there is an overwhelming amount of
testimony to prove that among the Native Americans at the time of the
Spanish conquest religious cannibalism was common. <span
id="fr_1821"></span>[3](#fn_1821) It was as a rule, perhaps, prisoners
of war who were eaten; and it is recorded that when in the Florida war
of 1528 famishing Spaniards were driven to eat the corpses of their own
comrades, the Floridan natives, who were wont to eat their captives,
were horrorstruck <span id="fr_1822"></span>[4](#fn_1822)—this though
they had no agriculture, and fared precariously at all times. <span
id="fr_1823"></span>[5](#fn_1823) But though certain tribes were
anthropophagous only on a war footing, there is only too much evidence
in others that cannibalism occurred on other religious pretexts; <span
id="fr_1824"></span>[6](#fn_1824) and as all primitive feasts were more
or less sacramental, and the sacramental eating of human flesh is seen
to have subsisted among the Aztecs long after simple cannibalism had
disappeared, there can be little doubt that originally the human
sacrifice was eaten among the American peoples.

Even in the "savage" stage, however, there can be traced the beginnings
of the recoil not only from the sacrifice but from the cannibal
sacrament. The letting of blood seems to have been in certain rites
substituted for slaying; <span id="fr_1825"></span>[7](#fn_1825) and in
the story of Hiawatha the Heaven-God, who lived as a man among the
Onondagas and had a mortal daughter, we find a parallel to the modified
legends of Iphigeneia and Jephthah's daughter. Heaven ordered that the
maiden should be sacrificed, and her father sadly brought her forth; but
there came a mighty sound as of a wind, and the people, looking on high,
saw a dark object approaching with terrific speed, whereupon they all
fled. The father and daughter stayed resignedly, and lo! the coming
thing was an enormous bird, which hurled itself with such force on the
maiden that she disappeared, and the bird

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

was buried up to the neck in the earth. <span
id="fr_1826"></span>[1](#fn_1826) Late or early, the legend was framed
with a purpose.

In the tribal stage, necessarily, there was little development of the
priesthood. Its beginnings were represented by the "medicine-men" or
sorcerers, who set up secret religious societies or orders, to at least
one of which, in the historic period, sorcerers of various types and
tongues could belong. <span id="fr_1827"></span>[2](#fn_1827) Of the
temple, too, the beginning is seen in the sacred hut, to which in
certain tribes only the king or the medicine-man has entrance, and in
which begin to be stored idols and sacred objects. <span
id="fr_1828"></span>[3](#fn_1828) As we go southward, towards the region
of the higher civilisation, we find an increasing development of the
priestly function, sometimes in combination with the kingly, as among
the Natchez of Florida, among whom in the seventeenth century was found
the worship of the sun, symbolised in the hut-temple by an ever-burning
fire. <span id="fr_1829"></span>[4](#fn_1829) There the king-priest was
"brother of the Sun," and the royal family constituted an aristocracy
with special privileges, though bound to marry outside their
caste. <span id="fr_1830"></span>[5](#fn_1830)

In the midway civilisations of Central America, this development has
gone far towards the state of things seen in the kingdom of the Aztecs.
In Yucatan, for instance, there was a hierarchy of priests, with a head;
and the order seems to have had extensive judicial powers. <span
id="fr_1831"></span>[6](#fn_1831) The temples, too, had become
considerable buildings, to which the leading men made roads from their
houses. <span id="fr_1832"></span>[7](#fn_1832) Alongside of the
priests, all the while, remained the sorcerers or "medicine-men," also
an official class with different types or orders, members of which,
however, were privately employed by the nobles, <span
id="fr_1833"></span>[8](#fn_1833) after the manner of "Levites" among
the early Hebrews; and these private priests competed with the hierarchy
in the matter of receiving formal confessions from penitents and
patients. <span id="fr_1834"></span>[9](#fn_1834) Convents existed for
virgins, and of those who spent their whole lives in them the statues
were after death worshipped as Goddesses, while the king's daughter
ranked as the "Fire Virgin," and to her others were sacrificed. <span
id="fr_1835"></span>[10](#fn_1835) Idols of all kinds abounded; and
wooden ones, like the Hebrew *teraphim*, were accounted precious family
heirlooms. <span id="fr_1836"></span>[11](#fn_1836) Human sacrifices, of
course, were frequent, children being made

<span id="page_354">p. 354</span>

victims in great numbers when captives were lacking, and legitimate sons
when the sons of slave women ran short, <span
id="fr_1837"></span>[1](#fn_1837) "not even the only son being
spared." <span id="fr_1838"></span>[2](#fn_1838) Surrogate sacrifices in
the form of blood-letting were normal; but the cannibal sacrament does
not seem to have been so; though it took place in Guatemala, where the
king and priests and nobles partook of the victims slain to "the highest
God" at the time of Lent, the high-priest and the king getting the hands
and feet. <span id="fr_1839"></span>[3](#fn_1839)

In the case of this particular sacrifice, the chosen victims, who were
slaves, were each allowed for a week the peculiar privileges accorded to
similar victims in the Old World, <span
id="fr_1840"></span>[4](#fn_1840) down to the detail of dining with the
king; and for this sacrifice, it is recorded, the victims were "brought
together in a particular house near the temple, and there got to eat and
drink until they were drunk," apparently on the principles of the Khonds
and Rhodians. <span id="fr_1841"></span>[5](#fn_1841) It seems now
difficult to doubt that the religion of ancient America is of Asiatic
derivation; and that the pyramidal altar-temples of Mexico and Babylon
are alike developments from simpler mounds or "high places" shaped by
the prehistoric peoples of Asia, who first carried the practice with
them to the New World. It is now reasonably established that the
"Mound-Builders" of the Mississippi valley were simply North-American
Indians, living very much at the culture-stage of those found by the
first whites, though there as elsewhere there may have been partial
retrogression in certain tribes and territories under stress of
war. <span id="fr_1842"></span>[6](#fn_1842)

From the tribal state, civilisation had risen to a stage at which, in
Central America, even outside the Aztec State, as in Yucatan, there were
schools in the temples where the children of the priests and nobles were
taught such science as the priests possessed, from books <span
id="fr_1843"></span>[7](#fn_1843) in which had been evolved a hieratic
script on the basis of hieroglyphics, <span
id="fr_1844"></span>[8](#fn_1844) as in ancient Egypt. They had advanced
far in agriculture, cultivating many plants and fruits; had numerous
stone buildings, and excellent stone-paved roads; and had made some
little progress in sculpture. But there had been no transcending of

<span id="page_355">p. 355</span>

the primeval concepts of religion; and human blood flowed for the Gods
far more freely than in the state of savagery. The savage's "happy
hunting ground" had been specialised into a heaven and a hell; <span
id="fr_1845"></span>[1](#fn_1845) the medicine-man into a great priestly
order; from his primitive symbolism had been evolved the sacrament of
baptism; his simple sun-worship had become a vast ceremonial; and in
many territories the "heathen" had so far anticipated Christian
civilisation as to have established the practice of confession. But the
stamp of primeval savagery, conserved by the spirit of religion, is
clear through it all: there is no gainsaying the fundamental
relationship of the lower and the higher cults. Around the civilisations
of Peru and Mexico, at the time of the Spanish conquest, there stretched
north and south a barbarism in which we know to have existed the germs
of universal historic religion—human sacrifices constituting sacraments;
beliefs in deities and spirits beneficent and maleficent; practices of
prayer and witchcraft, ritual and worship, festival and ordinance, the
whole in part conducted by the community as a whole, but guided by the
soothsayers and sorcerers who are the beginnings of priesthoods. From
such antecedents everywhere has all "higher" religion been evolved.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1810"></span>[350:1](pch77.htm#fr_1810) Note the same usage
among the Pawnees. Brine, *American Indians*, p. 132.

<span id="fn_1811"></span>[350:2](pch77.htm#fr_1811) Bancroft, *The
Native Races of the Pacific Coast*, iii, 498-9, citing Peter Martyr,
dec. vii, lib. x; Irving's *Columbus*, iii, 173-4; Müller,
*Amerikanische Urreligionen*, p. 421.

<span id="fn_1812"></span>[351:1](pch77.htm#fr_1812) Müller, p. 282.

<span id="fn_1813"></span>[351:2](pch77.htm#fr_1813) It is noteworthy
that an experienced South-Sea missionary, Dr. George Brown, is emphatic
in giving these explanations of cannibalism among Melanesians
(*Melanesians and Polynesians*, 1910, p. 110 *sq*.). "Many cannibals,"
he declares, "are very nice people." George Chalmers gave a similar
testimony.

<span id="fn_1814"></span>[351:3](pch77.htm#fr_1814) Robertson, *Hist.
of America*, B. iv, and Note xx (Works, ed. 1821. viii, 45, 416).

<span id="fn_1815"></span>[351:4](pch77.htm#fr_1815) Müller, p. 283.

<span id="fn_1816"></span>[351:5](pch77.htm#fr_1816) Waits,
*Anthropologie der Naturvölker*, iii, 207, citing Garcilasso, *Hist. de
la Conquête de Floride*, 1737, ii, 3, 11.

<span id="fn_1817"></span>[351:6](pch77.htm#fr_1817) Waits, iii, 207,
citing Strachey, *History of Travaile into Virginia*, ed. 1849, pp. 82,
93 *sq*.; A. Young, *Chronicles of the Pilgrim Fathers*, 1841, p. 358,
and others.

<span id="fn_1818"></span>[351:7](pch77.htm#fr_1818) Waits, citing J.
Irving, *Indian Sketches*, 1835, ii, 136, and Schoolcraft, iv, 50, v,
77; Brine, as last cited.

<span id="fn_1819"></span>[352:1](pch77.htm#fr_1819) Waitz, citing Kohl,
*Kitschi-Gami*, Bremen, 1859, i, 86.

<span id="fn_1820"></span>[352:2](pch77.htm#fr_1820) Waitz, p. 208,
citing Nuttall, *Journal of Travels into the Arkansas Territory*,
Philadelphia, 1821.

<span id="fn_1821"></span>[352:3](pch77.htm#fr_1821) J. G. Müller, pp.
141-8 and refs. Cp. Robertson, B. iv (Works, ed. 1821, viii, 43) and
refs.

<span id="fn_1822"></span>[352:4](pch77.htm#fr_1822) Robertson, as
cited, vol. viii, Note XIX, citing Torquemada.

<span id="fn_1823"></span>[352:5](pch77.htm#fr_1823) *Id*. *ib*. Note
III.

<span id="fn_1824"></span>[352:6](pch77.htm#fr_1824) Cases have occurred
down to the middle of the nineteenth century. Müller, as cited.

<span id="fn_1825"></span>[352:7](pch77.htm#fr_1825) Müller, p. 143.

<span id="fn_1826"></span>[353:1](pch77.htm#fr_1826) *Id*. p. 144,
citing Schoolcraft. Cp. the story cited from Stöber.

<span id="fn_1827"></span>[353:2](pch77.htm#fr_1827) Waitz, iii, 215.

<span id="fn_1828"></span>[353:3](pch77.htm#fr_1828) *Id*. p. 203.

<span id="fn_1829"></span>[353:4](pch77.htm#fr_1829) This seems to have
been a common institution among the Native Americans before the advent
of the whites. Cp. L. Carr, *The Mounds of the Mississippi Valley*, in
Smithsonian Report for 1891, pp. 535-7.

<span id="fn_1830"></span>[353:5](pch77.htm#fr_1830) Waitz, iii,
217-220.

<span id="fn_1831"></span>[353:6](pch77.htm#fr_1831) Spencer's
*Descriptive Sociology*, No. II, p. 21, col. 2, citing Liçana and Landa.

<span id="fn_1832"></span>[353:7](pch77.htm#fr_1832) *Id*. *ib*. col. 3,
citing Peter Martyr.

<span id="fn_1833"></span>[353:8](pch77.htm#fr_1833) *Id*. *ib*., citing
Landa.

<span id="fn_1834"></span>[353:9](pch77.htm#fr_1834) *Id*. p. 22, col.
1, citing Herrera and Liçana.

<span id="fn_1835"></span>[353:10](pch77.htm#fr_1835) *Id*. p. 21, col.
3, and p. 40, col. 2, citing Collogudo.

<span id="fn_1836"></span>[353:11](pch77.htm#fr_1836) *Id*. p. 21, col.
3, citing Landa.

<span id="fn_1837"></span>[354:1](pch77.htm#fr_1837) *Id*. p. 21, col.
3, citing Liçana, Landa, and Herrera.

<span id="fn_1838"></span>[354:2](pch77.htm#fr_1838) This is told of the
people of Vera Paz. *Id*. p. 22, col. 4, citing Ximenez.

<span id="fn_1839"></span>[354:3](pch77.htm#fr_1839) *Id*. p. 22. col.
2, citing Fr. Roman, in Ximenez. The idea in appropriating those parts
seems to have been that of minimising the eating done.

<span id="fn_1840"></span>[354:4](pch77.htm#fr_1840) Above, pp.
[114](pch29.htm#page_114), [116](pch29.htm#page_116),
[119](pch30.htm#page_119), [125](pch31.htm#page_125),
[137](pch32.htm#page_137), [154](pch35.htm#page_154).

<span id="fn_1841"></span>[354:5](pch77.htm#fr_1841) Above, pp.
[116](pch29.htm#page_116), [119](pch30.htm#page_119),
[137](pch32.htm#page_137), [140](pch32.htm#page_140), *note*.

<span id="fn_1842"></span>[354:6](pch77.htm#fr_1842) See the whole
problem thoroughly discussed by Mr. Lucien Carr in his treatise on *The
Mounds of the Mississippi Valley*, in the Smithsonian Report for 1891.
Cp. Winsor, as before cited, i, 397-410. "That many Indian tribes built
mounds and earth-works is beyond doubt; but that all the mounds and
earth-works of North America are by these same tribes and their
immediate ancestors is not thereby proved." Professor Putnam. cited by
Winsor, i, 402, *note*. The Toltec theory of the mounds, once common
(*e.g.*, J. D. Baldwin, *Ancient America*, 1872, pp. 200-205, and his
authorities), is practically exploded.

<span id="fn_1843"></span>[354:7](pch77.htm#fr_1843) Spencer, as cited,
p. 21, col. 2, citing Landa.

<span id="fn_1844"></span>[354:8](pch77.htm#fr_1844) *Id*. p. 51, col.
3, citing Wilson, *Prehistoric Man*, 2nd ed. ii, 133 *sq*.

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[355:1](pch77.htm#fr_1845) *Id*. p. 40, col.
1, citing Landa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 4. The Mexican Cultus](pch78)
