[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch75) 
[Next](pch77) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 2. Aztecs and Peruvians.

All this was recognised by the industrious Swiss historian of the
American religions fifty years ago, <span
id="fr_1798"></span>[4](#fn_1798) when the real unity of the human race
was still obscure, in that it was affirmed on such fantastic bases as
the myth of an originally created pair and the counter-hypothesis of
creation "in nations"—either of monkeys or men; <span
id="fr_1799"></span>[5](#fn_1799) and when congenital theories of a
peopling of America by the "ten lost tribes"

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

were much in vogue. There need then be no serious dispute over the
thesis <span id="fr_1800"></span>[1](#fn_1800) that "the origin of the
ancient American religions is to be sought for in the nature of their
human spirit"—a different thing from saying that they are autochthonous.
The true proposition is neither that, as Müller says, the American
peoples did *not* receive their religions from the peoples of the Old
World, nor that they *did:* both formulas are misleading. Inasmuch as
their ancestors were distinctly human when they first passed from Asia
to America, the germs of religion and of many rites were derivative; but
like all other peoples they evolved in terms of universal law. And as
their migrations are likely to have occurred in different epochs, and
from different stocks, we may look to find in them, scattered as they
are over an entire hemisphere, hardly less variations in language,
aspects, and civilisation than were to be traced in the races of the old
world a few thousand years ago.

Such variation is actually seen when we seek to ascertain the connection
of the different peoples of Ancient America with each other. For among
these there is fully as much variation as is found among the peoples of
Europe. To go no farther, the Aztecs or Mexicans differ noticeably in
certain physical characteristics from the Native Americans; and these
again show considerable variations of type. A decisive theory of the
culture-histories of these peoples cannot yet be constructed, inasmuch
as we are still very much in the dark as to the civilisations which
existed in Central and South America before those of Mexico and Peru.
For the title of this section, "The Religions of *Ancient* America," is
designed only to mark off the religions flourishing so lately as four
hundred years ago, and the aboriginal religions still existing, from
that Christian religion which was introduced into Mexico and Peru by the
Spaniards, and into North America by the English and French. The two
religious systems we have chiefly to consider, the Mexican and Peruvian
as they existed before the Spanish Conquest, are not very ancient in
their developed form; because even the two civilisations were
comparatively modern. The Aztecs and the Peruvians, as regards their
then situation, professed to date back only a few centuries from the
Conquest; and in both Peru and Mexico there were and still are the
architectural remains of civilisations, some of which were themselves so
ancient <span id="fr_1801"></span>[2](#fn_1801) as to be unintelligible
to the nations found by the Spaniards. Thus, near Lake Titicaca in
Peru <span id="fr_1802"></span>[3](#fn_1802) there are wonderful}

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

remains of structures which by their size suggested giant builders, the
work of a race whom (or whose successors) the Incas overthrew; and yet
further there are remains of rude circles of standing stones which
belonged to a primitive civilisation far more ancient still. So, in
Mexico, there are ancient ruins, such as those at Palanque, which
suggest a civilisation higher, on the side of art and architecture, and
at the same time much older, than that of the Aztecs. <span
id="fr_1803"></span>[1](#fn_1803)

All we can say with any safety is that, as it was put by Buckle, the
earlier civilisations grew up in those regions where there were combined
the conditions of a regular, easy, and abundant food supply—namely, heat
and moisture, without an overwhelming proportion of the latter, such as
occurs in Brazil. <span id="fr_1804"></span>[2](#fn_1804) Now, from the
point of view of the needs of an early civilisation, the golden mean
occurs, in South America, only in the territories which were covered by
the empire of the Incas, and farther north, from the Isthmus of Panama
to Mexico. We surmise then a long-continued movement of population
southwards, one wave pushing on another before it, till some reached
Patagonia. After a time, however, there might be refluxes. It is
admitted that Mexican tradition points to early developments of
civilisation about the Isthmus and Central America, and then waves of
migration and conquest northwards. And it may have been that the people
called the Toltecs, who flourished in Mexico before the Aztecs, and were
in several respects more highly civilised than they, <span
id="fr_1805"></span>[3](#fn_1805) represented yet again a backflow of
one of these peoples from the north, according to the tradition. <span
id="fr_1806"></span>[4](#fn_1806) Their alleged silent disappearance,
after four centuries of national life, is the standing puzzle of Mexican
history. <span id="fr_1807"></span>[5](#fn_1807) All that we know is,
that Mexico remained the seat of the most flourishing empires, mainly
because it could best yield an abundant and regular supply of vegetable
food, as maize; and that when Cortès invaded it, the civilisation of the
Aztecs, who constituted the most powerful of the several Mexican States
then existing, was among the most remarkable. <span
id="fr_1808"></span>[6](#fn_1808)

And herein lies the instructiveness of these civilisations, with

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

their religions, that they supply us with a set of results practically
independent of all the known history of Europe and Asia. It has been
remarked that the great drawback of most of the moral or human sciences
is that they do not admit of experiments as do the physical sciences.
You must take the phenomena you get and try to account for them, with no
aid from planned repetitions of cases. But, on the other hand, the human
sciences as latterly organised have an enormous wealth of data lying
ready to hand, and some collocations of data have for us the effect of
new revelations in human affairs. After men became absorbed in the
conception of European civilisation, with its beginnings, on the one
hand in Aryan barbarism, on the other in the Eastern and Egypto-Semitic
culture, they seemed to be shut up to a certain body of conclusions
about human nature and its tendencies of thought and action. What was
worse, the conclusions were presented ready made in terms of the
reigning religion. But when we go to the records of the cultures and
creeds of Mexico and Peru, records wonderfully preserved in the teeth of
the fanaticism which would have destroyed them all if it could, we stand
clear of the prejudices alike of Jew and Christian; we are in a measure
spared the old contrast between pretended monotheism and polytheism, the
eternal suggestion of the possible diffusion of revealed truth, <span
id="fr_1809"></span>[1](#fn_1809) the perpetual comparison between
Christendom and Paganism. We are faced by a civilisation and a religion
that reached wealth and complexity by normal evolution from the stages
of early savagery and barbarism without ever coming in contact with
those of Europe till the moment of collision and destruction. And to
study these American civilisations aright is to learn with clearness
lessons in sociology, or human science in general, which otherwise could
have been acquired only imperfectly and with hesitation. The
culture-histories of the two hemispheres, put side by side, illuminate
each other as do the facts of comparative anatomy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1798"></span>[346:4](pch76.htm#fr_1798) J. G. Müller, pp.
7-8.

<span id="fn_1799"></span>[346:5](pch76.htm#fr_1799) Cp. Nott and
Gliddon, *Types of Mankind*, 1854, p. 283; *Indigenous Races of the
Earth*, 1857, p. 648.

<span id="fn_1800"></span>[347:1](pch76.htm#fr_1800) Müller, p. 9.

<span id="fn_1801"></span>[347:2](pch76.htm#fr_1801) Cp. Kirk's note on
Prescott, p. 1, and Dr. Tylor, *Anahuac*, p. 189, as to the pre-Toltec
civilisation of Mexico.

<span id="fn_1802"></span>[347:3](pch76.htm#fr_1802) Squier, *Peru*,
1877, ch. 20; J. G. Müller, pp. 334-5; Keane, *Ethnology*, p. 138 *sq*.

<span id="fn_1803"></span>[348:1](pch76.htm#fr_1803) Bancroft, iv,
289-346. Cp. Keane, *Man*, p. 406 *sq*.

<span id="fn_1804"></span>[348:2](pch76.htm#fr_1804) *Introd. to the
Hist. of Civilisation in England*, 3-vol. ed. i, 101-8.

<span id="fn_1805"></span>[348:3](pch76.htm#fr_1805) Clavigero, *History
of Mexico*, Eng. tr. ed. 1807, i, 86 (B. ii, § 2); Keane, as last cited.

<span id="fn_1806"></span>[348:4](pch76.htm#fr_1806) Compare ch. i of
Prescott's *Conquest of Mexico*, and J. F. Kirk's notes on it
(Sonnenschein's ed.) with Réville, Lect. i. But the tradition may also
derive from the general movement of population southwards. Clavigero's
chronology, c. 8, is to the effect that the Toltecs arrived from the
north about 648, the Chichemecs in 1170, the "Acolhuans" about 1200, and
the Aztecs in 1296.

<span id="fn_1807"></span>[348:5](pch76.htm#fr_1807) Kirk's note on
Prescott, p. 7.

<span id="fn_1808"></span>[348:6](pch76.htm#fr_1808) The Acolhuan or
Tezcucan civilisation, however, seems to have been more advanced than
that of Mexico proper. See Prescott, B. i, c. 6, end; and below, § 5.
And see Lindesay Brine, *American Indians*, chs. xv and xvii, as to the
advanced architecture at Palanque, and at Uxmal in Yucatan. A good
account, with excellent illustrations of the architectural and art
remains at Mitla, is given by Edward Seler, in Bulletin 28 of the Bureau
of American Ethnology, before cited, pp. 243-324.

<span id="fn_1809"></span>[349:1](pch76.htm#fr_1809) That is, now. Lord
Kingsborough wrought hard in the last generation to prove that the
Biblical system was known to the Mexicans; and there was an early theory
that St. Thomas, that ubiquitous missionary, had given them
Christianity. Prescott, pp. 233, 641; Clavigero, B. vi, § 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 3. Primitive Religion and Human Sacrifice](pch77)
