[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch82) 
[Next](pch84) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 9. The Religion of Peru.

While in Mexico we see a society being ruined by religion, in Peru we
find one suffering economically a similar ruin from the principle of
empire. In Peru, the religious tendencies are seen at work in a much
modified degree. There the rapid multiplication of the priesthood was
hindered by the peculiar standing of the king and his family. In Mexico
the king was elected by the nobles: in Peru he reigned by divine right
of the strongest description; the doctrine being that the original Inca
was the Sun-God, who married his sister; and that all succeeding Incas
did the same, thus keeping the succession strictly divine. As they
extended their dominions by conquest, they astutely provided that the
religions of the conquered peoples should subsist, but in a state of
recognised subjection to the Inca, the divine high-priest, as the
priesthood generally ranked below the sacred caste of the Inca nobles;
so that the old cults had not the chance of growing as those of Mexico
did, though they remained popular and venerable. The two leading deities
were Pachacamac and Viracocha, who in virtue of similarity were often
identified. Each figured in myth as a Creator, and they were doubtless
originally the Gods of different peoples or tribes, though their cults
tended to unity under the politic despotism of the Incas. Pachacamac
signifies "life-giver of the earth," <span
id="fr_1953"></span>[1](#fn_1953) and Viracocha—who here assimilates to
Aphroditê—"foam of the sea"; and they seem accordingly to have been
respectively associated, to some extent, with the principles of heat and
moisture; but, as so many other ancient systems show, these principles
readily lend themselves to combination. Both belonged to the
pre-Incarial civilisation, but were adopted and blended by the Incas,
though their status as creators of all things, including the sun, was
inconsistent with the Incarial religion, in which the sun was the
Creator. <span id="fr_1954"></span>[2](#fn_1954) The omission to build
new temples, however, <span id="fr_1955"></span>[3](#fn_1955) was
probably undermining this cult; and the popular religion was becoming
more and more one of worship of the minor deities, with the Inca
figuring as the representative of the chief natural God, the Sun. The
Thunder and Lightning were worshipped

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

as the Sun's ministers; the Rainbow as his symbol or emanation; and the
Moon and Stars, and in particular the planet Venus, as separate
divinities; and Creator, Thunder, and Sun were sacrificed to as if very
much on a level in dignity. <span id="fr_1956"></span>[1](#fn_1956)

From such developments we may infer that the Peruvian popular culture
was nearly stationary or decaying; and it becomes easy to understand
how, after the Conquest, the Christian deities took the place of the old
without any difficulty; these being so many religious conventions, while
the real beliefs of the people remained attached, as they are now, to
the genii or sprites of their own lore. For an unprogressing and
unlettered people—as many of those in Europe have been at different
times—religion is mostly a matter of festivals and hand-to-mouth
superstitions; and the Peruvian common people are, under Christianity,
what they were under their Incas. European life gives abundant evidence
of how the usages of an ancient creed may survive the creed itself. In
Peru, as in Mexico, there was a solemn religious ceremony of renewing at
stated periods, by special generation, the fire used in the temples, and
even in the households. In Mexico it was done over a human sacrifice, by
means of the friction of two sticks, at the end of each cycle of
fifty-two years. <span id="fr_1957"></span>[2](#fn_1957) In Peru it was
done yearly by means of a concave mirror. <span
id="fr_1958"></span>[3](#fn_1958) So did men do in ancient Rome, and
similarly have northern European peasants done in Germany, in Scotland,
in Ireland, at intervals till our own time, regarding the "need fire" or
"forced fire" as a means of averting evil. <span
id="fr_1959"></span>[4](#fn_1959) It is one of the oldest rites of the
human race, and it has survived under all religions alike down to the
other day, when perhaps it received its death-blow from the lucifer
match. Equally universal is that ceremony of annually driving out the
evil spirits, <span id="fr_1960"></span>[5](#fn_1960) which was
undertaken in Peru by the Incas in person, and which is supposed to have
survived in Scotland to this day in the burghal ceremony of "riding the
marches." Customary usages and minor superstitions outlast faiths and
philosophies; and in Peru they defy the Church. Sun-worship is gone; but
the ideas of the Incarial times remain. And, indeed, there existed in
some districts eighty years ago, and probably survives even to-day, a
devout celebration of the memory of the ancient theocracy, in the shape
of an annual dramatic representation, which the rulers vainly sought

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

to suppress, of the death of the last Inca at the hands of the
Spaniards. <span id="fr_1961"></span>[1](#fn_1961)

It was about as ill-founded a devotion as any ever shown to a royal line
in our own hemisphere; for under the Incas the people were heavily
oppressed by minutely tyrannous laws and by taxes, they alone bearing
all burdens, and the priests and nobles going free. <span
id="fr_1962"></span>[2](#fn_1962) But were it not for the mistake of the
last Inca before Pizarro in recognising one of his sons by a foreign
queen, and dividing the empire between him and the heir apparent, the
Inca empire, despite the disaffection of some of its subjects by
conquest, might have subsisted long. As its priesthood was necessarily
less powerful, so its sacrificial system was less burdensome and less
terrible. Human sacrifices also were much less general than in Mexico;
but they existed; <span id="fr_1963"></span>[3](#fn_1963) and there is
reason to reject the claim of Garcilasso, who was biassed by his
Incarial descent, that the Incas had wholly abolished them. Peoples at
that culture-stage could not readily be forced to give up their ancient
rites. It is in fact on record that when an Inca was dangerously ill,
one of his sons was sacrificed for him to the Sun-God in the immemorial
fashion; <span id="fr_1964"></span>[4](#fn_1964) and it was in keeping
with such a usage that at least one tribe in Quito should regularly
sacrifice its first-born. <span id="fr_1965"></span>[5](#fn_1965) If it
be a sheer fable that at the accession of a new Inca there were
sacrificed some hundreds of children, <span
id="fr_1966"></span>[6](#fn_1966) no trust can be put in any of the
Spanish testimonies. It is however established by the "Fables and Rites
of the Yncas" <span id="fr_1967"></span>[7](#fn_1967) that the great
festival of Capacocha or Cachalmaca, instituted by one Inca at the
beginning of his reign, was celebrated with sacrifices of boys and
girls, one from each tribe or lineage, both at Cuzco and at the chief
town of each province. Further, after every victory certain captives
were sent to the capital to be sacrificed to the sun. It is thus only
too likely that among some of the coast peoples children were sacrificed
to the Gods every month. <span id="fr_1968"></span>[8](#fn_1968) What
seems to be certain is that, save perhaps among some of the more savage
tribes, the Peruvians under the later Incas had abolished cannibal
sacraments—a proof of the natural movement

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

of humanity in that direction where the direct interest of a powerful
priesthood did not too potently conserve religious savagery.

For the rest, they sacrificed their llamas, small birds, rabbits, sheep,
and dogs; and while they alone of the American races had burnt-offerings
of animals, <span id="fr_1969"></span>[1](#fn_1969) they ate their
unburnt sacrifices raw, <span id="fr_1970"></span>[2](#fn_1970) here
again showing the tendency of religion to preserve, wherever possible,
the most ancient usages of all. They had, indeed, the custom of Suttee,
like the Hindus and the Mexican Chichimecs; good widows, especially
those of the Incas, being at one time expected to bury themselves alive
when their husbands died, <span id="fr_1971"></span>[3](#fn_1971) so as
to be wives to them in the spirit world; but this custom was dying out,
being replaced by the symbolism of placing statuettes in a man's tomb to
represent his wives and servants. <span
id="fr_1972"></span>[4](#fn_1972) In the same way, human sacrifice was
being replaced by the surrogate of blood-letting. <span
id="fr_1973"></span>[5](#fn_1973) Above all, the blood sacrament had
become conventionalised in a quasi-Christian form. The Peruvians had the
institution of a Holy Communion, in which they ate of a sacred bread,
*sancu*, sprinkled with the blood of a sacrificed sheep, the priest
pronouncing this formula: "Take heed how ye eat this *sancu;* for he who
eats it in sin, and with a double will and heart, is seen by our Father,
the Sun, who will punish him with grievous troubles. But he who, with a
single heart, partakes of it, to him the Sun and the Thunderer will show
favour, and will grant children and happy years, and abundance of all
that he requires." All then made a solemn vow of piety and loyalty
before eating. <span id="fr_1974"></span>[6](#fn_1974)

To say, as some do, that there was nothing essentially "moral" in such
rites, because they had in view temporal well-being, <span
id="fr_1975"></span>[7](#fn_1975) is merely to set up one more one-sided
discrimination between Christianity and Paganism; for it is certain that
the early Christians regarded their eucharist as possessing miraculous
medicinal virtues. Equally unjudicial is the comment on the rites of
infant baptism and confession of sins (which the Peruvians also
practised) that "even where the Peruvian religion seems to undertake the

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

elevation and protection of morals, it does so rather with a utilitarian
and selfish view than with any real purpose of sanctifying the heart and
will." <span id="fr_1976"></span>[1](#fn_1976) It is hardly necessary to
reply that the Mexicans and Peruvians had just the same kind of moral
feeling in any given stage of civilisation as Christians have had in a
similar culture-stage, and that the desire for future salvation,
appealed to in all Christian evangelical teaching, is only
utilitarianism and selfishness *sub specie æternitatis*. The Spaniards
themselves recognised that the Mexicans ate the mystical body of the God
with every sign of devotion and contrition; <span
id="fr_1977"></span>[2](#fn_1977) and they were so far from depreciating
the Peruvian communion that they supposed St. Bartholomew had
established it. <span id="fr_1978"></span>[3](#fn_1978) The Mexican
wise-woman who prayed the Merciful Goddess to cleanse the babe from the
sin of its parents will compare fairly well with the practisers of
infant baptism among ourselves; and it cannot be shown that the Mexican
and Peruvian confessors stood as a rule any lower morally than those of
Christendom at the same culture-stage. The casting of horoscopes for
infants was practised in Europe just as in Mexico at the time of the
Conquest. The Mexican priests gave indulgences; but they never went to
the lengths of the Renaissance Papacy in that direction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1953"></span>[376:1](pch83.htm#fr_1953) Müller, p. 318.

<span id="fn_1954"></span>[376:2](pch83.htm#fr_1954) *Id*. pp. 314-319.

<span id="fn_1955"></span>[376:3](pch83.htm#fr_1955) See Mr. Kirk's note
in his ed. of Prescott, p. 44.

<span id="fn_1956"></span>[377:1](pch83.htm#fr_1956) *Rites and Laws of
the Yncas*, trans. by C. R. Markham, Hakluyt Society, 1873, p. 27.

<span id="fn_1957"></span>[377:2](pch83.htm#fr_1957) Prescott, *Mexico*,
c. iv, end; J. G. Müller, p. 520.

<span id="fn_1958"></span>[377:3](pch83.htm#fr_1958) Prescott, *Conquest
of Peru*, Kirk's ed. in 1 vol. c. iii, p. 51. "In cloudy weather they
had recourse to the means of friction." Réville, p. 196.

<span id="fn_1959"></span>[377:4](pch83.htm#fr_1959) Max Müller,
*Physical Religion*, pp. 286-9.

<span id="fn_1960"></span>[377:5](pch83.htm#fr_1960) On this usage, see
Dr. Frazer's *Golden Bough*, vol. iii, c. iii, § 14-15.

<span id="fn_1961"></span>[378:1](pch83.htm#fr_1961) Stevenson, *Twenty
Years’ Residence in South America*, 1825, i, 401; ii, 70-3.

<span id="fn_1962"></span>[378:2](pch83.htm#fr_1962) Prescott, *Peru*,
B. i, c. 2, citing Garcilasso.

<span id="fn_1963"></span>[378:3](pch83.htm#fr_1963) See Kirk's note to
Prescott, p. 51, in reply to the claim of Sir C. Markham on behalf of
the Incas. Cp. Müller, pp. 377-8. Sir C. Markham's case is stated by him
in Winsor's *Narrative History*, as above cited, i, 238-9. He does not
appear to recognise the bearing of his own assertion that the Incas made
a law prohibiting human sacrifice. Such a law is evidence of the
practice. The conflict of Spanish authorities is at once solved by
allowing that the survivals were local, not general.

<span id="fn_1964"></span>[378:4](pch83.htm#fr_1964) Müller, p. 378,
citing Montesimos.

<span id="fn_1965"></span>[378:5](pch83.htm#fr_1965) *Id*. p. 377,
citing Velasco.

<span id="fn_1966"></span>[378:6](pch83.htm#fr_1966) *Id*. p. 378,
citing five authorities.

<span id="fn_1967"></span>[378:7](pch83.htm#fr_1967) Translated from the
MS. of Molina by Sir C. Markham, who had denied the occurrence of human
sacrifices in Incarial Peru.

<span id="fn_1968"></span>[378:8](pch83.htm#fr_1968) Müller, pp. 378-9,
citing Xeres and Rottencamp.

<span id="fn_1969"></span>[379:1](pch83.htm#fr_1969) Prescott, p. 44,
citing McCulloch.

<span id="fn_1970"></span>[379:2](pch83.htm#fr_1970) Réville, p. 220.
Sir C. Markham's assertion, that the Peruvian sacrifices were with one
exception thank-offerings and not expiations, omits to define the
sacramental species.

<span id="fn_1971"></span>[379:3](pch83.htm#fr_1971) In this usage we
probably have the origin of the practice of burying alive the unfaithful
"Virgins of the Sun" in Peru, and Vestals in Rome. Dr. Wyllie explains
the practice in both cases by the idea of devoting to darkness the
unfaithful spouse of the Sun (Lectures cited, p. 207). But the Roman
Vestal was dedicated to the Goddess Vesta, who is identified with the
*earth*, as hearth-fire and as female principle. To the same d ancient
practice of burying wives alive may be ascribed the long retained
practice of putting some female criminals to death in that fashion.
Michelet (*Guerres de religion*, 1856. p. 88) gives the absurd
explanation that burying alive was resorted to as being more decent than
burning alive, because in the latter case the flames soon left the
victim naked.

<span id="fn_1972"></span>[379:4](pch83.htm#fr_1972) Still, it survived
the Conquest. Prescott, p. 43, n. citing Ondegardo.

<span id="fn_1973"></span>[379:5](pch83.htm#fr_1973) Müller, p. 379.

<span id="fn_1974"></span>[379:6](pch83.htm#fr_1974) *Rites and Laws of
the Incas*, p. 27.

<span id="fn_1975"></span>[379:7](pch83.htm#fr_1975) Réville, pp. 227,
233-5.

<span id="fn_1976"></span>[380:1](pch83.htm#fr_1976) Ib. p. 233.

<span id="fn_1977"></span>[380:2](pch83.htm#fr_1977) Prescott, *Mexico*,
app. p. 641.

<span id="fn_1978"></span>[380:3](pch83.htm#fr_1978) Prescott, *Peru*,
p. 52.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 10. Conclusion](pch84)
