[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch81) 
[Next](pch83) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### § 8. The Fatality of the Priesthood.

The main hope of the humaner thinkers would probably lie in the
substitution of a symbolic for an anthropophagous sacrament: if baked
effigies could be eaten, effigies might be sacrificed. But in some even
of the symbolic sacraments blood was a constituent. Thus in the cult of
Huitzilopochtli, for the baked image made of seeds for the winter
festival of the solstice—Christmas—the blood of slain children was the
cementing moisture. <span id="fr_1942"></span>[1](#fn_1942) Here again
we have the primitive "sympathetic magic": the image, which was
transfixed with an arrow before being eaten, represented the
potentialities of new vegetable life at the time of year when vegetation
was dead, and the blood of children was the deadly symbol of the
moisture that was the life of all things, besides being a means of as it
were vitalising the image. <span id="fr_1943"></span>[2](#fn_1943) Such
a cult was indeed far from reducing anthropophagy to a mere symbol.

So with the cult of Xiuhteuctli, the Fire-God. Alongside, apparently, of
the remarkable symbolic sacrament above mentioned there were
anthropophagous sacraments to the same God. He was one of the most
widely honoured of all, the first drink at every meal in every household
being taken in his name—a correlation which again suggests derivation
from an Asiatic fire-cult such as is seen blended in that of Agni in the
Vedas. In his name, too, every child was passed through the fire at
birth—another notable parallel to ancient Asiatic usages; <span
id="fr_1944"></span>[3](#fn_1944) and from his six hundred temples
burned as many perpetual fires. Every four years a great feast was held
in his honour at Quauhtitlan, not far from the city of Mexico; the first
act being to plant six high trees before the temple on the day previous,
and to sacrifice two slaves, who were flayed. On the feast day, two
priests appeared clad in those victims’ skins, hailed with the cry,
"See, there come our Gods"; and all day they danced to wild music, the
while many thousands of quails were sacrificed to the God. Finally the
priests took six prisoners and bound or hanged them to the tops of the
six trees, where they were shot through with arrows. When dead they were
taken down and their hearts cut out

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

in the usual way, the priests and nobility finally eating the flesh of
both the men and the quails as a sacrament. <span
id="fr_1945"></span>[1](#fn_1945)

It is not clear at what place and period the symbolical sacrifice in
this cult arose; but the essential problem is, whether it could have
ousted the other. And the answer must be that inasmuch as the human
sacrifice was specially associated with the power of the priests, and
was obviously to the tastes of the mass of the people of all grades,
nothing short of an overthrow of the existing polity by another could
have effected the transformation, there being no native culture in the
surrounding States that could give the requisite moral lead on a large
scale. Such violent subversion, it will be remembered, was a common
condition of religious evolution in the Old World in antiquity; and the
history of the great) priestly systems of Egypt, India, and Babylon
points to the conclusion that not otherwise than by the fiat of powerful
autocrats, or forcible overthrow at the hands of neighbouring and
kindred races, in the absence of peaceful culture-contacts of a higher
kind, could such systems be made to loosen their grasp on social and
intellectual life.

It will be observed that in the cult under notice the priest represents
the God even as does the victim. The same phenomenon occurs, sometimes,
though not always, with the same procedure of donning the victim's skin,
in many of the American sacrificial cults, Aztec and other. <span
id="fr_1946"></span>[2](#fn_1946) A recent hierologist has argued, in
view of the various instances in which priest-kings and sacrificial
priests have been themselves annually sacrificed, that "it was as the
shedder of divine \[victim's\] blood that the king-priest's blood was
shed," and that he was originally distinguished from his
fellow-worshippers" only by his greater readiness to sacrifice himself
for their religious needs." <span id="fr_1947"></span>[3](#fn_1947) We
need not dwell here on the fallacy of thus imputing a calculated and
reasoned self-devotion in the case of an act which, among savage men,
would stand just as much for lack of imagination or forethought.
Assuming the theory to be true, however, we must recognise that in the
case of the historic Mexican priesthood any ancient liability of the
kind had long disappeared. According to Herrera, the private chaplains
of the nobles were slain at the death of their masters; but this was as
slaves or attendants, not as public priests, and not as true
sacrifices. <span id="fr_1948"></span>[4](#fn_1948) In not a single case
do we learn

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

that the victim was furnished by the priestly class. <span
id="fr_1949"></span>[1](#fn_1949) That class indeed practised in some
measure, as we have seen, the asceticisms common to most ancient
priesthoods, but it had long made an end of any serious penalties
attaching to its profession. <span id="fr_1950"></span>[2](#fn_1950) The
priests, in short, were the dominant force in the Mexican society; and
under them it was on the one hand being economically ruined in the
manner of most ancient empires, and on the other being anchylosed in its
moral and intellectual life. To say this is of course not to select the
priests for blame as being the sole or primary causes of the fatal
development: their order was but the organised expression of the general
religious tendency. But they dramatically exhibit, once for all, the
capacity of "religion" in general to darken life and blight
civilisation.

The mere number of the priests was so great as to constitute a force of
fixation such as has never been countervailed in modern European
countries, where forces relatively less powerful have only slowly been
undermined by culture influences from more advanced neighbouring
communities. When we note that the temple of the Mexican Wine-God alone
had four hundred priests, <span id="fr_1951"></span>[3](#fn_1951) we
realise that we are in presence of social conditions which mere humanism
could not avail to transform, even if it found a hearing among the
priest-hoods. À fortiori, no philosophic developments on the sacerdotal
side could have availed. The growth of a pantheistic philosophy among
the priesthoods of ancient India and Babylonia and Egypt, and the growth
of a monotheistic doctrine among those of Jewry, were equally without
effect on the sacerdotal practices as a whole, these remaining in all
cases alike primitively sacrificial, though, for extra-sacerdotal
reasons already noted, they ceased to include human sacrifice. And in
Mexico, of course, the philosophic developments were slight at best. The
figuring of Tezcatlipoca as "the soul of the world" <span
id="fr_1952"></span>[4](#fn_1952) does not appear to have stood for any
methodically

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

pantheistic thought, being apparently an expression of henotheism common
in solar worships. The entire Mexican civilisation, in short, was being
arrested at a stage below that attained in the Mesopotamian empires long
before the Christian era.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1942"></span>[373:1](pch82.htm#fr_1942) Bancroft, iii,
297-300.

<span id="fn_1943"></span>[373:2](pch82.htm#fr_1943) Müller, pp. 605-6.
See above, [p. 144](pch33.htm#page_144).

<span id="fn_1944"></span>[373:3](pch82.htm#fr_1944) Dr. Müller remarks
(p. 569) in this connection that the entire Aztec religion has many
resemblances to the fire-worship of Siva. But the primary fire-worship
traced among the Sumer-Akkadians is to be looked to as the possible
source of that and the later Semitic as well as of the American forms.

<span id="fn_1945"></span>[374:1](pch82.htm#fr_1945) Müller, pp. 568-9;
Clavigero, B. vi, § 21 (i, 283-4); Humboldt, *Monuments*, 186, 206, 213.

<span id="fn_1946"></span>[374:2](pch82.htm#fr_1946) Müller, pp. 77,
493, 570, 577, 581, 591, 599, 600, 604, 606, 635, 640.

<span id="fn_1947"></span>[374:3](pch82.htm#fr_1947) Jevons, *Introd. to
the Hist. of Religion*, pp. 294, 296.

<span id="fn_1948"></span>[374:4](pch82.htm#fr_1948) Herrera, *General
History*, Eng. tr. 1725-6, iii, 220, cited in Spencer's *Descriptive
Sociology*, No. II, p. 20, col. 1.

<span id="fn_1949"></span>[375:1](pch82.htm#fr_1949) Thus Dr. Jevons’s
remark (p. 283) that "in Mexico *the* priest was allowed to evade the
violent death which attached to his office on condition that he found a
substitute (a war captive)," is apt to mislead; though it may be the
true explanation of the origin of the priestly habit of joining in the
fighting.

<span id="fn_1950"></span>[375:2](pch82.htm#fr_1950) We even find that
among the Native Americans boys *spared* from sacrifice were made
priests, being thus safe. Waltz, iii, 207, citing Strachey, *Hist. of
Travaile into Virginia*, ed. 1849, p. 93.

<span id="fn_1951"></span>[375:3](pch82.htm#fr_1951) Müller, p. 570.

<span id="fn_1952"></span>[375:4](pch82.htm#fr_1952) It is remarkable
that the doctrine of the Logos is here adumbrated in connection with the
Winter Sun, who would presumably be born at the winter solstice (when
the reign of Huitzilopochtli ended) and pass away at the vernal equinox.
As God of Drought, however, he was further God of Death, of the
Underworld, and of Judgment (Müller, pp. 614, 618-9, 621)—a combination
out of the common line of evolution, the God of Souls and of Wisdom
being usually one of the Beloved Gods. The special evolution seems to be
due to the fact that he was originally the God of the Tlailotlaks,
turned by the Aztecs to special account. Tezcatlipoca was nominally the
"greatest God" (Clavigero, B. vi, § 2, p. 244), though Huitzilopochtli
got more attention. "Tezcatlipoca was the most sublime figure in the
Aztec Pantheon" (Dr. Brinton, *American Hero Myths*, 1882, p. 69). See
his titles (*Id*. p. 70). He was the Night God (p. 71); and Clavigero
notes that his statue was of black stone.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: § 9. The Religion of Peru](pch83)
