[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Critical Views](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](pch86.md) 
[Next](pch88.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002EVPFEO/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Pagan Christs*, by John M. Robertson, \[1911\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

### APPENDIX C

### REPLIES TO CRITICISMS

#### § 1. General Opposition: The Hibbert Journal.

As has been remarked in the preface, the most notable aspect of the body
of criticism passed upon the first edition of the foregoing work is the
almost complete abstention from challenge of the theses upon which
challenge was specially invited by the writer—"that the Gospel story of
the Last Supper, Passion, Betrayal, Trial, Crucifixion, and
Resurrection, is visibly a transcript of a Mystery-Drama, and not
originally a narrative; and that that drama is demonstrably (as historic
demonstration goes) a symbolic modification of an original rite of human
sacrifice, of which it preserves certain verifiable details." The only
attempt I have seen to counter these positions—an attempt made only
incidentally by Dr. J. E. Carpenter—was, as I have elsewhere shown,
cancelled by the critic himself. For the rest, critic after critic has
impugned this or that analogy between Christian and pagan systems, this
or that item of historic assertion; and many have broadly flouted the
general thesis of the non-historicity of Jesus; but no one, so far as I
am aware, has attempted to gainsay the central argument upon which
attack was specially invited. I am therefore entitled to infer, so far,
that that argument has some validity; though, for sheer lack of debate,
I cannot yet count it inexpugnable.

That there should be found no flaws of statement or obscurities of
argument in a treatise covering so many fields, I was never foolish
enough to expect; and to one or two hostile critics I am indebted for
corrections of errors of detail. It is to be regretted that critics
capable of discovering such errors should put themselves in the wrong by
gratuitous misstatements of their own concerning the case they dealt
with. Dr. Margoliouth, for instance, pointed out that the legend which
makes Joshua the son of Miriam, ascribed by me to the Arabic chronicle
of Tabari, occurs only in the Persian version—a correction of some
importance. Dr. Margoliouth, however, saw fit to allege that my long
argument for the existence of a pre-Christian cult of Joshua (Jesus) son
of Miriam turned wholly on the reference of the Moslem legend to Tabari,
whereas it was only after putting my main case on other grounds that I
wrote: "Finally, *we have to note* (*a*) the remarkable Arab tradition
which makes Joshua the Son of Miriam."

This want of critical rectitude marks nearly the whole of the polemic
directed against *Pagan Christs*, and even where some sense of critical
principle has been exhibited, theological animus usually deflects the
reasoning in an unprofitable fashion. A lady reviewer

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

in the *Hibbert Journal*, who certainly showed more concern for argument
than most of the other critics of the book, embodied her case in such
propositions as these:—

1\. "Mr. Robertson, as we have seen, *proceeds on the assumption* that
the historicity of Christ is a myth."

2\. "His reasons......practically reduce themselves to this......that
Paul......shows total ignorance of the teachings and miracles ascribed
to Jesus in the Gospels."

3\. "He admits what they \[the Epistles\] imply—the hostility, for
instance, to their writer of the Jews throughout the Mediterranean. But
if this is granted, the historicity of Christ *must necessarily follow*.
We *can hardly believe* that the Jews would have been hostile to a myth:
they would have retorted that Jesus never even existed."

4\. "Our author, indeed, refuses to admit the historicity of the
disciples: he is clearly inconsistent in so doing, for the Epistles
imply it, and he admits the Epistles."

5\. "He explains away the reference to the Eucharist in 1 Cor. xi by
*assuming* that the passage is interpolated. For the rest, he assures us
that Paul or the 'forger' believed in a crucified Jesus as to whom he
had no biographical record, and he finds him (!) in the person of a
certain Jesus ben Pandira......We shall scarcely be guilty of scepticism
if we refuse to accept this solution."

6\. "His \[the author's\] theological position *requires* that he should
deny the historicity of the Crucifixion."

The "assumptions" in this debate are wholly on the side of the critic.
So far from being led by my "theological position" to deny the
historicity of Jesus or the Crucifixion, I had come to my present
theological conclusions long before doubting the historicity of either;
and only after striving for many years, on the normal assumptions, to
construct a tenable historical conception of the rise of Christianity,
did I find myself reluctantly driven, by purely historical
considerations, to give them up.

I had in the same way taken for granted the historicity of the twelve
apostles; and in abandoning that after an analysis made in the light of
the *Didachê* I still held by the historicity of the Founder. Even that
I only abandoned after an attempt to construct a theorem of a succession
of Jesuses.

So far, again, from "finding" Paul's Jesus in the Talmudic Jesus ben
Pandira, I have expressly shown that, while bound as historical students
to take full account of the apparent possibilities in that direction, we
can finally find there no standing-ground. I had in fact anticipated the
now common conclusion that the Talmudic Jesus, if not in the main
mythical, is little more than a name, historically speaking; and I
finally "found" Paul's Jesus in the abstraction of the human sacrifice,
named by the name of the ancient Jesus-God.

*There*, I should have supposed, was the likely point of attack for

<span id="page_398">p. 398</span>

negative criticism. But the attacks made at that point, so far as I have
seen, take the shape of mere rejection of the thesis. The *Hibbert
Journal* reviewer indeed contended that there is "no trace of such a
rite" as human sacrifice "among Palestinian Jews of the later period." I
leave the reader to decide for himself, after noting the fuller
exposition in the present edition, whether that statement can hold. For
the rest, my thesis of the Pre-Christian Jesus-God has received a
remarkable and quite independent corroboration in the work of Professor
W. Benjamin Smith, *Der Vorchristliche Jesus* (1906); and in the recent
discussions in Germany over Professor Arthur Drews’s *Die
Christusmythe*, that problem has naturally come in for much discussion.
So far, I have seen no rebuttal of my own position.

The other positions taken up by the *Hibbert Journal* reviewer are only
too easily turned. My "reasons" certainly do not "practically reduce
themselves" to the silence of "Paul." That is indeed a fatal crux, of
which the orthodox defence has vainly striven to dispose. But the bulk
of the cumulative argument of the examination of "The Gospel Myths" in
*Christianity and Mythology* remains to be dealt with even if the
problem of the Pauline Epistles be put aside; and the further argument
in *Pagan Christs* as to the non-historicity of the whole matter of the
mystery-drama is independent of the Pauline problem. Even if we accept
"the four" epistles as genuine, and pass the passages which I challenged
as interpolations, my central theses are in no way invalidated. The
acceptance of the tradition by "Paul" would not establish the
historicity of the tradition.

As regards the whole problem of the epistles, the *Hibbert Journal*
reviewer proceeds upon untenable premises. Her assertion that the
epistles imply the historicity of the *disciples* is an error which
comes of failure to realise the issue. The epistles never speak of
*disciples:* they speak of *apostles*, never alleging or suggesting that
those apostles were taught by "the Lord." They tell only of a going
cultus. And other errors follow. To say that I "accept the epistles,"
and at the same time to admit that I charge upon them capital
interpolations, is to break down at the start. The question of the
general genuineness of "the four" epistles I have left open, while
leaning more and more, though always with some reserves, to Van Manen's
conclusions. But my case was and is that, whether the epistles to the
Corinthians be genuine or spurious, they betray a general ignorance of
the purport of the gospel narratives. As thus: (*a*) the passage 1 Cor.
xv, 3-9, cannot well have been current as it stands before the gospels,
else they would surely have given the "five hundred" story; though (*b*)
verse 5 must have been written before the Judas story was added to the
gospels, since it speaks of Jesus as appearing to the whole "twelve,"
where the synoptics say "the eleven"; (*c*) the non-mention of the women
also infers ignorance of the gospel story; (*d*) the specification of
"all the apostles" tells of an

<span id="page_399">p. 399</span>

interpolation either of that phrase or of "the twelve"; and (*e*) the
specification of James is again independent of the gospel story. Now,
some of these items clearly tell in favour of an early and independent
narrative; but others as clearly tell of interpolation; and all, taken
together, impeach either the gospel narrative or themselves. The two
sets are irreconcilable.

If the writer of the epistle knew the facts, and if the gospels give the
facts, how came he to ignore the central episode of Judas? If he drew on
a current report concerning the "five hundred," how came the gospels to
ignore that? Assume the bulk of the passage to antedate the gospels,
what is to be inferred as to *their* composition? On the other hand, of
what evidential value is a series of assertions of supernatural
appearances, which further diverge markedly from the assertions in the
gospels? Be the epistle genuine or spurious, how can it be held to show
knowledge of the gospel story?

When, again, we turn to the passage 1 Cor. xi, 23 *sq*., we find the
formula "For I delivered unto you......that which also I received"
developed into "For I received *of the Lord* that which also I delivered
unto you"; and here, under profession of supernatural knowledge, we have
an express allusion to the betrayal, of which the other passage shows no
knowledge—nay, excludes any inference of knowledge. That *this* passage
is an interpolation is no "assumption," but an irresistible inference
from (*a*) the context and (*b*) the whole purport of that in ch. xv. It
ruptures the context; and it tells of what the writer of the other
chapter knew nothing. So far from being an arbitrary step on my part,
the inference of interpolation has been latterly made by a series of
German critics who probably had no knowledge of my argument, first
penned more than twenty years ago.

What then is left of "the apostles" in the Pauline Epistles? A plainly
valueless allusion to the twelve and one to "all the apostles"—allusions
which form part of a set of incredible assertions—the mention of "the
brethren of the Lord" (1 Cor. ix, 5), and the further allusions to "the
apostles" in Galatians, where the exordium has plain reference to the
claims of the *Judaic* apostles of the High-Priest or the Patriarch. If
this epistle be "genuine," it tells only of "apostles" of the Jesuist
cult, naming "James and Cephas and John," with a separate mention of
"Peter," and a description of James as "the brother of the Lord." This,
with 1 Cor. ix, 5, is of course one of the holdfasts of the orthodox
defence, being in fact the sole quasi-biographical detail as to Jesus in
the epistles. But (1) neither this nor any other epistle tells of the
*parents* of Jesus; and (2) in Acts xii, 2, we have "James, the brother
of *John*," killed by Herod before Paul joins the new sect. So that if
"James the brother of the Lord" were a brother of the Gospel Jesus and a
"pillar," he was so in supersession of the claims of the survivors of
"the twelve," since the two Jameses in the gospel list are sons of

<span id="page_400">p. 400</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Zebedee and
Alphæus; and there is no gospel mention of any discipleship on the part
of James the son of Joseph and Mary, any more than of the other brothers
named and sisters mentioned in Matthew xiii and Mark vi. Among these are
James and Joses; and in Matt. xxvii, 56, we have mention of "Mary the
mother of James and Joses," *without* specification of her or their
relationship to Jesus. Of what historical value, then, is the reference
to "James the brother of the Lord" in the epistle to the Galatians, even
supposing it to be genuine? In epistles so often interpolated—by the
admission of the revisers who have excised so many later
interpolations—such a phrase as "the brother of the Lord" was the
easiest of insertions; and even were the phrase primordial, the
inference that "brethren of the Lord" in 1 Cor. ix, 5, was a late
group-name is far more tenable than the exorbitant assumption that an
actual brother of the Gospel Jesus, who never figures as his supporter
in the records, had suddenly become a "pillar" of the cult; and that
other brothers had also become propagandists. If these were actual
brothers of Jesus, so acting in Paul's day, how comes it that there is
no hint of them in the Acts? The whole apostolic list of names and the
list of the "holy family" are alike hopeless imbroglios for any reader
concerned about historical truth. And if Galatians be *not* genuine—as
even many theologians are fain to surmise, in view of its pretensions to
supernaturally acquired knowledge of the Christian doctrine and its wide
divergence from the narrative of the Acts—it may still be interpolated
at any point. The separate allusions to "Cephas" and "Petros" are a
stumbling-block for any exegesis. Finally, as I have shown in the
Preface, the passage in which "brethren of the Lord" are mentioned in 1
Cor. ix is utterly incompatible with the passage on marriage in ch. vii,
so that the *main* mention of the "brethren" in the epistles must go by
the board.

It is hardly necessary to argue, in conclusion, against the assumption
that the Jews could not be "hostile to a myth." Does the reviewer
believe that the Gods of the heathen were *not* myths? When the Jews
denounced such Gods as daimons, did they deny the existence of daimons?
Were not the Christians hostile to Mithra? If Jesuist Jews could start a
circumstantial Jesus myth in an age of universal credulity, the Jews as
a matter of course would in the end take the line of denying, not the
existence of the alleged Founder, but the genuineness of his mission and
his claims. On Van Manen's theory, the epistles belong to the second
century. But, on any view of their date, they offered no point of
contact to historical criticism. Their Jesus is dateless, speechless,
homeless, without a biography. They locate neither his death nor his
birth, assign to him no period, quote from him no teaching, specify no
miracle. They do but name a crucified Jesus; and there may have been
many crucified Jesuses in Jewish history. The Talmudic Jesus would fit
that case, to say nothing of the presumptive sacrificial

<span id="page_401">p. 401</span>

victim called "Jesus Barabbas." The very interpolation which tells of
the betrayal and the Last Supper names no place and suggests no date.
Supposing even the string of assertions concerning the reappearances
after the resurrection to have been current in the first century, it
names neither place nor time; and it cites mainly unnamed Christian
witnesses. Even if the "five hundred" story were not a late
interpolation, it was open to no refutation. A number of Christians
could doubtless be got to say they had seen the Lord after his death;
and the "twelve," Cephas, and James were mere partisans, whether dead or
alleged to be alive. They too are dateless: the epistles never say
whether or not they survive.

And while orthodoxy dwells on such valueless "evidence," the Unitarian
defenders of the historicity of Jesus do not believe in the event so
evidenced. For them, there is nothing in the epistles that admits of
either proof or disproof in a debate between Paulinists and Jews. Had
the Jews, in terms of the argument of the *Hibbert Journal* reviewer,
said that Paul's Jesus "never existed," there could be no debate, for
there was no historical proposition for them to contest. A Jesus without
date, home, parents, doctrine, or named disciples, a Jesus merely
alleged to have been crucified, without mention of place or time, and to
have "risen again" at no specified place or time, was not a subject for
historical discussion. And if both Christian and non-Christian scholars,
in our own day, in an age of historical criticism, are still in large
numbers unable to see that the very absence of historical data from the
epistles puts them outside of historical discussion, the Jews of the
Pauline period could hardly be capable of so arguing.

To this, then, the case for the defence "reduces itself." The sole
quasi-historical datum in the epistles which makes for the historicity
of Jesus is the hopeless item concerning James and other "brethren of
the Lord." The sole "events" historically posited concerning Jesus are
that he was crucified and rose again, which last "event" the Unitarians
admit to be myth. As to the crucifixion, their belief turns on the
gospel narrative, the dramatic character of which they have not ventured
to deny in detail. But the writer or writers of the first epistle to the
Corinthians show in one passage vital ignorance of the gospel story of
the betrayal, and give absolutely no historic data for the crucifixion;
while the passage in which the betrayal is mentioned is on the face of
the case an interpolation, since it imports knowledge which the other
passage negates. *Solvuntur tabulæ*.

The Unitarian case is in fact only the orthodox case minus the
supernatural. But even the orthodox case is a compromise. If the early
Christians believed anything, they believed in the ascension. No
educated Christian now believes in the ascension. Yet educated
Christians believe in the resurrection on the testimony of an age which
believed in the ascension, and call the legend "evidence."

<span id="page_402">p. 402</span>

#### § 2. The Rev. Alfred Ernest Crawley.

The work entitled *The Tree of Life*, by the Rev. A. E. Crawley, <span
id="fr_2005"></span>[1](#fn_2005.md) author of *The Mystic Rose*, is an
interesting development of modern Christian apologetics. As an
anthropologist, Mr. Crawley is sufficiently familiar with the facts of
comparative hierology to know that all the main features of the
Christian creed and cultus—Divine Sonship, Virgin-birth, crucifixion,
resurrection, salvation, baptism, and eucharist—are common features of
pagan religion; and he takes the somewhat bold course of positing the
facts in question. He is indeed somewhat imprudent in putting in the
forefront of his exposition what he calls "The Rationalist Attack" and
"The Anthropological Attack," admitting that so far as they go they are
unanswerable. As to Biblical cosmology, he confesses (p. 141) that "the
arguments of Huxley and Laing in this matter can no longer be resisted";
and he in effect says the same thing of the supernaturalism of the
gospels. It is in the latter part of his book that he proffers his
vindication of the faith, in the form of the theorem (1) that religion
in general, howsoever mythical be its basis and content, is necessary to
"human nature"—that is, to the nature of those who "need" it; (2) that
it is the true bulwark of society against "Radicals and Socialists"; and
(3) that the Church of England is the best Church because she keeps "to
a *via media* which does more than represent the essence of Christian
doctrine, for it also *preserves the best elements of primitive
religion*." <span id="fr_2006"></span>[2](#fn_2006.md) Of this avowed
compound of savagery and "progress," the essential value is declared to
consist neither in truth or reasonableness nor in any inculcation of
altruism, but in the "feeling of life" which it conveys, its
substitution of egoism for altruism, its consecration of
"individualism." I give his own words (italics mine):—

"Kidd is profoundly mistaken when he speaks of the intense altruism of
the early Christians, and of the flood of altruistic emotion which
Puritanism and the Reformation let loose upon the world. Gibbon rightly
noted the intense egoism of the Christians; their altruism was confined
to their own family, as it were; and Wakeman rightly speaks of the
stern, uncompromising individualism of the Puritans. This *increase of
vitality* is illustrated by the martyrs, both of the early Christian and
Reformation times" (p. 275).

'Even the cruelties of the Inquisition, the tortures and the burnings,
were really another expression of the same *access of strength*. The
lesson of religious cruelty, like the lesson of martyrdom, is that if
religion, the permanent expression of vitality, can show *such
invincible strength of cruelty* on the one hand, and of endurance on the
other, *the fact is due to an increase of vitality*. We inherit, to our
inestimable gain, the spirit and strength of persecutor and

<span id="page_403">p. 403</span>

martyr alike: the resource, the endurance, the zeal, and the power of
our *best men* are due to that spirit and the human force which it
revealed" (p. 277).

Our Anglican sophist, it will be seen, has determined to take the wind
out of the sails of Nietzsche, whose doctrine he gravely pronounces to
be a "paradox." Before we pass to his specific defence of the Christ
myth, it would seem to be necessary to point out to his possible dupes
the sociological implications of his thesis, to say nothing of its
ethic. (For it is to be presumed that he makes converts, like his
congeners, Mr. Kidd, Mr. Drummond, and Mr. Balfour.) The "invincible
strength of cruelty" which he so devoutly admires was after all rather
more fully evidenced by the American Native Americans than even by the
Puritans who did their best to exterminate them; and, religion for
religion, the Choctaw religion would seem on his own principles to be
superior even to the Christian. As for the "vitality" imparted to the
Native Americans by their late conversion to Christianity, the concept
is one which must entertain the American Bureau of Ethnology. Of course,
the Choctaws cannot pretend to have done much in the way of religious
persecution—that is indeed a Jewish and Christian specialty; and it must
be admitted that when the Boxers have attempted something in that line
the Christians have certainly been able to outdo them in massacre. But
then on Mr. Crawley's principles it must surely have been a great
"increase of vitality" that enabled the Moslems to overrun all the early
centres of Christianity, and the Turks later to conquer Christian
Greece. Which makes a difficulty for the Neo-Christian.

As regards the services rendered by Christianity to States, again, the
would-be believer would do well to note (1) the "vitalising" effect of
the spirit of religious cruelty on Spain, which had so many more
persecutors and so many more martyrs than England; (2) the operation of
the same saving virtue in imperial Rome, where Christians are wont to
point to the abolition of the gladiatorial combats as the beneficent
work of their creed, but have not yet succeeded in demonstrating any
access of vitality to the empire from the first century onwards. It is
only fair to admit that the Spaniards contrived to destroy the
civilisations of Mexico and Peru. But then the religion of Mexico was
marked by an indurated and bloodthirsty cruelty which, on Mr. Crawley's
principles, should have meant an adequate amount of "vitality." As for
our own Anglo-Saxon ancestors, it remains for Mr. Crawley to demonstrate
wherein they showed increase of "vitality" between their pagan conquest
of Britain and their own conquest by their Norman fellow-Christians.

The nature of the thinking faculty which sustains Mr. Crawley in his
social philosophy may be gathered from a few samples. 1. "It is one of
the most noticeable of the *discrepancies* in the gospel narratives that
Christ *consistently* refused to give a 'sign,' *while his reporters
tell us of so many*" (p. 141). 2. "If ever a conviction *seemed to be
mortised in adamant*, it is perhaps the belief

<span id="page_404">p. 404</span>

that religion is essentially altruistic. But the facts *unmistakably*
point to the exact opposite" (p. 273). 3. "Even the most self-sufficient
of rationalists prays to something *without knowing it*" (p. 257). (In
which case Mr. Crawley knows the fact without any testimony.)

The reader is now substantially prepared to understand and appraise Mr.
Crawley's operations in Christian apologetics. He has a certain cynical
candour, which is not without its charm; but with his natural gift for
paralogism and his happy freedom from intellectual scruple, he yields
some flights of ethic and of logic which will not readily be matched in
modern controversy. On p. 125 he speaks of a "reaction against the
scientific attack......to be seen in an altered Agnosticism, *which is
really religious*, and is practically the old Christianity with all
dogma and ritual omitted, and the supernatural element excluded." On p.
131 we learn that "the *scientific* Agnostic" is "ready to return by
some rational path to the main beliefs of Christianity. This tendency
was seen in Comte and Haeckel; and the inference is legitimate that,
even where the cleavage between religion and science is apparently most
marked, yet man cannot do without religion." Then on pp. 290-1 we have
the assurance that in "the Ethical and Socialistic societies of to-day"
"morality takes the place of religion. The failure of these systems to
satisfy human nature is perhaps unexampled for completeness in the
history of practical ethics. Positivism, as has been said, is
Christianity with the Catholicism left out" \[what *was* "said," as it
happens, was the converse: "Catholicism with the Christianity left
out"\]: "*the Ethical movement leaves out everything*."

In Mr. Crawley's psychosis, moral, logical, and intellectual incoherence
combined yield a rare range of tergiversation. On p. 243 he informs us
that "Religious monism at once removes all false dualism from our
metaphysics." On p. 295 he delightedly chimes with Bishop Gore to the
effect that "It is common to all the anti-Christian views of sin that at
the last resort they make sin natural, a part of nature. It is
characteristic of Christ's view of sin—of the scriptural view of it—that
*it makes it unnatural*."

\[One cannot but linger in this connection over the further joint
achievement of Bishop Gore and Mr. Crawley in the way of falsifying
doctrinal history. "It is characteristic, again," says the Bishop, "of
the non-Christian view that it makes the body, the material, the seat of
sin. It is essential to the Christian view to find its seat and only
source in the will." "Now," adds Mr. Crawley, "this account applies
exactly to the primitive conception: the savage, like the Essene,
regards sin as a transgression of nature. Sin breaks taboo......"It must
be confessed that on the whole the Bishop contrives to get furthest from
the truth. If there is one doctrine that stands out from the whole
Christian and "scriptural" tradition, it is that sin entered the entire
human race by Adam's fall; and if there is one moral assumption that
dominates that tradition in the early, "dark,"

<span id="page_405">p. 405</span>

and middle ages, it is that the body is *by nature* prone to evil. The
simple doctrine, "if thy right eye offend thee, pluck it out," might
serve to decide the question for any save a Christian sophist. But Mr.
Crawley's summary of the savage theory of "nature" runs the Bishop's
formula close. The conception "transgression of nature" is simply not
possible to a true savage, and was never formulated by one. Taboo is
made and unmade by a word or a ceremony. Does the savage call either
"nature"?\]

I have spent some time over the main body of Mr. Crawley's doctrine,
thinking it useful to exhibit the moral and mental cast of a writer who
lays it down that "irreligion means deterioration," and who, knowing the
substantial truth of the results of modern anthropology and hierology,
professes to vindicate Christianity as "revelation." "The ordinary
believer," he writes, "*naïvely but justly*, requires that Christianity
shall be literally true, and its Founder both God and Man" (p. 144). So
Mr. Crawley goes about to accommodate the ordinary believer. The
critical argument of *Pagan Christs* he introduces to his readers in
this summary (p. 148): "Dionysus and Apollo also have their religions,
and precisely the same stories are told about founders as about the gods
they served. *Therefore* Buddha, Zoroaster, *Confucius*, *Laou-tze*,
Moses, and Christ *must* be mythical." Dr. J. E. Carpenter, I admit,
could not have done the "therefore" better. My only wonder is that Mr.
Crawley did not add Mohammed and Mrs. Eddy: the extras would have made
still better reading, and Mr. Crawley's ethic could easily afford them.
But there is no lack of completeness in his further proposition that
"Dionysus and Apollo are never represented as founders of religions *any
more than is Jehovah*." I leave comment to every adult who has read the
*Bacchae* and the Pentateuch. Wondering why Mr. Crawley did not say "any
more than Jesus," I proceed to transcribe his assertion (p. 149) that
"*Thus* the evidence for the historicity of founders *like* Buddha and
Zoroaster" \[Quetzalcoatl, for instance?\] "*is as strong as for any
historical fact, and* this is admitted *by the best students* of the
respective systems." The proposition and the proof of it I hope to help
to preserve by this transcription, to which I add no comment.

I may be excused for adding this from the same page:—"Robertson, indeed,
while arguing against the historicity of Jesus, stultifies his case by
admitting the historicity of 'another person of the same name,' the
Jesus ben Pandora of the Talmud." I ought here, perhaps, to make clear
for Mr. Crawley's "naïve" readers the full force and scope of his
argument. It means that if I deny the historicity of Moses, but admit
that of Moses of Chorene, I have stultified myself; and that if I
dispute the historicity of John Barleycorn I stultify my own signature.
It is a trifle, but it may be worth adding, that I did not admit the
historicity of Jesus ben Pandira, about which I expressed serious
doubts. But it is true that I admit the more or less clear historicity
of a number of the

<span id="page_406">p. 406</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jesuses mentioned
by Josephus, even as I admit the historicity of Mr. Crawley while
disputing that of his namesakes in *Vanity Fair*. Further, I have
postulated the probable historicity of an annual human sacrifice of a
victim *ritually* named Jesus Barabbas.

With that crushing syllogism ready to launch, Mr. Crawley had just
before advanced the proposition that the beginning of the Christian era
was a "period too late for the free formation either of divine or of
historical personalities by the mythopœic imagination"—an inexpensive
*petitio principii* which had often been put forward before. I might
leave him to reckon with those Christian hierologists who affirm the
post-Christian appearance of such deities as Balder and Krishna; but it
may suffice, even for a "naïve" believer of moderate intelligence, to
ask himself when and how or how "freely" were formed the "personalities"
of King Arthur and his Knights, Prester John, William Tell, the
Wandering Jew, Lohengrin, Tannhäuser, the Seven Sleepers, Saint George,
Faustus, and Saint Christopher.

If Mr. Crawley believed in the worthless argument he has hero used, he
obviously needed no other. If Jesus *cannot* be non-historical, the case
is at an end. He shows his sense of the futility of his own plea by
using a number of others—the argument from the *Chrestus* of Suetonius,
which clearly tells in favour of a Christ myth; the argument from
Tacitus, who, *if* he wrote the passage in his History, only repeated
what Christians said; and the argument from the passage in Josephus,
given up as spurious by most Christian scholars. Then, in utter
disregard of the Pauline epistles, he affirms that the Christian
tradition itself "mentions the humanity of Christ first"; and proceeds
to found on the hostile Jewish tradition of the "Sepher Toldoth Jeschu,"
concerning which he expressly argues that it is plainly framed by way of
countering the gospel story. Then it has no evidential value whatever,
and his case for the historicity of Jesus is at an end. The assertion
that the story of the Talmudic Jesus ben Pandira is "of *supreme* value"
as "*tending* to prove the historicity of Christ" could come only from
the writer who asserts that the Gospel Jesus *consistently* refuses to
work wonders while the same gospels tell that he worked many.

Mr. Crawley has nothing more to say beyond accusing non-sacramentalist
Christians of "stultifying the Incarnation"—the Incarnation in which he
himself does not believe, since he insists on the historicity of Jesus
and the lateness of the Incarnation story. Against the thesis of *Pagan
Christs* that the gospel tragedy is a mystery-drama he offers no
argument whatever. He is content to say in a footnote that Dupuis’s
derivation of the legend of St. Peter from the Janus myth "is worth
noting as a *type* of the extravagant inferences which are so
conspicuous in the work of G. W. Cox and J. M. Robertson." Of the charge
of extravagance he does not offer a hint of proof.

I do not propose to make a counter charge of "extravagance." The
scientific charge against Mr. Crawley, in its most charitable

<span id="page_407">p. 407</span>

form, would be that of intellectual antinomianism. He has simply no
intellectual ethic whatever, and he is evidently satisfied that religion
needs none, since he declares that religion in general, and Christianity
in particular, deals only with "the elemental" (pp. 209, 265). Which
means that if you feel you like to believe religion, and you think that
it is socially useful, you do well to profess it in disregard of all
argument (p. 296). He proceeds to explain in this connection (p. 265)
that "In the elemental view of life, every scientific error of the Bible
may be regarded as a truth. It is true, *for instance*, that *the sun
rises;* and not even the most pedantic rationalist will employ a more
scientific phrase." Observe the logical morality of the phrase "for
instance," which is made to cover every myth and every forgery in the
Bible.

Mr. Crawley, like most latter-day Christian priests, scouts the doctrine
of the "French deists" that religion in general has been a matter of
priestly imposture; thoughtfully omitting to tell the "naïve but just"
Christian reader that this was the verdict habitually pronounced by the
Christian priesthood upon all non-Christian religions during many
centuries. The deists, finding as much priest-craft in Christianity as
anywhere else, made a fairly reasonable extension of the doctrine. It
certainly needs qualification; though Mr. Crawley, with his usual
logical incoherence, offers a hopelessly fallacious argument against it.
Among the Australian Aruntas, as Messrs. Spencer and Gillen have shown,
certain myths propounded to the boys and women are perfectly well known
by the adult men to be frauds. This, in Mr. Crawley's opinion (pp.
195-6), proves that religious beliefs can never have been set up by
fraud. It is really a rather strong argument for the priestcraft theory.
For the Aruntas have no priests; and the old argument was that priests
were able to carry off impostures which among laymen without priests
would have been treated as such by adults.

Whatever may be the final verdict of hierology on that score, no careful
student will dispute the actuality of priestcraft among either savages
or civilised men. Of its existence among savages the proofs are
innumerable. Of its existence among educated Christians the latest proof
is Mr. Crawley's book. He helps us to understand the spirit and the
procedure of priestcraft in all ages. In the course of one of his
professional appeals to pious and other prejudice he writes:—"Theistic
and Christian prepossessions are often derided by rationalists; but
there is sound human nature behind the instinct, as we may properly call
it, which leads men to distrust an 'atheist'" (p. 297). "Human nature,"
from the point of view of Mr. Crawley's tribe, is notoriously a monopoly
of those who hold the beliefs which he inculcates; but, in spite of that
naïve claim, rationalists contrive to possess some. And after they read
Mr. Crawley it will probably reinforce their instinct, if we may dare so
to call it, that there is something profoundly untrustworthy about a
temporising priest who champions primitive superstition.'

<span id="page_408">p. 408</span>

#### § 3. The Rev. Dr. St. Clair Tisdall.

Dr. Tisdall illustrates at once the difficulty for orthodox theologians
of keeping their tempers when their faith is challenged, and the havoc
which passion can work in an argument, not to say in the reasoning
faculty itself. His animus disorders his enterprise from the start. In
the opening chapter of his work on *Mythic Christs and the True*, <span
id="fr_2007"></span>[1](#fn_2007.md) dealing with the question of
Mithraism, he refers to me as "a modern writer on the subject, who tells
us that his book 'challenges criticism above all by its thesis.'"
Pausing at that word, he goes on to charge me with first asserting that
we know very little of Mithraism, and then proceeding, "as do others, to
afford a complete account of the legends and the inmost theology of the
Mithraists, together with details of its origin."

It will be seen that the phrase first quoted by him is from the
introduction to this work (preface in first edition), where the phrasing
is not "*its thesis*," but "*its theses*," the reference being not to
any general thesis, but to two immediately specified propositions
concerning the Christian mystery-play. Having quoted "its thesis," Dr.
Tisdall burkes the rest of the passage, thus either wilfully garbling
the whole or failing in his anger to understand what he reads. To the
"theses" specified he makes not even an attempt to reply. The attack
which he goes on to make on me concerning Mithraism is, as the reader
will see from its statement, nugatory. Upon that subject neither I nor
any one else can give "a complete account of the legends and the inmost
theology." "If we know all this about Mithra," says Dr. Tisdall, quoting
some details from another writer and from me, "we know a great deal."
And he goes on to propound the crushing counter-thesis, "There are no
Mithraic Scriptures extant," as if that settled the question. It is idle
to discuss with such a writer what constitutes "a great deal." It may
suffice, however, to point out that what contemporary documentary
evidence we have concerning Mithraism, apart from the Zendavesta, comes
from Plutarch, Strabo, Athenæus, Herodotus, Porphyry, Commodianus,
Macrobius, and Julian; the Fathers Julius Firmicus Maternus, Tertullian,
Jerome, Justin Martyr, and Gregory Nazianzen; and the historian Elisæus
of Armenia. Whether we call their information little or much, there it
is. When he proceeds to charge me with eliciting from my "fancy"
statements which I quote from the Fathers of his own Church, he merely
raises the question whether it is his scholarship or his ethic that is
at fault.

Accusing me further (p. 7) of dishonestly "reading Christian doctrines
into Mithraism," Dr. Tisdall begins by vilifying that creed as
"debased." He then sets about proving his charge against me (1) by
citing from me a reference to the Khorda Avesta, xxvi, 107, whereafter
he declares in italics, "*There is no such chapter in* 

<span id="page_409">p. 409</span>

*existence*......But possibly this is merely a printer's error, though
an unfortunate one." If Dr. Tisdall knows the texts as he professes to
do, he must be perfectly well aware that xxvi—with the alternative
"(10)"—is Spiegel's chapter-number for the *Mihir Yasht* in the Khorda
Avesta. To say that "there is no such chapter in existence" is again to
raise questions not only of scholarship, but of intellectual ethic.
True, I have usually cited the *Mihir Yasht* by that title, and from
Darmesteter: the "error" consisted solely in not giving Spiegel's name,
with his rendering: "as the heavenly understanding allies itself to the
heavenly Mithra." All errors of reference, printers’ or writers’,
doubtless, are unfortunate, though for candid readers they are usually
soluble; but doubly unfortunate is the arrogance of a writer who, making
an attack such as the above, thrice prints "Fargand" for "Fargard" in
his own text; twice prints "Principal" for "Principle"; prints "Iride"
for "Iside"; prints "Pyramids" as a French word; and cites Jerome's
"*Contra Jovinianum*" as "*Contra Jovianum*." A writer who grounds his
attacks upon supposed printer's errors should be more careful about his
own proofs.

On the real issue, Dr. Tisdall is careful not to mention that in the
*Mihir Yasht* (= Khorda Avesta, xxvi, 107: Spiegel) the "heavenly
understanding" is declared to be allied with Mithra. He goes on
professedly to cite from Geldner's text of the Zendavesta a passage
which is *not* that referred to by me, laboriously and uselessly proving
that it does not speak of the "Word"; and then, turning to Vendidâd,
Fargard xix, 14, 15 (48, 54), stakes his credit on his own declaration
that I "may have been misled" by a translation "impossible for a person
at all acquainted with the original language." I fancy that most readers
will prefer to the smatterings of Dr. Tisdall the expert scholarship of
Darmesteter, who reads "the Word Incarnate" in *Mihir Yasht* xxxii, 137
(where Spiegel has simply "the Manthra"), or even that of Spiegel, who
reads "the holy Word" where Dr. Tisdall says no scholar could.

F'. Dr. Tisdall's case on this head substantially amounts to denying
that "sacred text" has any possible community of meaning with the idea
of the *Logos*. He thereby shows his general ignorance of the evolution
of the idea in question. (Both in Islam and in Brahmanism the Sacred
Book is theologically abstracted to an eternal and untreated existence;
and the psychic process is fundamentally the same as in the Hindu
hypostatising of Speech, which is the type of the Græcised doctrine.
"Speech *is* the Rig Veda," and "the 'word' *is* Brahma.")

Offering such proofs as that above noticed for his charge of dishonesty
against me, Dr. Tisdall (2) represents me (p. 12) as giving the Mithraic
case in proof of my allegation that the Christian doctrine of the Logos
comes from a pagan source. To realise the dishonesty of *that*
assertion, the reader need but peruse §§ 2, 3 of Ch. ii of Part II of
the foregoing volume, where the Logos idea is

<span id="page_410">p. 410</span>

traced to a probable Babylonian source. I have expressly represented the
idea of the Logos as late in Mithraism.

When, further, my reverend critic in this connection zealously contends
that even to prove that Mithra was "associated with" the Word would not
be to identify him with it, he raises the question whether he is aware
of the history of his own creed. If he knew that in early Christian
literature "it is common to find the titles of the Holy Ghost assigned
to the Logos," and if he could realise the fact that in ordinary
Christian conception the Logos performs the function of the Holy Spirit,
even he would hardly have flouted the suggestion that association of
that kind can easily lead to assimilation in a fluid system. For the
rest, he makes no attempt to deny that Sraosha, who was latterly
bracketed with Mithra, *was* "the Word"; and he does not even mention my
reasons for inferring that in one worship Mithra was practically
identified with Vohumano—Sraosha, the latter being worshipped, like
Mithra, along with Anaitis.

The gist of Dr. Tisdall's claim appears to be that no Eastern creed save
the Christian had either a Logos or a Mediator or a Virgin Mother, and
that Mithraism could have had no moral value. On all three heads he
writes as the merest Christian partisan. He is aware (p. 18) that in
Armenia the Christians professed to quote from Persians the statement
that "the God Mithra was born of a woman"; and still he professes to see
no trace of the idea of a virgin-birth. Yet in his own creed the God-Man
is declared to be born of a woman; and he does not for a moment pretend
that the Persians declared Mithra to be the son of a mortal *father*.
Confusing another text, he makes it assert that Mithra was "incestuously
born of a mortal mother," when the assertion really was (see above, [p.
322](pch71.htm#page_322), *note*.md) that the God was born of the incest of
Ahura Mazda with *his* mother. Any candid scholar would admit that on
the face of such references Mithra was reputed supernaturally born of
God and a mortal mother. When Dr. Tisdall argues further that the
conception of the *Petra Genetrix*, the Rock from which Mithra was born,
excludes the idea of any mother, he merely sets us asking whether he is
unaware that in ancient mythology the Earth, constantly personified, is
*the* mother *par excellence*.

On the general mythological topic of virgin-birth, Dr. Tisdall writes in
the childish strain of Canon McCulloch. Where a supernaturally
impregnated mother is not expressly *called* a virgin, he protests,
there is no analogy to the Christian story. Both reverend gentlemen seem
to be unaware that the title of "Virgin" was categorically given in
antiquity to Mother-Goddesses and Goddesses of many amours. They cannot
see that the essence of the idea under challenge lies in the item of
supernatural birth—birth without male congress, which is asserted by
Hesiod in the case of Hêrê. In the heat of his partisanship, Dr. Tisdall
angrily attacks Dr. Frazer for accepting the overwhelmingly strong
testimony of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen as to the belief of certain
Australian tribes that *all* births

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

are caused by the entrance of ancestral spirits, and that male congress
is not the cause of conception. On this head he advances the futile
argument that the tribes in question have strict marriage laws—as if
these were not intelligible in terms of mere sex instinct and property;
and he has the hardihood to affirm (p. 89) that "there is *no* proof
that savages hold or have ever held" the doctrine of spiritual
conception. After this, it matters little that, without an attempt at
proof, he declares me (p. 87) to have confounded

f Saoshyant with Sraosha in the Zoroastrian lore; and further flatly
denies that in that lore Saoshyant is virgin-born. Knowing nothing of
the life of Australian Aborigines, he insolently negates the whole
profound research of Messrs. Spencer and Gillen; and on the strength of
his private definition he overrules the verdict of Tiele, Cumont, Haug,
and Darmesteter concerning Saoshyant. When, however, a Sayce, turned
champion of orthodoxy, argues that the human race has not evolved from
savagery at all, that ineptitude is for Dr. Tisdall a sufficient ground
for refusing to admit that "men were originally savages"; and the
youthful folly of Renan's deliverance on the same subject—a deliverance
never repeated, in a book never completed—serves equally, with him, to
outweigh the whole mass of modern biological science. It does not occur
to Dr. Tisdall to ask whether even in 1854 Renan believed in the
Virgin-birth.

The reader will be able to realise Dr. Tisdall's philosophic standpoint
and logical faculty from his concluding deliverance (p. 91) that "if we
suppose that popular fancy, quite independently and with no apparent
reason (!), evolved the idea of supernatural—*nay, even, of
Virgin*—birth, then we must conclude one of two things: either (1) that
it is an unmeaning delusion, or (2) that *it was developed under Divine
guidance*." Deciding as a matter of course on the latter verdict, Dr.
Tisdall proceeds to explain that through all religion "'one unceasing
(*sic*) purpose runs' a Divine plan for the education of the human
race." On his own view, then, Mithraism was divinely superintended; and
the fatigued reader is moved to ask why the reverend critic took all his
previous pains to prove that the Mithraists *cannot* have had a notion
of Virgin-birth, or of a Logos, and must have been a licentious crew?
Given a Divine plan through all, are we not invited to credit Deity with
all the religious misconduct of all paganism?

Putting Dr. Tisdall's philosophic puerilities aside, I have to point
out, further, the bad faith of a citation by him (p. 21) from me (*Pagan
Christs*, 1st ed. p. 345: this ed. p. 326) as to the inscription on a
picture in a Mithraic catacomb of "phrases of the 'Eat and drink for
to-morrow we die' order." Dr. Tisdall is careful not to mention (*a*) my
remark that, if original, such phrases might stand for an antinomian
tendency such as Paul imputed to his Corinthian converts; or (*b*) my
further suggestion that they may very well have been inscribed by
Christian hands after the fall of Mithraism; or (*c*) my further comment
that there is no evidence whatever that

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Mithraism ever
developed such disorders as compelled the suppression of the Christian
*agapæ*. Needless to add, he does not tell that some declare the picture
to represent the *Christian* "Banquet of Seven." With his professed
faith in the Divine plan running through all religion, he is determined
at any cost to prove that the Deity led Mithraists by wholly evil paths.
Where Hausrath ascribes to their cult a purity which "won many hearts
from sin-stained Olympus" and attracted some of the best emperors, Dr.
Tisdall affirms that it won "generally the worst of them" (p. 17),
naming "Aurelian, Diocletian, Galerius, and Licinius, as well as Julian
the Apostate." Hausrath names Antoninus Pius, Constantius Chlorus, and
Julian—without thinking it necessary to add "the Apostate." Such are the
differences of method and result as between the sectarian and the
historian. If one were to comment on the charges brought by Paul the
Apostate against his Corinthian converts, or on the characters of the
common run of the Christian Emperors from Constantine the Apostate
onwards, Dr. Tisdall would presumably fall back either on his candid
theorem (p. 70, note) that Christian precept is not responsible for
Christian practice—a principle reserved by him for Christian use—or his
equally flexible doctrine that all religious history is under divine
supervision.

At that point we may leave the moral question save in so far as we are
forced still to question the moral spirit of the Christian champion. He
does not scruple to repel the assertion that Mithra was a Mediator by
declaring that it is founded solely on Plutarch's statement that "Mithra
was called μεσίτησ because he stood midway between the Good Principal
\[*sic*\] Ormazd, and the Evil Principal \[!\] Ahriman." The assertion
that he was a Mediator between man and God is accordingly declared not
to be "scholarly, or even honest." The suggestion here is that μεσίτησ
does not really mean Mediator; whereas that is the normal and standing
force of the term. The honest critic would have us believe that the
regular Greek word for "intercessor" could have no such connotation for
Mithraists when applied to Mithra, because Plutarch said he got the name
from being midway between Ormazd and Ahriman; and that whereas
Christians by his own account felt the need of a Mediator, Zoroastrians
and Mithraists would not. He does not scruple to write:—"If his
worshippers really held him \[Mithra\] to be a middle-man between Ormazd
and Ahriman, we can the better understand Mithra's undoubted association
with Cybele, Baal, and such immoral deities." Thus can hierology be
written by a Christian priest. If a heretic should ask whether Christ is
not practically a mid-way Power between God and Devil, saving his
worshippers from *both*, he would be a good deal nearer the truth; but
we can imagine the epithets with which Dr. Tisdall would greet him. The
reader will not be surprised to learn that, perverting to his purpose a
passage of Darmesteter, he represents ancient society (albeit under the
Divine Plan) in the last years B.C. to have attained merely to

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "the unbridling of
the human brute," adding that "so it is in France now."

It is on a basis of such sociology and psychology as this that Dr.
Tisdall reaches the conclusion that the belief of pagans in supernatural
births proves the reality of the gospel story. "The false coin," he sums
up, in the manner and on the plane of Justin Martyr, "pre-supposes the
genuine......The very existence of so many varied forms of legends of
births of this kind shows that such a thing is not 'unthinkable.'" So
that the currency of a multitude of narratives declared to be false (but
divinely inspired) proves the inherent credibility of one other
narrative of the same order. Such is the logic of official Christian
theology in England in 1909.

I have not taken the trouble to answer all of Dr. Tisdall's minor
criticisms. It may suffice to cite one more, as a sample of their
validity. On p. 24 he writes (italics mine):—"Though Mr. Robertson says,
'Mithraism was, *in point of range*, the most nearly universal religion
of the Western world, in the early centuries of the Christian era,' yet
*this statement requires modification*. Cumont informs us that, *at
first at least*, 'The *influence* of this small band of sectaries on the
great mass of the Roman population was virtually as infinitesimal as is
to-day the influence of Buddhist societies in modern Europe." That is to
say, my statement must be modified because it does not apply to the
period *before* that to which I specifically applied it. I spoke of
Mithraism "in the early centuries of the Christian era." Professor
Cumont's phrase refers expressly to the time of the beginnings, "towards
the end of the Republic." Dr. Tisdall has penned sheer nullity.

An excuse is perhaps needed for dealing at any length with a writer
capable of such dialectic. Mine is, that it is necessary at least to let
laymen know the nature of the minds which now seek to impose faith upon
them.

#### § 4. The Rev. Father Martindale.

In the Roman Catholic periodical *The Month*, for December, 1908, there
appeared an article by the Rev. Father Martindale under the title "The
Religion of Mithra: Third Article: VI. A Modern Apostle." It was devoted
to an attack on Part III of *Pagan Christs;* and as the title appears to
convey the belief that I am a Mithraist, it might seem negligible in a
serious discussion. The reverend author, however, has made so many
charges of bad faith, with so much revelation of bad faith on his own
part, that I have thought it advisable to deal with them in detail,
putting succinctly his misrepresentations, errors, and aspersions, and
my rebuttals.

1\. In his first paragraph, the rev. critic ascribes to me the thesis
that "the dwindling intelligence of the earlier Christian generations
misinterpreted a kind of mystery-play—such as were those of the 'death
and restoring to life' of Attis and Adonis and Osiris—as the

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

representation of actual events, and, by a coarse realism, *transformed
the libretto of this play into the Gospels*." Having posited this
falsification, he goes on: "We have no intention of touching even
lightly on Mr. Robertson's general theory."

*Comment*.—My thesis was that the mystery-play was closely
*transcribed*, and *added* to the gospels—an extremely different
statement. The refusal to face the theory was to be expected. It is
normal among defenders of the faith.

2\. Before dealing even with Mithraism, the rev. critic seeks to inflame
his fellow-Catholics by describing me as having made an "attack upon
that which is the spiritual life of so many millions, and from which
they draw comfort in sorrow and strength in moral stress."

*Comment*.—The critic ought really to have added that my "attack"
endangered his own income. In that way, the question of the truth or
untruth of the statements under discussion might have been still further
obscured. A picture of the happy state of human life under the
Inquisition might further have helped his polemic.

3\. Dealing with my section on Mithraism, the Rev. Father proclaims that
"the *list* of Mr. Robertson's *authorities* astonishes us." He goes on:
"After the respectable names of Tiele and Boissier we find cited,
*without discrimination*, H. Seel's *Mithrasgeheimnisse* (1823), of the
first part of which work M. Cumont says that it has but the remotest
connection with the cult of Mithra," etc. "Sainte-Croix's *Recherches*,
etc., are next cited," he continues, and Sainte-Croix also is little
valued by M. Cumont. "Sainte-Croix makes no use of the monuments, nor
does Windischmann, an author of far higher merit, however, whom Mr.
Robertson also quotes. *Creuzer and Lajard constantly recur as
authorities*"; and M. Cumont dismisses these likewise as valueless.

*Comment*.—Any reader of this paragraph, not having seen my essay on
Mithraism, would be nearly sure to take it for granted—unless he knew
something of the controversial methods of Father Martindale—that the
disparaged authors in question were cited by me as authorities for my
facts and theories. True, the underlined passage about Lajard and
Creuzer might puzzle him; for why should the critic now say
"constantly," after asserting generally that I cited the authors as my
"authorities"? But he concludes the passage by asserting that "Mr.
Robertson's imposing list of authorities is singularly diminished in
impressiveness when we see that it *includes* names like these." A
careful student, of course, might detect in the "includes" a sign of
consciousness that the critic had been playing fast and loose with his
readers, but the general impression conveyed to most readers of *The
Month* would be that I relied on exploded "authorities."

It is my disagreeable duty to point out that Father Martindale knew he
was deceiving his readers. The list of "authorities" of

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

which he speaks is not truthfully to be described as a list of
authorities at all. It is given as a footnote in support of one
sentence: "*As to this, students are agreed*"—''this" being the
proposition that "Mithraism was in point of range the most nearly
universal religion of the Western world in the early centuries of the
Christian era." The list of references from which he cites a few names
is compiled solely to bear out this assertion. I call Seel and
Sainte-Croix and Creuzer and Lajard "students," whatever be their
shortcomings; if they are not so describable, what, I wonder, is Father
Martindale? Besides those named I cite Beugnot, Ozanam, E. Meyer,
Roscher, Quinet, Renan, Jean Réville, Hertzberg, Gardner, Hausrath, and
Smith and Chatham's Dictionary—all which "authorities" he is careful not
to name; but I cite them only to show how well founded was my general
historic assertion concerning the vogue of Mithraism.

Even after categorically representing me as resting my case upon
untrustworthy "authorities," the Rev. Father writes: "*Yet, even when he
quotes these authorities only to deny their worth*, we are often left
with the curious impression that, be they right or wrong, the quoting of
them should be held to have somehow damaged the Christian tradition."
That is to say, the Rev. Father knew that the "imposing list of
authorities" was not a list of authorities at all. He knew that I *did
not* rely for my conclusions on the writers he disparaged; he knew that
I repeatedly dissented from their views, and that more than once I
censured their misstatements. And still he elected to leave standing the
original untruth.

If the Rev. Father had censured me for putting together such a list of
references at all, on the score that the assertion they are offered to
prove is one which probably no competent scholar would now dispute, I
should have admitted that his blame had some colour, and merely replied
that my essay was first written twenty years ago, when, so far as I
knew, there was no treatise on the subject in English, and I had to
acquire my information from many sources. Had M. Cumont's great work
been then in existence, I should probably never have planned my sketch.
Even when it was republished in *Pagan Christs*, so far as I knew, no
English study of the subject had appeared. I wrote for an uninformed
public. But at least my list has served to elicit a not unmemorable
exhibition of what a Christian priest will stoop to in the way of
prevarication against one whom he ostensibly supposes to be an "apostle"
of a non-Christian cult.

4\. After recounting his "curious impression" as above cited, the Rev.
Father proceeds as follows:—

"*Thus*, on p. 322 *seq*., the degrees of Mithraic initiation are
discussed. Mr. Robertson believes them to have numbered twelve. He
relies for proof upon a mutilated and incomprehensible text of Porphyry,
who is quoting Pallas; and upon an 'important citation' from Elias of
Crete, who, with Nicetas, asserts the degrees to have

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

been twelve. But Mr. Robertson does not notice that Elias and Nicetas
(*whom, indeed, he does not mention*) (!) are both of them using Nonnus,
a fantastic mythographer of the sixth or seventh century, whose witness
Mr. Robertson has himself, just above, abandoned."

*Comment*.—The Rev. Father makes "more mistakes than the thing admits
of." He puts Nonnus in the sixth or seventh century, when he would have
been impossible. The universal voice of history assigns him to the
fifth. With his customary good sense, further, the Rev. Father censures
me for not noting the inutility of an authority whom, as he admits, I
did not even name. Then he represents me as citing Porphyry for a list
of twelve "degrees of initiation," when I do not cite him for twelve of
anything. But these are trifles compared with the dimensions of the
mare's nest which is the chief content of the paragraph under notice.
The sentences which the Rev. Father attacks in my essay have nothing to
do with the Mithraic "degrees." They refer to the *trials* of
initiation—a totally different thing. A glance at the context might have
saved him had he been concerned for anything better than aspersing a
heretic: I refer twice over to the "austerities," the "elaborate and
painful process," which a Mithraic initiate had to undergo. I need not
therefore take the trouble to inquire whether his assertions as to Elias
of Crete and Nicetas are any more accurate than his dating of Nonnus.
The residual fact is that he has made a ridiculous mistake. His very
phrase "degrees of initiation" is a triumph of confusion.

5\. All the before-mentioned exploits occur within the space of two
pages of *The Month*. And still the exhibition continues. After
confusing the trials with the degrees of Mithraism, the rev. critic goes
on:—

"M. Cumont, however, makes it quite clear that we may trust St. Jerome's
formal evidence that the *degrees of initiation*" \[italics mine\]
"numbered seven. Monuments and inscriptions amply bear this out.
*Assuming, however, that they were twelve*, Mr. Robertson thus proceeds:
'Out of the various notices \[*i.e.*, the contradictory data of Jerome,
Porphyry, and irresponsible medieval writers\], partly by hypothesis, M.
Lajard has constructed a not quite trustworthy scheme, representing
twelve Mithraic degrees.'"

*Comment*.—That is to say, I assumed the degrees were twelve, though I
represent as not quite trustworthy the only list which gives that
number! I do not know whether the Rev. Father can yet realise that I
never did "assume" that the degrees were twelve, though I thought the
trials were probably of that number. The fact remains that Jerome's list
of seven lay before him in my essay, and that he suppresses the fact of
my having given it, suppressing also the fact that in a footnote I have
remarked as to one of Lajard's degrees being "particularly ill made
out." Having thus, by suppression and confusion, reduced the matter to
chaos, the Rev. Father

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

proceeds to assert that I make out the "hypothetical and untrustworthy"
Mithraic scheme "somehow responsible for Christian emblems." This is a
sample of what his state of mind can produce in the way of blundering.
My footnote, to which he furiously refers, speaks of a "curious
correspondence" between Lajard's *four grades* (which, in his usual way,
the critic confuses with his *twelve degrees*) and the emblems of the
four evangelists, adding, "these, however, were introduced into Judaism
from Assyrian sources at the exile." These words, expressly inserted to
guard against the notion that the emblems in question were taken from
Mithraism, the Rev. Father represents as setting up one of his
"impressions" to the exact contrary.

Those "curious impressions" I am content to leave to the psychologists
as data; but I will take the opportunity to explain to other readers
that the purport of the note in question is to suggest a widespread use,
dating back very far in religious history, of either the four
gospel-emblems or four emblems of a similar character. Apparently the
Rev. Father is exasperated by the suggestion that those emblems were not
originated as such by Christians, though he does not overtly dispute my
assertion that they existed in Judaism. The point as to Lajard's grades
is that they resolve his list of degrees into four—terrestrial, aërial,
igneous (or, rather, solar), and divine; while the Judæo-Christian
gospel-emblems of ox, eagle, lion, and man (and similar uses of emblems
among Assyrians and Arabs) seem to imply a similar symbolical division.
It is a matter of small importance; and, if I could have foreseen such
readers and critics as Father Martindale, I might have made the note
more elaborate. Such prevision, however, was beyond me. He calls the
list of degrees in Lajard "preposterous." I had already called it
"grotesque." But it is not more grotesque than his blunders, his
"curious impressions," and his misrepresentations.

6\. And still the Rev. Father contrives to continue blundering. Up to
his fourth page he has not once deviated into accuracy, and in the
paragraph following on that last quoted he asserts that on pp. 302-3 I
"wrongly identify Kronos-Zervan with Mithra."

*Comment*.—Knowing that I never for one moment did any such thing, I
re-read in blank astonishment the pages to which he refers. Only on the
first is Kronos-Zervan referred to; and the statement is that from
Armenian Mazdeism Mithraism *borrowed* "its enigmatic 'Supreme God,'
Kronos-Zervan, the Time Spirit, a Babylonian conception, represented in
the mysteries by the lion-headed or demon-headed and serpent-encircled
figure which bears the two keys. And *this deity*, in turn, tells of
Babylonian influence......"

With a sense of moral relief, I surmise that the critic actually did get
his idea from the elliptical beginning of the *next paragraph*, which
runs: "Of the deity thus shaped through many centuries, by many forces,
it seems warrantable to say that his cult was normally in an ethically
advanced stage "I suppose his intelligence could infer that by *this*
deity was meant the "enigmatic" Kronos-Zervan;

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

but I fancy I need not explain to any other reader that, as the whole
sequel shows, the reference is just to Mithra. Any reader not primed by
malice would realise this in a moment, even if for a moment he had been
misled.

7\. In the next paragraph the Rev. Father asserts that in my essay
monuments are declared to "prove the identification" of Mithra with
Anahita in a twy-sexed personality.

*Comment*.—Once more he has blundered. What I have said is that
Herodotus is "accused of blundering in combining Mithra with Mylitta, it
being shown" \[that is, by M. Cumont\] "from monuments that the goddess
identified with Mithra was Anaitis or Tanat." "But," I add, "that the
Armenian Anaitis and Mylitta were regarded as the same deity seems
clear." As usual, the Rev. Father has misunderstood the argument. And
when he goes on to say that "Mr. Robertson next identifies Mithra with
Strabo's Omanos" \[ = Vohu Manô, = Good Thought\], he as usual distorts
my words. What I have written is that "there is reason to suppose that
Omanus (or the Persian form of the word) was a name of Mithra, and that
it is an adaptation of Vohumano (Bahman) = Good Mind—a divine name with
a very fluctuating connotation." I am not concerned to discuss the
problem of the sexual duality of Mithra, as to which the Rev. Father, as
usual, is careful to conceal from his readers the relevant data—such as
the case of Men, the Moon-god, and the parallels in the Babylonian
pantheon. It is a matter on which his opinion counts for nothing; and he
seems never to have reflected upon the phenomena upon which the issue
turns.

8\. After significantly aspersing the Christian Father Julius Firmicus
Maternus because even the anti-pagan testimony of that writer does not
suit him, Father Martindale continues:—

"The other author quoted as '*making Mithra two-sexed and threefold, or
three formed*,' is Dionysius.' The pseudo-Areopagite really says: 'This
incident \[*i.e.*, the miraculous tripling of a certain day\] is
especially inserted into the Persian sacerdotal traditions, and the Magi
still commemorate the "triple Mithra" \[ = the tripled length of
Day-light\].' There is here no mention of sex nor of form."

*Comment*.—There is here a preliminary falsification, followed by a
memorable revelation of credulity. By writing in quotation marks
"Dionysius," and proceeding to cite "the pseudo-Areopagite" on his own
account, the Rev. Father deliberately suggests to his readers that I
cited "Dionysius" without any characterisation. My reference is actually
to "Dionysius the pseudo-Areopagite"—the usual way of referring to the
writer in question. Not content with such a perversion, he adds another.
He explicitly asserts that I quoted "Dionysius" as "making Mithra
two-sexed and threefold or three-formed." I did no such thing. I
expressly speak of the statement of Julius Firmicus (*i.e.*, Maternus)
"and later writers, that *the Persians* make Mithra both two-sexed and
threefold or three-formed"; and, giving a reference specifically to
Maternus, add

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "*Compare*
Dionysius the pseudo-Areopagite," etc. The Rev. Father professes to be
correcting me when he had to falsify my words in order to make them seem
to need correction.

As for the use he makes of Dionysius’ testimony, I could not have
believed, until I read him, that even in his Church there could be found
at the present day such medieval credulity. Not for two hundred years, I
should think, has any English scholar been found to attach the slightest
credit to the absurd proposition that Mithra's epithet of *triplasios*
referred to the miracle-story of the turning back of the shadow on the
dial for Hezekiah, whereby the day was "almost triplicated." Over two
hundred years ago, Cudworth could write that "learned men \[Vossius and
Selden to wit\] have already shown the foolery of this conceit." It has
been reserved for Father Martindale to reincarnate the credulity of the
pseudo-Areopagite and his scholiasts. He evidently takes the Hezekiah
legend as a historical fact, recorded by the Persians; though the very
text he accepts tells how Apollophanes the sophist denied all such
assertions. Selden, after quoting the comment of Georgius Pachymerius
about the triple extension of the day, adds: *Ita et Maximus
Scholiastes;* and for himself, *Nec in Græculorum verba juravi*. But
such *verba* seems to be Father Martindale's "authorities."

The Rev. Father had set out with a flourish against me as one who might
be expected, in an "attack" on the Christian religion, "whether from
respect for his adversary or from fears for himself," to be "very
careful in his choice of weapons." He is truly a precious authority upon
choice of weapons. But his textual escapades are hardly more amazing
than his hierological ideas. I have still a difficulty in conceiving
that any man who pretends to write upon Mithraism could seriously assert
that *triplasios* means triple-lengthed, thereby making the Magi
identify Mithra with one case of protracted daylight; or could allege
that the word tells nothing of "form." I suppose it is in all
seriousness possible to him; though even among Christian priests and
scholars, and in his own Church, there have been many with more insight
into the symbolism of alien faiths. Such scholars as Vossius, Selden,
Schedius, Huet, and Cudworth could all see that "the triple Mithra"
meant something more than three-days-on-end! Huet, a Catholic bishop,
could avow that "The triple Mithras of the Persians, spoken of by
Dionysius, seems to be a certain image of the Trinity." Mosheim, balking
at such speculation, despite Julian's phrase on "the triple function of
the God," prefers reasonably to say with Macrobius that "the three faces
of the sun and moon denoted the threefold relation of time, present,
past, and future." That simple conception, had Father Martindale
considered it, might have withheld him from translating *triplasios* as
triple-lengthed, and from his added nonsense to the effect that the
phrase "may indeed have applied to the twin torchbearers who flank
Mithra Tauroktonos." But enough of his interpretations: it is sufficient
to deal with his textual exploits.

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

9\. Coming at last to some central issues, he says, concerning my thesis
that Mithra was virgin-born:—

"Mr. Robertson would prefer to assert, in view of a 'primary tendency,'
that such a myth *must* have developed. He recurs, however, to positive
argument. Mithra, he says, is identical with Sabazios; Strabo says
Sabazios is as it were the child of the mother; Mithra must therefore
have had the same relation to a mother. But Anâhita (as Goddess of
Fertilising Waters) would 'necessarily figure in her cultus as a
mother,' and as Mithra (who was 'paired' with her) never appears (save
in worshipful metaphor) as a father, he *would perforce rank as her
son*."

*Comment*.—To the words, "primary tendency," in quotation marks, he
appends the reference "P. 96." No such words occur on p. 96 of my book;
they occur on p. 338. \[I here refer, of course, to the first edition.\]
For the closing words in the above-cited passage, again, he refers to p.
337, whereas they occur on p. 339. I should not have dreamt of noting
such slips were it not that, finding in one place a wrong figure in one
of my references—a 7 turned by the printer into a 9—the Rev. Father says
that "such correction is too often necessary in reading this book."
Felicitous and scrupulous to the last, he attempts to fasten discredit
upon me for a kind of error that occurs twice upon one of his own pages.

Turning to more serious matters, I have to note that his reference to my
thesis of a "primary tendency" is one more misrepresentation: the
tendency in question is explicitly indicated both on p. 96 and on p. 338
as that to "make the young God the son of the Supreme God." Then I add
that "when Mithra *became* specially identified, like Dionysos, with the
Phrygian God Sabazios, who was \[for Strabo\] the 'child as it were of
the \[great\] mother,' he necessarily came to hold the same relation to
the Mother-Goddess." There is nothing "primary" here: the process is
specifically secondary. Only thereafter do I argue that in all
likelihood—judging from the legend of the birth of Cyrus—there were
ancient Persian forms of the Virgin-birth myth. Having duly obscured the
argument here, the Rev. Father proceeds to allege that I "identify" the
miraculously born Saoshyant with Mithra, which is one more
falsification. My statement is that as "Sraosha (= Vohumano) came to be
identified with Mithra, so would there be a *blending or assimilation*
of Mithra with Saoshyas or Saoshyant, the Saviour and Raiser of the
Dead." This he calls "identifying." And then where I wrote: "As a result
*of all these myth motives* we find," etc., he drops out the words I
have italicised, and quotes me as saying "As a result.....we find,"
etc., thus sedulously garbling and perverting still.

10\. I shall not occupy myself in discussing with such a critic the
question of the Virgin-birth in the legend of Mithra. With M. Cumont I
might argue it—with due diffidence: with a cultist who cannot get into a
scientific relation with such a problem, it were trifling to reason upon
it. I have simply to note that when

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Father Martindale
devotes a paragraph to explaining that "some παρθένος divinities were
anything but virgin" he is again throwing dust in the eyes of his
readers, inasmuch as he implies that my argument does not recognise all
this. I have repeatedly pointed to the duality of the Asiatic and other
Goddesses, "who were on the one side virgins and on the other mothers."
The Rev. Father garbles to no purpose; he simply does not understand the
problem he is discussing.

11\. It remains to notice the Rev. Father's characteristic handling of
my thesis concerning a "Descent into Hell" in Mithraism:—

"With equal pluck Mr. Robertson determines to show that Mithra died,
descended into Hell, and rose again. *He has but one piece of evidence*.
It is a long passage from Firmicus Maternus, which relates a mystic
representation of a divine death, followed by an exultant return to
life."

*Comment*.—The unfailing inaccuracy of Father Martindale might almost
suggest among his fellow-believers a theory of obsession. To the first
sentence in this passage he appends a reference, "Pp. 319 *sq*." That
section is a discussion of the ceremonial death and resurrection of
Mithra; and when, on p. 321, I have remarked upon the Descent into Hades
of Herakles and Apollo, I go on to allude to the astronomical
explanation in these cases "and in the case of the Descent of Mithra to
Hades, *noticed later*." If he had taken the slightest pains to do
anything worthier than raise reckless cavils, he would have found on pp.
340-1 the full account of the Persian legend upon which—without the
slightest reference to Firmicus Maternus, who knows nothing of it—I
found my thesis. As usual, he has blundered hopelessly.

At the close of the paragraph under notice he proclaims that he is "left
wondering at the conclusions to which the 'will to disbelieve' can guide
an argument." Any reader of these pages, I fancy, will be left wondering
more profoundly at the tissue of error, absurdity, and prevarication
through which the passion to defend the faith can conduct a Christian
priest. In a footnote to the sentence last quoted he contrives to insert
yet another falsity.

12\. On the question as to Justin's view of the Mithraic Eucharist, the
Rev. Father writes, referring first to Justin's passage (*Tryph*. 70) as
to the devils imitating the prophecy of Daniel in the Mithraic
doctrine:—

"Notice, first, that Justin does not say this diabolic travesty of
prophecy was *pre-Christian in date;* and that he does positively say
(Apol. i., 66) that the devils imitate the Eucharist itself in the
Mithraic mysteries. Mr. Robertson should have quoted that passage. 'If
the Mithraists *had* simply imitated the historic Christians,' he
argues, 'the obvious course for the latter would be simply to say so.'
And that, indeed, is simply what Justin, in this passage, does say."

*Comment*.—Then "devils," in Justin, means for the Rev. Father
Martindale just Mithraists! If he could only understand things

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

occasionally, my task would have been lighter. The passage he says I
ought to have quoted I *had* quoted, textually, on pp. 321-2, giving the
reference, and adding similar passages from Tertullian about the devil's
doings. The Rev. Father has not even read through the essay he seeks to
discredit. Not once can he contrive to pass an accurate censure. But on
p. 331, from which he quotes, I explain my contention by quoting from
Justin the further passage: "When I hear that Perseus was begotten of a
virgin, I understand that *the deceiving serpent counterfeited also
this*." And I add: "Nobody now pretends that the Perseus myth, or the
Pagan virgin myth in general, is later than Christianity." Does the
learned Father suggest that Justin thought it was? Had he read *this*
passage? If so, why did he not at least try to meet the argument?

13\. In the next paragraph he avows that in Justin's days "the
historical sense was practically dormant"; and in the same breath he
affirms that "the divergent pedigrees of the historic Mithraic and
Christian meals are *so well known* as to render quite unnecessary and,
in our day, perverse, any theory of borrowing on either side." "So well
known"! Known, that is, in an age without the historic sense, as the
Rev. Father "knows" the dogmas he has assimilated, with about as much
"historical sense," relatively to the problems of his day, as Justin had
for his. But though I have called Justin perhaps the most foolish of the
Christian fathers," I never thought him so inane as to say "the devils
have counterfeited" when in his own opinion he could truthfully say:
"These tales and usages have all come into existence since the
propagation of the religion of Christ."

*Comment*.—As usual, Father Martindale entirely misses the point of my
estimate of Justin, which is that, foolish as he was, his line of
argument is followed by Tertullian. That is to say, it may pass as
common and typical. Upon my characterisation of Justin, Father
Martindale makes an exquisitely pointless retort; but he thinks fit to
abuse Maternus as "notoriously and constantly unreliable," and guilty of
"grotesque" misdescription—this because he does not avail for the Rev.
Father's polemic purposes.

14\. I have but reached the tenth page of his essay, and still I am
occupied with his misstatements. He represents me, in a hopelessly
incoherent passage, as saying that "much of the Song of Moses and
Zechariah's mystic stone prove the irremediably Mazdean character of
ancient Judaism." Another falsity. On p. 382 I argued that the parallel
between the arrow scene on the monuments and the story of Moses striking
the rock "suggests rather a *common source for both myths* than a
Persian borrowing from the Bible"; and that, "as the story of the babe
Moses is found long before in that of Sargon, *so*, probably, does the
rock story come from Central Asia." *That* is the implication on p. 333,
when I speak of "the presence of such a God-symbol in Hebrew religion
long before our era." Apparently, the Rev. Father puts the Song of

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moses and the Book
of Zechariah in one category, as belonging alike to "ancient Judaism." I
can believe it of him; but I ascribe a Mazdean element only to the
latter, not to the former.

15\. The Rev. Father next ascribes to me the thesis of "the
*identity*"—his favourite word—"of St. Peter with Mithra, and also with
Janus," when I had spoken of "assimilation with."

*Comment*.—I suppose he knows nothing of the general phenomena of
assimilation of deities in old cults—the addition of solar
characteristics to Gods of Vegetation—and of the modes of worship of the
latter in Sun-Cults, and so on. I will merely indicate to any of his
readers who may see this reply that they must not suppose they gather
from him any idea of my case.

16\. Nor shall I spend more time over the rest of his garbled
quotations—his citing me as saying "entitled to *assume*" when I wrote
"conclude"; his dropping out of an "even" when it qualified the context,
and so on. I must say a word, however, on one of his later
futilities—his laboriously facetious attempt to demonstrate that my
remarks on the probability of the "Chair of St. Peter" being a Mithraic
relic amount to a self-contradiction. The Rev. Father writes that my
argument amounts to this: "There is strong reason to suppose it is X. It
may well be, however, Y. There is at least a possibility that it is Z."

*Comment*.—What the Rev. Father, with his strange gift of fallacy, calls
Z, as any other reader will see, is just X; and the argument runs:
"There is strong reason to suppose that it is X. It may well, however,
be Y." Any reader but himself, or one of his type, would see that "a
relic of a pre-Christian cult" means simply a relic of Mithraism. And he
blunders even worse than usual when he argues that my phrase, "it may
well be that the whole thing is a fortuitous importation, like so many
other ecclesiastical relics," amounts to saying, "I may be quite wrong,
but the Church shall have her slap." I need hardly point out to any
other reader that, whether the chair be Mithraic or not, the Church
stands convicted of a legendary imposture, not only by the verdict of
every archæologist, but by the simplest application of common-sense.
With his customary strategy, he evades making the acknowledgment which
every honest inquirer has made—that, whatever it may have been, the
chair can never have been constructed as the episcopal chair of St.
Pester, or of any early Christian bishop.

17\. Upon one point at least the Rev. Father might be expected to be
right when he accused me of erring on it—the question of the wording of
the litanies of his own Church. I stated that, in listening to the Roman
litany of the Holy Name of Jesus, Mithraists who joined the Christian
Church knew they were listening to the very epithets of the Sun-God, and
I cited six—God of the Skies, Purity of the eternal light, King of
glory, Sun of justice, Strong God, Father of the Ages to come, Angel of
great counsel. Upon this the Rev. Father asserts first that the litany
in question did not exist at

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

that period. If this were true, it would be a valid rebuttal; but the
Rev. Father offers no evidence whatever, and I will merely say that I
believe the epithets cited by me, which are in the opening portion, are
as old as the fourth century in Christian worship. Having made his
historical assertion, however, the Rev. Father goes on to declare that
the epithets cited are "not Mithraic," and that "some of them are not in
the litany." *That* point may be easily settled. I have before me a
Catholic *Eucologe*, in Latin and French, apparently published in the
first half of last century. It gives the litany of the Holy Name of
Jesus, beginning with *Kyrie eleison*—a pretty good sign of antiquity in
a Roman litany—and among the earlier epithets are these:—*Pater de
cœlis, Deus; Candor lucis æternæ; Rex gloriæ; Sol Justitiæ, Deus fortis,
Pater futuri seculi; Magni consilii Angele*. I leave it to Catholic
authorities to state whether they repudiate the manual of devotion from
which I quote, or whether Father Martindale is here wrong as usual. On
the significance of the epithets, my readers can judge for themselves.

18\. I am willing now to leave Father Martindale's readers and mine to
judge which of us has been guilty of the "mortal sins against history
and good-sense "with which he so pretentiously charges me. If any of my
errors approximate to some of his, they are grave indeed. He speaks of
my work as a compilation of facts "tending to the destruction of the
hated system." If I thought myself capable of hating any opinion in his
fashion, I should indeed reconsider my work with concern. But he is of
the tribe who, hating Galileo for presenting an unwelcome truth, accused
him of hating Ptolemy and the Holy Ghost. Inspired always by either hate
or hysteria, they can imagine no other kind of motive for scientific
work. To the last, Father Martindale strives to envenom his readers by
quoting me as disparaging the early Christians when I write that "an
unwarlike population, for one thing, wants a *sympathetic* and emotional
religion; and here, *though Mithraism had many attractions, Christianity
had more*, having sedulously copied every one of its rivals, *and
developed special features of its own*." This he calls malevolent
disparagement. He simply cannot understand the mental processes of
anyone who studies the history of his faith in a scientific spirit: his
one thought is to cast aspersions at whatever conflicts with his
fanaticism. A dozen ecclesiastical historians have avowed the wholesale
adoption of pagan rites, symbols, and conceptions by the early Christian
Church: he makes it his task to try to discredit, by bluster and
misrepresentation, any rationalist who draws scientific inferences from
the fact.

19\. In that spirit he pens this passage:—

"'For the Dark Ages,' says Mr. Robertson, *pityingly*, 'the symbol of
the Cross was much more plausibly appealing than that of the god slaying
the Zodiacal bull.' Alas, poor Dark Ages! No more the
'mystically-figured Persian, beautiful as Apollo, triumphant as Ares,
*but*.....the gibbeted Jew, in whose legend figured tax-gatherers

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

and lepers, epileptics, and men blind from birth, domestic traitors and
cowardly disciples'—that was all they could appreciate."

Then he quotes Isaiah about the despised and rejected of men—a passage
which, with his ripe "historic sense," he evidently believes to have
been written in anticipation of the coming of the Jesus of the
Gospels—and adds:—

"*With those despisers stand the critics of the Dark Ages;* we with St.
Bernard, who said, *Tanto mihi carior, quanto pro me vilior!* We are
content to share the pessimism and barbarism of that great poet and
Crusader."

*Comment*.—Thus, on his last page and his first, the Rev. Father
falsifies the book he professes to criticise. He does, I suppose,
seriously regard me as taking moral satisfaction in the symbol of a God
knifing a bull. But whatever hallucinations he may harbour, he knew,
unless he was beside himself, that he had grossly garbled, by an
elision, the passage he professed to quote, wholly altering its
application so as to suggest that I was expressing my own predilections
when I sketched those of many pagans of the average pagan type. He knew
also that I had expressly spoken of the Mithraists in question as
ultimately going over in large numbers to Christianity. It would never
do to let the readers of *The Month* get a glimpse of a scientific view
of the process of transition.

20\. As if all that were not enough, Father Martindale ends his essay,
as he began it, with an explicit untruth. In the last sentence he speaks
of "the derivation *proposed* by Mr. Robertson for the *Mass*."

*Comment*.—I have proposed no derivation. The sole derivations for
"Mass" that are mentioned in my essay are indicated in the passage:
"Their \[the Mithraists’\] *mizd*, or sacred cake, was preserved in the
*mass*, which *possibly* copied the very name"; and in the footnote,
after referring to King and Seel as the sources of the suggestion, I add
that the word *missa* "*might* come, however, from the Greek *maza*, a
name for barley cake." Thus I did not give my assent to the *mizd*
derivation, and merely suggested a similar possibility for *maza*—doing
this because, like many other people not gifted with his credulity, I
have never been able to see plausibility in the traditional etymology of
*missa*.

21\. My critic speaks of some "eminent professor whose courtesy and
erudition enabled us to speak with such conviction on the derivation
proposed by Mr. Robertson for *Mass*," and who, he states, wrote of me:
"I think that his books were calculated to strengthen the belief in
revealed religion."

*Comment*.—I know not who the "eminent professor" is, nor where my
critic discussed the derivation which he misrepresents me as proposing.
I cannot find any discussion on the subject in his articles on
Mithraism. If he misinformed the eminent professor as successfully upon
my books in general as he has done on the point under notice, I doubt
not he could elicit from him plenty of

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

disparagement, especially if he be of Father Martindale's own creed and
cast of mind. If, indeed, they both believe what the Rev. Father quotes
him as saying, it is not clear why he is so anxious to denounce me. By
adding, however, a footnote to the clause last cited, he contrives to
suggest to his readers that the eminent professor is M. Cumont. The
footnote runs: "We may be allowed to add that since this article was in
print Professor Cumont has with great kindness written to us at some
length, assuring us that *the conclusions we have reached in it* are
fully justified." As most of the Rev. Father's article consists in
perversions of my words and aspersions upon me, he here suggests that
Professor Cumont backed him up in these. I therefore take the
opportunity to inform any of his readers who may see this that Professor
Cumont has not endorsed any of his attacks upon me, and wrote nothing
whatever to him concerning the derivation he says I proposed for the
word *Missa*. Thus he ends as he began in mystification.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

I have no doubt that the Rev. Father will remain well content with his
work, which he will justify to himself as a blow struck for his creed
and its founder. He avowedly feels himself to be of the tribe of St.
Bernard, "that great Crusader"; and of a surety he is. Like St. Bernard,
he lashes himself into a passion against all the supposed enemies of a
deity whom he represents as having taught him to love his enemies; like
the Saint, he sees in a vast movement of hate, massacre, and destruction
a fit expression of his devotion to a sacrificially slain God, of whom
he says, truly enough, *Tanto mihi carior, quanto pro me vilior*. "*Pro*
<span class="smallcaps">me</span> *vilior*": the confession is
memorable: the priest's very hysteria of devotion is rooted in egoism,
like his antipathy.

The spectacle he presents is apt to cure any rationalist of the tendency
to suppose that organised religion is a greater force for moralisation,
in virtue of its ethical elements, than for demoralisation by reason of
its stimulus to fanaticism and its intellectual misguidance. Those
Hellenists and Jews who, long before Christianity took its historic
shape, arrived at the doctrine of forgiveness for injuries, and preached
love of enemies—those men, one often feels, had undergone a profound
spiritual experience; and it was shared, presumably, by those who
inserted the doctrine in the gospels. But how many of those who, in the
past eighteen centuries, have hysterically professed to draw their
"spiritual life" from those gospels—how many of them all have ever been
turned from their primitive passions of resentment by the commandment
they call divine?

So far from "forgiving" a mere scientific opponent, who no more hates
them or their creed than he hates the Ptolemaic system or the foes of
his ancestors, they set out in a passion of resentment, not to get at
the truth, but to get at the enemy. In a nobler temper,

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Father Martindale
might have compassed something towards critical correction. In my essay,
I am practically certain, à priori, there must be errors of theory or
fact, or of both. I have never met with any similar treatise in which,
after close study, I have not found something in the nature of error;
and I would fain have my errors rectified, as I have already been able
to do at some points for myself. But I do not find that my Catholic
critic has ever come nearer exposing error in my case than to find a
minor inexactitude of phraseology; and in the pursuit he has himself
committed blunders beyond belief, and falsifications that for number and
perversity outgo anything I have personally met with in controversy. In
the hope of achieving a pious triumph he has selected some score of
propositions from an essay containing hundreds; and, withal, what a
fiasco he has achieved!

#### § 5. Dr. J. Estlin, Carpenter.

In the Unitarian journal *The Inquirer*, about the end of 1903, there
appeared a criticism of *Pagan Christs* over the initials "J. E. C."
Shortly afterwards I criticised it on the assumption that the initials
stood for the signature of Dr. J. E. Carpenter; and as this inference
was not challenged, and the criticism in question was entirely in
keeping with signed comments by Dr. Carpenter on this book and on
*Christianity and Mythology*, to which I have replied in the Appendix to
the second edition of the latter work, I here embody my rejoinder to the
attack first mentioned.

It may be well to repeat one or two points from the other reply referred
to. I there instanced (1), as an illustration of Dr. Carpenter's
historical judgment, his proposition that Krishna is a historical
character, arising within the Christian era; and (2), as illustrating
his controversial methods, his dismissal of my thesis concerning the
mystery-play added to the gospels with the decision that the "desolate
cry," "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?", *could not* be put
in the dying God's mouth in a mystery-play; after which contention he
obliviously decided, in another connection, that the cry was not
"desolate" at all, but a reference to the final note of triumph in the
Psalm from which it was quoted.

It is this critic—the affirmer of the historicity of Krishna—who
introduces a polemic against the present treatise with these
sentences:—"The author is of course entitled to his opinions. But he is
not entitled to claim support for them by constant inaccuracy, or by
suppression of evidence, or by treating the wildest conjectures as
historical facts." Dr. Carpenter's tone relieves me of any special
concern for amenity in dealing with him; and the present rejoinder may
thus be the more concise.

1\. At the outset, after charging me with "treating the wildest
conjectures as historical facts," my Unitarian critic asserts, by way of
opening illustration, that my thesis of the pre-Christian Jesus-cult

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

and ritual of human sacrifice is "justified" by me in a passage of three
sentences (*Pagan Christs*, 1st ed. pp. 153-4; present ed. [p.
162](pch36.htm#page_162).md), which he quotes. Then he writes:—"Well may
the author look on his work and find it very good; for he *concludes*,
'As a hypothesis the present solution must for the present stand.""

Thus by his own showing the "wild conjecture" is put, not as a proved
historic fact, but as a hypothesis. Further on, I remarked (p. 158):
"Beyond conjectures we cannot at present go." Dr. Carpenter has not
taken the trouble to follow the argument he asperses. The three
sentences which he represents as my sole "justification" of it are
simply the broad *preliminary* indications of the nature of the
hypothesis; and after the clause last quoted my text goes on: "But the
grounds for surmising a pre-Christian cult of a Jesus or Joshua may here
be noted." And here again the critic confusedly confesses that "*the
next step is to prove* that there was a pre-Christian cult," etc. He
appears to have written in a state of mind which precluded even the
semblance of accuracy or consistency.

2\. Of the eight paragraphs which constitute the alleged "step," the
critic refers to two only, which he thus discusses:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"This is done by identifying the successor of Moses with the 'Angel' of
Exodus xxiii, 20, who is again identified in the Talmud with the mystic
Metatron, who is in turn identifiable with the Logos; and the triumphant
conclusion follows: 'Thus the name Joshua =Jesus is already in the
Pentateuch associated with the conceptions of Logos, Son of God, and
Messiah' (p. 155).

"No historical student needs to be warned against these preposterous
assertions. But the unwary reader may easily be dazzled by the wide
array of references (many of which are useful to the collector of
critical curiosities), the legitimate product of extensive reading. The
mischief is that Mr. Robertson does not understand what evidence is,
*and is the easy prey, therefore, of Talmudic vagaries*."

</div>

The latter paragraph is truly interesting as a sample of logical chaos.
In his passion, the critic, with his self-certified sense of "evidence,"
has lost all hold of the issue. He describes as a "preposterous
assertion" (1) my statement that the Angel-leader is "*in the Talmud*
identified with the mystic Metatron, who is in turn identifiable with
the Logos." For this proposition I give references to Cahen and Hershon.
As the critic offers for his angry language no excuse beyond the passage
I have cited, it will be seen that, through sheer excitement of temper,
he supposes himself to be convicting me of absurdity when he merely
describes as a "Talmudic vagary" what I have represented as a Talmudic
proposition. Unless the learned Professor supposes me to have considered
the Angel-leader and Joshua historical characters, as he considers
Krishna, his outbreak thus far does not even amount to a proposition. It
is sheer verbal incoherence.

The other "assertion" specified as preposterous is my contention that
the mythical successor of the mythical Moses is identified in the
Pentateuch with the mythical Angel-leader. In "justification"

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

of that statement I point to the parallelism of the texts, Exodus xx,
20-23, and Joshua xxiv, 11. In the former text it is promised that an
Angel, in or on whom is the "name" of Yahweh, shall lead Israel to
triumph against the hostile tribes. As Joshua in the other text claims
to do this, he is pseudo-historically identified with the Angel. I
should indeed have said "Hexateuch" instead of "Pentateuch"; but I cited
the texts. Non-theological minds will probably see some plausibility in
an argument so borne out; but the readers of *The Inquirer* will not
gather from the article of Dr. Carpenter that any such justification was
put forward. It is by such instinctive economies that he establishes his
epithet "preposterous."

3\. After this I may perhaps be pardoned if I meet with a simple
rejection the critic's charge that in my estimate of the age of the bulk
of Buddha-lore I am "flying in the face of the evidence gathered in
recent years from inscriptions in different parts of India." I am
content to say that, when he asserts the inscriptions of the third
century B.C. to contain "the titles of *the* collections in which *the*
teaching was grouped" (making no qualification), he shows himself
unqualified to speak on the subject.

4\. There is somewhat more semblance of scholarly circumspection in the
critic's attack on my remark that "the first day of the week, Sunday,
was apparently from time immemorial consecrated to Mithra by Mithraists;
and as the Sun-God was pre-eminently 'the Lord,' Sunday was 'the Lord's
day 'long before the Christian era." He contends that "Mr. Robertson's
statements require him to show (1) that Mithra was called
*Kurios*, <span id="fr_2008"></span>[1](#fn_2008) and (2.md) that his
worshippers gave the name *Kuriakê* to the first day of the week before
the Christian era." The first statement, he observes, I do not attempt
to prove; and there is, he contends, no record of the application of the
epithet *Kurios* to Mithra. In regard to the second statement, he
alleges that I have misunderstood Deissmann's exposition as to the
pre-Christian use of the word *Kuriakos*, since I cite him, though he

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> "cites no instance of its application to designate a
day. That \[continues my critic\] is the unwarranted inference of our
author, who ascribes its use to the Mithra-worshippers 'long before the
Christian era,' without a shadow of justification. It is painful to
write thus of a student who is undoubtedly in earnest. The general
impression which his work produces is that his mythological combinations
applied to Christianity are worthless and misleading, and that no single
statement can be trusted without verification."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I confess to being
astonished that even an angry theologian, making pretension to a
competent knowledge of this question, should thus exhibit a complete
ignorance of the decisive fact that the expression *Kuriakên Kuriou*,
"Lord's-day of the Lord," in the *Teaching of the Twelve Apostles*,
proves the term *Kuriakê* to have had a pre-Christian application to a
day. Either the reviewer knew this detail or he did not. I am not
concerned to point the alternative inferences.

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

It is true that I had not thought it necessary to cite this fact (long
ago discussed by me) in my notes in *Pagan Christs;* I had in fact taken
it for granted that the point was no longer contested—which was clearly
a miscalculation on my part. But even Deissmann's demonstration of the
normal use of the word is quite sufficient to show that it *cannot* have
been spontaneously applied by Christians for the first time to their
holy-day.

As to the epithets of Mithra, the reader will observe that I did not say
that the title *Kurios* was applied to him on the monuments; the
critic's own quotation shows as much. That "the Sun-God" was "the Lord"
in the Roman Empire is admitted even by my critic. Cumont gives only
three Greek inscriptions—there are no more to give. The War-God of the
Persians was not likely to have shrines and devotees in Greece. But my
study on Mithraism showed (1) that Mithra was in Latin inscriptions
called *Sanctus dominus*, besides being separately styled *Dominus;* (2)
that in the Zendavesta he is "Lord of all countries"; (3) that he was
associated with Adonis and with Attis and with Dionysos, all of whom
were called Kurios; (4) that, like them, he was called Father; (5) that
in the Persian period he already had his "day"; (6) that his birthday
was Christmas-day, associated with "Lord" Adonis and the Sun-Gods in
general. Thus in such a syncretic cult, in such a syncretic age, when
the first day of the week was habitually named "the day of the Sun," the
popular ascription to Mithra of the title of Lord in the Greek-speaking
places where he was worshipped would be a matter of course, even if it
did not figure as one of his monumental titles in Greek. The title of
Lord for the Sun-God was primarily Semitic in the Eastern world—*e.g.*,
Baal, Adon, and Marnas, all meaning "Lord"—and the Mithraic cult in the
East might possibly abstain from an *official* adoption of Semitic
usage, though we find Mithra called *despotês* in Porphyry. But popular
usage could not be so restricted.

The view of my academic critic appears to be that while Jesus, described
as among other things the son of a carpenter, was naturally and normally
styled *Kurios*, the "Unconquered Sun-God" would not be; and that, while
Latin-speaking worshippers called him *Dominus*, Greek-speaking
worshippers never called him Kurios. I leave such "curiosities" of
scholarship to "collectors." It may be worth while to inform lay
readers, in passing, that *Kurios* is the normal New Testament word for
"master," and is to-day the ordinary Greek equivalent for "Mr."

But the essential point is that, as I asserted, "Sun-day was 'the Lord's
Day' long before the Christian era"; and that Sun-day had also been
Mithra's day long before the Christian era, Mithra being chief of the
seven planetary spirits associated with the days of the week. Where the
term *Kuriakê* was current for the chief day of the week, it would be
used by the Mithraists as by others. Cumont again and again affirms that
"the *dies Solis* was evidently the most

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

sacred of the week for the devotees of Mithra." But I did not assert
that the term *Kuriakê* was used by *them* long before the Christian
era. "That is the unwarranted inference of our" critic, proceeding
"without a shadow of justification." The pain which he gave himself in
discrediting me was thus quite pathetically gratuitous. And he himself
commits another gross blunder "without a shadow of justification." In
asserting that "the Sun-God (*without Mithra's name*) is called Dominus"
he either suppresses or proves himself ignorant of the fact that one
inscription reads "*Sancto domino invicto Mithræ*" (Cumont, ii, No. 60).
This from an expert who "understands what evidence means."

 

And now I have to ask the reader to note that these blundering
strictures, which come to absolutely nothing on examination, are the
sole proofs offered by my Unitarian critic for his account of me as
"claiming support" for my opinions "by constant inaccuracy, or by
suppression of evidence, or by treating the wildest conjectures as
historical facts." The great mass of my argument he has not even
attempted to indicate, much less to answer. It would really not pain me
particularly to say what I think of such criticism; but I forego the
indulgence. What is worth noting is that Unitarianism should thus once
more be exhibited as making a worse show in its criticism of new views
of Christian origins than is made by almost any Trinitarian critics. The
ill-supported pretension to comprehensive knowledge, the startling
deficit of candour, the substitution of mere bluster and invective for
argument, would almost seem out-of-date in the *Rock*. After all, there
is something painful in this; and I regret it. In a book such as *Pagan
Christs*, travelling over many obscure fields and raising many difficult
issues, there must needs be oversights, inadequacies, and errors; and I
take it as a matter of course that its central thesis in regard to the
Christian cult should be regarded at first sight as extravagant. Any
argument to that effect I should cheerfully examine; and when, as
sometimes happens, a fellow-student sends me a note of questionable
passages or errors of reference, I am sincerely grateful. It is a pity
that the Unitarian Professor, for his part, should proffer hardly
anything beyond mere futile aspersion.

I must not, however, omit to note one correction by Dr. Carpenter of a
statistical statement of mine. At the beginning of my essay on Mithraism
I had stated that the late Professor Robertson Smith wrote in the
*Encyclopædia Britannica* "some hundreds of pages on certain books of
the Bible." I did not possess a copy of the Encyclopædia; and I had
written on the strength of recollection of early reading in libraries.
My Unitarian critic has taken the trouble to count the pages of
Professor Smith's articles, and finds that they amount only to
forty-eight. I shall here take his word without checking him; and
acknowledge that the passage should have run to the effect that the last
edition of the Encyclopædia

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

*contained* some hundreds of pages (about 300) on Biblical matters, as
against the one half-page given to Mithraism. This statistical
correction is almost the only one I have thus far received from any
theological critic of my book, which counters the whole historical
doctrine of the current religion. My Unitarian critic pronounces the
error in question "a characteristic inaccuracy." I fear I must pronounce
that a characteristic assertion. If he had done nothing worse, I should
not have had to pen two exposures of his critical methods.

They have certainly had no corrective influence so far as he is
concerned, for in two recent reviews of the translation of the German
work of Professor Arthur Drews on "The Christ Myth" Dr. Carpenter
exhibits the old temper, the old unscrupulousness, the old incapacity
for a broad view of a great problem. He has evidently sat down to the
book with the sole object of finding errors of detail which may enable
him to seem to discredit the whole, never once seeking to meet the main
line of argument, or even to indicate it. No one could gather from his
reviews the drift of the reasoning he professes to confute. He can never
see the wood for the trees; and in hacking blindly at particular trees
he oftentimes wounds himself. Where there is the faintest opening for a
verbal misinterpretation, he ascribes the most irrational meaning the
words could suggest. Where, for instance, Drews in the translation (p.
241) remarks that all the details in the Passion are mythologically
"given"—from the derision and flagellation to the rock tomb and the
women at the place of execution—and the sentence ends, "in just the same
form in the worship of Adonis, Attis, Mithras, and Osiris," Professor
Carpenter asks, in a review in the *Christian Commonwealth:* "Who has
ever heard of the 'execution' of Adonis, or of the grave in a rock (in
the Egyptian Delta!) of Osiris?" adding: "Page after page in this book
are disfigured by these reckless assertions." Even an ordinary reader
might, after one perusal of his criticism, be able to suggest to the
infuriated Unitarian Professor that the passage in Drews must have
meant, not that all the four cults and myths mentioned were exactly the
same—a suggestion impossible to the most ignorant tyro—but that *in one
or other* were to be found all the details in the Christian narrative.
The critic himself indicated a suspicion that something had gone wrong
in the translation; but he let his censure stand.

In a later review by Dr. Carpenter in the Unitarian *Inquirer* the same
passage is thus handled in a footnote:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The reader may be directed to the amazing
statement, p. 241: 'The derision, the flagellation, both the thieves,
the crying out on the cross, the sponge with vinegar, the soldiers
casting dice for the dead man's garments, also the women at the place of
execution at the grave, the grave in a rock, *are found in just the same
form in the worship of Adonis, Attis, Mithras, and Osiris*' (italics
mine). Which of these deities was crucified?"</span>

</div>

In this passage Dr. Carpenter has joined serious garbling of his

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

own with an error on the part of the translator. The passage he cites
from Drews is preceded in the text and translation by the words
"Everything was given" (which he suppresses); and references are given
*to the Old Testament* as regards three of the details. Any candid and
competent reader would see at a glance that something was wrong with an
interpretation which assigned to the Gentile cults named a series of
details well known to be items of Jewish tradition and symbolism, and
actually indicated as such by the references. Even without reference to
the original, such a reader would divine the misconstruction on the part
of the translator. Where he has written, after a comma, "also the women
at the place of execution,......are found," the translation should have
run, after a semi-colon, "*further*, the women,......*who* are found."
Drews wrote "*ferner, die Weiber,......die*." The whole passage means,
and can only mean, that in addition to the other "given" items in the
crucifixion and burial scenes, most of which are Judaic, the mourning
women are found in the pagan cults mentioned.

And the case against Dr. Carpenter is clear. He has mentioned in a
footnote that he possesses only the first German edition of the
*Christusmythe*, not the expanded third, from which the translation is
made. But the first, had he examined it, would at once have enlightened
him, had he wished to be enlightened. There the context is different:
the Judaic items are not mentioned in the same sentence, and we have
this: "ferner das 'Felsengrab' des Heilands, die Weiber am Grabe, *die*
sich ganz ebenso auch im Kultus des Mithra and Adonis finden, usw." Even
here he would doubtless exclaim that both rock-tomb and women are not
found in *both* cults: that is his critical way. But between the first
edition and the translation he could not fail to see that Drews was
*not* asserting a fourfold crucifixion-myth, of which each form
contained all the details specified. For the rest, he shows his own
ignorance of hierology by scouting the "execution" of Adonis (concerning
whom he might learn from Dr. Frazer that the Adonisian ritual originally
centred round an annual human sacrifice to the Vegetation-God) and by
denying all connection between the cross-myth and Osiris, who actually
figures in a quasi-crucified form. But the essential point is his
utterly disingenuous way of covering the real issue by mere Old Bailey
cavils and misrepresentations, to the end of keeping it out of sight. In
all his columns of splenetic cavilling there is not one argument which
really affects the fundamental question.

Doubtless a reviewer can protest that he is not responsible for the
slips of a translator. But the business of an honest reviewer, and
surely of a theological teacher in the position of Dr. Carpenter, is,
first and foremost, to bring out the main positions and arguments of a
work which he professes to discuss and dismiss as a whole; and a
reviewer who pretends to dispose of an elaborate theorem, supported on
many historical lines, by alleging merely error of detail at subsidiary
points, is not morally fitted to be a public teacher.

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Our Unitarian
Professor, however, has done worse than this. In his first review, Dr.
Carpenter showed that even in his malice he surmised at least an error
of punctuation in the translation: in his second review, instead of
clearing up the point, he suppresses not only his own surmise, but an
essential part of the text, deliberately reducing it to a different
syntactical construction, to make it carry an impossible assertion. If
I, in a review of Dr. Carpenter's *First Three Gospels*, had simply
cited his astonishing self-contradiction in regard to the cry on the
cross, with some other self-contradictions only less flagrant, and had
thereupon pronounced the whole book the work of a man who either did not
believe what he said or chronically forgot what he had written, his more
careful readers would certainly have pronounced the verdict grossly
unfair as a general judgment. But Dr. Carpenter has himself gone further
than this. He has taken a plainly involved passage of a translation,
where the very references showed him that the meaning could not be that
which seemed to lie on the surface, and, confessedly suspecting an error
of construction on the translator's part, has in a second article
positively aggravated the translator's slip by leaving out, in
quotation, an essential clause.

Political debate notoriously abounds in misrepresentation and in unfair
criticism. But I do not believe that such a process of perversion as Dr.
Carpenter has indulged in would be successful on a political platform or
in the House of Commons. Such trickery, once perceived, would there
discredit the performer once for all. And, trickery apart, the *spirit*
in which the theological defence is conducted by Dr. Carpenter and his
friends would be felt to be scandalous in a serious debate among
truth-seeking laymen. In the *Christian Commonwealth*, to which he
contributed his first review, there appeared an editorial on Drews’s
book, in which the sole rebutting arguments, as distinguished from blank
declamation, were a pair of protests against (1) a passage in the
translation in which the disciples of Jesus were spoken of as having
known him through "many years of wandering," and (2) a passage which
overstated the force of a proposition by Dr. Cheyne concerning Nazareth.
Now, the first item in this case also turned on a slip of the
translator. Drews had written "mehrjährig," which means "of several
years," not "many." The critic, of course, was entitled to his cavil;
but here again an honest critic would have dealt with the force of the
argument as apart from the mere detail of the number of years. No such
attempt was made: the theological journalist never hinted to his readers
that Drews was putting a consideration which, with a mere substitution
of "several" for "many," told very strongly in support of Drews’s case,
and against the received tradition. In fine, an indictment of Drews’s
treatise in a popular yet pretentious Christian journal offered no
further confutation of his case than an outcry against a phrase which
happened to be a mistranslation, and against one overstatement of
another critic's opinion. A short letter

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

by me to the journal in question, pointing out the facts and suggesting
the moral, was suppressed, and a bare summary given, from which the
moral was carefully excluded. These dialecticians do not want truth, do
not want full and fair discussion, do not want elucidation. Their ideal
is to discredit those who assail their beliefs, and there an end.

Thus the defence of tradition goes on. Neo-Unitarian theologians and
journalists handle disturbing theses with as little concern for candour
or for patient comprehension, as much reliance on aspersion and
vituperation, as was ever shown by Trinitarian critics of Unitarianism.
And the Unitarian *Inquirer*, I observe, indignantly resents any return
of censure, apparently claiming for its own chief pundit a monopoly of
that. I regret to be unable to comply with the requirement.

#### § 6. Professor Carl Clemen.

The *Religionsgeschichtliche Erklärung des Neuen Testaments* of
Professor Lic. Dr. Carl Clemen (Giessen, 1909) would probably not be
certified as orthodox by theologians claiming to be such, inasmuch as it
admits the non-historicity of the Virgin-Birth and the pagan derivation
of a certain number of Christian doctrines. It strives, however, to do
all that can be done without avowed renunciation of scholarly critical
principles to minimise "*die Abhängigkeit des ältesten Christentums von
nicht jüdischen Religionen and philosophischen Systemen*." The reader
will note the "*ältesten*." Claiming to examine thoroughly the measure
of dependence of the oldest Christianity upon non-Jewish religions and
philosophic systems, Professor Clemen implicitly admits later pagan
influences. His treatment of the data as to the primary influences,
however, invites drastic criticism.

Undertaking to deal with Gentile influences not only upon the dogmas but
upon the narratives of the gospels, Professor Clemen leaves absolutely
unmentioned a whole series of explicitly posited precedents for gospel
narratives, while dealing, often laboriously, with others, often of less
importance. In his opening chapter he thinks fit to dismiss my volume on
*Christianity and Mythology* with an extract from a querulous account of
it given by Professor A. Réville. In the preface to the second edition
of that work I have shown that Professor Réville cannot have given even
a cursory attention to the bulk of it, else he would be open to a charge
of simple false witness. And now Professor Clemen, not having seen the
book himself, <span id="fr_2009"></span>[1](#fn_2009.md) disposes of it by
a citation from another Professor who had not read it. He has thus by a
wise economy of research taken no account of a score of the asserted
parallelisms which it is the professed object of his book to deal with.
At the

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

same time, and on the same principles, he dismisses as exhibitions of
*Parallelomanie* English writings which he admits he has not before him.

To the first edition of the present work he has, however, given some
little attention. Inaccurately enough, he cites as the *Grundgedanke* of
the book the two theses as to the mystery-drama on which criticism was
specially challenged. They do not constitute the *Grundgedanke*. The
*Grundgedanke* is the naturalness and interconnectedness of all
religion: the two theses in question represent the central result of the
investigation as regards Christian origins. But the real issue, of
course, is as to whether they will stand scrutiny. At this point, again,
Professor Clemen practises economy of effort. He takes some trouble,
indeed (p. 143 *sq*.), to affirm in detail that the Asiatic and other
analogies to the crucifixion are non-significant; but on the central
thesis as to the mystery-drama he is satisfied to offer the single
proposition: "That the Passion-story was originally composed as a
mystery-play does not follow from its dramatic character: *it is in
essence certainly historical*." The reader of the foregoing pages is
aware that the contention thus ingenuously evaded is not merely that
dramatic origin is to be inferred from a vaguely "dramatic character,"
but that the main story is historically incredible, and that a variety
of details, material and literary, can be explained only on the drama
hypothesis, their presence being unintelligible on any other. Upon this
argument Professor Clemen has not a word to say: he simply falls back on
a *petitio principii*, not even explaining what it is that he is
denying.

This is of course in the ordinary way of orthodox and semi-orthodox
apologetics; and I dwell on it here because Professor Clemen, in his
Introduction (§ 2), professes to observe scrupulously a critical
"method." As he states it, it is simply an adherence to the ordinary
principles of historical argument and evidence. But we now see what such
a profession of principle is worth. In the first place, Professor Clemen
ignores a multitude of the data with which he ought to grapple. That is
to say, he disparages a book which he has not read, but of which not
only the title suggests but a cited description tells him that it
affirms many myth-parallels between Christianity and other systems.
After making that citation, in proceeding to describe his method, he
remarks (p. 10) that it would be superfluous to disprove propositions
which are seen to be "untenable," or to deal with "popular" works which
do not once make the attempt to establish their astounding propositions.
Either these two rules of exclusion are meant to include *Christianity
and Mythology* or they are not. If not, he makes no excuse for evading
its examination. If they *are* meant to exclude it, he has been
unscrupulous enough to asperse and dismiss a book *which he has not
seen*, and whereof he cites only one splenetic hostile description,
which I have elsewhere shown to be written without perusal. Such are the
ethic and character of Professor Clemen's real

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "method." When,
finally, he does profess to deal with a capital thesis with which he is
avowedly bound to reckon, he burkes the entire argument, assumes without
discussion the point in dispute, and passes on to other issues. His
profession of method is either a dialectical sham or an exhibition of
failure to understand the nature of argument.

I have limited my criticism to Professor Clemen's handling of my own
books; but anyone who follows up his handling of the positions (among
others) of Gunkel and Jensen will there find a similar tactic of begging
the question wherever that course is the most convenient. If this is the
best that the professional theologian in Germany can do to meet the
anthropological and hierological analysis of Christian origins—and I
understand it is thought to be adequate by those who share its
positions—there is nothing more to be said. The entire tactic is one of
making small concessions (though even these are significantly numerous,
compared with the general denials of a few years ago) and evading or
suppressing vital issues. What Professor Clemen surrenders are the
points already surrendered by many "liberal" theologians: his ostensible
defence of other positions is mere asseveration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2005"></span>[402:1](pch87.htm#fr_2005.md) *The Tree of Life*,
by Ernest Crawley. Hutchinson and Co., 1905. Mr. Crawley does not put
"Rev." on his title-page.

<span id="fn_2006"></span>[402:2](pch87.htm#fr_2006.md) Pp. 263, 278.

<span id="fn_2007"></span>[408:1](pch87.htm#fr_2007.md) Published by the
North London Christian Evidence Society, 11 and 12 High Street,
Hampstead, N.W. 1909.

<span id="fn_2008"></span>[429:1](pch87.htm#fr_2008.md) The normal
transliteration is *Kyrios*, but I here follow that of my critic.

<span id="fn_2009"></span>[435:1](pch87.htm#fr_2009.md) This course is
strangely common among even distinguished German theologians. I am
surprised to note it in Dr. A. Schweitzer as well as in the late
Professor Pfleiderer. See App. to *Christianity and Mythology*, 2nd ed.
pp. 449, 456.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](pch88.md)
