[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040011)  [Next](0040013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Book I.

I Have thought it meet, my best beloved fellow-servant in the Lord, even
from this early period,<sup>[1](footnote/fn7)</sup> to provide for the
course which you must pursue after my departure from the
world,<sup>[2](footnote/fn7.htm#P711_174193)</sup> if I shall be called
before you; (and) to entrust to your
honour<sup>[3](footnote/fn7.htm#P712_174270)</sup> the observance of the
provision. For in things
worldly<sup>[4](footnote/fn7.htm#P713_174335)</sup> we are active
enough, and we wish the good of each of us to be consulted. If we draw
up wills for *such* matters, why ought we not much more to take
forethought for our
posterity<sup>[5](footnote/fn7.htm#P714_174529)</sup> in things divine
and heavenly, and in a sense to bequeath a legacy to be received before
the inheritance be divided,-(the legacy, I mean, of) admonition and
demonstration touching those (bequests) which are allotted out of (our)
immortal goods, and from the heritage of the heavens? Only, that you may
be able to receive in its
entirety<sup>[6](footnote/fn7.htm#P715_174947)</sup> this feoffment in
trust<sup>[7](footnote/fn7.htm#P716_175099)</sup> of my admonition, may
God grant; whom be honour, glory, renown, dignity, and power, now and to
the ages of the ages!

The precept, therefore, which I give you is, that, with all the
constancy you may, you do, after our departure, renounce nuptials; not
that you will on that score confer any benefit on me, except in that you
will profit yourself. But to Christians, after their departure from the
world,<sup>[8](footnote/fn7.htm#P718_175522)</sup> no restoration of
marriage is promised in the day of the resurrection, translated as they
will be into the condition and sanctity of
angels.<sup>[9](footnote/fn7.htm#P719_175675)</sup> Therefore no
solicitude arising from carnal jealousy will, in the day of the
resurrection, even in the case of her whom they chose to represent as
having been married to seven brothers successively, wound any
one<sup>[10](footnote/fn7.htm#P720_175905)</sup> of her so many
husbands; nor is any (husband) awaiting her to put her to
confusion.<sup>[11](footnote/fn7.htm#P721_176027)</sup> The question
raised by the Sadducees has yielded to the Lord's sentence. Think not
that it is for the sake of preserving to the end for myself the entire
devotion of your flesh, that I, suspicious of the pain of (anticipated)
slight, am even at this early
period<sup>[12](footnote/fn7.htm#P722_176351)</sup> instilling into you
the counsel of (perpetual) widowhood. There will at that day be no
resumption of voluptuous disgrace between us. No such frivolities, no
such impurities, does God promise to His (servants). But whether to you,
or to any other woman whatever who pertains to God, the advice which we
are giving shall be profitable, we take leave to treat of at large.

We do not indeed forbid the union of man and woman, blest by God as the
seminary of the human race, and devised for the replenishment of the
earth<sup>[13](footnote/fn7.htm#P726_176954)</sup> and the furnishing of
the world,<sup>[14](footnote/fn7.htm#P727_177010)</sup> and therefore
permitted, yet Singly. For Adam was the one husband of Eve, and Eve his
one wife, one woman, one
rib.<sup>[15](footnote/fn7.htm#P728_177140)</sup> We
grant,<sup>[16](footnote/fn7.htm#P729_177172)</sup> that among our
ancestors, and the patriarchs themselves, it was
lawful<sup>[17](footnote/fn7.htm#P730_177255)</sup> not only to marry,
but even to multiply wives.<sup>[18](footnote/fn7.htm#P731_177396)</sup>
There were concubines, too, (in those days.) But although the Church did
come in figuratively in the synagogue, yet (to interpret simply) it was
necessary to institute (certain things) which should afterward deserve
to be either lopped off or modified. For the Law was (in due time) to
supervene. (Nor was that enough:) for it was meet that causes for making
up the deficiencies of the Law should have forerun (Him who was to
supply those deficiencies). And so to the Law presently had to succeed
the Word<sup>[19](footnote/fn7.htm#P732_178044)</sup> of God introducing
the spiritual circumcision.<sup>[20](footnote/fn7.htm#P733_178166)</sup>
Therefore, by means of the wide licence of those days, materials for
subsequent emendations were furnished beforehand, of which materials the
Lord by His Gospel, and then the apostle in the last days of the
(Jewish) age,<sup>[21](footnote/fn7.htm#P734_178436)</sup> either cut
off the redundancies or regulated the disorders.

But let it not be thought that my reason for premising thus much
concerning the liberty granted to the old, and the restraint imposed on
the later time, is that I may lay a foundation for teaching that
Christ's advent was intended to dissolve wedlock, (and) to abolish
marriage talons; as if from this period
onward<sup>[22](footnote/fn7.htm#P738_179137)</sup> I were prescribing
an end to marrying. Let them see to that, who, among the rest of their
perversities, teach the disjoining of the "one flesh in twain;
"<sup>[23](footnote/fn7.htm#P739_179360)</sup> denying Him who, after
borrowing the female from the male, recombined between themselves, in
the matrimonial computation, the two bodies taken out of the consortship
of the self-same material substance. In short, there is no place at all
where we read that nuptials are prohibited; of course on the ground that
they are "a good thing." What, however, is *better* than this "good," we
learn from the apostle, who *permits* marrying indeed, but *prefers*
abstinence; the former on account of the insidiousnesses of temptations,
the latter on account of he straits of the
times.<sup>[24](footnote/fn7.htm#P740_179952)</sup> Now, by looking into
the reason thus given for each proposition, it is easily discerned that
the ground on which the power of marrying is conceded is *necessity*;
but whatever *necessity* grants, she by her very nature depreciates. In
fact, in that it is written, "To marry is better than to burn," what,
pray, is the nature of this "good" which is (only) commended by
comparison with "evil," so that the reason why" marrying" is *more* good
is (merely) that "burning" is *less*? Nay, but how far better is it
neither to marry nor to burn? Why, even in persecutions it is *better*
to take advantage of the permission granted, and "flee from town to
town,"<sup>[25](footnote/fn7.htm#P741_180615)</sup> than, when
apprehended and racked, to deny (the
faith).<sup>[26](footnote/fn7.htm#P742_180722)</sup> And therefore more
blessed are they who have strength to depart (this life) in blessed
confession of their
testimony.<sup>[27](footnote/fn7.htm#P743_180907)</sup> I may say, What
is *permitted* is not *good*. For how stands the case? I must of
necessity die (if I be apprehended and confess my faith.) If I think
(that fate) deplorable, (then flight) is good; but if I have a fear of
the thing which is permitted, (the permitted thing) has some suspicion
attaching to the cause of its permission. But that which is "better" no
one (ever) "permitted," as being undoubted, and manifest by its own
inherent purity. There are some things which are not to be *desired*
merely because they are not *forbidden*, albeit they are in a certain
sense *forbidden* when other things are preferred to them; for the
preference given to the higher things is a dissuasion from the lowest. A
thing is not "good" merely because it is not "evil," nor is it "evil"
merely because it is not
"harmful."<sup>[28](footnote/fn7.htm#P744_181778)</sup> Further: that
which is fully "good" excels on this ground, that it is not only not
harmful, but profitable into the bargain. For you are bound to prefer
what is profitable to what is (merely) not harmful. For the *first*
place is what every struggle aims at; the *second* has consolation
attaching to it, but not victory. But if we listen to the apostle,
forgetting what is behind, let us both strain after what is
before,<sup>[29](footnote/fn7.htm#P745_182213)</sup> and be followers
after the better rewards. Thus, albeit he does not "east a
snare<sup>[30](footnote/fn7.htm#P746_182319)</sup> upon us," he points
out what tends to utility when he says, "The unmarried woman thinks on
the things of the Lord, that both in body and spirit she may be holy;
but the married is solicitous how to please her
husband."<sup>[31](footnote/fn7.htm#P747_182655)</sup> But he nowhere
permits marriage in such a way as not rather to wish us to do our utmost
in imitation of his own example. Happy the man who shall prove like
Paul!

But we read "that the flesh is weak;
"<sup>[32](footnote/fn7.htm#P751_182936)</sup> and hence we
soothe<sup>[33](footnote/fn7.htm#P752_182977)</sup> ourselves in some
cases. Yet we read, too, that "the spirit is strong;
"<sup>[34](footnote/fn7.htm#P753_183173)</sup> for each clause occurs in
one and the same sentence. Flesh is an earthly, spirit a heavenly,
material. Why, then, do we, too prone to self-excuse, put forward (in
our defence) the weak part of us, but not look
at<sup>[35](footnote/fn7.htm#P754_183499)</sup> the strong? Why should
not the earthly yield to the heavenly? If the spirit is stronger than
the flesh, because it is withal of nobler origin, it is our own fault if
we follow the weaker. Now there are two
phases<sup>[36](footnote/fn7.htm#P755_183759)</sup> of human weakness
which make marriages<sup>[37](footnote/fn7.htm#P756_183812)</sup>
necessary to such as are disjoined from matrimony. The first and most
powerful is that which arises from *fleshly* concupiscence; the second,
from *worldly* concupiscence. But by us, who are servants of God, who
renounce both voluptuousness and ambition, each is to be repudiated.
Fleshly concupiscence claims the functions of adult age, craves after
beauty's harvest, rejoices in its own shame, pleads the necessity of a
husband to the female sex, as a source of authority and of comfort, or
to render it safe from evil rumours. To meet these its counsels, do you
apply the examples of sisters of ours whose names are with the
Lord,<sup>[38](footnote/fn7.htm#P757_184600)</sup> -who, when their
husbands have preceded them (to glory), give to no opportunity of beauty
or of age the precedence over holiness. They prefer to be wedded to
God.To God their beauty, to God their youth (is dedicated). With Him
they live; with Him they converse; Him they
"handle"<sup>[39](footnote/fn7.htm#P758_184955)</sup> by day and by
night; *to* the Lord they assign their prayers as dowries; *from* Him,
as oft as they desire it, they receive His
approbation<sup>[40](footnote/fn7.htm#P759_185137)</sup> as dotal gifts.
Thus they have laid hold for themselves of an eternal gift of the Lord;
and while on earth, by abstaining from marriage, are already counted as
belonging to the angelic family. Training yourself to an emulation of
(their) constancy by the examples of such women, you will by spiritual
affection bury that fleshly concupiscence, in abolishing the
temporal<sup>[41](footnote/fn7.htm#P760_185526)</sup> and fleeting
desires of beauty and youth by the compensating gain of immortal
blessings.

On the other hand, this *worldly* concupiscence (to which I referred)
has, as its causes, glory, cupidity, ambition, want of sufficiency;
through which causes it trumps up the "necessity" for
marrying,-promising itself, forsooth, heavenly things in return-to lord
it, (namely,) in another's family; to
roost<sup>[42](footnote/fn7.htm#P762_185942)</sup> on another's wealth;
to extort splendour from another's store to lavish
expenditure<sup>[43](footnote/fn7.htm#P763_186041)</sup> which you do
not feel! Far be all this from believers, who have no care about
maintenance, unless it be that we distrust the promises of God, and
(His) care and providence, who clothes with such grace the lilies of the
field;<sup>[44](footnote/fn7.htm#P764_186289)</sup> who, without any
labour on their part, feeds the fowls of the
heaven;<sup>[45](footnote/fn7.htm#P765_186381)</sup> who prohibits care
to be taken about to-morrow's food and
clothing,<sup>[46](footnote/fn7.htm#P766_186468)</sup> promising that He
knows what is needful for each of His servants-not indeed ponderous
necklaces, not burdensome garments, not Gallic mules nor German bearers,
which all add lustre to the glory of nuptials; but
"sufficiency,"<sup>[47](footnote/fn7.htm#P767_186716)</sup> which is
suitable to moderation and modesty, Presume, I pray you, that you have
need of nothing if you "attend upon the Lord;
"<sup>[48](footnote/fn7.htm#P768_186883)</sup> nay, that you have all
things, if you have the Lord, whose are all things. Think
often<sup>[49](footnote/fn7.htm#P769_187015)</sup> on things heavenly,
and you will despise things earthly. To widowhood signed and sealed
before the Lord nought is necessary but perseverance.

Further reasons for marriage which men allege for themselves arise from
anxiety for posterity, and the bitter, bitter pleasure of children. To
us this is idle. For why should we be eager to bear children, whom, when
we have them, we desire to send before us (to
glory)<sup>[50](footnote/fn7.htm#P773_187499)</sup> (in respect, I mean,
of the distresses that are now imminent); desirous as we are ourselves,
too, to be taken out of this most wicked
world,<sup>[51](footnote/fn7.htm#P774_187739)</sup> and received into
the Lord's presence, which was the desire even of an
apostle?<sup>[52](footnote/fn7.htm#P775_187833)</sup> To the servant of
God, forsooth, offspring is necessary! For of our own salvation we are
secure enough, so that we have leisure for children! Burdens must be
sought by us for ourselves which are avoided even by the majority of the
Gentiles, who are compelled by
laws,<sup>[53](footnote/fn7.htm#P776_188148)</sup> who are
decimated<sup>[54](footnote/fn7.htm#P777_188194)</sup> by
abortions;<sup>[55](footnote/fn7.htm#P778_188227)</sup> burdens which,
finally, are to *us* most of all unsuitable, as being perilous to faith!
For why did the Lord foretell a "woe to them that are with child, and
them that give suck,"<sup>[56](footnote/fn7.htm#P779_188459)</sup>
except because He testifies that in that day of disencumbrance the
encumbrances of children will be an inconvenience? It is to marriage, of
course, that those encumbrances appertain; but that ("woe") will not
pertain to widows. (*They*) at the first trump of the angel will spring
forth disencumbered-will freely bear to the end whatsoever pressure and
persecution, with no burdensome fruit of marriage heaving in the womb,
none in the bosom.

Therefore, whether it be for the sake of the flesh, or of the
world,<sup>[57](footnote/fn7.htm#P781_189003)</sup> or of posterity,
that marriage is undertaken, nothing of all these "necessities" affects
the servants of God, so as to prevent my deeming it enough to have once
for all yielded to some one of them, and by one marriage
appeased<sup>[58](footnote/fn7.htm#P782_189244)</sup> all concupiscence
of this kind. Let us marry daily, and in the midst of our marrying let
us be overtaken, like Sodom and Gomorrah, by that day of
fear!<sup>[59](footnote/fn7.htm#P783_189453)</sup> For *there* it was
not only, of course, that they were dealing in marriage and merchandise;
but when He says, "They were marrying and buying," He sets a
brand<sup>[60](footnote/fn7.htm#P784_189634)</sup> upon the very leading
vices of the flesh and of the
world,<sup>[61](footnote/fn7.htm#P785_189707)</sup> which call men off
the most from divine disciplines-the one through the pleasure of
rioting, the other though the greed of acquiring. And yet that
"blindness" *then* was felt long before "the ends of the
world."<sup>[62](footnote/fn7.htm#P786_189931)</sup> What, then, will
the case be if God *now* keep us from the vices which *of old* were
detestable before Him? "The time," says (the apostle), "is
compressed.<sup>[63](footnote/fn7.htm#P787_190219)</sup> It remaineth
that they who have wives<sup>[64](footnote/fn7.htm#P788_190349)</sup>
act as if they had them not."

But if they who *have* (wives) are (thus) bound to consign to oblivion
what they have, how much more are they who have *not*, prohibited from
seeking a second time what they no longer have; so that she whose
husband has departed from the world should thenceforward impose rest on
her sex by abstinence from marriage-abstinence which numbers of Gentile
women devote to the memory of beloved husbands! When anything seems
difficult, let us survey others who cope with still greater
difficulties. How many are there who from the moment of their baptism
set the seal (of virginity) upon their flesh? How many, again, who by
equal mutual consent cancel the debt of matrimony-voluntary
eunuchs<sup>[65](footnote/fn7.htm#P792_191416)</sup> for the sake of
their desire! after the celestial kingdom! But if, while the
marriage-tie is still intact, abstinence is endured, how much more when
it has been undone! For I believe it to be harder for what is intact to
be quite forsaken, than for what has been lost not to be yearned after.
A hard and arduous thing enough, surely, is the continence for God's
sake of a holy woman after her husband's decease, when
Gentiles,<sup>[66](footnote/fn7.htm#P793_191919)</sup> in honour of
their own Satan, endure sacerdotal offices which involve both virginity
and widowhood!<sup>[67](footnote/fn7.htm#P794_192045)</sup> At Rome, for
instance, they who have to do with the type of that "inextinguishable
fire,"<sup>[68](footnote/fn7.htm#P795_192173)</sup> keeping watch over
the omens of their own (future) penalty, in company with the (old)
dragon<sup>[69](footnote/fn7.htm#P796_192286)</sup> himself, are
appointed on the ground of *virginity*. To the Achaean Juno, at the town
Aegium, a *virgin* is allotted; and the (priestesses) who rave at Delphi
know not marriage. Moreover, we know that widows minister to the African
Ceres; enticed away, indeed, from matrimony by a most stem oblivion: for
not only do they withdraw from their still living husbands, but they
even introduce other wives to them in their own room-the husbands, of
course, smiling on it-all contact (with males), even as far as the kiss
of their sons, being forbidden them; and yet, with enduring practice,
they persevere in such a discipline of widowhood, which excludes the
solace even of holy
affection.<sup>[70](footnote/fn7.htm#P797_193009)</sup> These precepts
has the devil given to his servants, and he is heard! He challenges,
forsooth, God's servants, by the continence of his own, as if on equal
terms! Continent are even the priests of
hell!<sup>[71](footnote/fn7.htm#P798_193226)</sup> For he has found a
way to ruin men \_ even in good pursuits; and with him it makes no
difference to slay some by voluptuousness, some by continence.

To us continence has been pointed out by the Lord of salvation as an
instrument for attaining
eternity,<sup>[72](footnote/fn8.htm#P802_193657)</sup> and as a
testimony of (our) faith; as a commendation of this flesh of ours, which
is to be sustained for the "garment of
immortality,"<sup>[73](footnote/fn8.htm#P803_193868)</sup> which is one
day to supervene; for enduring, in fine, the will of God. Besides,
reflect, I advise you, that there is no one who is taken out of the
world<sup>[74](footnote/fn8.htm#P804_194055)</sup> but by the will of
God, if, (as is the case,) not even a leaf falls from off a tree without
it. The same who brings us into the
world<sup>[75](footnote/fn8.htm#P805_194203)</sup> must of necessity
take us out of it too. Therefore when, through the will of God, the
husband is deceased, the marriage likewise, by the will of God,
deceases. Why should *you* restore what God has put an end to? Why do
you, by repeating the servitude of matrimony, spurn the liberty which is
offered you? "You have been bound to a
wife,"<sup>[76](footnote/fn8.htm#P806_194552)</sup> sap the apostle;
"seek not loosing. You have been loosed from a
wife;<sup>[77](footnote/fn8.htm#P807_194811)</sup> seek not binding."
For even if you do not "*sin*" in re-marrying, still he says "pressure
of the flesh ensues."<sup>[78](footnote/fn8.htm#P808_195110)</sup>
Wherefore, so far as we can, let us love the opportunity of continence;
as soon as it offers itself, let us resolve to accept it, that what we
have not had strength<sup>[79](footnote/fn8.htm#P809_195296)</sup> (to
follow) in matrimony we may follow in widowhood. The occasion must be
embraced which puts an end to that which
*necessity*<sup>[80](footnote/fn8.htm#P810_195472)</sup> commanded. How
detrimental to faith, how obstructive to holiness, second marriages are,
the discipline of the Church and the prescription of the apostle
declare, when he suffers not men twice married to preside (over a
Church<sup>[81](footnote/fn8.htm#P811_195771)</sup> ), when he would not
grant a widow admittance into the order unless she had been "the wife of
one man; "<sup>[82](footnote/fn8.htm#P812_195906)</sup> for it behoves
God's altar<sup>[83](footnote/fn8.htm#P813_195955)</sup> to be set forth
pure. That whole halo<sup>[84](footnote/fn8.htm#P814_196004)</sup> which
encircles the Church is represented (as consisting) of holiness.
Priesthood is (a function) of widowhood and of celibacies among the
nations. Of course (this is) in conformity with the devil's principle of
rivalry. For the king of
heathendom,<sup>[85](footnote/fn8.htm#P815_196343)</sup> the chief
pontiff,<sup>[86](footnote/fn8.htm#P816_196376)</sup> to marry a second
time is unlawful. How pleasing must holiness be to God, when even His
enemy affects it!-not, of course, as having any affinity with anything
good, but as contumeliously affecting what is pleasing
to<sup>[87](footnote/fn8.htm#P817_196622)</sup> God the Lord.

For, concerning the honours which widowhood enjoys in the sight of God,
there is a brief summary in one saying of His through the prophet: "Do
thou<sup>[88](footnote/fn8.htm#P821_196840)</sup> justly to the widow
and to the orphan; and come
ye,<sup>[89](footnote/fn8.htm#P822_197043)</sup> let us reason, saith
the Lord." These two names, left to the care of the divine mercy, in
proportion as they are destitute of human aid, the Father of all
undertakes to defend. Look how the widow's benefactor is put on a level
with the widow herself, whose champion shall "reason with the Lord!" Not
to virgins, I take it, is so great a gift given. Although in *their*
case perfect integrity and entire sanctity shall have the nearest vision
of the face of God, yet the widow has a task more toilsome, because it
is easy not to crave after that which you know not, and to turn away
from what you have never had to
regret.<sup>[90](footnote/fn8.htm#P823_197814)</sup> More glorious is
the continence which is aware of its own right, which knows what it has
seen. The virgin may possibly be held the happier, but the *widow* the
more hardly tasked; the former in that she has always kept "the
good,"<sup>[91](footnote/fn8.htm#P824_198089)</sup> the latter in that
she has found "the good for herself." In the former it is grace, in the
latter virtue, that is crowned. For some things there are which are of
the divine liberality, some of our own working. The indulgences granted
by the Lord are regulated by their own grace; the things which are
objects of man's striving are attained by earnest pursuit. Pursue
earnestly, therefore, the virtue of continence, which is modesty's
agent; industry, which allows not women to be "wanderers;
"<sup>[92](footnote/fn8.htm#P825_198602)</sup> frugality, which scorns
the world.<sup>[93](footnote/fn8.htm#P826_198656)</sup> Follow companies
and conversations worthy of God, mindful of that short verse, sanctified
by the apostle's quotation of it, "Ill interviews good morals do
corrupt."<sup>[94](footnote/fn8.htm#P827_198836)</sup> Talkative, idle,
winebibbing, curious
tent-fellows,<sup>[95](footnote/fn8.htm#P828_199039)</sup> do the very
greatest hurt to the purpose of widow-hood. Through talkativeness there
creep in words unfriendly to modesty; through idleness they seduce one
from strictness; through winebibbing they insinuate any and every evil;
through curiosity they convey a spirit of rivalry in lust. Not one of
such women knows how to speak of the good of single-husbandhood; for
their "god," as the apostle says, "is their belly;
"<sup>[96](footnote/fn8.htm#P829_199495)</sup> and so, too, what is
neighbour to the belly.

These considerations, dearest fellow-servant, I commend to you thus
early,<sup>[97](footnote/fn8.htm#P831_199636)</sup> handled throughout
superfluously indeed, after the apostle, but likely to prove a solace to
you, In that (if so it shall turn
out<sup>[98](footnote/fn8.htm#P832_199783)</sup> ) you will cherish my
memory in them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book II.](0040013)
