[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040019)  [Next](0040021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

The Shepherd of Hermas, p. 85.

Here, and in chap. xx. below, Tertullian's rabid utterances against the
*Shepherd* may be balanced by what he had said, less unreasonably, in
his better mood.<sup>[299](footnote/fn16.htm#P1681_495591)</sup> Now he
refers to the *Shepherd's* (ii.
1)<sup>[300](footnote/fn16.htm#P1682_495714)</sup> view of pardon, even
to adulterers. But surely it might be objected even more plausibly
against "the Shepherd," whom he prefers, in common with all Christians,
as see John 8:1-11, which I take to be canonical Scripture. A curious
question is suggested by what he says of the figure of the Good Shepherd
portrayed on the chalice: Is this *irony*, as if the figure so familiar
from illustrations of the catacombs must be meant for the *Shepherd* of
Hermas? Regarding all pictures as idolatrous, he may intend to intimate
that adultery (=idolatry) was thus symbolized.

II

Clasping the knees of all, p. 86.

Here is a portrait of the early penitential discipline sufficiently
terrible, and it conforms to the apostolic pictures of the same. "Tell
it unto the Church," says our Lord (Matt. xviii. 17). In 1 Cor. v. 4 the
apostle ("present in spirit") gives judgment, but the whole Church is
"gathered together." In James 5:16 the "confession to one another" seems
to refer to this public discipline, as also the prayer for healing
enjoined on *one another*. St. Chrysostom, however, reflecting the
discipline of his day, in which great changes were made, says, on
Matthew 18:17, unless it be a gloss, "Dic Ecclesuoeid est Proesidibus =
prooeligddreuou/sin." (Tom. vii. p. 536, ed. Migne.)

III'

Remedial discipline, p. 87.

Powerfully as Tertullian states his view of this apostolic "delivering
unto Satan" as for final perdition, it is not to be gainsaid that (1
Corinthians 5:5) the object was salvation and hope, "that the spirit may
be saved in the day of the Lord Jesus." Thus, the power of Satan to
inflict bodily suffering (Job 2:6), when divinely permitted, is
recognised under the Gospel (Luke 13:16; 2 Corinthians 12:7). The
remedial mercy of trials and sufferings may be inferred when
providentially occurring.

IV

Personally upon Peter, p. 99.

See what has been said before. But note our author (now writing against
the Church, and as a Montanist) has no idea that the *personal*
prerogative of St. Peter had descended to any bishop. More when we come
to Cyprian, and see vol. iii. p. 630, this series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII. On Fasting. In Opposition to the Psychics.](0040021)
