[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040007)  [Next](0040009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidation.

I

The Prophecy of Enoch, p. 15.

Dr. Davidson is the author of a useful article on "Apocalyptic
Literature," from which we extract all that is requisite to inform the
reader of the *freshest* opinion as seen from his well-known point of
view. He notes Archbishop Lawrence's translation into English, and that
it has been rendered back again into German by Dillman (1853), as
before, less accurately, by Hoffmann. Ewald, Lucke, Koestlin, and
Hilgenfeld are referred to, and an article of his own in Kitto's
*Cyclopoedia*. We owe its re-appearance, after long neglect, to
Archbishop Lawrence (1838), and its preservation to the Abyssinians. It
was rescued by Bruce, the explorer, in an Aethiopic version; and the
first detailed announcement of its discovery was made by De Sacy, 1800.
Davidson ascribes its authorship to pre-Messianic times, but thinks it
has been interpolated by a Jewish Christian. Tertullian's negative
testimony points the other way: he evidently relies upon its
"Christology" as genuine; and, if interpolated in his day, he could
hardly have been deceived.

Its five parts are: I. The rape of women by fallen angels, and the
giants that were begotten of them. The visions of Enoch begun. II. The
visions continued, with views of the Messiah's kingdom. III. The
physical and astronomical mysteries treated of. IV. Man's mystery
revealed in dreams from the beginning to the end of the Messianic
kingdom. V. The warnings of Enoch to his own family and to mankind, with
appendices, which complete the book. The article in Smith's *Dictionary
of the Bible* is accessible, and need only be referred to as well worth
perusal; and, as it abounds in references to the entire literature of
criticism respecting it, it is truly valuable. It seems to have been
written by Westcott.<sup>[139](footnote/fn5.htm#P539_113373)</sup>

The fact that St. Jude refers to Enoch's prophesyings no more proves
that this book is other than apocryphal than St. Paul's reference to
Jannes and Jambres makes Scripture of the Targum. The apostle Jude does,
indeed, authenticate that particular saying by inspiration of God, and
doubtless it was traditional among the Jews. St. Jerome's references to
this quotation may be found textually in
Lardner.<sup>[140](footnote/fn5.htm#P541_113822)</sup> Although the book
is referred to frequently in the *Patrologia*, Tertullian only, of the
Fathers, pays it the respect due to Scripture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. On the Veiling of Virgins.](0040009)
