[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040041)  [Next](0040043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Prefatory Notice to Origen's Works.

\[The great biblical scholar and critic of the first half of the third
century deserves a more cordial recognition and appreciation than have
always been accorded to him. While it is true that in various matters he
has strange, even wild, fancies, and gives utterance to expressions
which can hardly, if at all, be justified; while it is also true that he
indulges beyond all reason (as it appears to us of the present age) in
utterly useless speculations, and carries to excess his great love of
allegorizing,-yet these are rather of the nature of possible guesses and
surmises on numerous topics, of more or less interest, than deliberate,
systematic teaching as matters of faith. He frequently speaks of them in
this wise, and does not claim for these guesses and speculations any
more credit than they may appear to his readers to be worth. In the
great fundamentals of the Christian creed Origen is unquestionably sound
and true. He does not always express himself in accordance with the
exact definitions which the Church Catholic secured in the century after
his decease, as a necessary result of the struggle with Arian and other
deadly heresies; but surely, in fairness, he is not to be too severely
judged for this. Some writers (e.g., J. M. Neale, in his *History of the
Patriarchate of Alexandria*) give an unfavorable and condemnatory view
of Origen and his career, but I am of opinion that Neale and others push
their objections much too far. I hold that Bishop Bull, and men like
him, are nearer to truth and justice in defending Origen and his
lifelong labors in the cause of the Master.

The Peri 'Arxw=n, which has come to us through the professedly
paraphrastic but really unsatisfactory version of Rufinus, is the work
which has given chief offence, and brought much odium upon Origen; but
as this was written in early life, and it is doubtful in how far Origen
is responsible for many things that are in it, it is only fair and just
to judge him by such works as the Kata Ke/lson and his valuable
*Homilies* on various books of Holy
Scripture.<sup>[1](footnote/fn61.htm#P6189_1078155)</sup> These go far
to prove clearly that he, whom Dr. Barrow designates as "the father of
interpreters," is worthy the high estimate which ancient as well as
modern defenders of his good name have fully set forth, and to justify
the conviction, that, if we possessed more out of the numerous works of
his which have entirely perished, we should rank him even more highly
than is done by Bishop Bull in his Defendio Fidei
Nicenae<sup>[2](footnote/fn61.htm#P6190_1078814)</sup>

In conclusion, I give a paragraph from the very valuable *Introduction
to the Criticism of the New Testament*, by Dr. F. H.
Scrivener,<sup>[3](footnote/fn61.htm#P6192_1078968)</sup> one of the
ablest of living biblical scholars and critics:-

" Origen is the most celebrated biblical critic of antiquity. His is the
highest name among the critics and expositors of the early Church. He is
perpetually engaged in the discussion of various readings of the New
Testament, and employs language, in describing the then existing state
of the text, which would be deemed strong if applied even to its present
condition, after the changes which sixteen more centuries must needs
have produced.... Seldom have such warmth of fancy and so bold a grasp
of mind been united with the lifelong, patient industry which procured
for this famous man the honourable appellation of *Adamantius*." S.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prologue of Rufinus.](0040043)
