[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040038)  [Next](0040040) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidation.

I Know nothing of the second poem of our author, and am indebted for the
following particulars to Dr.
Schaff.<sup>[23](footnote/fn60.htm#P6074_1026073)</sup>

It is an *apologetic poem* against Jews and Gentiles, written in uncouth
hexameters, and discusses in forty-seven sections the doctrine
concerning God and the Redeemer and mankind. It treats of the names of
Son and Father; and here, probably, he lays himself open to the charge
of Patripassian heresy. He passes to the obstacles encountered by the
Gospel, warns the Jews and the Gentiles to forsake their unprofitable
devotions, and enlarges on the eschatology, as he conceives of it. Let
me now quote textually, as follows:-

"The most interesting part of the second poem is the conclusion. It
contains a fuller description of Antichrist than the first poem. The
author expects that the end of the world wild come with the seventh
persecution. The Goths will conquer Rome and redeem the Christians; but
then Nero will appear as the heathen Antichrist, reconquer Rome, and
rage against the Christians three years and a half. He will be conquered
in turn by the Jewish and real Antichrist from the East, who, after the
defeat of Nero and the burning of Rome, will return to Judea, perform
false miracles, and be worshipped by the Jews. At last Christ appears,
that is, God himself (from the *Monarchian* stand-point of the author)
with the lost Twelve Tribes \[?\] as his army, which had lived beyond
Persia in happy simplicity and virtue. Under astounding phenomena of
nature he will conquer Antichrist and his host, convert all nations, and
take possession of the holy city of Jerusalem."

This idea of a double Antichrist re-appears in Lactantius, *Inst. Div*,
vii. 16 seqq.

This second poem was discovered by Cardinal Pitra in 1852. The two poems
were edited by E. Ludwig, Leipzig, 1877 and 1878.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origen](0040040)
