[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0040009)  [Next](0040011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##  Elucidations.

I

Vicar of the Lord, p. 27.

The recurrence of this emphatic expression in our author is worthy of
special note. He knew of no other "Vicar of Christ" than the promised
Paraclete, who should bring all Christ's words to remembrance, and be
"another Comforter." Let me quote from Dr.
Scott<sup>[60](footnote/fn6)</sup> a very striking passage in
illustration: "The Holy Ghost, after Christ's departure from the world,
acted *immediately* under Christ as the supreme vicegerent of his
kingdom; for next, and *immediately* under Christ, He authorized the
bishops and governors of the Church, and constituted them *overseers of
the flock* (Acts xx. 28). It was He that chose their persons, and
appointed their work, and gave them their several orders and directions:
in all which, it is evident that He acted under Christ as His supreme
substitute. Accordingly, by Tertullian he is styled \`the Vicarious
Virtue, or Power, 'as He was the *Supreme Vicar* and substitute of
Christ in mediating for God with men."

II

She shall be called *woman*, p. 31.

The Vulgate reads, preserving something of the original epigrammatic
force, "Vocabitur Vir-Ago, quoniam de Vir-O sumpta est." The late
revised English gives us, in the margin, *Isshah* and *Ish*, which marks
the play upon words in the Hebrew,-"She shall be called *Isshah* because
she was taken out of *Ish*." This *Epithalamium* is the earliest poem,
and Adam was the first poet.

As to the argument of our author, it is quite enough to say, that,
whatever we may think of his refinements upon St. Paul, he sticks to the
inspired text, and enforces God's Law in the Gospel. Let us reflect,
moreover, upon the awful immodesty of heathen manners (see Martial,
passim), and the necessity of enforcing a radical reform. All that
adorns the sex among Christians has sprung out of these severe and
caustic criticisms of the Gentile world and its customs. And let us
reflect that there is a growing licence in our age, which makes it
important to revert to first principles, and to renew the apostolic
injunctions, if not as Tertullian did, still as best we may, in our own
times and ways.

III

These crimes, p. 36.

The iniquity here pointed at has become of frightful magnitude in the
United States of America. We shall hear of it again when we come to
Hippolytus.<sup>[61](footnote/fn6.htm#P693_172989)</sup> May the
American editor be pardoned for referring to his own commonitory to his
countrywomen on this awful form of murder, in *Moral
Reforms*,<sup>[62](footnote/fn6.htm#P694_173225)</sup> a little book
upon practical subjects, addressed to his own diocese.

Hippolytus speaks of the crime which had shocked Tertullian as assuming
terrible proportions at Rome in the time of
Callistus<sup>[63](footnote/fn6.htm#P696_173457)</sup> and under his
patronage, *circa* A.V. 220. But in this case it was not so much the
novelty of the evil which attracted the rebuke of the Christian
moralist, but the fact that it was licensed by a bishop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. To His Wife.](0040011)
