[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc02)  [Next](gc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### CHAPTER 2

### The Fall of Man

I saw that the holy angels often visited the garden, and gave
instruction to Adam and Eve concerning their employment, and also taught
them concerning the rebellion of Satan and his fall.  The angels warned
them of Satan, and cautioned them not to separate from each other in
their employment, for they might be brought in contact with this fallen
foe.  The angels enjoined upon them to closely follow the directions God
had given them, for in perfect obedience only were they safe.  And if
they were obedient, this fallen foe could have no power over them.

            Satan commenced his work with Eve, to cause her to disobey. 
She first erred in wandering from her husband, next, in lingering around
the forbidden tree, and next in listening to the voice of the tempter,
and even daring to doubt what God had said - In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shalt surely die.  She thought, Perhaps it does not mean
just as the Lord said.  She ventured to disobey.  She put forth her
hand, took of the fruit, and ate.  It was pleasing to the eye, and
pleasant to the taste.  She was jealous that God had withheld from them
what was really for their good.  She offered the fruit to her husband,
thereby tempting him.  She related to Adam all that the serpent had
said, and expressed her astonishment that he had the power of speech.

            I saw a sadness came over Adam’s countenance.  He appeared
afraid and astonished.  A struggle appeared to be going on in his mind. 
He felt sure that this was the foe which they had been warned against,
and that his wife must die.  They must be separated.  His love for Eve
was strong.  And in utter discouragement he resolved to share her fate. 
He seized the fruit, and quickly ate it.  Then Satan exulted.  He had
rebelled in heaven, and had sympathizers who loved him, and followed him
in his rebellion.  He fell, and caused others to fall with him.  And he
had now tempted the woman to distrust God, to inquire into his wisdom,
and to seek to penetrate his all-wise plans.  Satan knew the woman would
not fall alone. Adam, through his love for Eve, disobeyed the command of
God and fell with her.

            The news of man’s fall spread through heaven.  Every harp
was hushed.  The angels cast their crowns from their heads in sorrow. 
All heaven was in agitation.  A counsel was held to decide what must be
done with the guilty pair.  The angels feared that they would put forth
the hand, and eat of the tree of life, and be immortal sinners.  But God
said that he would drive the transgressors from the garden.  Angels were
commissioned immediately to guard the way of the tree of life.  It had
been Satan’s studied plan that Adam and Eve should disobey God, receive
his frown, and then be led on to partake of the tree of life, that they
might live forever in sin and disobedience, and thus sin be
immortalized.  But holy angels were sent to drive them out of the
garden, while another company of angels were commissioned to guard the
way to the tree of life.  Each of these mighty angels appeared to have
something in their right hand, which looked like a glittering sword.

            Then Satan triumphed.  Others he had made to suffer by his
fall.  He had been shut out of heaven, they out of Paradise.

 

See Genesis chap.3

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3. The Plan of Salvation](gc04)
