[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc03)  [Next](gc05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 3

### The Plan of Salvation

Sorrow filled heaven, as it was realized that man was lost, and the
world that God created was to be filled with mortals doomed to misery,
sickness and death, and there was no way of escape for the offender. 
The whole family of Adam must die.  I saw the lovely Jesus, and beheld
an expression of sympathy and sorrow upon his countenance.  Soon I saw
him approach the exceeding bright light which enshrouded the Father. 
Said my accompanying angel, He is in close converse with His Father. 
The anxiety of the angels seemed to be intense while Jesus was communing
with his Father.  Three times he was shut in by the glorious light about
the Father, and the third time he came from the Father, his person could
be seen.  His countenance was calm, free from all perplexity and
trouble, and shone with benevolence and loveliness, such as words cannot
express.  He then made known to the angelic host that a way of escape
had been made for lost man.  He told them that he had been pleading with
his Father, and had offered to give his life a ransom, and take the
sentence of death upon himself, that through him man might find pardon. 
That through the merits of his blood, and obedience to the law of God,
they could have the favor of God, and be brought into the beautiful
garden, and eat of the fruit of the tree of life.

            At first the angels could not rejoice, for their commander
concealed nothing from them, but opened before them the plan of
salvation.  Jesus told them that he would stand between the wrath of his
Father and guilty man, that he would bear iniquity and scorn, and but
few would receive him as the Son of God.  Nearly all would hate and
reject him.  He would leave all his glory in heaven, appear upon earth
as a man, humble himself as a man, become acquainted by His own
experience with the various temptations with which man would be beset,
that he might know how to succor those who should be tempted; and that
finally, after his mission as a teacher should be accomplished, he would
be delivered into the hands of men, and endure almost every cruelty and
suffering that Satan and his angels could inspire wicked men to inflict;
that he should die the cruelest of deaths, hung up between the heavens
and the earth as a guilty sinner; that he should suffer dreadful hours
of agony, which even angels could not look upon, but would vail their
faces from the sight.  Not merely agony of body would he suffer; but
mental agony, that with which bodily suffering could in no wise be
compared.  The weight of the sins of the whole world would be upon him. 
He told them he would die and rise again the third day, and should
ascend to his Father to intercede for wayward, guilty man.

            The angels prostrated themselves before him.  They offered
their lives.  Jesus said to them that he should by his death save many;
that the life of an angel could not pay the debt.  His life alone could
be accepted of his Father as a ransom for man.

            Jesus also told them that they should have a part to act, to
be with him, and at different times strengthen him.  That he should take
man’s fallen nature, and his strength would not be even equal with
theirs.  And they should be witnesses of his humiliation and great
sufferings.  And as they should witness his sufferings, and the hate of
men towards him, they would be stirred with the deepest emotions, and
through their love for him, would wish to rescue, and deliver him from
his murderers; but that they must not interfere to prevent anything they
should behold; and that they should act a part in his resurrection; that
the plan of salvation was devised, and his Father had accepted the plan.

            With a holy sadness, Jesus comforted and cheered the angels,
and informed them that hereafter those whom he should redeem would be
with him, and ever dwell with him; and that by his death he should
ransom many, and destroy him who had the power of death.  And his Father
would give him the kingdom, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, and he should possess it forever and ever.  Satan and
sinners should be destroyed, never more to disturb heaven, or the
purified, new earth. Jesus bid the heavenly host be reconciled to the
plan that his Father accepted, and rejoice that fallen man could be
exalted again through his death, to obtain favor with God and enjoy
heaven.

            Then joy, inexpressible joy, filled heaven.  And the
heavenly host sung a song of praise and adoration.  They touched their
harps and sung a note higher than they had done before, for the great
mercy and condescension of God in yielding up his dearly Beloved to die
for a race of rebels.  Praise and adoration were poured forth for the
self-denial and sacrifice of Jesus; that he would consent to leave the
bosom of his Father, and choose a life of suffering and anguish, and die
an ignominious death to give life to others.

            Said the angel, Think ye that the Father yielded up his
dearly beloved Son without a struggle?  No, no.  It was even a struggle
with the God of heaven, whether to let guilty man perish, or to give his
beloved Son to die for them.  Angels were so interested for man’s
salvation that there could be found among them those who would yield
their glory, and give their life for perishing man.  But, said my
accompanying angel, that would avail nothing.  The transgression was so
great that an angel’s life would not pay the debt.  Nothing but the
death and intercessions of his Son would pay the debt, and save lost man
from hopeless sorrow and misery.

            But the work of the angels was assigned them, to ascend and
descend with strengthening balm from glory to soothe the Son of God in
his sufferings, and administer unto him.  Also, their work would be to
guard and keep the subjects of grace from the evil angels, and the
darkness constantly thrown around them by Satan.  I saw that it was
impossible for God to alter or change his law, to save lost, perishing
man; therefore he suffered his beloved Son to die for man’s
transgression.

            Satan again rejoiced with his angels that he could, by
causing man’s fall, pull down the Son of God from his exalted position. 
He told his angels that when Jesus should take fallen man’s nature, he
could overpower him, and hinder the accomplishment of the plan of
salvation.

            I was then shown Satan as he was, a happy, exalted angel. 
Then I was shown him as he now is.  He still bears a kingly form.  His
features are still noble, for he is an angel fallen. But the expression
of his countenance is full of anxiety, care, unhappiness, malice, hate,
mischief, deceit, and every evil.  That brow which was once so noble, I
particularly noticed.  His forehead commenced from his eyes to recede
backward.  I saw that he had demeaned himself so long, that every good
quality was debased, and every evil trait was developed.  His eyes were
cunning, sly, and showed great penetration.  His frame was large, but
the flesh hung loosely about his hands and face.  As I beheld him, his
chin was resting upon his left hand.  He appeared to be in deep
thought.  A smile was upon his countenance, which made me tremble, it
was so full of evil, and Satanic slyness.  This smile is the one he
wears just before he makes sure of his victim, and as he fastens the
victim in his snare, this smile grows horrible.

 

See Isaiah chap.53

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 4. The First Advent of Christ](gc05.md)
