[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc04)  [Next](gc06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 4

### The First Advent of Christ

 

Then I was carried down to the time when Jesus was to take upon himself
man’s nature, humble himself as a man, and suffer the temptations of
Satan.

            His birth was without worldly grandeur.  He was born in a
stable, cradled in a manger; yet his birth was honored far above any of
the sons of men.  Angels from heaven informed the shepherds of the
advent of Jesus, while the light and glory from God accompanied their
testimony.  The heavenly host touched their harps and glorified God. 
They triumphantly heralded the advent of the Son of God to a fallen
world to accomplish the work of redemption, and by his death bring
peace, happiness, and everlasting life to man.  God honored the advent
of his Son.  Angels worshiped him.

            Angels of God hovered over the scene of his baptism, and the
Holy Spirit descended in the shape of a dove, and lighted upon him, and
as the people stood greatly amazed, with their eyes fastened upon him,
the Father’s voice was heard from heaven, saying, Thou art my beloved
Son, in thee I am well pleased.

            John was not certain that it was the Saviour who came to be
baptized of him in Jordan.  But God had promised him a sign by which he
should know the Lamb of God.  That sign was given as the heavenly Dove
rested upon Jesus, and the glory of God shone round about him.  John
reached forth his hand, pointing to Jesus, and with a loud voice cried
out, Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world.

            John informed his disciples that Jesus was the promised
Messiah, the Saviour of the world.  As his work was closing, he taught
his disciples to look to Jesus, and follow him as the great teacher. 
John’s life was without pleasure.  It was sorrowful and self-denying. 
He heralded the first advent of Christ, and then was not permitted to
witness the miracles, and enjoy the power manifested by him.  He knew
that when Jesus should establish himself as a teacher, he must die.  His
voice was seldom heard, except in the wilderness.  His life was lonely. 
He did not cling to his father’s family, to enjoy their society, but
left them in order to fulfill his mission.  Multitudes left the busy
cities and villages, and flocked to the wilderness to hear the words of
the wonderful, singular Prophet.  John laid the axe at the root of the
tree.  He reproved sin fearless of consequences, and prepared the way
for the Lamb of God.

            Herod was affected as he listened to the powerful, pointed
testimonies of John.  With deep interest he inquired what he must do to
become his disciple.  John was acquainted with the fact that he was
about to marry his brother’s wife, while her husband was yet living, and
faithfully told Herod that it was not lawful.  Herod was not willing to
make any sacrifice.  He married his brother’s wife, and, through her
influence, seized John and put him in prison.  But Herod intended to
release him again.  While there confined, John heard through his
disciples of the mighty works of Jesus.  He could not listen to his
gracious words.  But the disciples informed him, and comforted him with
what they had heard.  Soon John was beheaded through the influence of
Herod’s wife. I saw that the least disciple that followed Jesus,
witnessed his miracles, and heard the comforting words which fell from
his lips, was greater than John the Baptist.  That is, they were more
exalted and honored, and had more pleasure in their lives.

John came in the spirit and power of Elijah, to proclaim the first
advent of Jesus.  I was pointed down to the last days, and saw that John
was to represent those who should go forth in the spirit and power of
Elijah, to herald the day of wrath, and the second advent of Jesus.

After the baptism of Jesus in Jordan, he was led by the Spirit into the
wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil.  The Holy Spirit had fitted him
for that special scene of fierce temptations.  Forty days he was tempted
of the Devil, and in those days he ate nothing.  Everything around Jesus
was unpleasant, from which human nature would be led to shrink.  He was
with the wild beasts, and the Devil, in a desolate, lonely place. I saw
that the Son of God was pale and emaciated through fasting and
suffering.  But his course was marked out, and he must fulfill the work
he came to do.

Satan took advantage of the sufferings of the Son of God, and prepared
to beset him with manifold temptations, hoping he should obtain the
victory over him, because he had humbled himself as a man.  Satan came
with this temptation, If thou be the Son of God, command that this stone
be made bread.  He tempted Jesus to condescend to him, and give him
proof of his being the Messiah, by exercising his divine power.  Jesus
mildly answered him, It is written, Man shall not live by bread alone,
but by every word of God.

Satan was seeking a dispute with Jesus concerning his being the Son of
God.  He referred to his weak, suffering condition, and boastingly
affirmed that he was stronger than Jesus.  But the word spoken from
heaven, Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I am well pleased, was
sufficient to sustain Jesus through all his sufferings.  I saw that in
all his mission he had nothing to do in convincing Satan of his power,
and of his being the Saviour of the world, Satan had sufficient evidence
of his exalted station and authority.  His unwillingness to yield to
Jesus’ authority, shut him out of heaven.

Satan, to manifest his strength, carried Jesus to Jerusalem, and set him
upon a pinnacle of the temple, and again tempted him, that if he was the
Son of God, to give him evidence of it by casting himself down from the
dizzy height upon which he had placed him.  Satan came with the words of
inspiration.  For it is written, He shall give his angels charge over
thee, and in their hands they shall bear thee up, lest at any time thou
dash thy foot against a stone.  Jesus answering said unto him, It is
said, Thou shalt not tempt the Lord thy God.  Satan wished to cause
Jesus to presume upon the mercy of his Father, and risk his life before
the fulfillment of his mission.  He had hoped that the plan of salvation
would fail; but I saw that the plan was laid too deep to be thus
overthrown, or marred by Satan.

I saw that Christ was the example for all Christians when tempted, or
their rights disputed.  They should bear it patiently.  They should not
feel that they have a right to call upon God to display his power, that
they may obtain a victory over their enemies, unless there is a special
object in view, that God can be directly honored and glorified by it. I
saw that if Jesus had cast himself from the pinnacle, it would not have
glorified his Father; for none would witness the act but Satan, and the
angels of God.  And it would be tempting the Lord to display his power
to his bitterest foe.  It would have been condescending to the one whom
Jesus came to conquer.

“And the Devil, taking him up into an high mountain, showed unto him all
the kingdoms of the world in a moment of time.  And the Devil said unto
him, All this power will I give thee, and the glory of them: for that is
delivered unto me; and to whomsoever I will I give it.  If thou,
therefore, wilt worship me, all shall be thine.  And Jesus answered and
said unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan; for it is written, Thou shalt
worship the Lord thy God, and him only shalt thou serve.”

Here Satan showed Jesus the kingdoms of the world.  They were presented
in the most attractive light.  He offered them to Jesus if he would
there worship him.  He told Jesus that he would relinquish his claims of
the possessions of earth.  Satan knew that his power must be limited,
and finally taken away, if the plan of salvation should be carried out. 
He knew that if Jesus should die to redeem man, his power would end
after a season, and he would be destroyed.  Therefore it was his studied
plan to prevent, if possible, the completion of the great work which had
been commenced by the Son of God.  If the plan of man’s redemption
should fail, he would retain the kingdom which he then claimed.  And if
he should succeed, he flattered himself that he would reign in
opposition to the God of heaven.

Satan exulted when Jesus left heaven, and left his power and glory
there.  He thought that the Son of God was placed in his power.  The
temptation took so easily with the holy pair in Eden, that he hoped he
could with his satanic cunning and power overthrow even the Son of God,
and thereby save his life and kingdom.  If he could tempt Jesus to
depart from the will of his Father, then his object would be gained. 
Jesus bid Satan get behind him.  He was to bow only to his Father.  The
time was to come when Jesus should redeem the possessions of Satan by
his own life, and, after a season, all in heaven and earth should submit
to him.  Satan claimed the kingdoms of earth as his, and he insinuated
to Jesus that all his suffering might be saved.  He need not die to
obtain the kingdoms of this world.  But he might have the entire
possessions of earth, and the glory of reigning over them, if he would
worship him.  Jesus was steadfast.  He chose his life of suffering, his
dreadful death, and, in the way appointed by his Father, to become a
lawful heir to the kingdoms of earth, and have them given into his hands
as an everlasting possession.  Satan also will be given into his hands
to be destroyed by death, never more to annoy Jesus, or the saints in
glory. 

 

See Deuteronomy 6:16,8:3; 2Kings 17:35-36; Psalms 91:11-12; Luke
chap.2-4

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chaper 5. The Ministry of Christ](gc06)
