[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc05)  [Next](gc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 5

### The Ministry of Christ

After Satan had ended his temptations, he departed from Jesus for a
season, and angels prepared him food in the wilderness, and strengthened
him, and the blessing of his Father rested upon him.  Satan had failed
in his fiercest temptations, yet he looked forward to the period of
Jesus' ministry, when he should at different times try his cunning
against him.  He still hoped to prevail against him by stirring up those
who would not receive Jesus, to hate and seek to destroy him.  Satan
held a special counsel with his angels.  They were disappointed and
enraged that they had prevailed nothing against the Son of God.  They
decided that they must be more cunning, and use their power to the
utmost to inspire unbelief in the minds of his own nation as to his
being the Saviour of the world, and in this way discourage Jesus in his
mission.  No matter how exact the Jews might be in their ceremonies and
sacrifices, if they could keep their eyes blinded as to the prophecies,
and make them believe that it was a mighty, worldly king who was to
fulfill these prophecies, they would keep their minds on the stretch for
a Messiah to come.

I was then shown that Satan and his angels were very busy during
Christ's ministry, inspiring men with unbelief, hate and scorn.  Often
when Jesus uttered some cutting truth reproving their sins, they would
become enraged.  Satan and his angels urged them on to take the life of
the Son of God.  Once they took up stones to cast at him, but angels
guarded him, and bore him away from the angry multitude to a place of
safety.  Again as the plain truth dropped from his holy lips, the
multitude laid hold of him, and led him to the brow of a hill, intending
to thrust him down.  A contention arose among themselves as to what they
should do with him, when the angels again hid him from the sight of the
multitude, and he, passing through the midst of them, went his way.

Satan still hoped the great plan of salvation would fail.  He exerted
all his power to make the hearts of all people hard, and their feelings
bitter against Jesus.  He hoped that the number who would receive him as
the Son of God would be so few, that Jesus would consider his sufferings
and sacrifice too great to make for so small a company.  But I saw that
if there had been but two who would have accepted Jesus as the Son of
God, to believe in him to the saving of their souls, he would have
carried out the plan.

Jesus commenced his work by breaking the power which Satan held over the
suffering.  He healed those who had suffered by his evil power.  He
restored the sick to health, healed the lame, and caused them to leap in
the gladness of their hearts, and glorify God.  He gave sight to the
blind, restored to health by his power those who had been infirm and
bound by Satan's cruel power many years.  The weak, the trembling, and
desponding, he comforted with gracious words.  He raised the dead to
life, and they glorified God for the mighty display of his power.  He
wrought mightily for all who believed on him.  And the feeble suffering
ones whom Satan held in triumph, Jesus wrenched from his grasp, and
brought to them by his power, soundness of body, and great joy and
happiness.

The life of Christ was full of benevolence, sympathy and love.  He was
ever attentive to listen to, and relieve the woes of those who came to
him.  Multitudes carried the evidences in their own persons of his
divine power.  Yet many of them soon after the work was accomplished
were ashamed of the humble, yet mighty teacher.  Because the rulers did
not believe on him, they were not willing to suffer with Jesus.  He was
a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.  But few could endure to be
governed by his sober, self-denying life.  They wished to enjoy the
honor which the world bestows.  Many followed the Son of God, and
listened to his instructions, feasting upon the words which fell so
graciously from his lips.  His words were full of meaning, yet so plain
that the weakest could understand.

Satan and his angels were busy.  They blinded the eyes and darkened the
understanding of the Jews.  Satan stirred up the chief of the people and
the rulers to take his life.  They sent officers to bring Jesus unto
them, and as they came near where he was, they were greatly amazed. 
They saw Jesus stirred to sympathy and compassion, as he witnessed human
woe.  They saw him in love and tenderness speak encouragingly to the
weak and afflicted.  They also heard him, in a voice of authority,
rebuke the power of Satan, and bid the captives held by him, go free. 
They listened to the words of wisdom that fell from his lips, and they
were captivated.  They could not lay hands on him.  They returned to the
priests and elders without Jesus.  They inquired of the officers, Why
have ye not brought him?  They related what they had witnessed of his
miracles, and the holy words of wisdom, love and knowledge which they
had heard, and ended with saying, Never man spake like this man.  The
chief priests accused them of being also deceived.  Some were ashamed
that they had not brought him.  The chief priests inquired in a
ridiculing manner if any of the rulers had believed on him. I saw that
many of the magistrates and elders did believe on Jesus.  But Satan kept
them from acknowledging it.  They feared the reproach of the people more
than they feared God.

Thus far the cunning and hatred of Satan had not broken up the plan of
salvation.  The time for the accomplishment of the object for which
Jesus came into the world was drawing on.  Satan and his angels
consulted together, and decided to inspire Christ’s own nation to cry
eagerly for his blood, and invent cruelty and scorn to be heaped upon
him.  He hoped that Jesus would resent such treatment, and not maintain
his humility and meekness.

While Satan was laying his plans, Jesus was carefully opening to his
disciples the sufferings he must pass through.  That he should be
crucified, and that he would rise again the third day.  But their
understanding seemed dull.  They could not comprehend what he told them.

 

See Luke 4:29; John 7:45-48; 8:59

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6. The Transfiguration](gc07)
