[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc06)  [Next](gc08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 6

### The Transfiguration

 

I saw that the faith of the disciples was greatly strengthened at the
transfiguration.  God chose to give the followers of Jesus strong proof
that he was the promised Messiah, that in their bitter sorrow and
disappointment they should not entirely cast away their confidence.  At
the transfiguration the Lord sent Moses and Elias to talk with Jesus
concerning his suffering and death.  Instead of choosing angels to
converse with his Son, God chose those who had an experience in the
trials of earth.  A few of his followers were permitted to be with him
and behold his face lighted up with divine glory, and witness his
raiment white and glistening, and hear the voice of God, in fearful
majesty, saying, This is my beloved Son, hear him.

Elijah had walked with God.  His work had not been pleasant.  God,
through him, had reproved sin.  He was a prophet of God, and had to flee
from place to place to save his life.  He was hunted like the wild
beasts that they might destroy him.  God translated Elijah.  Angels bore
him in glory and triumph to heaven.

Moses had been a man greatly honored of God.  He was greater than any
who had lived before him.  He was privileged to talk with God face to
face as a man speaketh with a friend.  He was permitted to see the
bright light and excellent glory that enshrouded the Father.  Through
Moses the Lord delivered the children of Israel from Egyptian bondage. 
Moses was a mediator for the children of Israel.  He often stood between
them and the wrath of God.  When the wrath of God was greatly kindled
against Israel for their unbelief, their murmurings, and their grievous
sins, Moses’ love for them was tested.  God promised him that if he
would let Israel go, let them be destroyed, he would make of him a
mighty nation.  Moses showed his love for Israel by his earnest
pleading.  In his distress he prayed God to turn from his fierce anger,
and forgive Israel, or blot his name out of his book.

When Israel murmured against God and against Moses, because they could
get no water, they accused him of leading them out to kill them and
their children.  God heard their murmurings, and bade Moses smite the
rock, that the children of Israel might have water.  Moses smote the
rock in wrath, and took the glory to himself.  The continual waywardness
and murmuring of the children of Israel had caused him the keenest
sorrow, and for a little he forgot how much God had borne with them, and
that their murmuring was not against Moses, but against God.  He thought
only of himself, how deeply he was wronged, and how little gratitude
they manifested in return, for his deep love for them.

As Moses smote the rock, he failed to honor God, and magnify him before
the children of Israel, that they might glorify God.  And the Lord was
displeased with Moses, and said that he should not enter the promised
land.  It was God’s plan to often prove Israel by bringing them into
strait places, and then in their great necessity exhibit his power, that
he might live in their memory, and they glorify him.

When Moses came down from the mount with the two tables of stone, and
saw Israel worshiping the golden calf, his anger was greatly kindled,
and he threw down the tables of stone, and broke them. I saw that Moses
did not sin in this.  He was wroth for God, jealous for his glory.  But
when he yielded to the natural feelings of the heart, and took glory to
himself, which was due to God, he sinned, and for that sin, God would
not suffer him to enter the promised land.

Satan had been trying to find something wherewith to accuse Moses before
the angels.  Satan triumphed in that he had caused him to displease God,
and he exulted, and told the angels that when the Saviour of the world
should come to redeem man, he could overcome him.  For this
transgression Moses came under the power of Satan - the dominion of
death.  Had he remained steadfast, and not sinned in taking glory to
himself, the Lord would have brought him to the promised land, and then
translated him to heaven without seeing death.

I saw that Moses passed through death, but Michael came down and gave
him life before he saw corruption.  Satan claimed the body as his, but
Michael resurrected Moses, and took him to heaven.  The Devil tried to
hold his body, and railed out bitterly against God, denounced him as
unjust, in taking from him his prey.  But Michael did not rebuke the
Devil, although it was through his temptation and power that God’s
servant had fallen.  Christ meekly referred him to his Father, saying,
The Lord rebuke thee.

Jesus told his disciples that there were some standing with him who
should not taste of death till they should see the kingdom of God come
with power.  At the transfiguration this promise was fulfilled.  The
fashion of Jesus’ countenance was changed, and shone like the sun.  His
raiment was white and glistening.  Moses was present, and represented
those who will be raised from the dead at the second appearing of
Jesus.  And Elias, who was translated without seeing death, represented
those who will be changed to immortality at Christ’s second coming, and
without seeing death will be translated to heaven. The disciples beheld
with fear and astonishment the excellent majesty of Jesus, and the cloud
that overshadowed them, and heard the voice of God in terrible majesty,
saying, This is my beloved Son, hear him.

 

See Exodus chap. 32; Numbers 20:7-12; Deuteronomy 34:5; 2 Kings 2:11;
Mark chap. 9; Jude 9

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 7. The Betrayal of Christ](gc08.md)
