[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc09)  [Next](gc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 9

### The Crucifixion of Christ

 

The Son of God was delivered to the people to be crucified.  They led
the dear Saviour away.  He was weak and feeble through pain and
suffering, caused by the scourging and blows which he had received, yet
they laid on him the heavy cross upon which they were soon to nail him. 
But Jesus fainted beneath the burden.  Three times they laid on him the
heavy cross, and three times he fainted.  They then seized one of his
followers, a man who had not openly professed faith in Christ, yet
believed on him.  They laid on him the cross, and he bore it to the
fatal spot.  Companies of angels were marshaled in the air above the
place.  A number of his disciples followed him to Calvary in sorrow, and
with bitter weeping.  They called to mind Jesus’ riding triumphantly
into Jerusalem, and they following him, crying, Hosanna in the highest!
and strewing their garments in the way, and the beautiful palm
branches.  They thought that he was then to take the kingdom and reign a
temporal prince over Israel.  How changed the scene!  How blighted their
prospects!  They followed Jesus; not with rejoicing; not with bounding
hearts and cheerful hopes; but with hearts stricken with fear and
despair they slowly, sadly followed him who had been disgraced and
humbled, and who was about to die.

The mother of Jesus was there.  Her heart was pierced with anguish, such
as none but a fond mother can feel.  Her stricken heart still hoped,
with the disciples, that her Son would work some mighty miracle, and
deliver himself from his murderers.  She could not endure the thought
that he would suffer himself to be crucified.  But the preparations were
made, and they laid Jesus upon the cross.  The hammer and the nails were
brought.  The heart of his disciples fainted within them.  The mother of
Jesus was agonized, almost beyond endurance, and as they stretched Jesus
upon the cross, and were about to fasten his hands with the cruel nails
to the wooden arms, the disciples bore the mother of Jesus from the
scene, that she might not hear the crashing of the nails, as they were
driven through the bone and muscle of his tender hands and feet.  Jesus
murmured not; but groaned in agony.  His face was pale, and large drops
of sweat stood upon his brow.  Satan exulted in the sufferings which the
Son of God was passing through, yet feared that his kingdom was lost,
and that he must die.

They raised the cross after they had nailed Jesus to it, and with great
force thrust it into the place prepared for it in the ground, tearing
the flesh, and causing the most intense suffering.  They made his death
as shameful as possible.  With him they crucified two thieves, one on
either side of Jesus.  The thieves were taken by force, and after much
resistance on their part, their arms were thrust back and nailed to
their crosses.  But Jesus meekly submitted.  He needed no one to force
his arms back upon the cross.  While the thieves were cursing their
executioners, Jesus in agony prayed for his enemies, Father, forgive
them, for they know not what they do.  It was not merely agony of body
which Jesus endured, but the sins of the whole world were upon him.

As Jesus hung upon the cross, some who passed by reviled him, wagging
their heads, as though bowing to a king, and said to him, Thou that
destroyest the temple and buildest it in three days, save thyself.  If
thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross.  The Devil used the
same words to Christ in the wilderness, If thou be the Son of God.  The
chief priests and elders and scribes mockingly said, He saved others,
himself he cannot save.  If he be the King of Israel, let him now come
down from the cross, and we will believe him.  The angels who hovered
over the scene of Christ’s crucifixion were moved to indignation as the
rulers derided him, and said, If he be the Son of God let him deliver
himself.  They wished there to come to the rescue of Jesus, and deliver
him; but they were not suffered to do so.  The object of his mission was
almost accomplished.  As Jesus hung upon the cross those dreadful hours
of agony, he did not forget his mother.  She could not remain away from
the suffering scene.  Jesus’ last lesson was one of compassion and
humanity.  He looked upon his mother, whose heart was well nigh bursting
with grief, and then upon his beloved disciple John.  He said to his
mother, Woman, behold thy Son.  Then said he to John, Behold thy
mother.  And from that hour John took her to his own house.

Jesus thirsted in his agony; but they heaped upon him additional insult,
by giving him vinegar and gall to drink.  The angels had viewed the
horrid scene of the crucifixion of their loved commander, until they
could behold no longer; and veiled their faces from the sight.  The sun
refused to look upon the dreadful scene.  Jesus cried with a loud voice,
which struck terror to the hearts of his murderers*, It is finished*. 
Then the veil of the temple was rent from the top to the bottom, the
earth shook, and the rocks rent.  Great darkness was upon the face of
the earth.  The last hope of the disciples seemed swept away as Jesus
died.  Many of his followers witnessed the scene of his sufferings and
death, and their cup of sorrow was full.

Satan did not then exult as he had done.  He had hoped that he could
break up the plan of salvation; but it was laid too deep.  And now by
Jesus’ death, he knew that he must finally die, and his kingdom be taken
away and given to Jesus.  He held a council with his angels.  He had
prevailed nothing against the Son of God, and now they must increase
their efforts, and with their cunning and power turn to Jesus’
followers.  They must prevent all they could from receiving salvation
purchased for them by Jesus.  By so doing Satan could still work against
the government of God.  Also it would be for his own interest to keep
from Jesus all he could.  For the sins of those who are redeemed by the
blood of Christ, and overcome, at last will be rolled back upon the
originator of sin, the Devil, and he will have to bear their sins, while
those who do not accept salvation through Jesus will bear their own
sins.

Jesus’ life was without worldly grandeur, or extravagant show.  His
humble, self-denying life was a great contrast to the lives of the
priests and elders, who loved ease and worldly honor, and the strict and
holy life of Jesus was a continual reproof to them, on account of their
sins.  They despised him for his humbleness, and purity.  But those who
despised him here, will one day see him in the grandeur of heaven, and
the unsurpassed glory of his Father.  He was surrounded with enemies in
the judgment hall, who were thirsting for his blood; but those hardened
ones who cried out, His blood be on us and on our children, will behold
him an honored King.  All the heavenly host will escort him on his way
with songs of victory, majesty and might, to him that was slain, yet
lives again a mighty conqueror.  Poor, weak, miserable man spit in the
face of the King of glory, while a shout of brutal triumph arose from
the mob at the degrading insult.  They marred that face with blows and
cruelty which filled all heaven with admiration.  They will behold that
face again, bright as the noonday sun, and will seek to flee from before
it.  Instead of that shout of brutal triumph, in terror they will wail
because of him.  Jesus will present his hands with the marks of his
crucifixion.  The marks of this cruelty he will ever bear.  Every print
of the nails will tell the story of man’s wonderful redemption, and the
dear price that purchased it.  The very men who thrust the spear into
the side of the Lord of life, will behold the print of the spear, and
will lament with deep anguish the part they acted in marring his body. 
His murderers were greatly annoyed by the superscription, **The King of
the Jews**, placed upon the cross above his head.  But then they will be
obliged to see him in all his glory and kingly power.  They will behold
on his vesture and on his thigh, written in living characters, **King of
Kings, and Lord of Lords**.  They cried to him mockingly, as he hung
upon the cross, Let Christ the King of Israel descend from the cross,
that we may see and believe.  They will behold him then with kingly
power and authority.  They will demand no evidence then of his being the
King of Israel; but overwhelmed with a sense of his majesty and
exceeding glory, they will be compelled to acknowledge, Blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord.

The shaking of the earth, the rending of the rocks, the darkness spread
over the earth, and the loud, strong cry of Jesus, *It is finished*, as
he yielded up his life, troubled his enemies, and made his murderers
tremble.  The disciples wondered at these singular manifestations; but
their hopes were all crushed.  They were afraid the Jews would seek to
destroy them also.  Such hate manifested against the Son of God they
thought would not end there.  Lonely hours the disciples spent in
sorrow, weeping over their disappointment.  They expected that he would
reign a temporal prince; but their hopes died with Jesus.  They doubted
in their sorrow and disappointment whether Jesus had not deceived them. 
His mother was humbled, and even her faith wavered in his being the
Messiah.

But notwithstanding the disciples had been disappointed in their hopes
concerning Jesus, yet they loved him, and respected and honored his
body, but knew not how to obtain it.  Joseph of Arimathea, an honorable
counsellor, had influence, and was one of Jesus’ true disciples.  He
went privately, yet boldly, to Pilate and begged his body.  He dared not
go openly; for the hatred of the Jews was so great that the disciples
feared that an effort would be made by them to prevent the body of Jesus
having an honored resting place.  But Pilate granted his request, and as
they took the body of Jesus down from the cross, their sorrows were
renewed, and they mourned over their blighted hopes in deep anguish. 
They wrapped Jesus in fine linen, and Joseph laid him in his own new
sepulchre.  The women who had been his humble followers while he lived
still kept near him after his death, and would not leave him until they
saw his sacred body laid in the sepulchre, and a stone of great weight
rolled at the door, lest his enemies should seek to obtain his body. 
But they need not have feared; for I beheld the angelic host watching
with untold interest the resting place of Jesus.  They guarded the
sepulchre, earnestly waiting the command to act their part in liberating
the King of glory from his prison house.

Christ’s murderers were afraid that he might yet come to life and escape
them.  They begged of Pilate a watch to guard the sepulchre until the
third day.  Pilate granted them armed soldiers to guard the sepulchre,
sealing the stone at the door, lest his disciples should steal him away,
and say that he had risen from the dead.

 

See Matthew 21:1-11, 27:32-66; Mark 15:21-47; Luke 23:26-56; John
19:17-42; Revelation 19:11-16

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 10. The Resurrection of Christ](gc11)
