[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc10)  [Next](gc12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 10

### The Resurrection of Christ

 

The disciples rested on the Sabbath, sorrowing for the death of their
Lord, while Jesus, the King of glory, rested in the sepulchre.  The
night had worn slowly away, and while it was yet dark, the angels
hovering over the sepulchre knew that the time of the release of God’s
dear Son, their loved commander, had nearly come.  And as they were
waiting with the deepest emotion the hour of his triumph, a strong and
mighty angel came flying swiftly from heaven.  His face was like the
lightning, and his garments white as snow.  His light dispersed the
darkness from his track, and caused the evil angels who had triumphantly
claimed the body of Jesus, to flee in terror from his brightness and
glory.  One of the angelic host who had witnessed the scene of Jesus’
humiliation, and was watching his sacred resting place, joined the angel
from heaven, and together they came down to the sepulchre.  The earth
shook and trembled as they approached, and there was a mighty
earthquake.  The strong and mighty angel laid hold of the stone and
quickly rolled it away from the door of the sepulchre, and sat upon it.

Terrible fear seized the guard.  Where was now their power to keep the
body of Jesus?  They did not think of their duty, or of the disciples
stealing him away.  They were amazed and affrighted, as the exceeding
bright light of the angels shone all around brighter than the sun.  The
Roman guard saw the angels, and fell as dead men to the ground.  One
angel rolled back the stone in triumph, and with a clear and mighty
voice, cried out, Thou Son of God!  Thy Father calls thee!  Come forth! 
Death could hold dominion over him no longer.  Jesus arose from the
dead.  The other angel entered the sepulchre, and as Jesus arose in
triumph, he unbound the napkin which was about his head, and Jesus
walked forth a victorious conqueror.  In solemn awe the angelic host
gazed upon the scene.  And as Jesus walked forth from the sepulchre in
majesty, those shining angels prostrated themselves to the ground and
worshiped him; then hailed him with songs of victory and triumph, that
death could hold its divine captive no longer.  Satan did not now
triumph.  His angels had fled before the bright, penetrating light of
the heavenly angels.  They bitterly complained to their king, that their
prey had been taken violently from them, and that he whom they so much
hated had risen from the dead.

Satan and his angels had enjoyed a little moment of triumph that their
power over fallen man had caused the Lord of life, to be laid in the
grave; but short was their hellish triumph.  For as Jesus walked forth
from his prison house a majestic conqueror, Satan knew that after a
season he must die, and his kingdom pass unto him whose right it was. 
He lamented and raged that notwithstanding all his efforts and power,
Jesus had not been overcome, but had laid open a way of salvation for
man, and whosoever would, might walk in it and be saved.

For a little, Satan seemed sad and showed distress.  He held a council
with his angels to consider what they should engage in next to work
against the government of God.  Said Satan, You must hasten to the chief
priests and elders.  We succeeded in deceiving them and blinding their
eyes, and hardening their hearts against Jesus.  We made them believe he
was an impostor.  That Roman guard will carry the hateful news that
Christ is risen.  We led the priests and elders on to hate Jesus, and to
murder him.  Now hold it before them in a bright light, that as they
were his murderers, if it becomes known that Jesus is risen, they will
be stoned to death by the people, in that they killed an innocent man.

I saw the Roman guard, as the angelic host passed back to heaven, and
the light and glory passed away, raise themselves to see if it were safe
for them to look around.  They were filled with amazement as they saw
that the great stone was rolled from the door of the sepulchre, and
Jesus was risen.  They hastened to the chief priests and elders with the
wonderful story of what they had seen; and as those murderers heard the
marvelous report, paleness sat upon every face.  Horror seized them at
what they had done.  They then realized that if the report was correct,
they were lost.  For a little they were stupefied, and looked one to the
other in silence, not knowing what to do or say.  They were placed where
they could not believe unless it be to their own condemnation.  They
went aside by themselves to consult what should be done.  They decided
that if it should be spread abroad that Jesus had risen, and the report
of such amazing glory, which caused the guard to fall like dead men,
should come to the people, they would surely be enraged, and would slay
them.  They decided to hire the soldiers to keep the matter secret. 
They offered them much money, saying, Say ye, His disciples came by
night and stole him away while we slept.  And when the guard inquired
what should be done with them for sleeping at their post, the priests
and elders said that they would persuade the governor and save them. 
For the sake of money the Roman guard sold their honor, and agreed to
follow the counsel of the priests and elders.

When Jesus as he hung upon the cross, cried out*, It is* *finished,* the
rocks rent, the earth shook, and some of the graves were shaken open;
for when Jesus arose from the dead, and conquered death and the grave;
when he walked forth from his prison house a triumphant conqueror; while
the earth was reeling and shaking, and the excellent glory of heaven
clustered around the sacred spot, obedient to his call, many of the
righteous dead came forth as witnesses that he had risen.  Those
favored, resurrected saints came forth glorified.  They were a few
chosen and holy ones who had lived in every age from creation, even down
to the days of Christ.  And while the chief priests and Pharisees were
seeking to cover up the resurrection of Christ, God chose to bring up a
company from their graves to testify that Jesus had risen, and to
declare his glory.

Those who were resurrected were of different stature and form. I was
informed that the inhabitants of earth had been degenerating, losing
their strength and comeliness.  Satan has the power of disease and
death, and in every age the curse has been more visible, and the power
of Satan more plainly seen.  Some of those raised were more noble in
appearance and form than others. I was informed that those who lived in
the days of Noah and Abraham were more like the angels in form, in
comeliness and strength.  But every generation has been growing weaker,
and more subject to disease, and their lives of shorter duration.  Satan
has been learning how to annoy men, and enfeeble the race.

Those holy ones who came forth after the resurrection of Jesus appeared
unto many, telling them that the sacrifice for man was completed, that
Jesus, whom the Jews crucified, had risen from the dead, and added, We
be risen with him.  They bore testimony that it was by his mighty power
that they had been called forth from their graves.  Notwithstanding the
lying reports circulated, the matter could not be concealed by Satan,
his angels, or the chief priests; for this holy company, brought forth
from their graves, spread the wonderful, joyful news; also Jesus showed
himself unto his sorrowing, heart-broken disciples, dispelling their
fears, and causing them gladness and joy.

As the news spread from city to city, and from town to town, the Jews in
their turn were afraid for their lives, and concealed the hate they
cherished towards the disciples.  Their only hope was to spread their
lying report.  And those who wished this lie to be true, believed it. 
Pilate trembled.  He believed the strong testimony given, that Jesus was
risen from the dead, and that many others he had brought up with him,
and his peace left him forever.  For the sake of worldly honor; for fear
of losing his authority, and his life, he delivered Jesus to die.  He
was now fully convinced that it was not merely a common, innocent man of
whose blood he was guilty but the blood of the Son of God.  Miserable
was the life of Pilate; miserable to its close.  Despair and anguish
crushed every hopeful, joyful feeling.  He refused to be comforted, and
died a most miserable death.

Herod’s heart grew still harder, and when he heard that Jesus had
arisen, he was not much troubled.  He took the life of James; and when
he saw that this pleased the Jews, he took Peter also, intending to put
him to death.  But God had a work for Peter to do, and sent his angel
and delivered him.  Herod was visited with judgment.  God smote him in
the sight of a great multitude as he was exalting himself before them,
and he died a horrible death.

Early in the morning before it was yet light, the holy women came to the
sepulchre, bringing sweet spices to anoint the body of Jesus, when lo!
they found the heavy stone rolled away from the door of the sepulchre,
and the body of Jesus was not there.  Their hearts sunk within them, and
they feared that their enemies had taken away the body.  And, behold,
two angels in white apparel stood by them; their faces were bright and
shining.  They understood the errand of the holy women, and immediately
told them that they were seeking Jesus, but he was not there, he had
risen, and they could behold the place where he lay.  They bid them go
tell his disciples that he would go before them into Galilee.  But the
women were frightened and astonished.  They hastily ran to the disciples
who were mourning, and could not be comforted because their Lord had
been crucified; they hurriedly told them the things which they had seen
and heard.  The disciples could not believe that he had risen, but, with
the women who had brought the report, ran hastily to the sepulchre, and
found that truly Jesus was not there.  There were his linen clothes, but
they could not believe the good news that Jesus had risen from the
dead.  They returned home marveling at the things they had seen, also at
the report brought them by the women.  But Mary chose to linger around
the sepulchre, thinking of what she had seen, and distressed with the
thought that she might have been deceived.  She felt that new trials
awaited her.  Her grief was renewed, and she broke forth in bitter
weeping.  She stooped down to look again into the sepulchre, and beheld
two angels clothed in white.  Their countenances were bright and
shining.  One was sitting at the head, the other at the feet, where
Jesus had lain.  They spoke to her tenderly, and asked her why she
wept.  She replied, They have taken away my Lord, and I know not where
they have laid him.

And as she turned from the sepulchre, she saw Jesus standing by her; but
knew him not.  Jesus spoke tenderly to Mary, and inquired the cause of
her sorrow, and asked her whom she was seeking.  She supposed he was the
gardener, and begged of him, if he had borne away her Lord, to tell her
where he had laid him, and she would take him away.  Jesus spoke to her
with his own heavenly voice, and said, Mary.  She was acquainted with
the tones of that dear voice, and quickly answered, Master! and with joy
and gladness was about to embrace him; but Jesus stood back, and said,
Touch me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my
brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father, and your Father,
and to my God, and your God.  Joyfully she hastened to the disciples
with the good news.  Jesus quickly ascended up to his Father to bear
from his lips that he accepted the sacrifice, and that he had done all
things well, and to receive all power in heaven, and upon earth, from
his Father.

Angels like a cloud surrounded the Son of God, and bid the everlasting
gates to be lifted up, that the King of glory might come in.  I saw that
while Jesus was with that bright, heavenly host, and in the presence of
his Father, and the glory of God surrounded him, he did not forget his
poor disciples upon earth; but received power from his Father, that he
might return unto them, and while with them impart power unto them.  The
same day he returned, and showed himself to his disciples.  He suffered
them then to touch him, for he had ascended to his Father, and had
received power.

But at this time Thomas was not present.  He would not humbly receive
the report of the disciples; but firmly, and self-confidently affirmed
that he would not believe, unless he should put his fingers in the
prints of the nails, and his hand in his side where the cruel spear was
thrust.  In this he showed a lack of confidence in his brethren.  And if
all should require the same evidence, but few would receive Jesus, and
believe in his resurrection.  But it was the will of God that the report
of the disciples should go from one to the other, and many receive it
from the lips of those who had seen and heard.  God was not well pleased
with such unbelief.  And when Jesus met with his disciples again, Thomas
was with them.  The moment he beheld Jesus he believed.  But he had
declared that he would not be satisfied without the evidence of feeling
added to sight, and Jesus gave him the evidence he had desired.  Thomas
cried out, my Lord and my God.  But Jesus reproved Thomas for his
unbelief.  He said to him, Thomas, because thou hast seen me, thou hast
believed; blessed are they that have not seen and yet have believed.

So, I saw, that those who had no experience in the first and second
angels’ messages <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) must receive them
from those who had an experience, and followed down through the
messages.  As Jesus was crucified, so I saw that these messages have
been crucified.  And as the disciples declared that there was salvation
in no other name under heaven, given among men; so, also, should the
servants of God faithfully and fearlessly declare that those who embrace
but a part of the truths connected with the third message <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) must gladly embrace the first, second and
third messages as God has given them, or have no part nor lot in the
matter.

I was shown that while the holy women were carrying the report that
Jesus had risen, the Roman guard were circulating the lie that had been
put in their mouths by the chief priests and elders, that the disciples
came by night, while they slept, and stole the body of Jesus.  Satan had
put this lie into the hearts and mouths of the chief priests, and the
people stood ready to receive their word.  But God had made this matter
sure, and placed this important event, upon which hangs salvation,
beyond all doubt, and where it was impossible for priests and elders to
cover it up.  Witnesses were raised from the dead to testify to Christ’s
resurrection.

Jesus remained with his disciples forty days, causing them joy and
gladness of heart, and opening to them more fully the realities of the
kingdom of God.  He commissioned them to bear testimony to the things
which they had seen and heard, concerning his sufferings, death and
resurrection; that he had made a sacrifice for sin, that all who would,
might come unto him and find life.  He with faithful tenderness told
them that they would be persecuted and distressed; but they would find
relief in referring to their experience, and remembering the words he
had spoken to them.  He told them that he had overcome the temptations
of the Devil, and maintained the victory through trials and suffering,
that Satan could have no more power over him, but would more directly
bring his temptations and power to bear upon them, and upon all who
should believe in his name.  He told them that they could overcome, as
he had overcome.  Jesus endowed his disciples with power to do miracles,
and he told them that although wicked men should have power over their
bodies, he would at certain times send his angels and deliver them; that
their lives could not be taken from them until their mission should be
accomplished.  And when their testimony should be finished, their lives
might be required to seal the testimonies which they had borne.  His
anxious followers gladly listened to his teachings.  They eagerly
feasted upon every word which fell from his holy lips.  Then they
certainly knew that he was the Saviour of the world.  Every word sunk
with deep weight into their hearts, and they sorrowed that they must be
parted from their blessed, heavenly teacher; that after a little they
should no more hear comforting, gracious words from his lips.  But again
their hearts were warmed with love and exceeding joy, as Jesus told them
that he would go and prepare mansions for them, and come again and
receive them, that they might ever be with him.  He told them that he
would send them the Comforter, the Holy Spirit, to guide, bless and lead
them into all truth; and he lifted up his hands and blessed them.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](gc11.htm#fr_0) See Revelation 14:6-8. 
Explained in chapters 23 and 24 of this book.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](gc11.htm#fr_1) See Revelation 14:9-12. 
Explained in chapter 28 of this book.

See Matthew 27:52-53, chap. 28; Mark 16:1-18; Luke 24:1-50; John chap.
20; Acts chap. 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 11. The Ascension of Christ](gc12)
