[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc11)  [Next](gc13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 11

### The Ascension of Christ

 

All heaven was waiting the hour of triumph when Jesus should ascend to
his Father.  Angels came to receive the King of glory, and to escort him
triumphantly to heaven.  After Jesus had blessed his disciples, he was
parted from them, and taken up.  And as he led the way upward, the
multitude of captives who were raised at his resurrection followed.  A
multitude of the heavenly host was in attendance; while in heaven an
innumerable number of angels awaited his coming.  As they ascended up to
the holy city, the angels who escorted Jesus cried out, Lift up your
heads, O ye gates, and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors, and the King
of glory shall come in.  With rapture the angels in the city, who
awaited his coming, cried out, who is this King of glory?  The escorting
angels with triumph answered, The Lord strong and mighty!  The Lord
mighty in battle!  Lift up your heads, O ye gates! even lift them up, ye
everlasting doors, and the King of glory shall come in.  Again the
heavenly host cried out, Who is this King of glory?  The escorting
angels in melodious strains answered, The Lord of hosts!  He is the King
of Glory!  And the heavenly train passed into the city.  Then all the
heavenly host surrounded the Son of God, their majestic commander, and
with the deepest adoration bowed, casting their glittering crowns at his
feet.  And then they touched their golden harps, and in sweet, melodious
strains, filled all heaven with their rich music and songs to the Lamb
who was slain, yet lives again in majesty and glory.

Next I was shown the disciples as they sorrowfully gazed towards heaven
to catch the last glimpse of their ascending Lord.  Two angels clothed
in white apparel stood by them, and said unto them, Ye men of Galilee,
why stand ye gazing up into heaven?  This same Jesus, which is taken up
from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him
go into heaven.  The disciples, with the mother of Jesus, witnessed the
ascension of the Son of God, and they spent that night in talking over
his wonderful acts, and the strange and glorious things which had
transpired within a short time.

Satan counselled with his angels, and with bitter hatred against God’s
government, told them that while he retained his power and authority
upon earth, their efforts must be tenfold stronger against the followers
of Jesus.  They had prevailed nothing against Jesus; but his followers
they must overthrow if possible, and carry on his work through every
generation, to ensnare those who should believe in Jesus, his
resurrection and ascension.  Satan related to his angels that Jesus had
given his disciples power to cast them out, rebuke them, and heal those
whom he should afflict.  Then Satan’s angels went forth like roaring
lions, seeking to destroy the followers of Jesus.

 

See Psalms 24:7-10, Acts1:1-11

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 12. The Disciples of Christ](gc13.md)
