[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc14)  [Next](gc16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 14

### The Conversion of Saul

 

As Saul journeyed to Damascus with letters of authority to take men or
women who were preaching Jesus, and to bring them bound unto Jerusalem,
evil angels exulted around him.  But as he journeyed, suddenly a light
from heaven shone around him, which made the evil angels flee, and
caused Saul to fall quickly to the ground.  He heard a voice saying,
Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?  Saul inquired, Who art thou,
Lord?  And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.  It is hard
for thee to kick against the pricks.  And Saul trembling and astonished
said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?  And the Lord said, Arise and
go into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do.

The men who were with him stood speechless, hearing a voice, but saw no
man.  As the light passed away, and Saul arose from the earth, and
opened his eyes, he saw no man.  The glory of the light of heaven had
blinded him.  They led him by the hand, and brought him to Damascus, and
he was three days without sight, neither did he eat or drink.  The Lord
then sent his angel to one of the very men whom Saul hoped to make
captive, and revealed to him in vision that he should go into the street
called straight, and inquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul
of Tarsus; for, behold, he prayeth, and hath seen in a vision a man
named Ananias coming in, and putting his hands on him, that he might
receive his sight.

Ananias feared that there was some mistake in this matter, and began to
relate to the Lord what he had heard of Saul.  But the Lord said unto
Ananias, Go thy way; for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to bear my name
before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel.  For I will
show him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake.  Ananias
followed the directions of the Lord, and entered into the house, and
putting his hands on him, said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that
appeared unto thee in the way as thou camest, hath sent me, that thou
mightest receive thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Spirit.

Immediately Saul received sight, and arose, and was baptized.  He then
preached Christ in the synagogues, that he was the Son of God.  All who
heard him were amazed, and inquired, Is not this he that destroyed them
which called on this name in Jerusalem? and came hither on that intent,
that he might bring them bound unto the chief priests.  But Saul
increased the more in strength, and confounded the Jews.  They were
again in trouble.  Saul told his experience in the power of the Holy
Spirit.  All were acquainted with the fact of Saul's opposition to
Jesus, and his zeal in hunting out and delivering up to death all who
believed on his name.  His miraculous conversion convinced many that
Jesus was the Son of God.  Saul related his experience, that as he was
persecuting unto the death, binding and delivering into prison, both men
and women, as he journeyed to Damascus, suddenly a great light from
heaven shone round about him, and Jesus revealed himself to him, and
taught him that he was the Son of God.  As Saul boldly preached Jesus,
he carried a powerful influence with him.  He had knowledge of the
scriptures, and after his conversion a divine light shone upon the
prophecies concerning Jesus, which enabled him to clearly and boldly
present the truth, and to correct any perversion of the scriptures. 
With the Spirit of God resting upon him, he would in a clear and
forcible manner carry his hearers down through the prophecies to the
time of Christ's first advent, and show them that the scriptures had
been fulfilled, which referred to Christ's sufferings, death and
resurrection.

 

See Acts chap.9

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 15. The Jews Decided to Kill Paul](gc16)
