[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc16)  [Next](gc18.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 16

### Paul Visited Jerusalem

 

Shortly after Paul's conversion he visited Jerusalem, and preached
Jesus, and the wonder of his grace.  He related his miraculous
conversion, which enraged the priests, and rulers, and they sought to
take his life.  But that his life might be saved, Jesus appeared to him
again in a vision while he was praying, saying unto him, Get thee
quickly out of Jerusalem; for they will not receive thy testimony
concerning me.  Paul earnestly plead with Jesus, Lord, they know that I
imprisoned and beat in every synagogue them that believed on thee.  And
when the blood of thy martyr Stephen was shed, I also was standing by
and consenting unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew
him.  Paul thought the Jews in Jerusalem could not resist his testimony;
that they would consider that the great change in him could only be
wrought by the power of God.  But Jesus said unto him, Depart, for I
will send thee far hence unto the Gentiles.

In Paul's absence from Jerusalem, he wrote many letters to different
places, relating his experience, and bearing a powerful testimony.  But
some strove to destroy the influence of those letters.  They had to
admit that his letters were weighty and powerful; but declared that his
bodily presence was weak, and his speech contemptible.

I saw that Paul was a man of great learning, and his wisdom and manners
charmed his hearers.  Learned men were pleased with his knowledge, and
many of them believed on Jesus.  When before kings and large assemblies,
he would pour forth such eloquence as would bear down all before him. 
This greatly enraged the priests and elders.  Paul could readily enter
into deep reasoning, and soar up, and carry the people with him, in the
most exalted trains of thought, and bring to view the deep riches of the
grace of God, and portray before them the amazing love of Christ.  Then
with simplicity he would come down to the understanding of the common
people, and in a most powerful manner relate his experience, which
called forth from them ardent desires to be the disciples of Christ.

The Lord revealed to Paul that he must again go up to Jerusalem; that he
would there be bound and suffer for his name.  And although he was a
prisoner for a great length of time, yet the Lord was carrying forward
his special work through him.  Paul's bonds were to be the means of
spreading the knowledge of Christ, and thus glorifying God.  As he was
sent from city to city for his trial, the testimony concerning Jesus,
and the interesting incidents of his conversion were related before
kings and governors, that they should not be left without testimony
concerning Jesus.  Thousands believed on him and rejoiced in his name. 
I saw that God's special purpose was fulfilled in the journey of Paul
upon the water, that the ship's crew might witness the power of God
through Paul, and that the heathen also might hear the name of Jesus,
and many be converted through his teaching, and by witnessing the
miracles he wrought.  Kings and governors were charmed by his reasoning,
and as, with zeal and the power of the Holy Spirit, he preached Jesus,
and related the interesting events of his experience, conviction
fastened upon them that Jesus was the Son of God; and while some
wondered with amazement as they listened to Paul, one cried out, Almost
thou persuadest me to be a Christian.  Yet they thought that at some
future time they would consider what they had heard.  Satan took
advantage of the delay, and as they neglected that opportunity when
their hearts were softened, it was forever.  Their hearts became
hardened.

I was shown the work of Satan in first blinding the eyes of the Jews so
that they would not receive Jesus as their Saviour; and next in leading
them, through envy because of his mighty works, to desire his life. 
Satan entered one of Jesus' own followers, and led him on to betray him
into their hands, and they crucified the Lord of life and glory.  After
Jesus arose from the dead, the Jews added sin to sin as they sought to
hide the fact of the resurrection, by hiring for money the Roman guard
to testify to a falsehood.  But the resurrection of Jesus was made
doubly sure by the resurrection of a multitude of witnesses who arose
with him.  Jesus appeared to his disciples, and to above five hundred at
once, while those whom he brought up with him appeared unto many
declaring that Jesus had risen.

Satan had caused the Jews to rebel against God, by refusing to receive
his Son, and in staining their hands with most precious blood in
crucifying him.  No matter how powerful the evidence given of Jesus'
being the Son of God, the Redeemer of the world; they had murdered him,
and could not receive any evidence in his favor.  Their only hope and
consolation, like Satan's after his fall, was in trying to prevail
against the Son of God.  They continued their rebellion by persecuting
the disciples of Christ, and putting them to death.  Nothing fell so
harshly on their ears as the name of Jesus whom they had crucified; and
they were determined not to listen to any evidence in his favor.  As in
the case of Stephen, as the Holy Spirit through him declared the mighty
evidence of his being the Son of God, they stopped their ears lest they
should be convinced.  And while Stephen was wrapped up in God's glory,
they stoned him to death.  Satan had the murderers of Jesus fast in his
grasp.  By wicked works they had yielded themselves his willing
subjects, and through them he was at work to trouble and annoy the
believers of Christ.  He worked through the Jews to stir up the Gentiles
against the name of Jesus, and against those who followed him, and
believed on his name.  But God sent his angels to strengthen the
disciples for their work, that they might testify of the things they had
seen and heard, and at last in their steadfastness, seal their testimony
with their blood.

Satan rejoiced that the Jews were safe in his snare.  They still
continued their useless forms, their sacrifices and ordinances.  As
Jesus hung upon the cross, and cried, *It is finished*, the vail of the
temple was rent in twain, from the top to the bottom, to signify that
God would no longer meet with the priests in the temple, to accept their
sacrifices and ordinances; and also to show that the partition wall was
broken down between the Jews and the Gentiles.  Jesus had made an
offering of himself for both, and if saved at all, both must believe in
Jesus as the only offering for sin, and the Saviour of the world.

While Jesus hung upon the cross, as the soldier pierced his side with a
spear, there came out blood and water, in two distinct streams, one of
blood, the other of clear water.  The blood was to wash away the sins of
those who should believe in his name.  The water represents that living
water which is obtained from Jesus to give life to the believer.

 

See Matthew 27:51; John 19:34; Acts chap. 24 & 26

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 17. The Great Apostasy](gc18.md)
