[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc18)  [Next](gc20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 18

### Mystery of Iniquity

 

It has ever been the design of Satan to draw the minds of the people
from Jesus to man, and to destroy individual accountability.  Satan
failed in his design when he tempted the Son of God.  He succeeded
better as he came to fallen man.  The doctrine of Christianity was
corrupted.  Popes and priests presumed to take an exalted position, and
taught the people to look to them to pardon their sins, instead of
looking to Christ for themselves.  The Bible was kept from them, in
order to conceal the truths which would condemn them.

The people were entirely deceived.  They were taught that the popes and
priests were Christ's representatives, when in fact they were the
representatives of Satan; and when they bowed to them, they worshiped
Satan.  The people called for the Bible; but the priests considered it
dangerous to let them have the word of God to read for themselves, lest
they become enlightened, and their sins be exposed.  The people were
taught to look to these deceivers, and receive every word from them, as
from the mouth of God.  They held that power over the mind, which God
alone should hold.  And if any dared to follow their own convictions,
the same hate which Satan and the Jews exercised towards Jesus would be
kindled against them, and those in authority would thirst for their
blood. I was shown a time when Satan especially triumphed.  Multitudes
of Christians were slain in a dreadful manner because they would
preserve the purity of their religion.

The Bible was hated, and efforts were made to rid the earth of the
precious word of God.  The Bible was forbidden to be read on pain of
death, and all the copies of the holy Book which could be found were
burned.  But I saw that God had a special care for his word.  He
protected it.  At different periods there were but a very few copies of
the Bible in existence, yet God would not suffer his word to be lost. 
And in the last days, copies of the Bible were to be so multiplied that
every family could possess it.  I saw that when there were but a very
few copies of the Bible, it was precious and comforting to the
persecuted followers of Jesus.  It was read in the most secret manner,
and those who had this exalted privilege felt that they had had an
interview with God, with his Son Jesus, and with his disciples.  But
this blessed privilege cost many of them their lives.  If discovered,
they were taken from reading the sacred Word to the chopping block, the
stake, or to the dungeon to die from starvation.

Satan could not hinder the plan of salvation.  Jesus was crucified, and
arose again the third day.  He told his angels that he would make even
the crucifixion and resurrection tell to his advantage.  He was willing
that those who professed faith in Jesus should believe that the laws
regulating the Jewish sacrifices and offerings ceased at the death of
Christ, if he could push them further, and make them believe that the
law of ten commandments died also with Christ.

I saw that many readily yielded to this device of Satan.  All heaven was
moved with indignation, as they saw the holy law of God trampled under
foot.  Jesus and all the heavenly host were acquainted with the nature
of God's law; they knew that he would not change or abolish it.  The
hopeless condition of man caused the deepest sorrow in heaven, and moved
Jesus to offer to die for the transgressors of God’s holy law.  If his
law could be abolished, man might have been saved without the death of
Jesus. The death of Christ did not destroy the law of his Father; but
magnified and honored it, and enforces obedience to all its holy
precepts.  Had the church remained pure and steadfast, Satan could not
have deceived them, and led them to trample on the law of God.  In this
bold plan, Satan strikes directly against the foundation of God's
government in heaven and on earth.  His rebellion caused him to be
expelled from heaven.  After he rebelled, in order to save himself, he
wished God to change his law; but God told Satan, before the whole
heavenly host, that his law was unalterable.  Satan knows that if he can
cause others to violate God's law he is sure of them; for every
transgressor of his law must die.

Satan decided to go still further.  He told his angels that some would
be so jealous of God's law that they could not be caught in this snare;
that the ten commandments were so plain that many would believe that
they were still binding; therefore he must seek to corrupt the fourth
commandment which brings to view the living God.  He led on his
representatives to attempt to change the Sabbath, and alter the only
commandment of the ten which brings to view the true God, the maker of
the heavens and the earth.  Satan presented before them the glorious
resurrection of Jesus, and told them that by his rising on the first day
of the week, he changed the Sabbath from the seventh to the first day of
the week.  Thus Satan used the resurrection to serve his purpose.  He
and his angels rejoiced that the errors they had prepared took so well
with the professed friends of Christ.  What one might look upon with
religious horror, another would receive.  The different errors would be
received, and with zeal defended.  The will of God plainly revealed in
his word, was covered up with error and tradition, which have been
taught as the commandments of God.  But although this heaven-daring
deception was to be suffered to be carried on down through time until
the second appearing of Jesus, yet through all this time of error and
deception, God has not been left without a witness.  There have been
true and faithful witnesses keeping all of God's commandments through
the darkness and persecution of the church.

I saw that angels were filled with amazement as they beheld the
sufferings and death of the King of glory.  But I saw that it was no
marvel to the angelic host that the Lord of life and glory, who filled
all heaven with joy and splendor, should break the bands of death, and
walk forth from his prison house a triumphant conqueror.  And if either
of these events should be commemorated by a day of rest, it is the
crucifixion.  But, I saw that neither of those events were designed to
alter or abolish God's law; but they give the strongest proof of its
immutability.

 Both of these important events have their memorials.  By partaking of
the Lord's supper, the broken bread and the fruit of the vine, we show
forth the Lord's death until he comes.  By observing this memorial, the
scenes of his sufferings and death are brought fresh to our minds.  The
resurrection of Christ is commemorated by our being buried with him by
baptism, and raised up out of the watery grave in likeness of his
resurrection, to live in newness of life.

I was shown that the law of God would stand fast forever, and exist in
the new earth to all eternity.  At the creation, when the foundations of
the earth were laid, the sons of God looked with admiration upon the
work of the Creator, and all the heavenly host shouted for joy.  It was
then that the foundation of the Sabbath was laid.  At the close of the
six days of creation, God rested on the seventh day from all his work
which he had made; and he blessed the seventh day and sanctified it,
because that in it he had rested from all his work.  The Sabbath was
instituted in Eden before the fall, and was observed by Adam and Eve,
and all the heavenly host.  God rested on the seventh day, and blessed
and hallowed it; and I saw that the Sabbath would never be done away;
but the redeemed saints, and all the angelic host, will observe it in
honor of the great Creator to all eternity.

 

See Daniel chap. 7; 2 Thessalonians chap. 2

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 19. Death, Not Eternal Life in Misery](gc20)
