[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc21)  [Next](gc23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 21

### The Church and World United

 

Satan then consulted with his angels, and they there considered what
they had gained.  It was true that they had kept some timid souls
through fear of death, from embracing the truth; but many, even of the
most timid, received the truth, and immediately their fears and timidity
left them, and as they witnessed the death of their brethren, and saw
their firmness and patience, they knew that God and angels assisted them
to endure such sufferings, and they grew bold and fearless.  And when
called to yield their own lives, they maintained their faith with such
patience and firmness as caused even their murderers to tremble.  Satan
and his angels decided that there was a more successful way to destroy
souls, and more certain in the end.  They saw that although they caused
Christians to suffer, their steadfastness, and the bright hope that
cheered them, caused the weakest to grow strong, and that the rack and
the flames could not daunt them.  They imitated the noble bearing of
Christ when before his murderers, and many were convinced of the truth
by witnessing their constancy, and the glory of God which rested upon
them.  Satan decided that he must come in a milder form.  He had
corrupted the doctrines of the Bible; and traditions which were to ruin
millions were taking deep root.  He restrained his hate, and decided not
to urge on his subjects to such bitter persecution; but lead on the
church to contend, not for the faith once delivered to the saints, but,
for various traditions.  As he led on the church to receive favors and
honors of the world, under the false pretense of benefiting them, she
began to lose favor with God.  Gradually the church lost her power, as
she shunned to declare the straight truths which shut out the lovers of
pleasure and friends of the world.

            The church is not the separate and peculiar people she was
when the fires of persecution were kindled against her.  How is the gold
become dim?  How is the most fine gold changed?  I saw that if the
church had always retained her holy and peculiar character, the power of
the Holy Spirit which was imparted to the disciples would be with her. 
The sick would be healed, devils would be rebuked and cast out, and she
would be mighty, and a terror to her enemies.

I saw that a very large company professed the name of Christ, but God
does not recognize them as his.  He has no pleasure in them.  Satan
seemed to assume a religious character, and was very willing that the
people should think they were Christians.  He was very willing that they
should believe in Jesus, his crucifixion, and his resurrection.  Satan
and his angels fully believed all this themselves, and trembled. But if
this faith does not provoke to good works, and lead those who profess it
to imitate the self-denying life of Christ, he is not disturbed; for
they merely assume the Christian name, while their hearts are still
carnal; and he can use them in his service better than if they made no
profession. Under the name of Christian they hide their deformity.  They
pass along with their unsanctified natures, and their evil passions
unsubdued.  This gives occasion for the unbeliever to throw their
imperfections in the face of Jesus Christ, to reproach him, and to cause
those who do possess pure and undefiled religion to be brought into
disrepute.

The ministers preach smooth things to suit carnal professors.  This is
just as Satan would have it.  They dare not preach Jesus and the cutting
truths of the Bible; for if they should, these carnal professors would
not hear them.  Many of them are wealthy and must be retained in the
church, although they are no more fit to be there than Satan and his
angels.  The religion of Jesus is made to appear popular and honorable
in the eyes of the world.  The people are told that those who profess
religion will be more honored by the world.  Very widely do such
teachings differ from the teachings of Christ.  His doctrine and the
world could not be at peace.  Those who followed him had to renounce the
world.  These smooth things originated with Satan and his angels.  They
formed the plan, and nominal professors have carried it out.  Hypocrites
and sinners unite with the church.  Pleasing fables are taught, and
readily received.  But if the truth should be preached in its purity, it
would soon shut out hypocrites and sinners.  But there is no difference
between the professed followers of Christ and the world.  I saw that if
the false covering could be torn off from the members of the churches,
there would be revealed such iniquity, vileness and corruption, that the
most diffident child of God would have no hesitancy in calling them by
their right name, children of their father, the Devil; for his works
they do.  Jesus and all the heavenly host looked with disgust upon the
scene; yet God had a message for the church that was sacred and
important.  If received, it would make a thorough reformation in the
church, revive the living testimony that would purge out hypocrites and
sinners, and bring the church again into favor with God.

 

See Isaiah 30:8-21; James 2:19; Revelation chap.3

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 22. William Miller](gc23)
