[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc23)  [Next](gc25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 23

### The First Angel's Message

 

I saw that God was in the proclamation of the time in 1843.  It was his
design to arouse the people, and bring them to a testing point where
they should decide.  Ministers were convicted and convinced of the
correctness of the positions taken on the prophetic periods, and they
left their pride, their salaries, and their churches, to go forth from
place to place and proclaim the message.  But as the message from heaven
could find a place in the hearts of but a very few of the professed
ministers of Christ, the work was laid upon many who were not
preachers.  Some left their fields to sound the message, while others
were called from their shops and their merchandise.  And even some
professional men were compelled to leave their professions to engage in
the unpopular work of giving the first angel's message.  Ministers laid
aside their sectarian views and feelings, and united in proclaiming the
coming of Jesus.  The people were moved everywhere the message reached
them.  Sinners repented, wept and prayed for forgiveness, and those
whose lives had been marked with dishonesty, were anxious to make
restitution.

Parents felt the deepest solicitude for their children.  Those who
received the message, labored with their unconverted friends and
relatives, and with their souls bowed with the weight of the solemn
message, warned and entreated them to prepare for the coming of the Son
of man.  Those cases were the most hardened that would not yield to such
a weight of evidence set home by heart-felt warnings.  This
soul-purifying work led the affections away from worldly things, to a
consecration never before experienced.  Thousands were led to embrace
the truth preached by Wm. Miller, and servants of God were raised up in
the spirit and power of Elijah to proclaim the message.  Those who
preached this solemn message, like John the forerunner of Jesus, felt
compelled to lay the axe at the root of the tree, and call upon men to
bring forth fruits meet for repentance.  Their testimony was calculated
to arouse and powerfully affect the churches, and manifest their real
character.  And as they raised the solemn warning to flee from the wrath
to come, many who were united with the churches received the healing
message; they saw their backslidings, and, with bitter tears of
repentance, and deep agony of soul, humbled themselves before God.  And
as the Spirit of God rested upon them, they helped to sound the cry,
Fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come.

The preaching of definite time called forth great opposition from all
classes, from the minister in the pulpit, down to the most reckless,
heaven-daring sinner.  No man knoweth the day and the hour, was heard
from the hypocritical minister and the bold scoffer.  Neither would be
instructed and corrected on the use made of the text by those who were
pointing to the year when they believed the prophetic periods would run
out, and to the signs which showed Christ near, even at the doors.  Many
shepherds of the flock, who professed to love Jesus, said they had no
opposition to the preaching of Christ's coming; but they objected to the
definite time.  God's all-seeing eye read their hearts.  They did not
love Jesus near.  They knew that their unchristian lives would not stand
the test; for they were not walking in the humble path laid out by him. 
These false shepherds stood in the way of the work of God.  The truth
spoken in its convincing power to the people aroused them, and like the
jailer, they began to inquire, What must I do to be saved.  But these
shepherds stepped between the truth and the people, and preached smooth
things to lead them from the truth.  They united with Satan and his
angels, and cried, Peace, peace, when there was no peace.  I saw that
angels of God had marked it all, and the garments of those unconsecrated
shepherds were covered with the blood of souls.  Those who loved their
ease, and were content with their distance from God, would not be
aroused from their carnal security.

Many ministers would not accept this saving message themselves, and
those who would receive it, they hindered.  The blood of souls is upon
them.  Preachers and people joined to oppose this message from heaven. 
They persecuted Wm. Miller, and those who united with him in the work. 
Falsehoods were circulated to injure his influence, and at different
times after he had plainly declared the counsel of God, applying cutting
truths to the hearts of his hearers, great rage was kindled against him,
and as he left the place of meeting, some waylaid him in order to take
his life.  But angels of God were sent to preserve his life, and they
led him safely away from the angry mob.  His work was not yet finished.

The most devoted gladly received the message.  They knew it was from
God, and that it was delivered at the right time.  Angels were watching
with the deepest interest the result of the heavenly message, and when
the churches turned from and rejected it, they in sadness consulted with
Jesus.  He turned his face from the churches, and bid his angels to
faithfully watch over the precious ones who did not reject the
testimony, for another light was yet to shine upon them.

I saw that if professed Christians had loved their Saviour's appearing,
if their affections were placed on him, if they felt that there was none
upon earth to be compared with him, they would have hailed with joy the
first intimation of his coming.  But the dislike they manifested, as
they heard of their Lord's coming, was a decided proof that they did not
love him.  Satan and his angels triumphed, and cast it in the face of
Jesus Christ and his holy angels, that his professed people had so
little love for Jesus that they did not desire his second appearing.

I saw the people of God, joyful in expectation, looking for their Lord. 
But God designed to prove them.  His hand covered a mistake in the
reckoning of the prophetic periods.  Those who were looking for their
Lord did not discover it, and the most learned men who opposed the time
also failed to see the mistake.  God designed that his people should
meet with a disappointment.  The time passed, and those who had looked
with joyful expectation for their Saviour were sad and disheartened,
while those who had not loved the appearing of Jesus, but embraced the
message through fear, were pleased that he did not come at the time of
expectation.  Their profession had not affected their hearts, and
purified their lives.  The passing of the time was well calculated to
reveal such hearts.  They were the first to turn and ridicule the
sorrowful, disappointed ones, who really loved the appearing of their
Saviour.  I saw the wisdom of God in proving his people, and giving them
a searching test to discover those who would shrink and turn back in the
hour of trial.

Jesus and all the heavenly host looked with sympathy and love upon those
who had with sweet expectation longed to see him whom their souls
loved.  Angels were hovering around them, to sustain them in the hour of
their trial.  Those who had neglected to receive the heavenly message
were left in darkness, and God's anger was kindled against them, because
they would not receive the light he had sent them from heaven.  Those
faithful, disappointed ones, who could not understand why their Lord did
not come, were not left in darkness.  Again they were led to their
Bibles to search the prophetic periods.  The hand of the Lord was
removed from the figures, and the mistake was explained.  They saw that
the prophetic periods reached to 1844, and that the same evidence they
had presented to show that the prophetic periods closed in 1843, proved
that they would terminate in 1844.  Light from the word of God shone
upon their position, and they discovered a tarrying time. -- If the
vision tarry, wait for it. -- In their love for Jesus' immediate coming,
they had overlooked the tarrying of the vision, which was calculated to
manifest the true waiting ones.  Again they had a point of time.  Yet I
saw that many of them could not rise above their severe disappointment,
to possess that degree of zeal and energy which had marked their faith
in 1843.

Satan and his angels triumphed over them, and those who would not
receive the message, congratulated themselves upon their far-seeing
judgment and wisdom in not receiving the delusion, as they called it. 
They realized not that they were rejecting the counsel of God against
themselves, and that they were working in union with Satan and his
angels to perplex God's people, who were living out the heaven-born
message.

The believers in this message were oppressed in the churches.  Fear had
held them for a time, so that they did not act out the sentiments of
their heart, but the passing of the time revealed their true feelings. 
They wished to silence the testimony which the believers felt compelled
to bear, that the prophetic periods extended to 1844.  With clearness
they explained their mistake, and gave their reasons why they expected
their Lord in 1844.  The opposers could not bring any arguments against
the powerful reasons offered.  The anger of the churches was kindled
against them.  They were determined not to listen to any evidence, and
to shut their testimony out of the churches, so that others could not
hear it.  Those who dared not withhold from others the light God had
given them, were shut out of the churches; but Jesus was with them, and
they were joyful in the light of his countenance.  They were prepared to
receive the message of the second angel.

 

See Daniel 8:14; Habakkuk 2:1-4; Malachi chap. 3 & 4; Matthew 24:36;
Revelation 14:6-7

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 24. The Second Angel’s Message](gc25)
