[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc25)  [Next](gc27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 25

### Advent Movement Illustrated

 

I saw a number of companies who seemed to be bound together by cords. 
Many in these companies were in total darkness.  Their eyes were
directed downward to the earth, and there seemed to be no connection
between them and Jesus.  I saw individuals scattered through these
different companies whose countenances looked light, and whose eyes were
raised upward to heaven.  Beams of light from Jesus, like rays of light
from the sun, were imparted to them.  An angel bid me look carefully,
and I saw an angel watching over every one of those who had a ray of
light, while evil angels surrounded those who were in darkness.  I heard
the voice of an angel cry, Fear God and give glory to him, for the hour
of his judgment is come.

A glorious light rested down upon these companies, to enlighten all who
would receive it.  Some of those who were in darkness received the light
and rejoiced; while others resisted the light from heaven, and said that
it was deception to lead them astray.  The light passed away from them,
and they were left in darkness.  Those who had received the light from
Jesus, joyfully cherished the increase of precious light which was shed
upon them.  Their faces lighted up, and beamed with holy joy, while
their gaze was directed upward to Jesus with intense interest, and their
voices were heard in harmony with the voice of the angel, Fear God and
give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come.  As they raised
this cry, I saw those who were in darkness thrusting them with side and
with shoulder.  Then many of those who cherished the sacred light, broke
the cords which confined them, and stood out separate from those
companies.  And as many were breaking the cords which bound them, men
belonging to these different companies, who were revered by them, passed
through the companies, and some with pleasing words, and others with
wrathful looks and threatening gestures, fastened the cords which were
weakening, and were constantly saying, God is with us.  We stand in the
light.  We have the truth.  I inquired who these men were.  I was told
that they were ministers, and leading men, who had rejected the light
themselves, and were unwilling that others should receive it.  I saw
those who cherished the light looking with interest and ardent desire
upward, expecting Jesus to come and take them to himself.  Soon a cloud
passed over those who rejoiced in the light, and their faces looked
sorrowful.  I inquired the cause of this cloud.  I was shown that it was
their disappointment.  The time when they expected their Saviour had
passed, and Jesus had not come.  Discouragement settled upon them, and
those men I had before noticed, the ministers and leading men,
rejoiced.  Those who had rejected the light, triumphed greatly, while
Satan and his evil angels also exulted around them.

Then I heard the voice of another angel, saying, Babylon is fallen! is
fallen!  A light shone upon those desponding ones, and with ardent
desires for his appearing, they again fixed their eyes upon Jesus.  Then
I saw a number of angels conversing with the second angel, who had
cried, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, and these angels raised their
voices with the second angel, and cried, Behold the Bridegroom cometh!
go ye out to meet him!  The musical voices of these angels seemed to
reach everywhere.  An exceeding bright and glorious light shone around
those who had cherished the light which had been imparted to them. 
Their faces shone with excellent glory, and they united with the angels
in the cry, Behold, the Bridegroom cometh!  And as they harmoniously
raised the cry among these different companies, those who rejected the
light, pushed them, and with angry looks, scorned and derided them.  But
the angels of God wafted their wings over the persecuted ones, while
Satan and his angels were seeking to press their darkness around them,
to lead them to reject the light from heaven.

Then I heard a voice saying to those who had been pushed and derided,
come out from among them, and touch not the unclean.  A large number
broke the cords which bound them, and they obeyed the voice, and left
those who were in darkness, and united with those who had previously
broken the cords, and they joyfully united their voices with them.  I
heard the voice of earnest, agonizing prayer from a few who still
remained with the companies who were in darkness.  The ministers and
leading men were passing around in these different companies, fastening
the cords stronger; but still I heard this voice of earnest prayer. 
Then I saw those who had been praying reach out their hands for help
towards that united company who were free, rejoicing in God.  The answer
from them, as they earnestly looked to heaven, and pointed upward, was,
Come out from among them, and be separate.  I saw individuals struggling
for freedom, and at last they broke the cords that bound them.  They
resisted the efforts which were made to fasten the cords tighter, and
would not heed the repeated assertions, God is with us, We have the
truth with us.  Individuals continued to leave the companies who were in
darkness, and joined the free company, who appeared to be in an open
field raised above the earth.  Their gaze was upward, and the glory of
God rested upon them, and they shouted the praises of God.  They were
united, and seemed to be wrapt in the light of heaven.  Around this
company were some who came under the influence of the light, but who
were not particularly united to the company.  All who cherished the
light shed upon them were gazing upward with intense interest.  Jesus
looked upon them with sweet approbation.  They expected Jesus to come. 
They longed for his appearing.  They did not cast one lingering look to
earth.  Again I saw a cloud settle upon the waiting ones.  I saw them
turn their weary eyes downward.  I inquired the cause of this change. 
Said my accompanying angel, They are again disappointed in their
expectations.  Jesus cannot yet come to earth.  They must yet suffer for
Jesus and endure greater trials.  They must give up errors and
traditions received from men, and turn wholly to God and his word.  They
must be purified, made white and tried.  And those who endure that
bitter trial will obtain an eternal victory.

Jesus did not come to earth as the waiting, joyful company expected, to
cleanse the Sanctuary, by purifying the earth by fire.  I saw that they
were correct in their reckoning of the prophetic periods.  Prophetic
time closed in 1844.  Their mistake consisted in not understanding what
the Sanctuary was, and the nature of its cleansing.  Jesus did enter the
Most Holy place to cleanse the Sanctuary at the ending of the days.  I
looked again at the waiting, disappointed company.  They looked sad. 
They carefully examined the evidences of their faith, and followed down
through the reckoning of the prophetic periods, and could discover no
mistake.  Time was fulfilled, but where was their Saviour?  They had
lost him.

I was then shown the disappointment of the disciples as they came to the
sepulchre and found not the body of Jesus.  Said Mary, They have taken
away my Lord, and I know not where they have laid him.  Angels told the
sorrowing disciples that their Lord had risen, and would go before them
into Galilee.

I saw that as Jesus looked upon the disappointed ones with the deepest
compassion, he sent his angels to direct their minds that they might
find him, and follow him where he was; that they might understand that
the earth is not the Sanctuary; that he must needs enter the Most Holy
place of the heavenly Sanctuary to cleanse it; to make a special
atonement for Israel, and to receive the kingdom of his Father, and then
return to earth and take them to dwell with him forever.  The
disappointment of the disciples well represents the disappointment of
those who expected their Lord in 1844.  I was carried back to the time
when Christ triumphantly rode into Jerusalem.  The joyful disciples
believed that he was then to take the kingdom, and reign a temporal
prince.  They followed their King with high hopes.  They cut down the
beautiful palm branches, and took off their outer garments, and with
enthusiastic zeal spread them in the way; and some went before, and
others followed crying, Hosanna to the Son of David!  Blessed is he that
cometh in the name of the Lord!  Hosanna in the highest!  The excitement
disturbed the Pharisees, and they wished Jesus to rebuke his disciples. 
But he said unto them, If these should hold their peace, the stones
would immediately cry out.  The prophecy of Zechariah 9:9, must be
fulfilled, yet, I saw, the disciples were doomed to a bitter
disappointment.  In a few days they followed Jesus to Calvary, and
beheld him bleeding and mangled upon the cruel cross.  They witnessed
his agonizing death, and laid him in the tomb.  Their hearts sunk with
grief.  Their expectations were not realized in a single particular. 
Their hopes died with Jesus.  But as he arose from the dead, and
appeared to his sorrowing disciples, their hopes revived.  They had lost
their Saviour; but again they had found him.

I saw that the disappointment of those who believed in the coming of the
Lord in 1844, was not equal to the disappointment of the disciples. 
Prophecy was fulfilled in the first and second angels' messages.  They
were given at the right time, and accomplished the work God designed
they should.

 

See Daniel 8:14; Matthew 21:4-16, 25:6; Mark 16:6-7; Luke 19:35-40; John
14:1-3, 20:13; 2 Corinthians 6:17; Revelation 10:8-11, 14:7-8

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 26. Another Illustration](gc27)
