[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc26)  [Next](gc28) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 26

### Another Illustration

 

I was shown the interest which all heaven had taken in the work which
had been going on upon the earth.  Jesus commissioned a strong and
mighty angel to descend and warn the inhabitants of earth to get ready
for his second appearing.  I saw the mighty angel leave the presence of
Jesus in heaven.  Before him went an exceedingly bright and glorious
light.  I was told that his mission was to lighten the earth with his
glory, and warn man of the coming wrath of God.  Multitudes received the
light.  Some seemed to be very solemn, while others were joyful and
enraptured.  The light was shed upon all, but some merely came under the
influence of the light, and did not heartily receive it.  But all who
received it, turned their faces upward to heaven, and glorified God. 
Many were filled with great wrath.  Ministers and people united with the
vile, and stoutly resisted the light shed by the mighty angel.  But all
who received it withdrew from the world, and were closely united
together.

Satan and his angels were busily engaged in seeking to attract the minds
of all they could from the light.  The company who rejected it were left
in darkness.  I saw the angel watching with the deepest interest the
professed people of God, to record the character they developed, as the
message of heavenly origin was introduced to them.  And as very many who
professed love for Jesus turned from the heavenly message with scorn,
derision and hatred, an angel with a parchment in his hand, made the
shameful record.  All heaven was filled with indignation, because Jesus
was slighted by his professed followers.

I saw the disappointment of the trusting ones.  They did not see their
Lord at the expected time.  It was God's purpose to conceal the future,
and bring his people to a point of decision.  Without this point of time
the work designed of God would not have been accomplished.  Satan was
leading the minds of very many far ahead in the future.  A period of
time proclaimed for Christ's appearing must bring the mind to earnestly
seek for a present preparation.  As the time passed, those who had not
fully received the light of the angel, united with those who had
despised the heavenly message, and they turned upon the disappointed
ones in ridicule.  I saw the angels in heaven consulting with Jesus. 
They had marked the situation of Christ's professed followers.  The
passing of the definite time had tested and proved them, and very many
were weighed in the balance and found wanting.  They all loudly
professed to be Christians, yet failed in following Christ in almost
every particular.  Satan exulted at the state of the professed followers
of Christ.  He had them in his snare.  He had led the majority to leave
the straight path, and they were attempting to climb up to heaven some
other way.  Angels saw the pure, the clean, and holy, all mixed up with
sinners in Zion, and the world-loving hypocrite.  They had watched over
the true lovers of Jesus; but the corrupt were affecting the holy.

Those whose hearts burned with a longing, intense desire to see Jesus,
were forbidden by their professed brethren to speak of his coming. 
Angels viewed the whole scene, and sympathized with the remnant, who
loved the appearing of Jesus.  Another mighty angel was commissioned to
descend to earth.  Jesus placed in his hand a writing, and as he came to
earth, he cried, Babylon is fallen! is fallen!  Then I saw the
disappointed ones again look cheerful, and raise their eyes to heaven,
looking with faith and hope for their Lord's appearing.  But many seemed
to remain in a stupid state, as if asleep; yet I could see the trace of
deep sorrow upon their countenances.  The disappointed ones saw from the
Bible that they were in the tarrying time, and that they must patiently
wait the fulfillment of the vision.  The same evidence which led them to
look for their Lord in 1843, led them to expect him in 1844.  I saw that
the majority did not possess that energy which marked their faith in
1843.  Their disappointment had dampened their faith.  But as the
disappointed ones united in the cry of the second angel, the heavenly
host looked with the deepest interest, and marked the effect of the
message.  They saw those who bore the name of Christians turn with
derision and scorn upon those who had been disappointed.  As the words
fell from the mocker's lips, You have not gone up yet! an angel wrote
them.  Said the angel, They mock God.

I was pointed back to the translation of Elijah.  His mantle fell on
Elisha, and wicked children (or young people) followed him, mocking,
crying, Go up thou bald head!  Go up thou bald head!  They mocked God,
and met their punishment there.  They had learned it of their parents. 
And those who have scoffed and mocked at the idea of the saints' going
up, will be visited with the plagues of God, and will realize that it is
not a small thing to trifle with him.

Jesus commissioned other angels to fly quickly to revive and strengthen
the drooping faith of his people, and prepare them to understand the
message of the second angel, and of the important move which was soon to
be made in heaven.  I saw these angels receive great power and light
from Jesus, and fly quickly to earth to fulfill their commission to aid
the second angel in his work.  A great light shone upon the people of
God as the angels cried, Behold the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet
him.  Then I saw those disappointed ones rise, and in harmony with the
second angel, proclaim, Behold the Bridegroom cometh, go ye out to meet
him.  The light from the angels penetrated the darkness everywhere. 
Satan and his angels sought to hinder this light from spreading, and
having its designed effect.  They contended with the angels of God, and
told them that God had deceived the people, and that with all their
light and power, they could not make the people believe that Jesus was
coming.  The angels of God continued their work, although Satan strove
to hedge up the way, and draw the minds of the people from the light. 
Those who received it looked very happy.  They fixed their eyes up to
heaven, and longed for the appearing of Jesus.  Some were in great
distress, weeping and praying.  Their eyes seemed to be fixed upon
themselves, and they dared not look upward.

A precious light from heaven parted the darkness from them, and their
eyes, which had been fixed in despair upon themselves, were turned
upward, while gratitude and holy joy were expressed upon every feature. 
Jesus and all the angelic host looked with approbation upon the
faithful, waiting ones.

Those who rejected and opposed the light of the first angel’s message,
lost the light of the second, and could not be benefited by the power
and glory which attended the message, Behold the Bridegroom cometh. 
Jesus turned from them with a frown.  They had slighted and rejected
him.  Those who received the message were wrapt in a cloud of glory. 
They waited and watched and prayed to know the will of God.  They
greatly feared to offend him.  I saw Satan and his angels seeking to
shut this divine light from the people of God; but as long as the
waiting ones cherished the light, and kept their eyes raised from earth
to Jesus, Satan could have no power to deprive them of this precious
light.  The message given from heaven enraged Satan and his angels, and
those who professed to love Jesus, but despised his coming, scorned and
derided the faithful, trusting ones.  But an angel marked every insult,
every slight, every abuse they received from their professed brethren. 
Very many raised their voices to cry, Behold the Bridegroom cometh, and
left their brethren who did not love the appearing of Jesus, and who
would not suffer them to dwell upon his second coming.  I saw Jesus turn
his face from those who rejected and despised his coming, and then he
bade angels lead his people out from among the unclean, lest they should
be defiled.  Those obedient to the messages stood out free and united. 
A holy and excellent light shone upon them.  They renounced the world,
tore their affections from it, and sacrificed their earthly interests. 
They gave up their earthly treasure and their anxious gaze was directed
to heaven, expecting to see their loved Deliverer.  A sacred, holy joy
beamed upon their countenances, and told of the peace and joy which
reigned within.  Jesus bade his angels go and strengthen them, for the
hour of their trial drew on.  I saw that these waiting ones were not yet
tried as they must be.  They were not free from errors.  And I saw the
mercy and goodness of God in sending a warning to the people of earth,
and repeated messages to bring them up to a point of time, to lead them
to a diligent search of themselves, that they might divest themselves of
errors which have been handed down from the heathen and papists. 
Through these messages God has been bringing out his people where he can
work for them in greater power, and where they can keep all his
commandments.

 

See 2Kings 2:11-25; Daniel 8:14; Habakkuk 2:1-4; Matthew 25:6;
Revelation 14:8, 18:1-5

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 27. The Sanctuary](gc28)
