[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc27)  [Next](gc29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 27

### The Sanctuary

 

I was then shown the grievous disappointment of the people of God.  They
did not see Jesus at the expected time.  They knew not why their Saviour
did not come.  They could see no evidence why prophetic time had not
ended.  Said an angel, Has God's word failed?  Has God failed to fulfill
his promises?  No: he has fulfilled all he promised.  Jesus has risen
up, and has shut the door of the Holy place of the heavenly Sanctuary,
and has opened a door into the Most Holy place, and has entered in to
cleanse the Sanctuary.  Said the angel, All who wait patiently shall
understand the mystery.  Man has erred; but there has been no failure on
the part of God.  All was accomplished that God promised; but man
erroneously looked to the earth, believing it to be the Sanctuary to be
cleansed at the end of the prophetic periods.  Man's expectations have
failed; but God's promise not at all.  Jesus sent his angels to direct
the disappointed ones, to lead their minds into the Most Holy place
where he had gone to cleanse the Sanctuary, and make a special atonement
for Israel.  Jesus told the angels that all who found him would
understand the work which he was to perform.  I saw that while Jesus was
in the Most Holy place he would be married to the New Jerusalem, and
after his work should be accomplished in the Holiest, he would descend
to earth in kingly power and take the precious ones to himself who had
patiently waited his return.

I was then shown what did take place in heaven as the prophetic periods
ended in 1844.  I saw that as the ministration of Jesus in the Holy
place ended, and he closed the door of that apartment, a great darkness
settled upon those who had heard, and had rejected the messages of
Christ's coming, and they lost sight of him.  Jesus then clothed himself
with precious garments.  Around the bottom of his robe was a bell and a
pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate.  He had suspended from his
shoulders a breastplate of curious work.  And as he moved, it glittered
like diamonds, magnifying letters which looked like names written, or
engraven upon the breastplate.  After he was fully attired, with
something upon his head which looked like a crown, angels surrounded
him, and in a flaming chariot he passed within the second vail.  I was
then bid to take notice of the two apartments of the heavenly
Sanctuary.  The curtain, or door, was opened, and I was permitted to
enter.  In the first apartment I saw the candlestick with seven lamps,
which looked rich and glorious; also the table on which was the
shew-bread, and the altar of incense, and the censer.  All the furniture
of this apartment looked like purest gold, and reflected the image of
the one who entered that place.  The curtain which separated these two
apartments looked glorious.  It was of different colors and material,
with a beautiful border, with figures of gold wrought upon it,
representing angels.  The vail was lifted, and I looked into the second
apartment.  I saw there an ark which had the appearance of being of the
finest gold.  As a border around the top of the ark, was most beautiful
work representing crowns.  It was of fine gold.  In the ark were the
tables of stone containing the ten commandments.  On each end of the ark
was a lovely cherub with their wings spread out over it.  Their wings
were raised on high, and touched each other above the head of Jesus, as
he stood by the ark.  Their faces were turned towards each other, and
they looked downwards to the ark, representing all the angelic host
looking with interest at the law of God.  Between the cherubim was a
golden censer.  And as the prayers of the saints in faith came up to
Jesus, and he offered them to his Father, a sweet fragrance arose from
the incense.  It looked like smoke of most beautiful colors.  Above the
place where Jesus stood, before the ark, I saw an exceeding bright glory
that I could not look upon.  It appeared like a throne where God dwelt. 
As the incense ascended up to the Father, the excellent glory came from
the Father's throne to Jesus, and from Jesus it was shed upon those
whose prayers had come up like sweet incense.  Light and glory poured
upon Jesus in rich abundance, and overshadowed the mercy-seat, and the
train of the glory filled the temple.  I could not long look upon the
glory.  No language can describe it.  I was overwhelmed, and turned from
the majesty and glory of the scene.

I was shown a Sanctuary upon earth containing two apartments.  It
resembled the one in heaven.  I was told that it was the earthly
Sanctuary, a figure of the heavenly.  The furniture of the first
apartment of the earthly Sanctuary was like that in the first apartment
of the heavenly.  The vail was lifted, and I looked into the Holy of
Holies, and saw that the furniture was the same as in the Most Holy
place of the heavenly Sanctuary.  The priests ministered in both
apartments of the earthly.  In the first apartment he ministered every
day in the year, and entered the Most Holy but once in a year, to
cleanse it from the sins which had been conveyed there.  I saw that
Jesus ministered in both apartments of the heavenly Sanctuary.  He
entered into the heavenly Sanctuary by the offering of his own blood. 
The earthly priests were removed by death, therefore they could not
continue long; but Jesus, I saw, was a priest forever.  Through the
sacrifices and offerings brought to the earthly Sanctuary, the children
of Israel were to lay hold of the merits of a Saviour to come.  And in
the wisdom of God the particulars of this work were given us that we
might look back to them, and understand the work of Jesus in the
heavenly Sanctuary.

At the crucifixion, as Jesus died on Calvary, he cried, It is finished,
and the vail of the temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom.  This was to show that the services of the earthly Sanctuary
were forever finished, and that God would no more meet with them in
their earthly temple, to accept their sacrifices.  The blood of Jesus
was then shed, which was to be ministered by himself in the heavenly
Sanctuary.  As the priests in the earthly Sanctuary entered the Most
Holy once a year to cleanse the Sanctuary, Jesus entered the Most Holy
of the heavenly, at the end of the 2300 days of Daniel 8, in 1844, to
make a final atonement for all who could be benefited by his mediation,
and to cleanse the Sanctuary.

 

See Exodus chap.25-28; Leviticus chap.16; 2Kings 2:11; Daniel 8:14;
Matthew 27:50-51; Hebrews chap.9; Revelation chap.21

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 28. The Third Angel's Message](gc29)
