[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc32)  [Next](gc34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 32

### The Shaking

 

I saw some with strong faith and agonizing cries, pleading with God. 
Their countenances were pale, and marked with deep anxiety, which
expressed their internal struggle.  There were firmness and great
earnestness expressed in their countenances, while large drops of
perspiration rose upon their foreheads, and fell.  Now and then their
faces would light up with the marks of God's approbation, and again the
same solemn, earnest, anxious look settled upon them.

Evil angels crowded around them, pressing their darkness upon them, to
shut out Jesus from their view, that their eyes might be drawn to the
darkness that surrounded them, and they distrust God, and next murmur
against him.  Their only safety was in keeping their eyes directed
upward.  Angels were having the charge over the people of God, and as
the poisonous atmosphere from these evil angels was pressed around these
anxious ones, the angels, which had the charge over them, were
continually wafting their wings over them to scatter the thick darkness
that surrounded them.

Some, I saw, did not participate in this work of agonizing and
pleading.  They seemed indifferent and careless.  They were not
resisting the darkness around them, and it shut them in like a thick
cloud.  The angels of God left them, and went to the aid of those
earnest, praying ones.  I saw the angels of God hasten to the assistance
of all those who were struggling with all their energies to resist those
evil angels, and trying to help themselves by calling upon God with
perseverance.  But the angels left those who made no effort to help
themselves, and I lost sight of them.

As these praying ones continued their earnest cries, at times a ray of
light from Jesus came to them, and encouraged their hearts, and lighted
up their countenances.

I asked the meaning of the shaking I had seen.  I was shown that it
would be caused by the straight testimony called forth by the counsel of
the true Witness to the Laodiceans.  It will have its effect upon the
heart of the receiver of the testimony, and it will lead him to exalt
the standard and pour forth the straight truth.  This straight testimony
some will not bear.  They will rise up against it, and this will cause a
shaking among God's people.

I saw that the testimony of the true Witness has not been half heeded. 
The solemn testimony upon which the destiny of the church hangs, has
been lightly esteemed, if not entirely disregarded.  This testimony must
work deep repentance, and all that truly receive it, will obey it, and
be purified.

Said the angel, List ye!  Soon I heard a voice that sounded like many
musical instruments, all sounding in perfect strains, sweet and
harmonious.  It surpassed any music I had ever heard.  It seemed to be
so full of mercy, compassion, and elevating, holy joy.  It thrilled
through my whole being.  Said the angel, Look ye!  My attention was then
turned to the company I had seen before, who were mightily shaken.  I
was shown those whom I had before seen weeping, and praying with agony
of spirit.  I saw that the company of guardian angels around them had
doubled, and they were clothed with an armor from their head to their
feet.  They moved in exact order, firm like a company of soldiers. 
Their countenances expressed the severe conflict which they had endured,
the agonizing struggle they had passed through.  Yet their features,
marked with severe internal anguish, shone now with the light and glory
of heaven.  They had obtained the victory, and it called forth from them
the deepest gratitude, and holy, sacred joy.

The numbers of this company had lessened.  Some had been shaken out, and
left by the way.  The careless and indifferent who did not join with
those who prized victory and salvation enough to agonize, persevere, and
plead for it, did not obtain it, and they were left behind in darkness,
and their numbers were immediately made up by others taking hold of the
truth, and coming into the ranks.  Still the evil angels pressed around
them, but they could have no power over them.

I heard those clothed with the armor speak forth the truth in great
power.  It had effect.  I saw those who had been bound; some wives had
been bound by their husbands, and some children had been bound by their
parents.  The honest who had been held or prevented from hearing the
truth, now eagerly laid hold of the truth spoken.  All fear of their
relatives was gone.  The truth alone was exalted to them.  It was dearer
and more precious than life.  They had been hungering and thirsting for
truth.  I asked what had made this great change.  An angel answered, It
is the latter rain; the refreshing from the presence of the Lord; the
loud cry of the third angel.

Great power was with these chosen ones.  Said the angel, Look ye!  My
attention was turned to the wicked, or unbelievers.  They were all
astir.  The zeal and power with the people of God had aroused and
enraged them.  Confusion, confusion, was on every side.  I saw measures
taken against this company, who were having the power and light of God. 
Darkness thickened around them, yet there they stood, approved of God,
and trusting in him.  I saw them perplexed.  Next I heard them crying
unto God earnestly.  Through the day and night their cry ceased not.  I
heard these words, Thy will, O God, be done!  If it can glorify thy
name, make a way of escape for thy people!  Deliver us from the heathen
round about us!  They have appointed us unto death; but thine arm can
bring salvation.  These are all the words I can bring to mind.  They
seemed to have a deep sense of their unworthiness, and manifested entire
submission to the will of God.  Yet everyone, without an exception, was
earnestly pleading, and wrestling like Jacob for deliverance.

Soon after they had commenced their earnest cry, the angels, in sympathy
would have gone to their deliverance.  But a tall, commanding angel
suffered them not.  Said he, The will of God is not yet fulfilled.  They
must drink of the cup.  They must be baptized with the baptism.

Soon I heard the voice of God, which shook the heavens and the earth. 
There was a mighty earthquake.  Buildings were shaken down, and fell on
every side.  I then heard a triumphant shout of victory, loud, musical
and clear.  I looked upon this company who, a short time before were in
such distress and bondage.  Their captivity was turned.  A glorious
light shone upon them.  How beautiful they then looked.  All weariness
and marks of care were gone.  Health and beauty were seen in every
countenance.  Their enemies, the heathen around them, fell like dead
men.  They could not endure the light that shone upon the delivered,
holy ones.  This light and glory remained upon them, until Jesus was
seen in the clouds of heaven, and the faithful, tried company was
changed in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, from glory to glory. 
And the graves were opened and the saints came forth, clothed with
immortality, crying victory over death and the grave, and together with
the living saints, were caught up to meet their Lord in the air; while
the rich, musical shouts of glory and victory were upon every immortal
tongue, and proceeding from every sanctified, holy lip.

 

See Psalms chap.86; Hosea 6:3; Haggai 2:21-23; Matthew 10:35-39, 20:23;
Ephesians 6:10-18; 1Thessalonians 4:14-18; Revelation 3:14-22

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 33. The Sins of Babylon](gc34)
