[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc33)  [Next](gc35) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 33

### The Sins of Babylon

 

I saw the state of the different churches since the second angel
proclaimed their fall.  They have been growing more and more corrupt;
yet they bear the name of being Christ's followers.  It is impossible to
distinguish them from the world.  Their ministers take their text from
the Word, but preach smooth things.  The natural heart feels no
objection to this.  It is only the spirit and power of the truth, and
the salvation of Christ, that is hateful to the carnal heart.  There is
nothing in the popular ministry that stirs the wrath of Satan, makes the
sinner tremble, or applies to the heart and conscience the fearful
realities of a judgment soon to come.  Wicked men are generally pleased
with a form without true godliness, and they will aid and support such a
religion.  Said the angel, Nothing less than the whole armor of
righteousness can overcome, and retain the victory over the powers of
darkness.  Satan has taken full possession of the churches as a body. 
The sayings and doings of men are dwelt upon instead of the plain
cutting truths of the word of God.  Said the angel, The friendship and
spirit of the world are at enmity with God.  When truth in its
simplicity and strength, as it is in Jesus, is brought to bear against
the spirit of the world, it awakens the spirit of persecution at once. 
Many, very many, who profess to be Christians, have not known God.  The
character of the natural heart has not been changed, and the carnal mind
remains at enmity with God.  They are Satan's own faithful servants,
notwithstanding they have assumed another name.

I saw that since Jesus had left the Holy place of the heavenly
Sanctuary, and had entered within the second vail, the churches were
left as were the Jews; and they have been filling up with every unclean
and hateful bird.  I saw great iniquity and vileness in the churches;
yet they profess to be Christians.  Their profession, their prayers and
their exhortations, are an abomination in the sight of God.  Said the
angel, God will not smell in their assemblies.  Selfishness, fraud and
deceit are practiced by them without the reprovings of conscience.  And
over all these evil traits they throw the cloak of religion.  I was
shown the pride of the nominal churches.  God was not in their thoughts;
but their carnal minds dwell upon themselves.  They decorate their poor
mortal bodies, and then look upon themselves with satisfaction and
pleasure.  Jesus and the angels looked upon them in anger.  Said the
angel, Their sins and pride have reached unto heaven.  Their portion is
prepared.  Justice and judgment have slumbered long, but will soon
awake.  Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, saith the Lord.  The
fearful threatenings of the third angel are to be realized, and they
will drink the wrath of God.  An innumerable host of evil angels are
spreading themselves over the whole land.  The churches and religious
bodies are crowded with them.  And they look upon the religious bodies
with exultation; for the cloak of religion covers the greatest crimes
and iniquity.

All heaven beholds with indignation, human beings, the workmanship of
God, reduced to the lowest depths of degradation, and placed on a level
with the brute creation by their fellow men.  And professed followers of
that dear Saviour whose compassion was ever moved as he witnessed human
woe, heartily engage in this enormous and grievous sin, and deal in
slaves and souls of men.  Angels have recorded it all.  It is written in
the book.  The tears of the pious bond-men and bond-women, of fathers,
mothers and children, brothers and sisters, are all bottled up in
heaven.  Agony, human agony, is carried from place to place, and bought
and sold.  God will restrain his anger but a little longer.  His anger
burns against this nation, and especially against the religious bodies
who have sanctioned, and have themselves engaged in this terrible
merchandise.  Such injustice, such oppression, such sufferings, many
professed followers of the meek and lowly Jesus can witness with
heartless indifference.  And many of them can inflict with hateful
satisfaction, all this indescribable agony themselves, and yet dare to
worship God.  It is solemn mockery, and Satan exults over it, and
reproaches Jesus and his angels with such inconsistency, saying, with
hellish triumph, *Such are Christ's followers*!

These professed Christians read of the sufferings of the martyrs, and
tears course down their cheeks.  They wonder that men could ever possess
hearts so hardened as to practice such inhuman cruelties towards their
fellow-men, while at the same time they hold their fellow-men in
slavery.  And this is not all.  They sever the ties of nature, and
cruelly oppress from day to day their fellow-men.  They can inflict most
inhuman tortures with relentless cruelty, which would well compare with
the cruelty papists and heathens exercised towards Christ's followers. 
Said the angel, It will be more tolerable for the heathen and for
papists in the day of the execution of God's judgment than for such
men.  The cries and sufferings of the oppressed have reached unto
heaven, and angels stand amazed at the hard-hearted, untold, agonizing
suffering, man in the image of his Maker, causes his fellow-man.  Said
the angel, The names of such are written in blood, crossed with stripes,
and flooded with agonizing, burning tears of suffering.  God's anger
will not cease until he has caused the land of light to drink the dregs
of the cup of his fury, and until he has rewarded unto Babylon double. 
Reward her even as she rewarded you, double unto her double according to
her works: in the cup which she hath filled, fill to her double.

I saw that the slave-master would have to answer for the soul of his
slave whom he has kept in ignorance; and all the sins of the slave will
be visited upon the master.  God cannot take the slave to heaven, who
has been kept in ignorance and degradation, knowing nothing of God, or
the Bible, fearing nothing but his master's lash, and not holding so
elevated a position as his master's brute beasts.  But he does the best
thing for him that a compassionate God can do.  He lets him be as though
he had not been; while the master has to suffer the seven last plagues,
and then come up in the second resurrection, and suffer the second, most
awful death.  Then the wrath of God will be appeased.

 

See Amos 5:21; Romans 12:19; Revelation 14:9-10, 18:6

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 34. The Loud Cry](gc35)
