[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc35)  [Next](gc37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 35

### The Third Message Closed

 

I was pointed down to the time when the third angel's message was
closing.  The power of God had rested upon his people.  They had
accomplished their work, and were prepared for the trying hour before
them.  They had received the latter rain, or refreshing from the
presence of the Lord, and the living testimony had been revived.  The
last great warning had sounded everywhere, and it had stirred up and
enraged the inhabitants of earth, who would not receive the message.

I saw angels hurrying to and fro in heaven.  An angel returned from the
earth with a writer's ink-horn by his side, and reported to Jesus that
his work was done, that the saints were numbered and sealed.  Then I saw
Jesus, who had been ministering before the ark containing the ten
commandments, throw down the censer.  He raised his hands upward, and
with a loud voice said, *It* *is done. * And all the angelic host laid
off their crowns as Jesus made the solemn declaration, He that is
unjust, let him be unjust still; and he which is filthy, let him be
filthy still; and he that is righteous, let him be righteous still; and
he that is holy, let him be holy still.

I saw that every case was then decided for life or death. Jesus had
blotted out the sins of his people.  He had received his kingdom, and
the atonement had been made for the subjects of his kingdom.  While
Jesus had been ministering in the Sanctuary, the judgment had been going
on for the righteous dead, and then for the righteous living.  The
subjects of the kingdom were made up.  The marriage of the Lamb was
finished.  And the kingdom, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, was given to Jesus, and the heirs of salvation, and Jesus
was to reign as King of kings, and Lord of lords.

As Jesus moved out of the Most Holy place, I heard the tinkling of the
bells upon his garment, and as he left, a cloud of darkness covered the
inhabitants of the earth.  There was then no mediator between guilty
man, and an offended God.  While Jesus had been standing between God and
guilty man, a restraint was upon the people; but when Jesus stepped out
from between man and the Father, the restraint was removed, and Satan
had the control of man.  It was impossible for the plagues to be poured
out while Jesus officiated in the Sanctuary; but as his work there is
finished, as his intercession closes, there is nothing to stay the wrath
of God, and it breaks with fury upon the shelterless head of the guilty
sinner, who has slighted salvation, and hated reproof.  The saints in
that fearful time, after the close of Jesus' mediation, were living in
the sight of a holy God, without an intercessor.  Every case was
decided, every jewel numbered.  Jesus tarried a moment in the outer
apartment of the heavenly Sanctuary, and the sins which had been
confessed while he was in the Most Holy place, he placed back upon the
originator of sin, the Devil.  He must suffer the punishment of these
sins.

Then I saw Jesus lay off his priestly attire, and clothe himself with
his most kingly robes -- upon his head were many crowns, a crown within
a crown -- and surrounded by the angelic host, he left heaven.  The
plagues were falling upon the inhabitants of the earth.  Some were
denouncing God, and cursing him.  Others rushed to the people of God,
and begged to be taught how they should escape the judgments of God. 
But the saints had nothing for them.  The last tear for sinners had been
shed, the last agonizing prayer offered, the last burden had been
borne.  The sweet voice of mercy was no more to invite them.  The last
note of warning had been given.  When the saints, and all heaven were
interested for their salvation, they had no interest for themselves. 
Life and death had been set before them.  Many desired life; but did not
make any effort to obtain it.  They did not choose life, and now there
was no atoning blood to cleanse the sinner.  No compassionate Saviour to
plead for them, and cry, Spare, spare the sinner a little longer.  All
heaven had united with Jesus, as they heard the fearful words, It is
done, It is finished.  The plan of salvation had been accomplished.  But
few had chosen to accept the plan.  And as mercy's sweet voice died
away, a fearfulness and horror seized them.  With terrible distinctness
they hear, Too late! too late!

Those who had not prized God's word were hurrying to and fro.  They
wandered from sea to sea, and from the north to the east, to seek the
word of the Lord.  Said the angel, They shall not find it.  There is a
famine in the land; not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but
of hearing the words of the Lord.  What would they not give for one word
of approval from God? but no, they must hunger and thirst on.  Day after
day have they slighted salvation, and prized earthly pleasure, and
earthly riches, higher than any heavenly inducement and treasure.  They
have rejected Jesus, and despised his saints.  The filthy must remain
filthy forever.

A great portion of the wicked were greatly enraged, as they suffered the
effects of the plagues.  It was a scene of fearful agony.  Parents were
bitterly reproaching their children, and children reproaching their
parents, brothers their sisters, and sisters their brothers.  Loud
wailing cries were heard in every direction, It was you who kept me from
receiving the truth, which would have saved me from this awful hour. 
The people turned upon the ministers with bitter hate, and reproached
them, telling them, You have not warned us.  You told us all the world
was to be converted, and cried, Peace, peace, to quiet every fear that
was aroused.  You have not told us of this hour, and those who warned us
of it you said were fanatics, and evil men, who would ruin us. But the
ministers, I saw, did not escape the wrath of God.  Their sufferings
were ten-fold greater than their people's.

 

See Ezekiel 9:2-11; Daniel 7:27; Hosea 6:3; Amos 8:11-13; Revelation
chap. 16, 17:14

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 36. The Time of Jacob's Trouble](gc37)
