[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc38)  [Next](gc40) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 38

### The Saints' Reward

 

Then I saw a very great number of angels bring from the city glorious
crowns; a crown for every saint with his name written thereon; and as
Jesus called for the crowns, angels presented them to him, and the
lovely Jesus, with his own right hand, placed the crowns on the heads of
the saints.  In the same manner, the angels brought the harps, and Jesus
presented them also to the saints.  The commanding angels first struck
the note, and then every voice was raised in grateful, happy praise, and
every hand skillfully swept over the strings of the harp, sending forth
melodious music in rich and perfect strains.  Then I saw Jesus lead the
redeemed company to the gate of the city.  He laid hold of the gate and
swung it back on its glittering hinges, and bade the nations who had
kept the truth to enter in.  There was everything in the city to feast
the eye.  Rich glory they beheld everywhere.  Then Jesus looked upon his
redeemed saints; their countenances were radiant with glory; and as he
fixed his loving eyes upon them, he said, with his rich, musical voice,
I behold the travail of my soul, and am satisfied.  This rich glory is
yours to enjoy eternally.  Your sorrows are ended.  There shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more
pain.  I saw the redeemed host bow and cast their glittering crowns at
the feet of Jesus, and then, as his lovely hand raised them up, they
touched their golden harps, and filled all heaven with their music, and
songs to the Lamb.

I then saw Jesus leading the redeemed host to the tree of life, and
again we heard his lovely voice, richer than any music that ever fell on
mortal ear, saying, The leaves of this tree are for the healing of the
nations.  Eat ye all of it.  Upon the tree of life was most beautiful
fruit, which the saints could partake of freely.  There was a most
glorious throne in the City, and from under the throne proceeded a pure
river of water of life, as clear as crystal.  On either side of this
river of life was the tree of life.  On the banks of the river were
beautiful trees bearing fruit which was good for food.  Language is
altogether too feeble to attempt a description of heaven.  As the scene
rises before me I am lost in amazement; and carried away with the
surpassing splendor and the excellent glory, I lay down the pen, and
exclaim, O what love!  What wondrous love!  The most exalted language
cannot describe the glory of heaven, nor the matchless depths of a
Saviour's love.

 

See Isaiah 53:11; Revelation 21:4, 22:1-2

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 39. The Earth Desolated](gc40)
