[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc39)  [Next](gc41) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 39

### The Earth Desolated

 

I then beheld the earth.  The wicked were dead, and their bodies were
lying upon the face of the earth.  The inhabitants of earth had suffered
the wrath of God in the seven last plagues.  They had gnawed their
tongues for pain and had cursed God.  The false shepherds were signal
objects of Jehovah's wrath.  Their eyes had consumed away in their
holes, and their tongues in their mouths, while they stood upon their
feet.  After the saints were delivered by the voice of God, the rage of
the wicked multitude was turned upon each other.  The earth seemed to be
deluged with blood, and dead bodies were from one end of the earth to
the other.

The earth was in a most desolate condition.  Cities and villages, shaken
down by the earthquake, lay in heaps.  Mountains were moved out of their
places, leaving large caverns.  The sea had thrown out ragged rocks upon
the earth, and rocks had been torn out of the earth, and were scattered
all over its surface.  The earth looked like a desolate wilderness. 
Large trees were rooted up, and were strewn over the land.  Here is
Satan's home, with his evil angels, through the 1000 years.  Here they
will be confined, and wander up and down over the broken surface of the
earth, and see the effects of his rebellion against God's law.  The
effects of the curse which he has caused, he can enjoy through the 1000
years.  Limited alone to the earth, he will have no privilege of ranging
around to other planets, to tempt and annoy those who have not fallen. 
Satan suffers in this time extremely.  Since his fall his evil traits
have been in constant exercise.  He is then deprived of his power, and
left to reflect upon the part he has acted since his fall, and to look
forward with trembling and terror to the dreadful future, when he must
suffer for all the evil he has done, and be punished for all the sins he
has caused to be committed.

Then I heard shouts of triumph from the angels, and from the redeemed
saints, which sounded like ten thousand musical instruments, because
they were to be no more annoyed and tempted by the Devil, and the
inhabitants of other worlds were delivered from his presence and his
temptations.

Then I saw thrones, and Jesus and the redeemed saints sat upon them; and
the saints reigned as kings and priests unto God, and the wicked dead
were judged, and their acts were compared with the statute book, the
word of God, and they were judged according to the deeds done in the
body.  Jesus, in union with the saints, meted out to the wicked the
portion they must suffer, according to their works; and it was written
in the book of death, and set off against their names.  Satan and his
angels were also judged by Jesus and the saints.  Satan's punishment was
to be far greater than that of those whom he had deceived.  It so far
exceeded their punishment that it could not be compared with theirs. 
After all those whom he had deceived had perished, Satan was to still
live and suffer on much longer.

After the judgment of the wicked dead was finished, at the end of the
one thousand years, Jesus left the City, and a train of the angelic host
followed him.  The saints also went with him.  Jesus descended upon a
great and mighty mountain, which, as soon as his feet touched it, parted
asunder, and became a mighty plain.  Then we looked up and saw the great
and beautiful City, with twelve foundations, twelve gates, three on each
side, and an angel at each gate.  We cried out, The City! The great
City!  It is coming down from God out of heaven!  And it came down in
all its splendor, and dazzling glory, and settled in the mighty plain
which Jesus had prepared for it.

 

See Zechariah 14:4-12; Revelation 20:2-6, 20:12, 21:10-27

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 40. The Second Resurrection](gc41)
