[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](gc40)  [Next](gc42.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/157258095X/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Great Controversy*, by Ellen G. White, \[1858\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

 

### CHAPTER 40

### The Second Resurrection

 

Then Jesus and all the holy retinue of angels, and all the redeemed
saints, left the City.  The holy angels surrounded Jesus, and escorted
him on his way, and the train of redeemed saints followed.  Then Jesus
in terrible, fearful majesty called forth the wicked dead; and as they
came up with the same feeble, sickly bodies that went into the grave,
what a spectacle! what a scene!  At the first resurrection all came
forth in immortal bloom; but at the second, the marks of the curse are
visible on all.  Kings and the noble men of earth come forth with the
mean and the low, learned and unlearned together.  All behold the Son of
man; and those very men who despised and mocked Jesus, and smote him
with the reed, and that put the crown of thorns upon his sacred brow,
behold him in all his kingly majesty.  Those who spit upon him in the
hour of his trial, now turn from his piercing gaze, and from the glory
of his countenance.  Those who drove the nails through his hands and his
feet, now look upon the marks of his crucifixion.  Those who thrust the
spear into his side, behold the marks of their cruelty on his body.  And
they know that he is the very One whom they crucified, and derided in
his expiring agony.  And then there arises one long protracted wail of
agony, as they flee to hide from the presence of the King of kings and
Lord of lords.

All are seeking to hide in the rocks, and shield themselves from the
terrible glory of him whom they once despised.  As all are overwhelmed
and pained with his majesty and his exceeding glory, they with one
accord raise their voices, and with terrible distinctness exclaim,
Blessed is he who cometh in the name of the Lord.

Then Jesus and the holy angels, accompanied by all the saints, again go
to the City, and the bitter lamentations and wailings of the doomed
wicked fill the air.  Then I saw that Satan again commenced his work. 
He passed around among his subjects, and made the feeble and weak
strong, and then he told them that he and his angels were powerful.  He
then pointed to the countless millions who had been raised.  There were
mighty warriors and kings who were well skilled in battle, and who had
conquered kingdoms.  And there were mighty giants, and men who were
valiant, and had never lost a battle.  There was the proud, ambitious
Napoleon whose approach had caused kingdoms to tremble.  There stood men
of very high stature, and of dignified, lofty bearing, who had fallen in
battle.  They fell while thirsting to conquer.  As they come forth from
their graves, they resume the current of their thoughts where it ceased
in death.  They possess the same spirit to conquer which ruled when they
fell.  Satan consults with his angels, and then with those kings and
conquerors and mighty men.  Then he looks over the vast army and tells
them that the company in the City is small and feeble, and that they can
go up and take that City, and cast out its inhabitants, and possess its
riches and glory themselves.

Satan succeeds in deceiving them, and all immediately commence to fit
themselves for battle.  They construct weapons of war; for there are
many skillful men in that vast army.  And then with Satan at their head,
the multitude move on.  Kings and warriors follow close after Satan, and
the multitude follow after in companies.  Every company has a leader,
and order is observed as they march over the broken surface of the earth
to the holy City.  Jesus closes the gates of the City, and this vast
army surround it and place themselves in battle array.  They have
prepared all kinds of implements of war, expecting to have a fierce
conflict.  They arrange themselves around the City.  Jesus and all the
angelic host with the glittering crowns upon their heads, and all the
saints with their bright crowns, ascend to the top of the wall of the
City.  Jesus speaks with majesty and says, Behold, ye sinners, the
reward of the just!  And behold ye my redeemed, the reward of the
wicked!  The vast multitude behold the glorious company on the walls of
the City.  And as they witness the splendor of their glittering crowns,
and see their faces radiant with glory, expressing the image of Jesus,
and then behold the unsurpassed glory and majesty of the King of kings,
and Lord of lords, their courage fails.  The sense of the treasure and
the glory which they have lost, rushes upon them, and they have a
realizing sense that the wages of sin is death.  They see the holy,
happy company whom they have despised, clothed with glory, honor,
immortality and eternal life, while they are outside of the City with
every mean and abominable thing.

 

See Matthew 23:29; Revelation 6:15-16, 20:7-9, 22:12-15

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 41. The Second Death](gc42.md)
