<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftc05)  [Next](ftc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0879800356/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Fortune Telling by Cards*, by P.R.S. Foli, \[1915\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### The Signification of Quartettes, Triplets, and Pairs

<span class="small">*Combinations of court cards—Combinations of plain
cards—Various cards read together—General meaning of the several
suits—Some lesser points to notice*.</span>

#### Combinations of Court Cards.

*Four Aces*.—When these fall together they imply danger, financial loss,
separation from friends, love troubles, and, under some conditions,
imprisonment. The evil is mitigated in proportion to the number of them
that are reversed.

*Three Aces*.—Passing troubles, relieved by good news, faithlessness of
a lover and consequent sorrow. If reversed, they mean foolish excess.

*Two Aces*.—These portend union; if hearts and clubs it will be for
good, if diamonds and spades, for evil, probably the outcome of
jealousy. If one or both be reversed, the object of the union will fail.

*Four Kings*.—Honours, preferment, good appointments. Reversed, the good
things will be of less value, but will arrive earlier.

*Three Kings*.—Serious matters will be taken in hand with the best
result, unless any of the three cards be reversed, when it will be
doubtful.

*Two Kings*.—Co-operation in business, upright conduct and prudent
enterprises to be crowned with success. Each one reversed represents an
obstacle. All three reversed spell utter failure.

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

*Four Queens*.—A social gathering which may be spoilt by one or more
being reversed.

*Three Queens*.—Friendly visits. Reversed, scandal, gossip, and possibly
bodily danger to the inquirer.

*Two Queens*.—Petty confidences interchanged, secrets betrayed, a
meeting between friends. When both are reversed there will be suffering
for the inquirer resulting from his own acts. Only one reversed means
rivalry.

*Four Knaves*.—Roistering and noisy conviviality. Any of them reversed
lessens the evil.

*Three Knaves*.—Worries and vexations from acquaintances, slander
calling the inquirer's honour in question. Reversed, it foretells a
passage at arms with a social inferior.

*Two Knaves*.—Loss of goods, malicious schemes. If both are reversed the
trouble is imminent; if one only, it is near.

#### Combinations of Plain Cards.

*Four Tens*.—Good fortune, wealth, success in whatever enterprise is in
hand. The more there are reversed, the greater number of obstacles in
the way.

*Three Tens*.—Ruin brought about by litigation. When reversed the evil
is decreased.

*Two Tens*.—Unexpected luck, which may be connected with a change of
occupation. If one be reversed it will come soon, within a few weeks
possibly; if both are reversed, it is a long way off.

*Four Nines*.—Accomplishment of unexpected events. The number that are
reversed stand for the time to elapse before the fulfilment of the
surprise.

*Three Nines*.—Health, wealth, and happiness. Reversed, discussions and
temporary financial difficulties caused by imprudence.

*Two Nines*.—Prosperity and contentment, possibly accompanied by
business matter, testamentary documents, and possibly a change of
residence. Reversed, small worries.

*Four Eights*.—Mingled success and failure attending a journey or the
taking up of a new position. Reversed, undisturbed stability.

*Three Eights*.—Thoughts of love and marriage, new

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

family ties, honourable intentions. Reversed, flirtation, dissipation
and foolishness.

*Two Eights*.—Frivolous pleasures, passing love fancies, an unlooked-for
development. Reversed, paying the price of folly.

*Four Sevens*.—Schemes and snares, intrigue prompted by evil passions,
contention and opposition. Reversed, small scores off impotent enemies.

*Three Sevens*.—Sadness from loss of friends, ill-health, remorse.
Reversed, slight ailments or unpleasant reaction after great pleasure.

*Two Sevens*.—Mutual love, an unexpected event Reversed, faithlessness,
deceit or regret.

#### Various Cards Read Together.

The ten of diamonds next to the seven of spades means certain delay.

The ten of diamonds with the eight of clubs tells of a journey
undertaken in the cause of love.

The nine of diamonds with the eight of hearts foretells for certain a
journey.

The eight of diamonds with the eight of hearts means considerable
undertakings; with the eight of spades there will be sickness; and with
the eight of clubs there is deep and lasting love.

The seven of diamonds with the queen of diamonds tells of a very serious
quarrel; with the queen of clubs we may look for uncertainty; with the
queen of hearts there will be good news.

The ten of clubs followed by an ace means a large sum of money; should
these two cards be followed by an eight and a king, an offer of marriage
is to be expected.

When the nine, ace, and ten of diamonds fall together we may look for
important news from a distance; and if a court card comes out after them
a journey will become necessary.

The eight and seven of diamonds in conjunction imply the existence of
gossip and chatter to be traced to the inquirer.

When the king, queen, knave, and ace of one colour appear

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

in sequence it is a sign of marriage; should the queen of spades and the
knave of hearts be near, it shows there are obstacles in the way; the
proximity of the eight of spades bodes ill to the couple in question,
but their happiness will be assured by the presence of the eight of
hearts and the eight of clubs.

The ace of diamonds and the ten of hearts also foretell wedding bells.

The seven of spades, with either a court card or the two of its own
suit, betrays the existence of a false friend.

The eight and five of spades coming together tell of jealousy that will
find vent in malicious conduct.

A number of small spades in sequence are significant of financial loss,
possibly amounting to ruin.

The king of hearts and the nine of hearts form a lucky combination for
lovers.

The nine of clubs joined to the nine of hearts is indicative of affairs
connected with a will likely to benefit the inquirer.

The queen of spades is the sign of widowhood, but if accompanied by the
knave of her own suit she is symbolical of a woman who is hostile and
dangerous to the inquirer.

#### General Meaning of the Several Suits.

Hearts, as might well be supposed, are specially connected with the work
of Cupid and Hymen. The suit has also close reference to affairs of the
home and to both the domestic and social sides of life.

Diamonds are mainly representative of financial matters. small and
great, with a generally favourable signification.

Clubs are the happiest omens of all. They stand for worldly prosperity,
a happy home life with intelligent pleasures and successful
undertakings.

Spades, on the other hand, forebode evil. They speak of sickness, death,
monetary losses and anxieties, separation from friends and dear ones, to
say nothing of the minor worries of life. They are also representative
of love, unaccompanied by reverence or respect, and appealing
exclusively to the senses.

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

#### Some Lesser Points to Notice.

When a number of court cards fall together it is a sign of hospitality,
festive social intercourse, and gaiety of all kinds. Married people who
seek to read the cards must represent their own life partner by the king
or queen of the suit they have chosen for themselves, regardless of
anything else. For example, a very dark man, the king of spades, must
consider his wife represented by the queen of spades, even though she
may be as fair as a lily and not yet a widow.

Bachelors and spinsters may choose cards to personate their lovers and
friends according to their colouring. Two red tens coming together
foretell a wedding, and two red eights promise new garments to the
inquirer.

A court card placed between two cards of the same grade—for instance,
two nines, two sevens, &c., shows that the one represented by that card
is threatened by the clutches of the law, and may be lodged at His
Majesty's expense.

It is considered a good augury of success when, in dealing the cards
out, those of lesser value than the knave are in the majority,
especially if they are clubs.

Should a military man consult the cards he must always be represented by
the king of diamonds.

It is always essential to cut cards with the left hand, there being a
long-established idea that it is more intimately connected with the
heart than the right. A round table is generally preferred by those who
are in the habit of practising cartomancy. It is a matter of opinion as
to whether the cards speak with the same clearness and accuracy when
consulted by the inquirer without an intermediary. The services of an
adept are generally supposed to be of great advantage, even when people
have mastered the rudiments of cartomancy themselves.

Patience, the power of putting two and two together, a quick intuitive
perception, and a touch of mysticism in the character, are all useful
factors in the pursuit of this pastime.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. What the Cards can Tell of the Past, the Present, and
the Future](ftc07)

</div>
