<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftc17)  [Next](ftc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0879800356/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Fortune Telling by Cards*, by P.R.S. Foli, \[1915\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

### CHAPTER XVI

#### Your Heart's Desire

<span class="small">*The wish with fifteen cards—Another way—The wish
with thirty-two cards—What the four aces tell—The wish in seven
packs—The wish card again*.</span>

#### The Wish with Fifteen Cards.

HAVING shuffled the cards well, select according to the second method
the card which will represent the inquirer—a king for a man, a queen for
a woman—and place this card on the table; then request your subject to
wish for some one thing whilst he or she is shuffling the pack (which
must only include the selected thirty-two cards). The pack must be cut
once.

Take the cards, and holding them easily in your own hands, let the
inquirer draw fifteen cards, placing them face downwards on the table,
one on top of the other in the order drawn. The fifteen cards having
been drawn, discard the others, and place the selected ones in position
according to the following plan: The representative card is to be in the
centre, and the other cards are to be placed to the left—to the
right—above—below—and on the centre, one by one. Thus on the left you
will have the first, sixth, and eleventh; on the right, the second,
seventh, and twelfth; above, the third, eighth, and thirteenth; below,
the fourth, ninth, and fourteenth; and on the representative card you
will have placed the fifth, tenth, and fifteenth. (See diagram.)

Then take the left packet and turn and read according to the meaning in
the combination of sevens. The next packet to be taken is the one on the
right, then the one above, and following that the packet below. The left
and top packets

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span id="img_10300"></span> ![](img/10300.jpg)

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

represent events that may influence your wish in the future; the packets
on the right and below show those events which have influenced it in the
past; whilst those cards covering the representative card indicate
affairs that may be expected immediately, and are to be read in strict
reference to the wish.

#### Another Way with Fifty-two Cards.

Let the inquirer shuffle the cards well, and cut them into three packs,
having first selected your representative card, as in the former method,
and placed it in the centre of a circle.

Take up the packs and lay the cards in a circle, using forty-two, and
with the remaining nine form a triangle inside the circle. The cards
must be laid face down.

Now let the inquirer choose any fifteen cards, which must be faced
upwards as he makes his selection. When fifteen cards are chosen, read
the signification according to the meaning given in the combination of
nines.

Generally speaking, if diamonds predominate the fortune will be fair; if
hearts appear in the ascendant, love affairs are prosperous; clubs will
show how material interests are progressing; and spades will prepare us
for sorrow.

#### The Wish with Thirty-two Cards.

Take out all the twos, threes, fours, fives, and sixes from an ordinary
pack. The inquirer must then shuffle the remaining thirty-two, cut with
the left hand, and wish from the depths of the heart. The dealer places
eight cards, face downwards, upon the table in a row before him. He next
turns them up one by one, beginning from the left, and as soon as a pair
of any kind, it does not matter what, be exposed, they must both be
covered by cards taken from the pack in his hand. If they all pair off
exactly, it may be taken as a sign that the inquirer's wish will be
gratified, but if at any moment there are no pairs exposed, the fates
are unpropitious, and the search for a favourable answer must be
abandoned. Should most of the cards pair off, leaving only one, two, or
three unmated, it portends delay and disappointment before the
realisation of the desire.

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

#### What the Four Aces Tell.

Take the thirty-two cards up again, shuffle them, and mentally register
your wish. The first thirteen cards must be turned up, and a careful
search made for any aces that may be there. If found, place them on one
side. The rest of the cards must be shuffled again and thirteen more
dealt out, with a second search for aces. This is done a third time if
all the four have not appeared; and if they still refuse to come, there
is no hope of the wish being granted. It is the best possible omen if
the four aces come out in the first deal, and very good luck if they
arrive with only two attempts; but the third is the last chance, so the
turning up of those thirteen cards is fraught with much excitement.

#### The Wish in Seven Packs.

This is a very simple method, but it is by no means always propitious to
the inquirer; if, however, he *does* get the desired answer, we take it
that the capricious goddess is in a very smiling mood.

Thirty-two cards are required, and they must be arranged in suits in the
following order: Ace, king, queen, knave, ten, nine, eight, seven. The
cards must not be shuffled, but the arranged pack is cut, with the left
hand, into seven smaller packs, and all are placed face downwards upon
the table.

The dealer must then proceed to turn up the top cards of each pack, and
as a pair of queens, nines, knaves, or whatever they may happen to be
becomes visible, he must remove them from the packs. Should all the
cards pair off in this manner, the wish may be taken as one that will
speedily be granted. Should the cards come out awkwardly, literally in
sixes and sevens instead of pairs, the inquirer must adapt his desires
to the inevitable with the best grace he can.

#### The Wish Card Again.

Yet a sixth way, which will give some idea if the heart's desire will be
gratified, is as follows:—

Shuffle the whole pack of cards and give them to the

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

inquirer, who must then divide the pack into three, wishing intently all
the time. Take up the packs separately and glance through them; the nine
of hearts is the most important card, as that is the symbol of the wish.
Should this be in juxtaposition to the card—the king or
queen—representing the inquirer, and with favourable surroundings, then
you may conclude that the things hoped for will come to pass. Also, if
the wish card is in combination with cards that are an indication of the
inquirer's desires, it is a favourable augury

For instance, if the wish referred to business, and the suit of clubs
surrounded the nine of hearts, then it might be concluded that the
matter would terminate in a prosperous manner. Diamonds, as they
foretell wealth, would also pro muse prosperity; hearts imply good
wishes and good will, whilst spades carry a sinister import.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII. A Rhyming Divination](ftc19)

</div>
