<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Tarot](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ftc19)  [Next](ftc21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0879800356/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Fortune Telling by Cards*, by P.R.S. Foli, \[1915\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

#### The Tarots

<span class="small">*Derivation of name—Remote origin—The great
Etteilla*.</span>

#### Derivation of Name.

THESE immediate predecessors of our own playing cards were primarily
used for divination, and are supposed to have been the invention of one
Jacques Gringonneur, an astrologer and cabalist, who was probably of
Jewish extraction, as the Tarot packs extant in Europe are of an
Israelitish character. Various derivations are given of the name. A
simple one is that they were called Tarots because of the crossed
diagonal lines upon the back of the cards, a design known by the word
*tarotée*. There were Roman numerals in the margin above the symbolic
devices. The game played with them after the numeral cards had been
added was called *tarrochi*.

#### Remote Origin.

Cartomancers and occultists trace the Tarots back into the dim and
distant past. The science of hieroglyphics was based upon an alphabet in
which the gods were letters, the letters were ideas, the ideas numbers,
and the numbers perfect signs. This alphabet is supposed to date from
the days of Abraham, and is called the famous "Book of Thoth." Moses,
who was learned in all the lore of the Egyptians, took it back to his
own people and guarded the secret jealously. It is supposed to have come
down to us in the Tarots, which have been changed and modified by the
time and place of their adoption.

Another theory is given by the famous cartomancer Etteilla,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

who says: "On a table or altar in the temple of Ptah at Memphis, at the
height of the breast of the Egyptian Magus, were, on one side, a book or
collection of cards, or plates of gold (the tarots), and on the other a
vase, &c." According to this authority the name *tarot* is derived from
the pure Egyptian word *Tar*, a path; and *Ro*, *Ros*, *Rog*, royal, the
combined meaning reading "The Royal Path of Life."

A writer of the eighteenth century, Count de Gibelen, says: "If it were
known that there exists in our day a work of the ancient Egyptians,
which had escaped the flames that devoured their superb libraries, and
which contains their purest doctrines on the most interesting subjects,
every one would doubtless be anxious to acquire the secrets of so
valuable a work. . . . This work is composed of seventy-eight
illustrations . . ."

Count de Gibelen here refers to the "Book of Thoth," or the Tarot pack
of cards. A writer on occult subjects (Macgregor Mathers) believes that
the title of this book is derived from *târu*, an Egyptian word which
means "to require an answer" or "to consult"; and that the second "t" is
added to denote the feminine gender.

"Papus," in his "Key to Occult Science," tells a quaint story as to the
reason why the ancient Egyptians came to confide their secrets to the
"Book of Thoth." When the overthrow of the kingdom was at hand, the
priests met in solemn conclave to decide what means might be used to
preserve their secrets inviolate for the initiates of all future ages.

After much deliberation it was held to be best to confide these secrets
to something which appealed to vice in man and not to his nobler
qualities, so thus the "Book of Thoth" was compiled.

And, indeed, to those interested in occult science it is evident that
many solemn mysteries are here symbolised, the explanation of which
would be out of place in a book principally designed for amusement, as
this is.

#### The Great Etteilla.

*Le Célèbre Etteilla* was the great exponent of the mysteries of the
Tarots in the time of the French Revolution. He was well known in Paris
as a hairdresser, but he had a mind

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

above his trade, and proceeded to steep himself in the study of the
occult. Having mastered much of the mystic lore then available, he
started to evolve a system of his own, invented mystic signs, made
cabalistic calculations, drew diagrams, and produced weighty volumes to
further the cause to which he had devoted himself. His principal work
appeared in 1783, and from being somewhat of a celebrity as Alliette the
fashionable hairdresser, he mounted to the top of the ladder of popular
favour, and reigned supreme for thirty years as *Le Célèbre Etteilla*.
So much for spelling your name backwards! Disciples and rivals grew up
and thronged around him. In the perilous days of 1789, men came to him
with blanched lips and drawn features, asking if they might hope to live
through the morrow. There were but few "smooth things" to prophesy in
those dark days. One cannot help wondering whether he helped any to
evade the doom that threatened them.

Etteilla used the Tarots, and adapted them to his own system. Some
students of the occult think that he mishandled the sacred emblems of
ancient wisdom, but most cartomancers look upon him as one of the chief
authorities on fortune-telling by cards, and his method has been made
the basis of several subsequent and modern experiments.

It is to be observed that the Tarots are not universally known in the
present day, and at the few places where they are sold a fairly high
price is asked for them, in comparison with the cost of an ordinary pack
of playing cards. For this reason those systems which can only be worked
with the Tarots have not been dealt with at length in these pages. The
following chapter gives an outline of the way in which these symbolical
and mysterious cards can be used, together with some of the
significations attached to those composing the major and minor arcana.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. Etteilla's Method](ftc21)

</div>
