[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj310)  [Next](mhj312) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_486">p. 486</span>

### CHAP. X.

#### Continuation of the Discourse on the Lesser Mysteries

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> that part of the discourse which
remains to be laid before the reader, the Hierophant, insisting on the
necessity of enlightening the people to operate the grand revolution,
seems to fear that the Candidate has not clearly conceived the real plan
of this revolution, which is in future to be the sole object of all his
instructions. "Let your instructions and lights be
[universally](errata.htm#35) diffused; so shall you render mutual
security universal; *and security and instruction will enable us to live
without prince or government*. If that were not the case, why should we
go in quest of either?'' <span id="fr_153"></span>[1](#fn_153)

Here then the Candidate is clearly informed of the grand object towards
which he is to direct all his future instructions. To teach the people
to live without *princes* or *governments*, without laws or even civil
society, is to be the general tendency of all his lessons. But of what
nature must these lessons be to attain the desired object?—*They are to
treat of morality, and of morality alone*. "For (continues the
Hierophant) if light be the work of morality, light and security will
gain strength as morality expands itself. *Nor is true morality any
other than the art of teaching men to shake off their wardship, to
attain the age of manhood, and thus to need neither princes nor
governments*." <span id="fr_154"></span>[2](#fn_154)

When we shall see the Sect enthusiastically pronouncing the word
*morality*, let us recollect the definition which it has just given us
of it. Without it, we could not have understood the real sense of the
terms *honest men*, *virtue*, *good* or *wicked men*. We see that,
according to this definition, the honest man is he who labours at the
overthrow of civil society, its laws, and its chiefs: for these are the
only crimes or virtues mentioned in the whole Code. Presupposing that
the Candidate may object that it would be impossible to bring mankind to
adopt such doctrines, the Hierophant anticipates the objection, and
exclaims, "He is little acquainted with the powers of reason and the
attractions of virtue; he is a very novice in the regions of light, who
shall harbour such mean ideas as to his own essence, or the nature of
mankind. . . .If either he or I can attain this point, why should not
another attain it also? What! when men can be led to despise the horrors
of death, when they may be inflamed with the enthusiasm of religious and
political follies, shall they be deaf to that very doctrine which can
alone lead them to happiness? *No, no; man is not so wicked* 

<span id="page_487">p. 487</span>

*as an arbitrary morality would make him appear*. He is wicked, because
Religion, the State, and bad example, perverts him. It would be of
[advantage](errata.htm#36) to those who wish to make him better, were
there fewer persons whose interest it is to render him wicked in order
that they may support their power by his wickedness."

"Let us form a more liberal opinion of human nature. We will labour
indefatigably, nor shall difficulties affright us. May our principles
become the foundation of all morals! *Let reason at length be the
religion of men, and the problem is solved*." <span
id="fr_155"></span>[3](#fn_155)

This pressing exhortation will enable the reader to solve the problem of
*the altars, the worship, and the festivals of Reason*, in the French
Revolution; nor will they be any longer at a loss to know from what
loathsome den their shameless Goddess rose.

The Candidate also obtains the solution of all that may have appeared to
him problematic in the course of his former trials. "Since such is the
force of morality and of morality alone (says the Hierophant), since it
alone can operate the grand revolution which is to restore liberty to
mankind, and abolish the empire of imposture, superstition, and
despotism; you must now perceive why on their first entrance into our
Order we oblige our pupils to apply closely to the study of morality, to
the knowledge of themselves and of others. You must see plainly, that if
we permit each Novice to introduce his friend, *it is in order to form a
legion that may more justly he called holy and invincible than that of
the Theban*; since the battles of the friend fighting by the side of his
friend are those which are to reinstate human nature in its rights, its
liberty, and its primitive independence."

"The morality which is to perform this miracle is not a morality of vain
subtleties. It is not that morality which, degrading man, renders him
careless of the goods of this world, forbids him the enjoyment of the
innocent pleasures of life, and inspires him with the hatred of his
neighbour. It must not be a morality favouring the interests only of its
teachers, which prescribes persecution and intoleration, which militates
against reason, which forbids the prudent use of the passions; whose
virtues are no other than inaction, idleness, and the heaping of riches
on the slothful.—*Above all, it must not be that morality which, adding
to the miseries of the miserable, throws them into a state of
pusillanimity and despair, by the threats of hell and the fear of
devils*.

"It must, on the contrary, be that morality so much disregarded and
defaced at the present day by selfishness, and replete with
heterogeneous principles. It must be a divine doctrine, such as Jesus
taught to his disciples, and of which he gave the real interpretation in
his secret conferences."

This sudden transition naturally leads Weishaupt to the developement of
a mystery of iniquity for which we have long since seen him preparing
his *Major Illuminees*, and particularly the *Scotch Knights* of
illuminization. The better to understand this mystery, let us recall to
mind how the *Insinuators* or the teachers began by solemnly assuring
their different Candidates, Novices, or *Minerval* Academicians, that in
all the lodges of Illuminism there never arises

<span id="page_488">p. 488</span>

a question in the least degree prejudicial to religion or the state. All
these promises have been gradually lost sight of, and the proselyte has
had time to accustom his ears to declamations against the priesthood and
royalty. It has already been insinuated, that the Christianity of our
times is very different from that taught by Jesus Christ; the time was
not arrived for numbering Christ himself among the impostors; his name,
his virtues, might still be venerated by certain adepts. Some there
were, perhaps, who would be shocked at bare-faced Atheism; and it is on
their account that Weishaupt has thus treated of Christ. In the
preceding degree he had contented himself with hinting, that the
doctrines of this divine teacher had been perverted; nor had he declared
what species of political revolution was (as he pretended) pointed out
in the Gospel. But here the execrable sophister apostrophizes the God of
the Christians in language similar to that in which we have since seen
the too famous Fauchet declaiming in the revolutionary pulpit. It is
here that Weishaupt declares Jesus Christ to be the Father of the
Jacobins, or rather (to speak the revolutionary language) the great
Doctor of the *Sans-culottes*. But, to enable us the better to judge of
the cunning and premeditated villainy of this detestable artifice, let
us first attend to the correspondence of the adept who, under Weishaupt,
is charged with the compiling of the Code. Knigge, like the monstrous
prototype of Illuminism, subdivides the adepts into those who scoff at
and detest revelation, and those who stand in need of a revealed
religion to fix their ideas. It is to explain this that Knigge writes
the following letter to Zwack:

"To unite these two classes of men, to make them concur and co-operate
toward our object, it was necessary to represent Christianity in such a
light as to recall the superstitious to reason, and to teach our more
enlightened sages not to reject it on account of its abuse. This should
have been the secret of Masonry, and have led us to our object.
Meanwhile despotism strengthens daily, though liberty universally keeps
pace with it. It was necessary then to unite the extremes. We therefore
assert here, that Christ did not establish a new religion, but that his
intention was simply to reinstate natural religion in its rights; that
by giving a general bond of union to the world, by diffusing the light
and wisdom of his morality, and by dissipating prejudices, *his
intention was, to teach us the means of governing ourselves, and to
re-establish, without the violent means of revolutions, the reign of
Equality and Liberty among men*. This was easily done by quoting certain
texts from Scripture, and by giving explanations of them, *true or false
is of little consequence*, provided each one finds a sense in these
doctrines of Christ consonant with his reason. We add, that this
religion, so simple in itself, was afterwards defaced; but that, by
means of inviolable secrecy, it has been transmitted in purity to us
through Freemasonry."

"Spartacus (Weishaupt) had collected many materials for this, and I
added my discoveries in the instructions for these two degrees. Our
people, therefore, being convinced that we alone are possessed of the
real secrets of Christianity, *we have but to add a few words against
the Clergy and Princes*. In the last mysteries we have to unfold to our
adepts *this pious fraud*, and then by writings demonstrate

<span id="page_489">p. 489</span>

*the origin of all* religious impositions, and their mutual connexion
with each other." <span id="fr_156"></span>[4](#fn_156)

If the reader be not too much disgusted with *this pious fraud*, but can
still attend to the declamations of the Hierophant, let us once more
enter that den of demons wherein presides the triple genius of impiety,
hypocrisy, and anarchy.

The Hierophant is about to say, "that their grand and ever-celebrated
master, Jesus of Nazareth, appeared in an age when corruption was
universal; in the midst of a people who from time immemorial had been
subjected to, and severely felt the yoke of slavery; <span
id="fr_157"></span>[5](#fn_157) and who eagerly expected their deliverer
announced by the Prophets. Jesus appeared and taught the doctrine of
reason; to give greater efficacy to these doctrines, he formed them into
a religion, and adopted the received traditions of the Jews. He
prudently grafted his new school on their religion and their customs,
which he made the vehicle of the essence and secrets of his new
doctrines. He did not select sages for his new disciples, but ignorant
men chosen from the lowest class of the people, to show that his
doctrine was made for all, and suitable to every one's understanding; to
show too, that the knowledge of the grand truths of reason was not a
privilege peculiar to the great. He does not teach the Jews alone, but
all mankind, the means of acquiring their liberty, by the observation of
his precepts. He supported his doctrines by an innocent life, and sealed
them with his blood."

"His precepts for the salvation of the world are, simply, the love of
God and the love of our neighbour; he asks no more. . . .Nobody ever
reduced and consolidated the bonds of human society within their real
limits as he did—No one was ever more intelligible to his hearers, or
more prudently covered the sublime signification of his doctrine. *No
one, indeed, ever laid a surer foundation for liberty than our grand
master, Jesus of Nazareth*. It is true, that on all occasions (*in
ganzen*) he carefully concealed the sublime meaning and natural
consequences of his doctrines; *for he had a secret doctrine, as is
evident* from more than one passage of the Gospel."

It was during the time that he was writing this hypocritical history of
the Messiah, that Weishaupt was turning the credulous proselyte into
ridicule; as to the other adepts, he well knew that they anticipated
such explanations, or at least would be delighted with them. Hence that
impudence with which he falsifies the Scriptures. To prove the existence
of this secret school, the doctrines of which are reserved for the
initiated alone, he cites these words of Christ: "To you is given to
know the mystery of the kingdom of God; but to them that are without,
all things are done in parables." <span id="fr_158"></span>[6](#fn_158)
But he [carefully](errata.htm#37) avoids mentioning the order which
Christ gives to his disciples, "That which I tell you in the dark, speak
ye in the light; and that which you hear in the ear, preach ye upon the
house-tops." <span id="fr_159"></span>[7](#fn_159) Weishaupt then
proceeds to these words: "And their princes have power over them but it
is not so among you; but whoever will be greater shall be your
minister." <span id="fr_160"></span>[8](#fn_160) This precept, as well
as all those on Christian humility, he transforms into principles

<span id="page_490">p. 490</span>

of disorganizing equality inimical to all constituted authorities.—With
equal ease he avoids all those lessons so often repeated both by Christ
and his Apostles, on the obligation of rendering to Cæsar what is
Cæsar's, of paying tribute, and of recognizing the authority of God
himself in that of the law and of the magistrates. If Christ has
preached the love of our neighbour, or fraternal love, his words are
immediately perverted by *Weishaupt* into a love of *his* Equality. If
Christ exhorts his disciples to contemn riches, the impostor pretends it
is *to prepare the world for that community of riches* which destroys
all property. In fine, the conclusions drawn from these impious and
deriding explanations, and from many others of a similar nature, are
contained in the following words:

"If therefore *the object* of the secret of Jesus, which has been
preserved by the institution of the mysteries, and clearly demonstrated
both by the conduct and the discourses of this divine master, *was to
reinstate mankind in their original Equality and Liberty*, and to
prepare the means; how many things immediately appear clear and natural,
which hitherto seemed to be contradictory and unintelligible! *This
explains in what sense Christ was the saviour and the liberator of the
world. Now the doctrine of original sin, of the fall of man, and of his
regeneration, can be understood. The state of pure nature, of fallen or
corrupt nature, and the state of grace, will no longer be a problem.
Mankind, in quitting their state of original liberty, fell from the
state of nature and lost their dignity. In their civil society, under
their governments, they no longer live in the state of pure nature, but
in that of fallen and corrupt nature. If the moderating of their
passions and the diminution of their wants, reinstate them in their
primitive dignity, that will really constitute their redemption and
their state of grace. It is to this point that morality, and the most
perfect of all morality, that of Jesus, leads mankind. When at length
this doctrine shall be generalized throughout the world, the reign of
the good and of the elect shall be established*." <span
id="fr_161"></span>[9](#fn_161)

This language is surely not enigmatical. The proselyte, once master of
the mysteries it contains, needs only to be informed, how the great
revolution, which they foretell, became the object of secret societies,
and what advantages accrue to these societies from the secresy in which
they exist.

The Hierophant then, for the instruction of the proselyte, goes back to
the origin of Masonry; he declares it to be the original school and
depository of the true doctrine. He takes a view of its hieroglyphics,
and shapes them to his system. The *rough stone* of Masonry becomes the
symbol of the *primitive state* of man, *savage* but *free*.—*The stone
split or broken is* the state of fallen nature, of mankind in civil
society, no longer united in one family, but divided according to their
states, governments, or religions. The polished stone represents mankind
reinstated in its primitive dignity, in its independence. Yet Masonry
has not only lost these explanations; but the illuminizing orator goes
so far as to say, "*The Freemasons, like Priests and chiefs of nations,
have banished reason from the earth. They have inundated the world with
tyrants, impostors, spectres, corpses, and men like to wild beasts*."

<span id="page_491">p. 491</span>

Should any reader be surprised at seeing the Hierophant give this
account of Masonry, let him reflect on the hatred which Weishaupt had
sworn against every school where the name of any deity was preserved.
The *Jehovah* or the *Grand Architect* of Masonry, the *two-fold God* of
the Rosycrusian magicians, still render the occult lodges a school of
some sort of Theosophy. But how reserved soever the Hierophant may be
with regard to Atheism, the proselyte must, nevertheless, foresee, that
should he be admitted to one degree higher, neither the *Grand
Architect* nor the *two-fold God* will meet a better fate than the God
of the Christians. And therefore it is that Weishaupt declaims against
those *spirits*, *apparitions*, and all the *superstitions* of
Freemasonry; hence the theosophic Masons are involved in the general
malediction pronounced against the priesthood and the throne.

It can be easily conceived, that Weishaupt must represent true Masonry,
or the pretended real Christianity, as solely extant in Illuminism. But
the Hierophant enjoins the proselyte *not to think that this is the only
advantage which the Order and the whole universe draw from this
mysterious association*.

Here let magistrates, the chiefs of nations, every man who still retains
any regard for the support of laws and empires, and of civil society,
let them, I say, read and meditate on these other advantages. The lesson
is of the utmost importance—Whoever you are, all honest citizens,
whether *Masons, Rosycrusians, Mopses, Hewers of Wood, Knights*; all you
who thirst after the mysteries of the lodges, cease to accuse me of
conjuring up chimerical dangers. I am not the man who speaks: it is he
who of all others has been the *best acquainted* with your association,
and has known what advantages could be drawn from them by able and
patient conspirators.—Read; and tell us which is the most impressive on
your mind, the pleasures you may find in your lodges, or the dangers of
your country. Read; and if the name of citizen be still dear to you,
reflect whether yours should remain inscribed on the registers of a
secret society. You were ignorant of the dangers; the most monstrous of
conspirators will lay them open to you, and he will call them
advantages. He literally says, "Though these mysterious Associations
should not attain our object, they prepare the way for us; they give a
new interest to the cause; they present it under points of view hitherto
unobserved; they stimulate the inventive powers and the expectations of
mankind; *they render men more indifferent as to the interests of
governments*; they bring men of divers nations and religions within the
same bond of union; *they deprive the church and the state of their
ablest and most laborious members*; they bring men together who would
never otherwise have known or met each other. *By this method alone they
undermine the foundation of states, though they had really no such
project in view. They throw them together and make them clash one
against the other*. They teach mankind the power and force of union;
they point out to them the imperfection of their *political
constitutions*, and that without exposing them to the suspicions of
their enemies, such as magistrates and public governments. They *mask
our progress, and procure us the facility of incorporating in our plans
and of admitting into our Order, after the proper trials, the most able
men, whose patience*,

<span id="page_492">p. 492</span>

*long abused, thirsts after the grand ultimatum*. By this means they
weaken the enemy; and though they should never triumph over him, *they
will at least diminish the numbers and the zeal of his partizans*; they
divide his troops to cover the attack. In proportion as these new
associations or secret societies, formed in different states, shall
acquire strength and prudence at the expence of the former ones (that is
to say, of civil society), *the latter must weaken, and insensibly
fall*."

"Beside, our Society originates, and must naturally and essentially
deduce its origin from those very governments whose vices have rendered
our union necessary. We have no object but that better order of things
for which we incessantly labour; *all the efforts, therefore, of Princes
to stop our progress will be fruitless; the spark may long remain hidden
in the ashes, but the day must come in which shall burst forth the
general flame*. For nature nauseates always to run the same course. The
heavier the yoke of oppression weighs on man, the more sedulously will
he labour to throw it off; and the liberty he seeks shall expand itself.
*The seed is sown whence shall spring a new world; the roots extend
themselves; they have acquired too much strength, they have been too
industriously propagated, for the day of harvest to fail us*.—Perhaps it
may be necessary to wait thousands and thousands of years; but sooner or
later nature shall consummate its grand work, and she shall restore
*that dignity* to man *for which he was destined from the beginning*."

Reader, you have heard them. These conspirators have said more than I
should have dared to hint at on the nature and danger of these
associations. It would be useless for me to rest longer on that point. I
shall end by showing by what artifices the Hierophant endeavours to
tranquilize the consciences of those adepts who may have been startled
at these predictions. Notwithstanding all that he has said of those
times when Illuminism shall find means of *binding hands and
subjugating*; notwithstanding all that aversion against governments
which he seeks to infuse into the adepts, he concludes in a hypocritical
strain peculiar to his wickedness. "We are here at once the observers
and the instruments of nature.—We do not wish to precipitate her steps.
To enlighten men, to correct their morals, to inspire them with
benevolence, such are our means. Secure of success, we abstain from
violent commotions. To have foreseen the happiness of posterity, and to
have prepared it by irreproachable means, suffices for our felicity. The
tranquility of our consciences is not troubled by the reproach of aiming
at the ruin or overthrow of states and thrones. Such an accusation could
with no more propriety be preferred against us, than it might against
the statesmen who had foreseen and foretold the impending and inevitable
ruin of the state.—As assiduous observers of Nature, we admire her
majestic course; and, burning with the noble pride of our origin, we
felicitate ourselves on being the [children](errata.htm#38) of men and
of God."

"But carefully observe and remember, that we do not impose our opinions;
we do not oblige you to adopt our doctrines. Let the truth you can
acknowledge be your only guide. Free man, exercise here thy primitive
right; seek, doubt, examine; do you know of, or can you find elsewhere,
any thing

<span id="page_493">p. 493</span>

that is better?—Make us acquainted with your views, as we have exposed
ours to you. We do not blush at the limits of our understandings; we
know that we are but men; we know that such are the dispositions of
nature, such the lot of man, that he is not to expect to attain
perfection at his outset; he can attain it but by degrees. It is by
gaining experience from our errors, by profiting of the lights acquired
by our forefathers, that we shall become at once the children of wisdom,
and the parents of a still wiser progeny. If, therefore, you think that
you have found truth in the whole of our doctrine, adopt the whole.
Should you perceive any error to have stolen in with it, remember that
truth is not the less estimable on that account. If you have met with
nothing that pleases you here, reject the whole without fear; and
remember, that in many things, at least, we only need further research,
or a new investigation. Do you observe any thing blameable or laudable,
see and make choice of what you approve. Should you be more enlightened
yourself, then your eye may have discovered truths which are still
denied to us. The more art we employ in the instruction of our pupils to
lead them to the paths of wisdom, the less you will be inclined to
refuse us a portion of your applause."

Thus ends the discourse of the Hierophant.—The proselyte who has heard
it without shuddering, may flatter himself with being worthy of this
priesthood. But before he is sacrilegiously anointed, he is led back to
the porch, where he is invested with a white tunic. He wears a broad
silken scarlet belt; the sleeve is tied at the extremity and middle with
bandages of the same colour, which make it bulge out. <span
id="fr_162"></span>[10](#fn_162) I am particular in the description of
this dress, because it was in a similar one that, during the French
revolution, a comedian appeared personally attacking Almighty God,
saying, "No! thou dost not exist. If thou hast power over the thunder
bolts, grasp them; aim them at the man who dares set thee at defiance in
the face of thy altars. But no, I blaspheme thee, and I still live. No,
thou dost not exist." In the same costume, and to prepare him for the
same blasphemies, the Epopt is recalled into the temple of mysteries. He
is met by one of the Brethren, who does not permit him to advance till
he has told him, "that he is sent to enquire whether he (the proselyte)
has perfectly understood the discourse which has been read to
him—whether he has any doubts concerning the doctrines which are
contained in it—whether his heart is penetrated with the sanctity of the
principles of the Order—whether he is sensible of the call, feels the
strength of mind, the fervent will, and all the disinterestedness
requisite to labour at the grand undertaking—whether he is ready to make
a sacrifice of his will, and to suffer himself to be led by the most
excellent superiors of the Order."

I will spare the reader the disgusting impiety of the ceremonial which
immediately follows.—The rites of the preceding degree were in derision
of the Last Supper; these are an atrocious mimicry of the sacerdotal
ordination. A curtain is drawn, and an altar appears with a crucifix
upon it. On the altar also is a Bible; and the ritual of the Order lies
on a reading desk; on the side a censer, and a phial full of oil. The
Dean acts the part of a Bishop, and he is surrounded with acolytes. He
prays over the proselyte, blesses him, cuts hair

<span id="page_494">p. 494</span>

from the top of his head, clothes him in the vestments of the
priesthood, and pronounces prayers after the fashion of the Sect. On
presenting the cap he says, "*Cover thyself with this cap, it is more
valuable than the crown of kings*." The very expressions of the Jacobin
with his red cap. The communion consists in honey and milk, which the
Dean gives to the proselyte, saying, "This is what Nature gives to man.
Reflect how happy he would still have been, if the desire of
superfluities had not, by depriving him of a taste for such simple food,
multiplied his wants, and poisoned the balm of life."

All the preceding part of this degree sufficiently explains the real
meaning of these words. The ceremonies are terminated with delivering to
the Epopt that part of the code which relates to his new degree. I shall
relate all that is necessary for the reader to be informed of, when,
after having treated of the degree of Regent, and of the Grand
Mysteries, I shall come to investigate the government of the Order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[494:1](mhj311.htm#fr_153) Und allgemeine
aufklärung and sicherheit machen fürsten and Staaten entbehrlich. Oder
wo zu braucht man sie sodann.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[494:2](mhj311.htm#fr_154) Die moral ist also
die kunst welche menschen lehrt volljährig zu werden, der vormundschaft
los zu werden, in ihr männliches alter zu tretten, and die fürsten zu
entbehren.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[494:3](mhj311.htm#fr_155) Und endlich macht
die vernunft zur religion der menschen, so ist die aufgabe aufgelösst.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[494:4](mhj311.htm#fr_156) Orig. Writ. Vol. II.
Letter from Philo to Cato, page 104, and following.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[494:5](mhj311.htm#fr_157) Here is another
example of the manner in which history is falsified—The Jews were
enslaved from time immemorial! Does this nation then make its whole
history consist in the years of its captivity? Had it forgot its liberty
and its triumphs under Joshua, David, Solomon, and its other Kings? Was
it just emerged from its captivity when it fell under the dominion of
the Romans, a dominion under which it remained at the time of Christ's
birth? The adept has heard talk of the captivity of the Jews, of those
periods when Almighty God, as a punishment for their crimes, delivered
them over to their enemies; and he inconsiderately concludes, that their
whole history is but one continued scene of bondage.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[494:6](mhj311.htm#fr_158) St. Mark, Ch. iv. V.
11.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[494:7](mhj311.htm#fr_159) St. Matthew. Ch. x.
V. 27.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[494:8](mhj311.htm#fr_160) St. Mark, Ch. x. V.
42, 43.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[494:9](mhj311.htm#fr_161) Orig. Writ. Part II.
P. 106, 7. The last Works of Spartacus, P. 58.—The author has
transcribed the whole of what is printed in Italics in German, lest his
translation of this extraordinary [passage](errata.htm#39) should be
suspected of being exaggerated. As he perfectly understands the German
language, and is a man of undoubted veracity, I have omitted it, but in
so doing think it my duty to mention it. <span
class="smallcaps">Trans</span>.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[494:10](mhj311.htm#fr_162) Last Works of Philo
and Spartacus, at the end of the Discourse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. The Regent, or the Prince Illuminee](mhj312)
