[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj318.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_563">p. 563</span>

### CHAP. XVIII.

#### Of the National Directors, of the Areopagites, and of the General of Illuminism.

<span class="smallcaps">In</span> the general plan of the Government of
the Illuminees it is said, that every Brother shall receive particular
instructions according to the rank he holds in the Hierarchy of the
Order: Yet I have never been able to discover those intended for the use
of the National Directors. This part of the Code is not to be found
either in the *two volumes* so often quoted of the *Original Writings*,
or in that of *Philo and Spartacus* which has thrown so much light on
the mysteries. It does not appear, that any of the German writers who
have been the best informed on, and the most strenuous opponents of,
Illuminism have ever been able to discover them. For some time I even
entertained doubts whether the *Superiors* called *National Directors*,
and those styled *Inspectors*, were not of the same degree in the
Hierarchy of the Sect.—They were certainly distinct employments in the
year 1782; for Weishaupt's letters at that period mention Germany as
divided into *three inspections*, each *Inspector* having several
Provincials subordinate to him. <span id="fr_244"></span>[1](#fn_244.md)
But, on the other side, the general account which the Order puts into
the hands of its Regents, and the last works of Philo printed in 1788,
mention no intermediate office between the *Provincials* and the
*Nationals*, which latter are sometimes described as *National
Superiors*, at others as *National Inspectors*. Their correspondence and
subordination is direct from the Supreme Council. <span
id="fr_245"></span>[2](#fn_245.md) It is therefore evident, that in the
last digest of the Code the two offices of *National Inspector* and
*Director* were united. But in vain would the Sect conceal the
instructions which it has appropriated to the functions of these
*National* Superiors. The denomination alone testifies the importance
which attaches to their office; and if the precise nature of their
duties be wanting, it is easy to supply the deficiency, by what has
already escaped the vigilance of the Sect in the foregoing parts of the
Code.

Let the reader recall to his mind what has been said in the Chapter on
the *Epopts*, of the systems which they were to form in order to seize
on the empire of the Sciences and direct them all toward the
accomplishment of the plots of the Sect. In the same degree we have seen
them annually assembling in each province, and compiling from their
partial attacks every means that their inventions could furnish,
insensibly to enslave the public opinion, and to

<span id="page_564">p. 564</span>

eradicate from the minds of the people what the Sect is pleased to call
religious prejudices. We have seen the class of Regents more
particularly occupied in sapping the foundations of the throne, and in
destroying that veneration in which nations held the persons and
functions of their Sovereigns—Nay, there exists a particular law framed
for the Epopts which has not yet been cited, and which must here be
introduced. It is to be found *in the Second Volume of the Original
Writings, second Section, intitled—Articles agreed upon by the
Areopagites in Ardameth* 1151 (A.D. December 1781)—There under the
article <span class="smallcaps">High Mysteries</span>, I read, "If among
our Epopts *any speculative geniuses* are to be found, they shall be
admitted to the degree of *Mage*.—These adepts shall be employed in
collecting and digesting all the grand philosophical systems, and will
invent or compile for the *people a system of religion* which our Order
means as soon as possible to give to the universe." <span
id="fr_246"></span>[3](#fn_246.md)

I do not forget that I am to treat of the *National Directors*; but am
somewhat afraid that my readers may adduce this plan for giving a new
religion to the whole universe, as invalidating their plot for the
destruction of every religion. Let such readers, however, reflect on the
religion which Weishaupt has himself laid down for his *Mages*. It is
the rankest *Spinosism*, admitting of no God but the world itself; that
is to say, absolute Atheism. Let them also remember, that one of the
last secrets of the Grand Mysteries, is to reveal to the adepts that all
religions are grounded on and are the invention of imposture. Nor is it
by any means difficult to account for these two schemes of the Sect, the
one for the creation of a new religion, the other for the destruction of
all. These plans are to be successive in their operations. Sentiments of
Religion are too deeply engraven in the minds of the people for
Weishaupt to flatter himself with suddenly eradicating it, or at least
without substituting some capricious and sophisticated faith, which in
reality would no more constitute a religion than the *Worship of
Reason*, of which the French Revolution has given us an impure essay.
The religion, therefore, to be invented by the Mages of Illuminism is no
more than a preparatory step that should destroy the religion of Christ
throughout the universe. This advantage gained, it will remain no very
difficult task to open the eyes of the whole world on the inanity and
imposture of their own; and thus it will have served as a scaffolding
which naturally disappears with the edifice that is to be pulled down.
This religion to be invented may be considered as on a parallel with
those new governments, those democracies, which are to amuse the people
until the period shall come when their Illuminizing Equality and Liberty
shall have taught them, that each one is essentially his own sovereign,
that this sovereignty is an imprescriptible right inherent in each man,
in direct opposition to democracy, and even to all property or social
compact.

Such is the general tenour of the systems to be invented and prosecuted
by the Sect, for attaining the grand object of these Conspirators. All
the adepts which the Sect comprises under the denomination of
*speculative geniuses* are perpetually labouring at these systems under
the direction of the Provincials. But they are not the persons who
complete the plans; they are only to present

<span id="page_565">p. 565</span>

the first sketch, which each Provincial is obliged to transmit to the
*National Directory*, there to undergo a further investigation and
receive its final polish. <span id="fr_247"></span>[4](#fn_247.md) One of
the first duties, therefore, of the *National Director* will be to
collect all these anti-religious and anti-social systems, to pass
judgment on them, and to declare how far they can contribute towards the
universal disorganization. But even these could not alone suffice for so
great a work; they are surrounded by the Elect of the nation as the
Provincial is by the Chosen of the provinces. This council of the Elect,
after mature deliberation, declare which are the systems that are worthy
of being adopted by the Order; and they will make all the additions and
corrections that they may conceive conducive to the success of the
general plan. Thus corrected and digested, these systems of impiety and
disorganization are deposited in the *archives* of the Director, which
now become *national*. It is to these that the Provincials have recourse
in all their doubts, and hence flow all those lights which are to expand
themselves throughout the nation:—it is hence also that the National
Director <span id="fr_248"></span>[5](#fn_248.md) will take all the new
regulations which he may judge necessary for the better combination and
concordance of the efforts of the National Brethren.—But the Sect does
not confine its views to one nation. It has formed within itself a
supreme tribunal, which has subjected all nations to its inquisition.
Composed of twelve *Peers* or *Fathers* of the Order, <span
id="fr_249"></span>[6](#fn_249.md) it is presided over by the General; and,
under the name of Areopagites, it becomes the common centre of
communication from the adepts of all nations, as the *National* is the
centre of one particular nation, the *Provincial* of one province, the
*Local Superior* of the lodges of his district, the *Minerval Master* of
his academy, the *Venerable* of his Masonic Lodge; and, finally, as the
*Insinuator* or *Recruiter* is of his novices or candidates. Thus, from
the first step to the pinnacle of the Order, every thing is connected
and gradually ascends by means of the *Quibus Licets*, *Solis* and
*Primos*.—Every thing that happens in each nation gradually ascends to
the *National*, and from these *Directors* all is transmitted to the
centre of all nations, to the supreme council of the Areopagites, and
the General in chief, the universal Director of the Conspiracy.

The grand point, therefore, to be observed in the code concerning the
National Director is, his direct correspondence with the Areopagites. It
is evident from the terms expressed in the general plan of the
government which the Sect reveals to its Regents. "In every nation there
shall be a National Director associated and in direct communication with
our Fathers, the first of whom holds the helm of the Order." <span
id="fr_250"></span>[7](#fn_250.md) This accounts for the injunction given
to the Provincial, to make frequent and exact returns to the National
Director of every thing that may take place in his province; to have
recourse to him on all doubtful occasions, or in cases of especial
importance; and never to take any step in politics without having first
consulted him. <span id="fr_251"></span>[8](#fn_251.md) This explains why
the choice of those adepts which are to be advanced to the political
degree of Regent, or to the Prefectships of districts, <span
id="fr_252"></span>[9](#fn_252.md) is left to the option of the National,
or even the nomination of the Provincials. <span
id="fr_253"></span>[10](#fn_253.md) This informs us why all the *Quibus
Licets* of the Regents are reserved to the Director, that is to say,

<span id="page_566">p. 566</span>

that all the secrets of their political discoveries may more certainly
reach the hands of him who is to leave no secret hidden from the Fathers
of the Order. <span id="fr_254"></span>[11](#fn_254.md)

Such then are the rights of, such the laws for the National Inspector of
Illuminism; and so great is the importance which the Sect attaches to
this office. To him are forwarded all the secrets of the brethren spread
throughout the provinces, the Courts, or towns; to him are sent all the
projects, all the reports on the successes gained by, or dangers
impending over the Order; on the progress of its plots; on employments,
dignities, and power to be acquired for the adepts; on the candidates to
be rejected, the enemies to be crushed, the councils and state offices
of princes to be seized. To him, in short, are reported all the means
which can retard or accelerate the fall of the Altar and of empires, the
disorganization of every church and state within his inspection.—It is
by means of his direct correspondence, and that of his Co-nationals,
that the discoveries of the Scrutators, the political plans of the
Brethren, the speculations of the plodding *geniuses* of the Order, the
plans proposed and debated in the councils of Princes, and every thing,
in short, which can weaken or strengthen the opinion of the people;
which is to be foreseen or hindered, to be anticipated or hastened in
each town, court, or family, are concentrated, and subjected to the
views of the supreme council of the Sect. Hence no sovereign, no
minister of state, no father of a family, no man in the bonds of the
most intimate friendship, can say, My secret is my own, it has not, it
will not, come to the knowledge of the Areopagites. By means of these
same National Directors too, we behold all the orders of the
Illuminizing Peers gradually descending to the adepts of all nations, of
all provinces, academies, and lodges, whether *Minerval* or <span
class="smallcaps">Masonic</span>; and immediately re-ascending through
these same Nationals an exact statement to the Areopagites in what
manner each command has been executed. It is by the Nationals too, that
the supreme council is informed of the negligent Brethren who need to be
stimulated, of the transgressors and stubborn adepts who deserve
punishment, and stand in need of being reminded that they have sworn to
submit both their lives and fortunes to the commands of the high
Superiors (the unknown Fathers) of the Areopagites. In vain would the
Sect strive to conceal the laws which the code lays down for these
Inspectors. After what the reader has already seen of the laws of the
Order, he must naturally conclude that such are evidently the mysteries
comprehended in those words, *There shall be in each empire a National
Director associated or in direct correspondence with the Fathers of the
Order*.

With [respect](errata.htm#78.md) to the laws and interior economy of the
councils, it is easy to be conceived, that the Sect has succeeded in
encompassing them with impenetrable darkness. Some few rays of light,
however, have been cast on it, and that by the Fathers themselves.

In the first place, we see *Philo*-Knigge, in his Apology, speaking as
follows of these supreme magistrates of Illuminism: "Their labours, with
regard to the parts purely speculative, were to have in view the
knowledge and the

<span id="page_567">p. 567</span>

tradition of all the important, holy, and sublime discoveries to be made
*in the religious* mysteries and in the higher philosophy. Twelve
Areopagites only are to compose this tribunal; and one of them is to be
the chief. When any one of the members dies, or retires, his successor
is chosen from among the Regents." <span
id="fr_255"></span>[12](#fn_255.md) This general idea given by Knigge of
the Supreme Council is indeed mysterious;—but he could scarcely be
expected to *publish* more, knowing as he did the fate which awaits
those who betray the secrets of the Sect. He has, however, at least said
enough to give us clearly to understand, that all the religious and
philosophical or rather impious and sophisticated speculations of the
Epopts, perpetually perverting the sciences and operating the extinction
of all religious ideas, are concentrated within the council of the
Areopagites; we have seen them combining, digesting, approving, or
rejecting *those plans of a new religion* which the *Mages* are directed
to invent, and which the Sect *means incontinently to give to the
world*.

In his familiar correspondence, Spartacus speaks more openly and with
greater latitude to his beloved Cato. Therein it appears, that
anti-religious systems do not alone employ the meditations of the
Fathers; for, soon after having mentioned the object of those *Quibus
Licets* in [which](errata.htm#79.md) the young adepts were to give an
account of the prejudices they might have discovered in themselves,
which of them predominated, and how far they had succeeded in destroying
them, he proceeds to say, "It is by these means that I discover such of
our Order as have the proper dispositions for adopting certain *special*
doctrines, and more elevated, on governments and religious
opinions." <span id="fr_256"></span>[13](#fn_256.md) He then continues,
"*The maxims and politics of the Order* are completely explained *in the
end*. Here, in the *Supreme Council*, they project and examine the plans
to be adopted for gradually enabling us to attack the enemy of reason
and human nature *personally* (*auf den leib*). Here also the mode of
introducing such plans into the Order is discussed, and it is decided to
which brethren they are to be entrusted, and how far each one can be
employed in their execution, in proportion to the insight given to
him." <span id="fr_257"></span>[14](#fn_257.md)

The reader is already too well acquainted with the maxims and policy of
Illuminism, not to join with me in saying, Here then is the grand object
of this Supreme Council of the Sect! It is in that dark recess that all
those artifices are devised for rendering the disorganizing systems of
Equality and Liberty familiar to the Illuminizing adepts: There is
exactly ascertained the proportion which each class of the Brethren can
bear in this universal destruction of religion, [empire](errata.htm#80.md),
society, and property; there again is the day anxiously sought and the
means prepared, for hereafter throwing off the mask, and attacking
*personally* the defenders of religion, laws, and property, as so many
enemies to reason and humanity; there concentrate all the declarations,
the reports, the plans of all the brethren dispersed throughout the
universe, that the Sect may judge of its own strength, and compare it
with that of the friends to the Altar and the Laws. To sum up all, it is
there that the artifices and means are determined on, and the merits and
powers of the higher adepts are investigated prior to their being
entrusted with that part of the grand conspiracy to which

<span id="page_568">p. 568</span>

their abilities are best adapted. Let the reader remember, that it is
not a stranger to the Sect who has thus described the Areopage; it is
the grand Legislator of Illuminism himself. Can we any longer stand in
need of the regulations for this council? No; we well know what they
must be; we know that impiety, and the most consummate arts in seduction
and sedition, are to be their leading features; we further know, that
its members must resemble Weishaupt himself, before they can be
permitted to sit with him in council. What other bond of union do they
need, beside the machination of the most hideous plots, the just or
unjust means of forwarding the interests of the Sect as much as
circumstances will permit, and the ensuring of success by the blackest
and most profound artifices that depravity can invent? The fertile
genius of the Legislator, however, would not commit the success of the
least of his crimes to chance. He attempted to sketch a code of laws for
his Areopagites, and for any future *Spartacus* that might succeed him.
The code contains but a *sketch* of what he calls *laws ad interim*. It
is to be found in the ninth section of the first volume of the Original
Writings, and is addressed to the Areopagites. Many other passages of
his letters relate to the same object.—I have transcribed the following
articles:

"The Areopagites shall form the Supreme Council (literally, the Supreme
College).—Their occupations shall relate to affairs of the greatest
importance, and they shall pay little or no attention to such as are
less essential.—They may *recruit*, it is true (*können sie zwar
recroutiren*); that is to say, they may entice Candidates into the
Order; but they must leave the care of their instruction to some
intelligent adept. From time to time they will visit these Candidates,
to inspire them with fresh ardour, to stimulate their zeal—They will be
particularly careful in seeing that the progress and method of our
Illuminées is every where uniform—They will more particularly watch over
Athens (*Munich*, the principal Lodge after that of Ingolstadt, where
Weishaupt resided at the time he wrote these instructions). They will
make no reports concerning that Lodge to any body but Spartacus. They
will send monthly a statement of all the principal events, *a sort of
Gazette* (*Ein art von Zeitung*), to the Brethren (*Conscii*); that is
to say, to those only who are initiated in the last secrets. But
(continues Weishaupt) *nota bene*, this Gazette as yet has been no more
than our common journal; the *Conscii* must compose one for the use of
the Areopagites. These latter will labour at *projects*,
*ameliorations*, and other objects of a similar nature, which are to be
made known to the *Conscii* by circular letters. They are the people who
are to bear a part of the weight of the general correspondence—They are
not allowed to open the letters of complaint (*die litteras
gravatoriales*); that is to say, those containing any complaints against
them. These are to be transmitted to the general, to Spartacus, as a
sure means of informing him that they fulfil their duty. This
instruction being only provisional, and relating solely to the Areopage,
shall not be circulated; but the council will take a copy and send back
the Original to Spartacus. <span id="fr_258"></span>[15](#fn_258.md)

"The assembling of the council is to be regulated according to the
feasts marked in the calendar of the Order. (*Nach dem calendario
Illuminatorum an* 

<span id="page_569">p. 569</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Ordens festen*)."
But this was soon found to be insufficient, and Weishaupt exhorts his
Areopagites to meet in their senate every post-day, and at the hour of
the delivery of the letters.

Short as this sketch of a Code for the Areopagites may seem, it clearly
denotes the essence of their functions, and shows how they are to act as
a central point for the whole Sect. A grand question was still undecided
when *Spartacus* gave these laws to the council; which was nothing less
than, Whether *Spartacus* was to preserve a legislative and sovereign
power over the Members of this Council, similar to that authority which
they were to exercise over the rest of the Order?—Great Conspirators
will seldom brook control even by their fellows. They will be equal
among themselves and in their dens of conspiracy. *Spartacus*-Weishaupt
was naturally of a despotic disposition. His Areopagites for a long time
complained of it. <span id="fr_259"></span>[16](#fn_259.md) But he
contended, that as founder, he had the indefeasible right of giving to
the association those laws and regulations which he judged necesssary
for its perpetuation. He soon, indeed, repented of the decision he had
given against himself in favour of his Senate, "That the *plurality* of
votes should dictate the eternal laws of the Sect" (*Lex semper
valitura*) <span id="fr_260"></span>[17](#fn_260.md) Notwithstanding these
complaints of the Areopagites, however, he speedily found means of
re-instating himself in that authority, the privation of which only
thwarted his artful conceptions, by subjecting them to the opinions of
persons less consummate in the conspiring arts than their master. He
sometimes submits to the justification of his conduct; but that is the
very moment in which the reader should observe him artfully reclaiming
all the rights and pretending to the exercise of unlimited despotism,
though his cant appears to reject the very idea of it. Addressing his
opponents in the shape of his pupils, he recalls to their minds the
monstrous services he has rendered them in their youth, as so many
benefactions of the most tender friendship, and asks them "of what they
can in their consciences complain?" "When (says he) did you ever observe
harshness or haughtiness in my conduct, with respect to you? When did I
ever assume the tone of Master? Is it not rather with an excess of
confidence, of goodness, of openess with my friends, that I may be
reproached?"—When in this manner Weishaupt has captivated his
Areopagites, he comes to the point: "Read then (he says) my letters over
and over again. You will therein perceive that the grand object of our
Society is not a thing of small consequence for me; that I know how to
view it, and treat it also, in the most serious manner; that I have
always aimed at the establishment of order, submission, discipline, and
activity, as the sole means that can lead you to the grand object. In
undertaking a work of such vast importance, was I not obliged by
prayers, exhortations, and advice, to maintain and stimulate the ardour
of my first, my dearest companions, on whom every thing depended?—If I
wish to keep the *supreme direction* in my own hands, hear my reasons,
which are most certainly of great weight:

"In the first place, I must necesssarily know with whom I have to deal,
and must be ascertained of the fidelity of our people; and, to
effectuate this, I am not to receive reports from a sixth hand, or
perhaps one still more

<span id="page_570">p. 570</span>

remote, on the execution of my plans, which have been approved of by the
Elect of our Mysteries. . . *In the next place, am I not the Constructor
of this grand Edifice?* Is there no respect due to me?. . . . When my
system shall be completed, will it not be necessary for me to inspect
the whole, and keep every man at his station? It is a great and radical
defect in a society, where a Superior is dependent on the Inferiors, as
it has been attempted to render me.

"But, to show you how much I value the friendship of my former friends,
above all the authority I may exercise over others, I renounce all my
rights, all my authority. Accept my warmest acknowledgements for all
your past labours and patience. I flatter myself they have been hurtful
to nobody, and that many have acquired from me lights on secret
societies which they would not easily have found elsewhere. The purity
of my intentions is my consolation and my recompense. From this instant
I betake myself to obscurity and repose, where I shall not meet with
zealous and envious opponents. There I shall be my own master, and my
own subject." <span id="fr_261"></span>[18](#fn_261.md)

The Illuminizing Despot thus artfully pleaded his cause. The Areopagites
were impatient of his authority, but at the same time felt the want of
so disorganizing a genius; and that they might not be deprived of its
co-operation they reproached the Legislator with the extinction of his
zeal.—The fire, however, was only hidden beneath the embers; they once
more submit to the yoke of their former chief, who, inflamed with zeal,
dictates the conditions on which alone he will deign to place himself
once more at their head. Every thing is worthy of being remarked in
them. The haughty spirit in which they are conceived, the nature,
object, and extent of the power he assumes over the Supreme Council and
Elect of the Order, are all worthy of our attentive notice.

"I begin (says he) by telling you before hand, that it may not any more
be a subject of surprize, that I will be more severe than ever. I will
not overlook a single fault, and shall in that respect be much more
strict toward persons whom I know rather than toward those with whom I
am not so familiar. My object and views require it. And to whom would
you have me address myself, if not to the chiefs of the Order, since
they alone are in direct correspondence with me? That things may
succeed, it is necessary that we should be actuated but by one opinion,
one sentiment, and be acquainted but with one language! And how can this
be accomplished, if I cannot freely speak my mind to our people? I will
then re-assume my post of General on the following conditions:

"I. That you will execute neither more nor less than what I shall
command. I shall expect it in future; at least, should any change be
thought necessary, I am to receive previous notice of it.

"II. I expect that every Saturday a proper report shall be sent to me of
every thing that has taken place during the week, and that it shall be
in the form of *Minutes* signed by all the Elect present.

"III. That I shall be informed of all the Members that have been
recruited, or persons that are to be recruited, with an outline of their

<span id="page_571">p. 571</span>

characters; and let some particulars concerning them be added when they
are

admitted.

"IV. That the statutes of the class in which you labour be punctually
observed, and that no [dispensations](errata.htm#81.md) be granted without
previous investigation. For should each one take upon himself to make
such changes as he pleased, where would be the unity of the Order.—What
I exact from you, you shall exact from those that are subject to you. If
there be no order and subordination in the higher ranks, there will be
none in the lower." <span id="fr_262"></span>[19](#fn_262.md)

It was on the 25th of May 1779, that Weishaupt dictated these laws to
his Areopage. A fifth condition seems to have made them merely
provisional, and to have entrusted the despotic power in Weishaupt's
hand only until the order had acquired a proper consistency; but he took
care not again to lose the newly-acquired supremacy; though the
Areopagites still regretted the loss of their Aristocracy, and the being
reduced to be the mere agents or prime ministers of the *Spartacus* of
the Order. But let us attend to that *Spartacus*, who has always
represented the most legitimate authority as an outrage on human nature.
Let us hear him invoking Machiavel in support of that which he wishes to
exercise over the Order. He pleads his own cause with Zwack, who is also
jealous of his Master, by showing all the disorder it occasioned, by
every body wishing to introduce his own ideas into the Order, and then
quotes the following passages from Machiavel: "It must be laid down as a
general rule, that it seldom or never happens that any Government is
either well-founded at first, or thoroughly reformed afterwards, *except
the plan be laid and conducted by* <span class="smallcaps">one man
only</span>, who has the sole power of giving all orders and making all
laws that are [necessary](errata.htm#82.md) for its establishment. A
prudent and virtuous Founder of a State, therefore, whose chief aim is
to promote the welfare of many rather than to gratify his own ambition,
to make provision for the good of his country, in preference to that of
his heirs or successors, ought to endeavour by all means to get the
supreme *authority wholly into his hands*: nor will a reasonable man
ever condemn him for taking any measures (even the most extraordinary,
if they are necessary) for that purpose: The *means* indeed *may seem
culpable*, but the end will justify him if it be a good one;—for he only
is blameable who uses violence to throw things into confusion and
distraction; and not he who does it to [establish](errata.htm#83.md) peace
and good Order." After this long quotation which Weishaupt has made from
a French [translation](errata.htm#84.md) of Machiavel, *Chap. IX.
Discourses upon the first Decad of Livy*, he continues in a sorrowful
tone: "but I have not been able to obtain so favourable a decision. The
Brethren have viewed that which is but a necessary law in the art of
governing, in the light of ambition and a thirst of dominion." <span
id="fr_263"></span>[20](#fn_263.md) In the midst of this contention for
power, he felt himself so superior in the art of governing conspiring
associations at least, that he did not hesitate at writing to his
Areopagites, *As to politics and morality, Gentlemen, you must confess
that you are as yet at a great distance behind me*. <span
id="fr_264"></span>[21](#fn_264.md) He at length succeeded in persuading
them, that it was necessary that the General of the Order should also,
as

<span id="page_572">p. 572</span>

president of the Areopagites holding the *helm of the Order*, be the
absolute director. <span id="fr_265"></span>[22](#fn_265.md)

Weishaupt, who left nothing relating to the disorganizing arts in an
imperfect state, must, no doubt, have composed instructions to guide his
successors in the exercise of their supremacy, and to teach them how to
make the same use of it which he intended. But the reader will easily
conceive, that these never could have escaped the vigilance of the Sect,
nor pierced the dark cloud with which it had enveloped itself. It may
even be possible that Weishaupt had not sufficient confidence in his
Areopagites to entrust them with the entire plan. Throughout the whole
hierarchy of Illuminism the lower degree is entirely ignorant of the
particular instructions of the superior degrees; and why should not
Weishaupt, who wished to perpetuate his disorganizing genius in all the
succeeding Generals, have followed the same plan? He undoubtedly
dictated laws and rules for their conduct, gave them rights which were
to maintain both themselves and their Areopagites in their hierarchical
superiority, and second them in the pursuit of their grand object; and
these were entitled Instructions for *the General of the Illuminees*. No
historian can flatter himself with the discovery of such a code of
artifice and cunning; the most unrelenting wickedness and hypocrisy had
invented it; and genius alone can pretend to dive into such secrets. The
historian can only pretend to collect those articles which are to be
found in Weishaupt's familiar correspondence, or in other parts of the
code or writings of the Sect. Were we to throw this compilation into the
form of instructions, the following might be nearly the result of our
research.

I. The General shall be chosen by the twelve Peers of the Areopage, on
the plurality of votes. <span id="fr_266"></span>[23](#fn_266.md)

II\. The Areopagites can only elect one of the members of their senate
for General; (*ein aus ihrher mitte gewähltes oberhaupt*); <span
id="fr_267"></span>[24](#fn_267.md) that is to say, a man who has
sufficiently distinguished himself among the Regents to be admitted
among the twelve supreme adepts of Illuminism, and who has afterwards
made himself so eminent in their council, that he is judged to be the
first Illuminee in the world.

III\. The adept is supposed to possess qualities requisite for a General
in consequence of those he may have evinced before he was called to the
Supreme Council. As he is to preside over the whole Order, he must (more
than any body else) be impressed with the principles of the founder, and
be divested of all religious, political, or national prejudices. The
grand object of the Order must be more particularly inculcated into him,
namely, that of teaching the whole universe to set aside all government,
laws, and altars; and he must perpetually attend to the grand interests
of human nature. His zeal is to be stimulated at the sight of every man
who is subjected to any authority. It is to reinstate the inhabitants of
the earth in their original Equality and Liberty that he is constituted
General of all the Illuminees that are or will be spread over the world
during his reign, all labouring at the accomplishment of the grand
revolution of the *Man-King*. <span id="fr_268"></span>[25](#fn_268.md)

<span id="page_573">p. 573</span>

IV\. The General shall have immediately under him the twelve *Peers* of
the Supreme Council, and the various agents and secretaries which he
shall judge necesssary to second him in the exercise of his
functions. <span id="fr_269"></span>[26](#fn_269.md)

V. The better to secure himself from the notice of the civil and
ecclesiastical powers, he may assume, after the example of the founder,
some public office under the very Powers the annihilation of which is to
be his sole object. But he will be only known to the Areopagites and to
his agents and secretaries in his quality of General. <span
id="fr_270"></span>[27](#fn_270.md) The better to conceal the residence of
the General, the town where he has fixed will have three names. The
common name known to all; the geographical one peculiar to the Order;
and a third known only to the Areopagites and the *Conscii* or
Elect. <span id="fr_271"></span>[28](#fn_271.md)

VI\. Our success greatly depending on the moral conduct of the
Areopagites, the General will pay particular attention to prevent all
public scandals which might hurt the reputation of the Order. He will
represent to them in the strongest colours how much bad example will
contribute to alienate from the Order the kinds of persons who might
otherwise prove its most useful members. <span
id="fr_272"></span>[29](#fn_272.md)

VII\. The better to preserve that respect which virtue commands from
inferiors, the General will assume the character of austere morals. That
he may always have the grand object present to his mind, and be wholly
occupied with the duties he has to fulfil; let him never lose sight of
that great maxim so frequently inculcated in his letters by the founder,
as the leading feature to which he owed all his successes. *Multum
sudavit et alsit, abstinuit venere et vino. He neither feared heat nor
cold; he abstained from wine and women*, that he might always be master
of his secret, always be master of himself, and prepared for all
exigencies where the interests of the Order might require it. <span
id="fr_273"></span>[30](#fn_273.md)

VIII\. The General shall be the central point for the Areopagites, as
the latter are for the whole body of Illuminees. That is to say, each
Areopagite holding correspondence with the National Inspectors is to
make a report of all the Quibus Licets sent, and of all the secrets
discovered by the corresponding Inspector; the secrets thus flowing from
all parts will ultimately settle under the eye of the General. <span
id="fr_274"></span>[31](#fn_274.md)

IX\. The functions of the General, and the success of his dispositions,
greatly depending on the information he receives by means of this
correspondence, he will distribute it among his Areopagites, assigning
to each that of a particular nation whose Inspector is to transmit all
his reports to him. <span id="fr_275"></span>[32](#fn_275.md)

X. The principal heads of this correspondence shall be—1st, The number
of the brethren in general, that the force of the Sect may be
ascertained in each nation.—2dly, Those brethren who distinguish
themselves the most by their zeal and intelligence—3dly, Those adepts
who hold important offices about the Court, in the Church, Armies, or
Magistracy: also what kinds of services might be expected from or
prescribed to them in the grand revolution which our Order was preparing
for human nature.—4thly, The general progress which our maxims and our
doctrine were making in the public opinion; how far nations were
prepared for the grand revolution; what

<span id="page_574">p. 574</span>

strength and means of defence still remained in the hands of the civil
and [ecclesiastical](errata.htm#85.md) powers; what persons were to be
placed or displaced; what engines were to be played off, to hasten and
secure the success of our revolution; and the means necessary to bind
the hands of those who might resist. <span
id="fr_276"></span>[33](#fn_276.md)

XI\. If from this correspondence he should judge it necesssary to
dismiss any of the brethren from the Order, (and all the rights
recognized by the adepts as inherent in the Order, particularly that of
*Life and Death* being in the hands of the General) he will have to
decide what further punishment is to follow the ejectment: whether the
culprit is to be declared infamous throughout all the lodges of the
Order, or whether the pain of death is to be pronounced against
him. <span id="fr_277"></span>[34](#fn_277.md)

XII\. The General, after having chastised the imprudent, cowardly, and
treacherous adepts, will turn his attention toward the discovery of
those brethren who may be best fitted for seconding his views in each
empire. Without making himself known to them, he will establish a line
of communication between them. He will himself prepare the links of this
immense chain after the manner laid down by our founder as the grand
means of governing, from his mysterious centre, all the diverging
ramifications of the Sect to the extremities of the earth; as a means of
vivifying invisible armies in an instant, of putting them in motion, of
directing their course, and of irretrievably executing the most
astonishing revolutions, even before the very Potentates whose thrones
are overturned have had time to surmise their danger.

XIII\. The use of the chain is obvious and easy. To touch the fist link
is all that is required. A single stroke of a pen is the grand spring
that imparts motion to the whole. But the success depends on the choice
of the time. In his hidden abode the General shall
[meditate](errata.htm#86.md) the means, and catch the propitious moment.
The signal of universal revolution shall not be given till a time when
the combined force and instantaneous efforts of the brethren shall be
irresistible.

The illuminizing General who shall have managed this chain with the
greatest art, who shall have spread it both far and near, who shall have
imparted to it a sufficient power of action to bear away and overturn at
a single effort every throne and every altar, all political and
religious institutions, and shall strew the earth with the ruins of
empires—He will be the creator of the *Man-King, sole king, sole
sovereign* of his actions as of his thoughts. To that General is
reserved the glory of consummating the grand revolution which has so
long been the ultimate object of our mysteries.

Whatever proofs I may have adduced, that must naturally lead my readers
to such a conclusion, it may nevertheless be an object of surprise to
them to see that Weishaupt had really planned this long chain of
subterraneous communications, by which himself and his successors were
empowered [invisibly](errata.htm#87.md) to actuate thousand of legions,
which instantaneously, on a day prescribed, might burst into existence
armed with pikes and torches, and all the horrid implements of universal
revolution. Let my readers then cast their eyes on this *series of
progression*, which Weishaupt has with his own hand traced

<span id="page_575">p. 575</span>

in his letters first to *Cato*-Zwack and afterwards to *Celsus*-Bader.
The explanations are his own, and let them be particularly attended to.

"For the present, direct nobody to me but *Cortez*, that I may have some
leisure to digest my speculations, and determine each one's place; for
every thing depends on that. My operations with you shall be directed by
the following table:

<span id="img_57500"></span> ![](img/57500.jpg)

"Immediately under me I have two adepts, into whom I infuse my whole
spirit; each of these corresponds with two others, and so on. By this
method, and in the simplest way possible, I can inflame and put in
motion thousands of men at once. It is by such means that orders are to
be transmitted and political operations carried on." <span
id="fr_278"></span>[35](#fn_278.md)

A few days after he writes to Celsus-Bader, and tells him, "I have sent
to Cato a table (*schema*) showing how one may *methodically* and
without much trouble *arrange a great multitude of men in the finest
order possible*. He will probably have shown it to you; if he has not,
ask for it. Here is the figure (*then follows the figure*).

"The spirit of the first, of the most ardent, of the most profound adept
daily and incessantly [communicates](errata.htm#88.md) itself to the two A,
A; by the one to B, B; by the other to C, C: B B and C C communicate it
to the eight following; these to the next sixteen, from thence to the
thirty-two and so downwards. I have written a long explanation of it all
to Cato. In a word, *every man has his Aide-Major, by whose means he
immediately acts on all the others. The whole force first issues from
the center and then flows back again to it*. Each one subjects, as it
were, to his own person, *two men whom he searches to the bottom, whom
he observes*, disposes, inflames, and drills, as it were, like recruits,
that they may hereafter exercise and fire with the whole regiment. The
same plan may be followed throughout all the degrees." <span
id="fr_279"></span>[36](#fn_279.md)

This is not a document which, like many others, flowed unintentionally
from Weishaupt's pen, and which he left his disciples to collect, in
order to form the political Code—*Give me leisure to digest my
speculations, and to determine each one's place—It is by such means that
orders are to be transmitted, and political operations carried on*.
These words evidently demonstrate, that it is not a provisional law
which he is about to pronounce, but a premeditated one, that is to last
till that fatal period when whole legions, fired with his spirit, are to
be led to that terrible exercise for which he had so long been drilling
them;

<span id="page_576">p. 576</span>

that time so expressly foretold by Weishaupt and his Hierophants, when
they were to *tie hands*, to *subjugate*, *fire on*, *and vandalize* the
whole universe.

When this fatal law shall be fulfilled, then will the last *Spartacus*
sally forth from his baleful den, and triumphantly claim the sanguinary
palm of murder and destruction from the Old Man of the Mountain, who
would scarcely have been worthy of being his precursor. The earth loaded
with the ruins of laws and empires; mortals blaspheming their God;
nations lamenting over their conflagrating towns, their palaces, public
monuments, and arts, and even their cottages, all overthrown; society
weeping over its laws;-such shall be the sight which the last
*Spartacus* will contemplate with joy, when he shall exultingly exclaim,
"At length, my Brethren, the long-wished for day is come; let us
celebrate the name, and dedicate this day as sacred to the memory of
Weishaupt, our founder. We have consummated his grand mysteries; no laws
shall exist, but those of his Order. Should nations be ever tempted to
*return to their wickedness*, (to laws and society) this code, which has
once destroyed their bonds, may do it again.

Will not hell vomit forth its legions to applaud this last *Spartacus*,
to contemplate in amazement this work of the Illuminizing Code?—Will not
Satan exclaim, "Here then are men as I wished them. I drove them from
Eden; Weishaupt has driven them to the forests. I taught them to offend
their God; he has made them reject their God entirely. I had left the
earth to repay them for the sweat of their brow; he has stricken it with
sterility; for it will be in vain for them to pretend to till and sow
that which they shall not reap. I left them in their inequality of
riches; but he has swept all away; he has destroyed the very idea of
property; he has transformed mankind into brigands. Their virtues,
happiness, and greatness under the protecting laws of society or of
their country, was an object of jealousy to me; but he has cursed their
laws and their country, and has reduced them to the stupid pride and
ignorance of the roaming, savage, and vagabond clans. In tempting them
to sin, I could not deprive them of repentance and the hope of pardon;
but Weishaupt has taught them to scoff at crime and despise repentance.
Villany without remorse, and hopeless misfortune, are all that he has
left to the miserable inhabitants of the earth!

Meanwhile, before Satan shall exultingly enjoy this triumphant
[spectacle](errata.htm#89.md), which the Illuminizing Code is preparing,
let us examine how far success has hitherto attended on its
footsteps?—What share has it borne in that revolution which has already
desolated so many countries and menaces so many others.—How it
engendered that disastrous monster called *Jacobin*, raging
uncontrouled, and almost unopposed, in these days of horror and
devastation-In short, what effects this Code of the Illuminees has
produced, and what effects it may produce.—This will be the object of
the *historical part* of the Sect, and of the IVth and last volume of
these Memoirs.

<span id="page_577">p. 577</span> <span id="page_578">p. 578</span>

 

END OF THE THIRD PART

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_244"></span>[578:1](mhj319.htm#fr_244.md) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Let. 15, to Cato.

<span id="fn_245"></span>[578:2](mhj319.htm#fr_245.md) Directions System,
No. 5, and Philo's Endliche erklärung, page 81. <span id="page_577">p.
577</span>

<span id="fn_246"></span>[578:3](mhj319.htm#fr_246.md) So werden die selben
*Magi*—Diese sammeln und bringen die höhere philosophische Systeme in
ordnung, und bearbeiten ein *volks-religion*, welche der Orden
demnächsten der welt geben will.—In the original, which is in
Cato-Zwack's handwriting, the words *volks-religion* are in cypher, thus
20, 14, 2, 3, 18,—17, 8, 2, 4, 6, 4, 14, 13.

<span id="fn_247"></span>[578:4](mhj319.htm#fr_247.md) Instructions for the
degree of Epopt, No. 12 and 14.

<span id="fn_248"></span>[578:5](mhj319.htm#fr_248.md) Deswegen kommen
jährlich ein mal alle Presbyter einer provinz auf der grossen Synode
zusammen, machen ein grosses verzeichniss der in diesem jahr gesammlten
beylagen *an die National Direction* wo selbst es in die haupt-katalog
eingetragen, und damit ein schatz von kenntnissen formirt wird, woraus
jeder befridigt werden kann: denn daraus werden die regel abstrahirt,
und was noch fehlt, weitere beobachtungs aufgaben, wie schon ervähnt
worden, aufgeschrieben um feste sätze zu bekommen. Ibid. No. 15.

<span id="fn_249"></span>[578:6](mhj319.htm#fr_249.md) Philo's Endliche
erklärung, Page 119.

<span id="fn_250"></span>[578:7](mhj319.htm#fr_250.md) *Directions System*,
No. 4.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[578:8](mhj319.htm#fr_251.md) Ibid. No. 10 and 11.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[578:9](mhj319.htm#fr_252.md) Ibid. No. 15 and 23.

<span id="fn_253"></span>[578:10](mhj319.htm#fr_253.md) Ibid. No. 9.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[578:11](mhj319.htm#fr_254.md) Ibid. No. 22.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[578:12](mhj319.htm#fr_255.md) Last Observations
of Philo, Page 115.

<span id="fn_256"></span>[578:13](mhj319.htm#fr_256.md) Aus diesen kann ich
ersehen welche geneigt sind gewisse sonderbare staats lehren, weiters
hinauf religions meynungen anzunehmen.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[578:14](mhj319.htm#fr_257.md) Und am end folgt
die totale einsicht in die *Politic* und maximen des Ordens. In diesen
obersten *Conseil*, werden die project entworfen, wie den feinden der
vernunft und Menschlichkeit nach und nach *auf den leib* zu gehen seye:
Wie die sache unter den Ordens mitgliedern einzuleiten, wen es
anzuvertauen? Wie ein jeder *a proportione* seiner einsicht känne dazu
gebraucht werden.—*Original Writings*, *Letter to* Cato-*Zwack*, *10th
March, 1778*.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[578:15](mhj319.htm#fr_258.md) Extracts from the
Instruction to Cato, Marius, and Scipio, Original Writings, Vol. I.
Sect. ix.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[578:16](mhj319.htm#fr_259.md) Letters of Philo to
Cato and last Observations of Philo.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[578:17](mhj319.htm#fr_260.md) Letter of the 8th
November, 1778.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[578:18](mhj319.htm#fr_261.md) Original Writings,
Vol. I. Sect. 49.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[578:19](mhj319.htm#fr_262.md) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Letters 49 and 50.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[578:20](mhj319.htm#fr_263.md) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Let. 2, to Cato.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[578:21](mhj319.htm#fr_264.md) Ibid. Let. 10.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[578:22](mhj319.htm#fr_265.md) General Plan of the
Order, No. 5.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[578:23](mhj319.htm#fr_266.md) Last Observations
of Philo, Page. 119.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[578:24](mhj319.htm#fr_267.md) Ibid.

<span id="fn_268"></span>[578:25](mhj319.htm#fr_268.md) See the Mysteries.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[578:26](mhj319.htm#fr_269.md) See above.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[578:27](mhj319.htm#fr_270.md) Orig. Writ.
Spartacus' Letters, passim, et supra.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[578:28](mhj319.htm#fr_271.md) Orig. Writ. Vol. I.
Sect. 3.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[578:29](mhj319.htm#fr_272.md) Ib. Vol. II. Let 9
& 10.

<span id="fn_273"></span>[578:30](mhj319.htm#fr_273.md) Ibid. Vol. I. Let
16, &c

<span id="fn_274"></span>[578:31](mhj319.htm#fr_274.md) Vide supra.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[578:32](mhj319.htm#fr_275.md) Ibid. Vol. II. Let
6, 13, &c.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[578:33](mhj319.htm#fr_276.md) See the different
degrees and the views with which the *Quibus Licets* and tablets, &c.
&c. are written. <span id="page_578">p. 578</span>

<span id="fn_277"></span>[578:34](mhj319.htm#fr_277.md) Orig. Writ. Vol.
II. Let 8, et supra, Oath of the Novice.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[578:35](mhj319.htm#fr_278.md) I here feel it
incumbent on me to insert the original text, to show that I do not
exaggerate Weishaupt's meaning. The following are the terms in which he
writes to Cato:—"An mich selbst aber verveisen sie dermalen noch keinen
unmittelbar als den *Cortez*, bis ich schreibe, damit ich indessen
speculiren, und die leute geschickt rangieren kann; den davon hängt
alles ab. Ich werde in dieser figur mit ihnen operiren." (*Here stands
the figure already inserted above: The Letters A B C allude to the
explanation given in the Letter to Celsus*). "Ich habe zwey unmittelbar
unter mir welchen ich meinen ganzen geist einhauche, und von diesen
zweyen hat wieder jeder zwey andere, und so fort. Auf diese art kann ich
auf die einfachste art tausend menschen in bewegung und flammen setzen.
Auf eben diese art muss man die *ordres* erheilen, und im politischen
opieren." *Original Writings, Vol. II. Let 8, to Cato, of the 16th
February 1782*. It may be remarked that Weishaupt's style is none of the
purest.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[578:36](mhj319.htm#fr_279.md) The original text
of this letter is to be found in the Original Letters, Vol. II. Let 13,
to Celsus without any date. It is as follows: "Ich habe an Cato ein
*schema* geschickt, wie man planmässig eine grosse menge menschen in der
schönsten ordnung. . . abrichten kann. . . Es ist diese forme."

"Der geist des ersten, wärmsten, und einsichtsvollesten communicirt sich
unaufhörlich und täglich an A A—A an B B: und das andere an C C—B B, und
C C communiciren sich auf die nämliche art an die unteren 8. Diese an
die weitere 16, und 16 an 32, und so weiter. An Cato hab ich es
weitläufiger geschrieben: Kurz! Jeder hat zwey flügel adjutanten,
wodurch er mittelbar in all übrige wirkt. Im centro geht alle kraft aus,
und vereignigt sich auch wieder darinn. Jeder sucht sich in gewisser
subordination zwey männer aus, die er ganz studiert, beobachtet,
abrichtet, anfeuert, und so zu sagen, wie recrouten abrichtet, damit sie
dereinst mit dem ganzen regiment abfeuern und exerciren können. Das kann
man durch alle grade so einrichten."

I do not find the long explanation mentioned as sent to Cato by
Weishaupt, nor do I remember to have seen it. It would most certainly be
curious, and we should see in a clearer light how he was to infuse his
spirit into and fire the minds of thousands of men; but still these two
letters are proofs more than sufficient for our purpose.

 
