[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj309)  [Next](mhj311.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

### CHAP. IX.

#### Seventh Part of the Code of the Illuminees.—Class of the Mysteries.—Of the lesser Mysteries; the Epopt or Priest of Illuminism.

<span class="smallcaps">However</span> accurately the Sect may have
ascertained the progress of its adepts in the preparatory degrees, still
Weishaupt seems to fear that some may be startled when they come to be
acquainted with the ultimate views of Illuminism. He wishes therefore to
lead them to his darkest plots by gradual shades. Hence the division of
lesser and greater mysteries, and the subdivision into degrees. The
first degree into which the adepts are initiated in this class is that
of *Epopt*; but these new dignitaries are only known by that title to
the inferior class; the higher degrees call them *Priests*. <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142.md)

Let not the reader take alarm at the denomination of *lesser mysteries*,
as if they were of no consequence; for he will gradually, as he ascends,
discover their dark designs and dealings. But before the adept is
allowed to proceed, he must collect every thing that his mind, his
memory, or all his former lessons can afford, of anti-religious and
anti-social principles, to enable him to give written answers to the
following questions:

"I. Do you think the present state of nations corresponds with the
object for which man was placed upon earth? For example, do governments,
civil associations, or religion, attain the ends for which they were
designed? Do the sciences to which men apply furnish them with real
lights; are they conducive (as they ought to be) to real happiness? Are
they not, on the contrary, the offspring of numberless wants, and of the
unnatural state in which men live? Are they not the crude inventions of
crazy brains, or of geniuses laboriously subtle?"

"II. What civil associations and what sciences do you think tend or do
not tend to the grand object? Did there not formerly exist an order of
things more simple? What sort of an idea can you form of that ancient
state of the world?"

"III. Now that we have passed through all those nullities (*or through
all those useless and vain forms of our civil constitutions*), do you
think that it would be possible to return back to the original and noble
simplicity of our forefathers? Supposing we had returned to it, would
not our past misfortunes render that state more durable? Would not all
mankind be in a similar state

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

with an individual who, having enjoyed the sweets of innocence during
his childhood, and fallen a prey to error and his passions during his
youth, at length, instructed by the risks he has run, and by experience,
endeavours to return to that innocence and purity which rendered his
childhood so happy?"

"IV. What means were best to be employed for restoring mankind to that
happy state? Should it be by public measures, by violent revolutions, or
by any means that should ensure success?"

"V. Does not the Christian Religion in all its purity afford some
indications, does it not hint at some state or happiness similar to
this? Does it not even prepare it?"

"VI. Is this holy and simple religion really what different Sects
profess it to be at this present day, or is it more perfect?"

"VII. Can this more perfect Christianity be known or taught? Could the
world (such as it now is) support a stronger degree of light? Do you not
think that, before the numberless obstacles could be removed, it would
be proper to preach to mankind a religion more perfect, a philosophy
more elevated, and the art of each one's governing himself according to
his greatest advantage?"

"VIII. Would not our moral and political views lead men to oppose this
blessing? From our political and moral views then, or from an ill-judged
interest, or even from deep-rooted prejudices, these obstacles
originate. If men, therefore, oppose the renovation of human happiness,
is it not because, slaves to ancient forms, they reject and reprobate
every thing which is not to be found in those forms, though it should be
the most natural, the grandest, and most noble of all possible things?
Does not personal interest, alas! at present predominate over the
general interest of mankind?"

"IX. Must we not then silently and gradually remedy those disorders
before we can flatter ourselves with the re-establishment of the golden
age? Meanwhile, is it not adviseable to *disseminate the truth in Secret
Societies?*"

"X. Can we trace any such secret doctrine in the ancient schools of the
sages, or in the allegorical lessons given by Jesus Christ, the Saviour
and liberator of mankind, to his most intimate disciples? Have you not
observed a sort of gradual education in that art which you see has been
transmitted to our Order, from the highest antiquity?" <span
id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_143.md)

Should the answers of the Candidate to all these questions show that the
progress he has made in his gradual education is not what the Order had
reason to expect, he will solicit in vain the advancement he hoped for.
Should his answers be equivocal, he will receive orders to prepare new
ones, or to be more explicit. <span id="fr_144"></span>[3](#fn_144.md) But
if he show the proper dispositions, and the Sect foresee no probability
of his being startled at the lessons of the Hierophant on those grand
objects which are to be disclosed to him, the Superiors give their
assent, and a synod of the illuminized priesthood is held. The day of
the initiation is fixed. At the hour agreed upon, the introducing adept
waits upon his new proselyte and takes him into a carriage. The windows
being closed, the Candidate blind-folded, and the coachman continually
winding and varying his course, are precautions more than sufficient to
hinder the proselyte from

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

ever being able to trace the spot to which he is conducted. Led by the
hand, and still blind-folded, he slowly ascends to the porch of the
temple of the mysteries. His guide then divests him of the Masonic
insignia, puts a drawn sword into his hand, takes off the bandage from
his eyes, and leaves him, strictly forbidding him to proceed a step
until he hears the voice which is to call him. He is then left to his
reflections.

With respect to the pomp of the mysteries, when the Brethren celebrate
them in all their splendour, the walls of the temple are hung in red,
and lighted up with an immense number of candles or lamps. A voice is at
length heard, saying, "Come, enter, unhappy fugitive! The fathers wait
for you; enter and shut the door after you." The proselyte
[obeys](errata.htm#28.md) the voice which calls him. At the bottom of the
temple he beholds a throne under a rich canopy with a table before it,
on which lie a crown, a sceptre, a sword, some pieces of gold money, and
precious jewels, all interlaid with chains. At the foot of this table,
on a scarlet cushion, is thrown a white robe, a girdle, and the simple
ornaments of the sacerdotal costume. The proselyte, standing at the
bottom of the temple and in front of the throne, is addressed by the
Hierophant as follows: "Behold and fix thine eyes on the splendour of
the throne. If all this childish mummery, these crowns, these scepters,
and all these monuments of human degradation, have any charms in your
eyes, speak; and it may be in our power to gratify your wishes. Unhappy
man! if such are your objects, if you wish to rise to power that you may
assist in the oppression of your Brethren, go, and at your peril make
the trial. Are you in quest of power, of force, of false honours, and of
such superfluities, we will labour for you; we will procure such
transient advantages for you, we will place you as near the throne as
you can desire, and will leave you to the consequences of your folly;
but observe, our sanctuary shall be for ever shut against you.

"On the contrary, do you wish to be initiated into wisdom, would you
teach the art of rendering men better, more free and more happy, then be
welcome, be thrice welcome. Here you behold the attributes of Royalty,
and there, on the cushion, you see the modest vestment of innocence;
make thy choice, and let it be the choice which thy heart shall
dictate."

If, contrary to all expectations, the Candidate should make choice of
the Regalia, he hears a thundering voice exclaim, "Monster, retire!
cease to pollute this holy place! Begone, fly, before it is too late."
At these words he is led out of the temple by the Brother who introduced
him.—But should he chuse the white robe, how different will be the
language! "Health and salutation to thy great and noble soul! Such was
the choice we expected from you. But stop; it is not permitted to you to
invest yourself with that robe, until you have learned to what you are
in future destined by us." <span id="fr_145"></span>[4](#fn_145.md)

The Candidate is then ordered to be seated. The Code of the Mysteries is
opened, and the Brethren in silence attend to the oracles of the
Hierophant.

Now, reader, you who have been through so long a course of trials,
questions, rituals, and insidious degrees; who have been led through all
the preparatory labyrinth of illuminized education, if still you be in
the dark as to

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

the object of such precautions and artifices, follow me into this den
which the Sect dares to call the *holy place*; seat thyself by the
adept, and listen to their Oracles.—This is the master-piece of the
founder. Hear with patience, though your indignation should be excited
by his monstrous fertility in Sophism, in impiety, in blasphemy against
your gospel and your God, treachery against your Magistrates, your
country, and its laws, against your titles and your rights, against
those of your ancestors and your progeny—Let Kings and Subjects, the
rich and poor, the merchant and the labourer, let every class of
citizens attend; let them hearken, and learn at length what hellish
plots are contriving against them in the dark recesses of these
diabolical dens. In vain shall the lethargic soul accuse us of credulity
or groundless terrors. Those lessons which the Sect view as the
master-piece of their code lie before me, such as they flowed from the
pen of the Legislator, such as they were published by order of the
Sovereign who seized the archives of the Sect, that all nations might
learn the dreadful dangers with which they were menaced. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[5](#fn_146.md) I have them again embellished by the
compiler of the Sect, corrected and reviewed by the Council of the
Areopagites, attested by the compiler as true and conformable to the
copy signed and sealed with the signet of the Sect. <span
id="fr_147"></span>[6](#fn_147.md)

Read then, and rock thyself to sleep in the cradle of voluntary
ignorance if thou canst, content with having assured thyself that every
conspiracy against the *existence of civil society* or of all government
whatever, every conspiracy against the *existence of property*, can be
but a chimera.

It is to the Candidate, and in presence of the Brethren already
initiated to these mysteries, that the Illuminizing President addresses
the following discourse:

*Discourse of the Hierophant for the Degree of Priest or Epopt of the
Illuminees*. <span id="fr_148"></span>[7](#fn_148.md)

"At length (he says) the time of your reward succeeds to the trials of
an assiduous preparation. At present you know yourself, and have learned
to know others; you are what you ought to be, such as we wished to see
you. It will now be your duty to conduct others.—What you already know,
and what you are about to learn, will expose to your view the extreme
weakness of human nature. In this advantage alone lies the true source
of power which one man exercises over another. The dark clouds
dissipate; the sun of light rises; the gates of the sanctuary unfold; a
portion of our mysteries is going to be revealed to you. Let the gates
of the temple be shut against the prophane; I will only speak to the
Illustrious, to the Holy, to the Elect. I speak to those who have ears
to hear, who have tongues which they can command, and who have minds
sufficiently enlightened to understand.

"Surrounded by the Illustrious, you are about to enter into that class
which bears an essential part in the government of our sublime Order.
But do you know what it is to govern, can you conceive what this right
can be in a secret society? To exercise such an empire, not over the
vulgar or the grandees

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

of the people, but over the most accomplished men, over men in all
stations, of all nations, of all religions; to reign over them without
any exterior constraint, to keep them united by durable bonds, to
inspire them all with one spirit; to govern with all possible precision,
activity, and silence, men spread over the whole surface of the globe,
even to its utmost confines. This is a problem which no political wisdom
has ever been able to solve. To reunite the distinctions of Equality,
Despotism, and Liberty; to prevent the treasons and persecutions which
would be the inevitable consequences; of nothing, to create great
things; to stand firm against the swelling torrent of evils and abuse;
to make happiness universally shine on human nature; would be a
master-piece of morality and polity re-united. The civil constitutions
of states offer but little aid to such an undertaking. Fear and violence
are their grand engines; with us, each one is voluntarily to lend his
assistance. . . . Were men what they ought to be, we might on their
first admission into our society explain the greatness of our plans to
them; but the lure of a secret is perhaps the only means of retaining
those who might turn their backs upon us as soon as their curiosity had
been gratified: The ignorance or imperfect education of many makes it
requisite that they should be first formed by our moral lessons. The
complaints, the murmurs of others against the trials to which we are
obliged to condemn them, sufficiently show you what pains we must
bestow, with what patience and what constancy we must be endowed; how
intensely the love of the grand object must glow in our hearts, to make
us keep true to our posts in the midst of such unthankful labour; and
not abandon for ever the hope of regenerating mankind."

"It is to partake with us of these labours that you have been called. To
observe others day and night; to form them, to succour them, to watch
over them; to stimulate the courage of the pusillanimous, the activity
and the zeal of the lukewarm; to instruct the ignorant; to raise up
those who have fallen, to fortify those who stagger; to repress the
ardour of rashness, to prevent disunion; to veil the faults and
weaknesses of others; to guard against the acute inquisitiveness of wit;
to prevent imprudence and treason; in short, to maintain the
subordination to and esteem of our Superiors, and friendship and union
among the Brethren, are the duties, among others still greater, that we
impose upon you."

"Have you any idea of secret societies; of the rank they hold, or of the
parts they perform in the events of this world? Do you view them as
insignificant or transient meteors? O, Brother! God and Nature, when
disposing of all things according to the proper times and places, had
their admirable ends in view; *and they make use of these secret
societies as the only and as the indispensable means of conducting us
thither*."

"Hearken, and may you be filled with admiration! This is the point
whither all the moral tends; it is on this that depends the knowledge of
the rights of secret societies, of all our doctrine, of all our ideas of
good and bad, of just and unjust. You are here situated between the
world past and the world to come. Cast your eyes boldly on what has
passed, and in an instant ten

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

thousand bolts shall fall, and thousands of gates shall burst open to
futurity—You shall behold the inexhaustible riches of God and of Nature,
the degradation and the dignity of man. You shall see the world and
human nature in its youth, if not in its childhood, even there where you
thought to find it in its decrepitude and verging toward its ruin and
ignominy."

Should this long exordium, which I have nevertheless abridged, have
fatigued the reader, let him rest and reflect for an instant. The
enthusiastic strain which predominates in this first part pervades the
whole. Weishaupt thought it necessary to his object to afford his
proselytes no time for reflection. He begins by inflaming them; he
promises great things; though this impious and artful mountebank knows
that he is going to fob them off with the greatest follies, the grossest
impieties and errors. I have called him an impious and artful
mountebank; but that is falling far short of what the proofs attest.
Weishaupt knows that he deceives, and wishes to delude his proselytes in
the most atrocious manner. When he has misled, he scoffs at them, and
with his confidants derides their imbecility. He has, however, his
reasons for beguiling them, and knows for what uses he intends them when
he has infused into them his erroneous and vicious principles. The
greater the consideration they may enjoy in the world, the more heartily
he laughs at their delusion. He thus writes to his intimate friends:
"You cannot conceive how much my degree of Priest is admired by our
people. But what is the most extraordinary is, that several great
protestant and reformed divines, who are of our Order, really believe
that that part of the discourse which alludes to religion contains the
true spirit and real sense of Christianity; *poor mortals! what could I
not make you believe?*—Candidly I own to you, that I never thought of
becoming the founder of a religion." <span
id="fr_149"></span>[8](#fn_149.md) In this manner does the impostor delude
his followers, and then scoffs at them in private. These great divines
were probably of that class among the protestants which we should, among
us, call apostates, a Syeyes or an Autun, for example; for it is
impossible that any man endowed with common sense or candour could avoid
seeing that the whole tendency of this long discourse is the total
overthrow of all religion and of all government.

A second observation well worthy the notice of our readers is, the
extreme *importance* which the Sect gives to *secret societies*, and
what mighty expectations it grounds on their mysterious existence. Let
nations and chiefs of nations examine themselves, reflect whether they
have ever calculated the means and importance of these secret societies
so well as those who founded them; and say, whether fear and diffidence
on the one side should not keep pace with the expectations and
confidence of the other. But let us return to the Lodge wherein
Weishaupt initiates his adepts.

Continuing his enthusiastic strain, the Hierophant informs the
proselyte, that Nature, having a great plan to develope, begins by the
lesser and most imperfect parts; that she then regularly proceeds to the
middle terms, to bring things to a state of perfection; which state may
serve as a point whence she may again depart, to raise them to a higher
order of perfection.

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

"Nature (says he) makes us begin at infancy, from infancy she raises us
to manhood. She at first left us in the savage state, but soon brought
us to civilization, perhaps that we might be more sensible, more
enraptured and tenacious of what we are, from viewing the contrast of
what we were. But to what changes, and those of an order infinitely more
important, does our future destiny lead us!"

Were the candidate master of his own reason, he must conclude from these
principles, that human nature had acquired perfection when passing from
the savage state to that of civil society; that if he. is still to
acquire perfection it can never be by returning to his primitive state.
But sophisters have their tortuosities, and the adepts are involved in a
folly and blindness, with which the Almighty God permits them to be
stricken, since they prefer error to truth, and impiety to Christianity.

"As has the individual man (continues the Hierophant) so human nature in
the aggregate has its childhood, its youth, its manhood, and its old
age. At each of these periods mankind learn and are subject to fresh
wants--hence arise their political and moral revolutions—It is at the
age of manhood that human nature appears in all its dignity. It is then
that, taught by long experience, man conceives at length how great a
misfortune it is for hire to invade the rights of others, to avail
himself of some few advantages, purely exterior, to raise himself, to
the prejudice of others. It is then that he sees and feels the happiness
and dignity of man."

"The first age of mankind is that of savage and uncouth nature. A family
is the whole society; hunger and thirst easily quenched, a shelter from
the inclemency of the seasons, a woman, and, after fatigue, rest, are
then the only wants. *At that period men enjoyed the two most
inestimable blessings* <span class="smallcaps">Equality</span> and <span
class="smallcaps">Liberty</span>; *they enjoyed them to their utmost
extent; they would have forever enjoyed them, had they chosen to follow
the track which Nature had traced for them*—or had it not entered the
plans of God and Nature first to show man *for what happiness he was
destined*; happiness the more precious, as he had begun by tasting it;
happiness so early lost, but instantaneously regretted and fruitlessly
sought after, until he should have learned how *to make proper use of
his strength*, and how to conduct himself in his intercourse with the
rest of mankind. In his primitive state he was destitute of the
conveniencies of life, but he was not on that account unhappy; not
knowing them, he did not feel the want of them. Health was his ordinary
state, and physical pain was his only source of uneasiness—*Oh happy
mortals! who were not sufficiently enlightened to disturb the repose of
your mind*, or to feel those great agents of our miseries the love of
power and of distinctions, the propensity to sensuality, the thirst
after the representative signs of all wealth, those *truly original
sins* with all their progeny, envy, avarice, intemperance, sickness, and
all the tortures of imagination!"

Thus we see this primitive and savage state, this first essay of Nature,
already transformed (in the mouth of the Hierophant) into the happiest
state that man ever knew: *Equality and Liberty* are the sovereign
principles of happiness in that state. Should the reader be as much
blinded as the proselyte,

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

and not see whither all this is tending, let him proceed, and hear how
man was deprived of this happiness by the institution of civil
societies.

"An infortunate germ soon vivifies in the breast of man, and his
primitive peace and felicity disappear."

"As families multiplied, the means of subsistence began to fail; the
*nomade* (or roaming) life ceased, and PROPERTY started into existence;
men chose habitations; agriculture made them intermix. Language became
universal; living together, one man began to measure his strength with
another, and the weaker were distinguished from the stronger. This
undoubtedly created the idea of mutual defence, of one individual
governing divers families reunited, and of thus defending their persons
and their fields against the invasion of an enemy; *but hence* <span
class="smallcaps">Liberty</span> *was ruined in its foundation, and*
<span class="smallcaps">Equality</span> *disappeared*."

"Oppressed with wants unknown until that period, man perceived that his
own powers were no longer sufficient. To supply this defect, the weakest
imprudently submitted to the strongest or to the wisest; not however to
be ill-treated, but that he might be protected, conducted, and
enlightened.—All submission, therefore, even of the most unpolished
mortal, has an existence only in as much *as he wants* the person to
whom he subjects himself, and on the express condition that that person
can succour him. *His power ceases when my weakness no longer exists, or
when another acquires superiority. Kings are fathers; the paternal power
is at an end when the child has acquired his strength. The father would
offend his children if he pretended to prolong his rights beyond that
term. Every man having attained to years of discretion may govern
himself, when a whole nation therefore is arrived at that period, there
can exist no further plea for keeping it in wardship*. "

In putting such language into the mouth of the Hierophant, the founder
of Illuminism had too well studied the strength and illusion of words;
he had been too cautious in the choice and preparation of his adepts
ever to fear that any of them would answer, "You who thus give oracles,
what do you understand by nations having attained their majority?
Without doubt such as, having emerged from ignorance and barbarism, have
acquired the lights necesssary for their happiness; and to what can they
be indebted for these lights and this happiness, if not to their civil
association? It will be then, if ever, that they will find it both
reasonable and necessary to remain under the *guardianship* of their
laws and of their government, lest they should fall back into the
barbarism and ignorance of the roaming clans, or be precipitated into
the horrors of anarchy, from revolution to revolution, under the
successive [tyranny](errata.htm#29.md) of the brigand, of the executioner
of the sophisticated despot, or under that of a sophister Syeyes and his
colegislative Marsellois, of a Robespierre and his guillotines, of the
Triumvirs and their proscriptions. The populace alone in the minority of
ignorance, the sophisters alone in the majority of wickedness and
corruption, shall applaud thy mysteries."

Certain of not meeting with such reflexions from the adepts, the
Hierophant continues to inculcate his principles by attributing every
thing to strength, and destroying all principles of morality or of
reason, though he will

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

affect the tone of both; and ends by forming his judgment on man in
society, as he would judge tigers and wild beasts in the forests.—These
are his new doctrines.

"Never did strength submit to weakness.—Nature has destined the weak to
serve, because they have wants; the strong man to govern, because he can
be useful. Let the one lose his force, and the other acquire it, they
will then change situations, and he that obeyed will command. He that
stands in need of another, also depends upon him, and he has renounced
to him his rights. Hence few wants is the first step towards liberty.
*It is for this reason that the savages are the most enlightened of men,
and perhaps they alone are free*. <span id="fr_150"></span>[9](#fn_150.md)
When wants are durable, servitude is also lasting. Safety is a durable
want. Had men refrained from all injustice, they would have remained
free; it was injustice which made them bend beneath the yoke. To acquire
safety, they deposited the whole force in the hands of one man; and thus
created a new evil, that of fear. The work of their own hands frightened
them; and to live in safety they robbed themselves of that very safety.
This is the cause of our governments.—*Where then shall we find a
protecting force?* In union; but how rare, alas! is that union, except
in our new and secret associations, better guided by wisdom, and leagued
in straiter bonds! and hence it is that nature itself inclines us toward
these associations."

Subtle as is the artifice in this description of human nature, and in
that affectation of beholding on the one side nothing but tyrants and
despots, and on the other only oppressed and trembling slaves in the
state of society; whatever share Nature may have had in the institution
of social order, or in reclaiming mankind from forests and wildernesses
to live under laws and a common chief; the Hierophant nevertheless
exultingly exclaims, "Such is the faithful and philosophic picture of
despotism and of liberty, of our wishes and of our fears. Despotism was
engrafted on liberty, and from despotism shall liberty once more spring.
The re-union of men in society is at once the cradle and the grave of
despotism; it is [also](errata.htm#30.md) the grave and cradle of liberty.
*We were once possessed of liberty, and we lost it but to find it again
and never lose it more; to learn by the very privation of it the art of
better enjoying it in future*." Reader, observe these words; if they do
not evidently point out the object of the Sect, if you do not perceive
the wish of bringing mankind back to those times of the *nomade herds of
savages*, and of men destitute of *property*, laws, or government, read
and convince yourself by what follows: "*Nature drew men from the savage
state and re-united them in civil societies; from these societies we
proceed to further wishes, and to a wiser choice* (*aus den staaten
tretten wir in neue klüger gewählte*). *New associations present
themselves to these wishes, and by their means we return to the state
whence we came, not again to run the former course, but better to enjoy
our new destiny*—let us explain this mystery."

"*Men then had passed from their peaceable state to the yoke of
servitude; Eden, that terrestrial paradise, was lost to them. Subjects
of sin and slavery, they were reduced to servitude and obliged to gain
their bread by the sweat of their brow*.—In the number of these men some
promised to protect, and thus became their

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

chiefs—at first they reigned over herds or clans—these were soon
conquered, or united together in order to form a numerous people; hence
arose nations and their chiefs kings of nations. At the formation of
states and nations, the world ceased to be a great family, to be a
single empire; the great bond of nature was rent asunder."

The impudence of such assertions must astonish the reader; he will ask
himself can there possibly exist beings thus belying evidence itself,
and pretending to show the universe forming but one and the same family,
and the grand bond of nature in those roaming and scattered herds, where
the child can scarcely walk when he is separated from his father? How is
it possible to represent mankind as divorcing from the great family, at
the very period when they unite under the same chiefs and the same laws,
for their mutual protection and safety? But, reader, suspend thy
indignation. Let us call up in evidence against the Sect those brigands
and [sophisticated](errata.htm#31.md) murderers which it decorated with the
high-sounding title of *Patriots*, and which it stimulated to bloodshed
and methodized murder by the fanaticizing sounds of *people*, *nation*,
*country*. At the very time that they rend the air with such accents,
with names so dear as they pretend, hear the maledictions which their
mysteries heap upon every *people*, every *nation*, every *country*.

At that period, when men re-united and formed nations, "they ceased to
acknowledge a common name—*Nationalism, or the love for a particular
nation*, took place of the general love. With the division of the globe,
and of its states, benevolence was restrained within certain limits,
beyond which it could no longer trespass.—Then it became a merit to
extend the bounds of states at the expence of the neighbouring ones.
Then it became lawful to abuse, offend, and despise foreigners, to
attain that end—*and this virtue was styled patriotism;* and he was
styled *a patriot* who, just toward his countrymen, and unjust to
others, was blind to the merits of strangers, and believed the very
vices of his own country to be perfections.—In such a case, why not
restrain that love within a narrower compass, to citizens living in the
same town, or to the members of one family; or why even should not each
person have concentrated his affections in himself. *We really beheld
Patriotism generating Localism, the confined spirit of families, and at
length Egoism. Hence the origin of states and governments, and of civil
society, has really proved to be the seeds of discord, and Patriotism
has found its punishment in itself . . .Diminish, reject that love of
the country, and mankind will once more learn to know and love each
other as men*. Partiality being cast aside, that union of hearts will
once more appear and expand itself—on the contrary, extend the bonds of
*Patriotism*, and you will teach man that it is impossible to blame the
closer contraction of love, to a single family, to a single person, in a
word, to the *strictest Egoism*."

But let us abridge these blasphemies. The Hierophant, under pretence of
his universal love, may vent his spleen against the distinctions of
*Greeks* or *Romans*, of French or English, of Italian or Spanish, of
*Pagan* or *Jew*, of *Christians* or *Mahometans*, which denote nations
and their religions: he may repeat, if he pleases, that amidst these
different denominations that *of man is* 

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

*overlooked*; what will be the result of such declamation?—With our
illuminizing doctor, in common with every class of the disorganizing
Sophisters, is not this pretended universal love to be a cloak for the
most odious hypocrisy? He only pretends to universal philanthropy, that
he may dispense with loving his neighbour. He detests the love of one's
country, only because he detests the laws of nations; he cannot even
brook the love of one's family (he has given us a fine specimen in the
person of his sister), and he will substitute that universal love
because he is no more attached to them than he is to the Chinese, the
Tartar, or the Hottentot, which he neither has seen nor ever will see,
and that all human nature may be equally indifferent to him. He extends
the bond that it may lose its elasticity and discontinue its action.—He
calls himself citizen of the universe, that he may cease to be a citizen
in his own country, a friend in society, or a fond father and dutiful
child in his own family. His love, he tells us, extends from pole to
pole, that he may love nothing that is near him. Such is the
philanthropy of our Cosmopolites!

The proselyte stands astonished in stupid admiration at these
expressions of universal love.—The Hierophant proceeds to the *Codes of
Nations*. Still in extasy at these doctrines, he learns that they are in
direct opposition *to the laws of nature*; nor will he even perceive
that his new code is in direct opposition to the very first laws of
nature, as it eradicates the love of one's own family and that of one's
country. Nor will he ask, why the fulfilling of his duty toward his
fellow-countrymen should hinder him from treating the barbarian or the
savage with proper affection? Then follow new sophisms, to persuade the
adept that the original fault of man was, the dereliction of the
Equality and Liberty of the savage state by the institution of civil
laws.

Here, more than ever, are calumny and hatred blended with enthusiasm by
the Hierophant, who, reviewing the different ages of the world since the
existence of civil institutions, pictures nations as groaning under
oppression, despotism, and slavery, or glutted with the blood of wars
and revolutions, which always terminate in tyranny. At one time it is
the representation of Kings surrounding themselves with herds or legions
called soldiers, in order to gratify their ambition by conquests on
strangers, or to reign by terror over their enslaved subjects; at other
times, it is the people themselves brandishing their arms, not to attack
tyranny in its source, but merely to change their tyrants. If they think
of giving themselves representatives, it is these very representatives,
*who, forgetting that they only hold their missions and powers from the
people, form Aristocracies and Oligarchies*, which all end by flowing
into the general reservoir of Monarchy and Despotism. He never loses
sight of his sophism of human nature degraded and vilified under the
yoke of tyranny. These declamations, enthusiastically pronounced, at
length make the proselyte exclaim, in unison with his master, "*Are such
then the consequences of the institution of states and of civil society?
O folly! oh people! that you did not foresee the fate that awaited you;
that you should yourselves have seconded your despots in degrading human
nature to servitude, and even to the condition of the brute!*"

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

Could a true Philosopher have been present, his heart must have burst
with generous indignation; he would have abruptly challenged the
Hierophant to declare whence he had learned to metamorphose the annals
of society into those of brigands and monsters? Is the history of man
then reduced to the records of plagues, famines, storms, tempests, or of
convulsed elements? Have no serene days shone on man? Shall the sun be
represented as a malevolent object, because it is sometimes obscured by
fogs or clouds? Are we to fly from our habitations because many have
been destroyed by fire? Shall we curse life and health because we are
subject to pains and infirmities? Why else this fable painting of the
disasters which have in the course of ages befallen civil society? Why
are we to be silent on the misfortunes from which it has preserved us,
or on the advantages which it has heaped on man, in reclaiming him from
the forests?

But the voice of reason cannot penetrate into the den of conspiracy. The
oracles of Weishaupt shall there be confidently repeated by the
Hierophant. He draws nigher and nigher to the grand object, to the means
of making those misfortunes disappear, which originate, as he pretends,
in the institution of laws and governments. "Oh nature!" he continues,
"how great and incontestible are thy rights? It is from the womb of
disaster and mutual destruction that the means of safety spring!
Oppression disappears because it meets with abettors, and reason regains
its rights because people wish to stifle it. He, at least, who wishes to
mislead others, should seek to govern them by the advantages of
instruction and science. Kings themselves at length perceive, that there
is little glory in reigning over ignorant herds—Legislators begin to
acquire wisdom, and they favour *property* and industry:—perverse
motives propagate the sciences, and Kings protect them as agents of
oppression. Other men profit of them to investigate the origin of their
rights. They at length seize on that unknown mean of forwarding a
revolution in the human mind, and of thus triumphing for ever over
oppression. But the triumph would be of short duration, and man would
fall back into his degraded state, had not Providence in those distant
ages husbanded the means which it has transmitted down to us, of
secretly meditating and at length operating the salvation of human kind.

"*Those means are, the secret schools of Philosophy. Those schools have
been in all ages the archives of nature and* <span class="smallcaps">of
the rights of man</span>. These schools *shall one day retrieve the fall
of human nature*, <span class="smallcaps">and Princes and Nations shall
disappear from the face of the earth</span>, *and that without any
violence*. Human nature shall form one great family, and the earth shall
become the habitation of the man of reason.—Morality shall alone produce
this great Revolution. *The day shall come when each father shall, like
Abraham and the Patriarchs, become the Priest and absolute Sovereign of
his family*. <span class="smallcaps">Reason shall be the only book of
laws</span>, *the sole Code of man*. <span class="smallcaps">This is one
of our grand mysteries</span>. *Attend to the demonstration of it, and
learn how it has been transmitted down to us*."

I have already said, that had my object been only to prove the reality
of a Conspiracy formed by Illuminism against the existence of every
society,

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

every civil Code, and every nation; these lessons of the Hierophant
would render every other proof superfluous. But that the reader may know
the full extent of the dangers which threaten us, it is necesssary that
he should be shown how those plots of frenzy become really transformed
into plots of profound wickedness; that he should be acquainted with the
means employed enthusiastically to inflame the minds of whole legions of
adepts. Let us then attend to the Hierophant. If patience be necessary
to follow him, greater still has it been necessary to enable me to
transcribe such doctrines.

"What strange blindness can have induced men to imagine that human
nature was always to be governed as it has hitherto been.

"Where shall we find a man acquainted with all the resources of nature?
Who dare prescribe limits, and say *thus far shalt thou proceed, and no
farther*, to that nature, whose law is unity in the variegated infinite?
Whence shall issue the command, that it shall always run the same
course, and for ever renew it again—Where is the being who has condemned
men, the best, the wisest, and the most enlightened of men, to perpetual
slavery? *Why should human nature be bereft of its most perfect
attribute, that of governing itself? Why are those persons to be always
led who are capable of conducting themselves? Is it then impossible for
mankind or at least the greater part, to come to their majority?* If one
be enabled to do it why should not another; show to one person what you
have taught another; teach him the grand art of mastering his passions
and regulating his desires; teach him, that from his earliest youth he
stands in need of others; that he must abstain from giving offence if he
wishes not to be offended; that he must be beneficent if he wishes to
receive favours. Let him be patient, indulgent, wise, and benevolent.
Let these virtues be made easy to him by principles, experience, and
examples; and you will soon see whether he needs another to conduct him?
If it be true, that the greater part of mankind are too weak or too
ignorant to conceive these simple truths, and to be convinced by them;
Oh then our happiness will be at an end, and let us cease to labour at
rendering mankind better, or at seeking to enlighten them."

"Oh prejudice! oh contradiction of the human mind! shall the empire of
reason, the capacity of governing ourselves, be but a chimerical dream
for the greater number of men, while on the other hand prejudice leads
us to believe that such is the inherent right of the children of Kings,
of reigning families, and of every man whom wisdom or particular
circumstances render independent!"

What horrid artifice is contained in these sentences! The poor proselyte
really imagines that he sees the most striking contradictions in the
very foundations of our civil societies. He really thinks that we
believe them to rest on the hereditary privilege of Kings and of their
children, to be born with all the necessary wisdom to conduct
themselves, while nature has refused such gifts to other mortals; though
Weishaupt, who scoffs in private at the credulity and folly of his
adepts, knows as well as we do, that such has never been the idea even
of the most ignorant populace. He [knows](errata.htm#32.md) that we believe
Kings to be born children like other men, with the same weaknesses, the
same passions,

<span id="page_482">p. 482</span>

and like incapacity; he knows as well as we do, that the gift of
conducting ourselves and others is to be acquired by education, and by
the helps and lights with which a man may be encompassed; and we know as
well as he does, that the child of the most obscure parentage would
often make a better king than many Sovereigns; as he might also be an
excellent magistrate, or a great general, had he received a
proportionate education. But does there hence follow any contradiction
in civil society, because, uncertain as to the persons who would be the
most proper for governing, but certain of the intrigues and broils which
would accompany the election of Kings, it has obviated those
inconveniencies by hereditary crowns and empires? And after all, what is
the meaning of that sophisticated pretence founded on the
[power](errata.htm#33.md) of being able to conduct oneself? Question the
most prudent and the wisest of men, and he will readily say, though I do
not stand in need of laws, magistrates, or Kings, to restrain me from
being unjust toward others, or from oppressing and plundering, I yet
want their assistance to secure me from being oppressed or plundered.
The less I am inclined to injure others, the more I need the protection
of the law from all injury. You are pleased to call my submission to the
laws slavery; I, on the contrary, look to it as my safety, and as the
guarantee of that liberty which enables me to do good and to live happy
and at peace in society. I have never heard of laws which forbad me to
live like an honest man. It is the wicked man only who recognises
liberty but in the impunity of his crimes; I scorn such liberty, and
bless the hand that deprives me of it. You call him a tyrant and a
despot, I call him my King and my benefactor. The better I know how to
conduct myself with respect to others, the more thankful I am to him who
hinders others from behaving ill to me.

The reader must pardon me these reflexions; I know they are superfluous
to those who think; but may not this work fall into the hands of persons
as credulous as the unhappy proselyte. In exposing the envenomed weapons
of the Sect, let it not be said that I withhold the antidote. Should any
be still blind enough not to perceive the tendency of all these sophisms
of Illuminism, let them hearken to the Sect ardently declaring their
hopes; the Hierophant continues:

"Are we then fallen from our dignity so low as not even to feel our
chains, or to hug them, and not cherish the flattering hope of being
able to break them, or to recover our liberty, not by rebellion or
violence (for the time is not yet come), but by force of reason. Because
a thing cannot be accomplished to-morrow, should we despair of ever
being able to effect it? *Abandon such short-sighted men to their own
reasonings and their own conclusions; they may conclude again and again;
but nature will continue to act. Inexorable to all their interested
remonstrances, she proceeds, and nothing can impede her majestic course.
Some events may take place contrary to our wishes; but they will all
rectify of themselves; inequalities will be levelled, and a lasting calm
shall succeed the tempest*. The only conclusion to be drawn from all
these objections is, that we are too much accustomed to the present
state of things, or perhaps self-interest has too great sway over us,
*to let us own that it is not impossible to attain universal
independence*—

<span id="page_483">p. 483</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Let then the
laughers laugh and the scoffers scoff*. He that observes and compares
what Nature has done with what she does at present, will soon see, that
in spite of all our intrigues she tends invariably toward her object.
Her proceedings are imperceptible to him who reflects but little; they
are visible only to the sage whose mind's eye penetrates even to the
womb of time.—From the summit of the mount he discovers in the horizon
that distant country, the very existence of which is not surmised by the
servile multitude of the plain."

The principal means which Weishaupt. offers to his adepts for the
conquest of this land of promise, this soil of independence, are, to
diminish the wants of the people, and to enlighten their minds. Hearken
to his lessons, you who, heretofore protected by your laws, peaceably
exercised an honourable and lucrative profession, and you who, once
rivals of the flourishing commerce of Great Britain on the immensity of
the ocean, are now but the sorrowful and dejected coasters of the Texel,
imprudent disciples of a disorganizing Sect.—Learn, that it is in the
secret hatred sworn against you by the Sect in its mysteries that you
are to seek the destruction of Lyons, the pillage of Bourdeaux, the ruin
of Nantes and Marseilles, the fate, in short, of so many other towns
flourishing in commerce, even the fate of Amsterdam itself; and then let
your aching eye glance on your trees of Equality and Liberty. At the
very time when you thought that you were seconding the views of the Sect
against the Nobles, Priests, and Monarchs, only to reinstate the people
in their rights of Equality and Liberty, the Sect was aiming its blows
at you as the grand artificers of Despotism. At that very period your
profession was already proscribed by the mysteries, as that which of all
others most surely tended to retain the people in slavery; the
Illuminizing Jacobin was teaching his adepts, that "he who wishes to
subject nations to his yoke, need but to create wants which he alone can
satisfy.—Erect the *mercantile tribe* (die kaufmanschaft) into an
hierarchical body; that is to say, confer on it some rank or some
authority in the government, and you will have created the most
formidable, the most *despotic* of all powers. You will see it giving
laws to the universe, and on it alone will rest the independence of one
part of the world and the slavery of the other. For that man dictates
the law who has it in his power to create or foresee, to stifle, weaken,
or satisfy want. And who are better enabled to do this than merchants?"
Thus we see that those men who were such ardent supporters of Jacobinism
in our commercial towns, with a view to partake of the government, are
precisely those whose profession the profound Jacobin chiefly detests in
every form of government. May the elucidation of this mystery inspire
the industrious inhabitants of hospitable Britain with new zeal for
their laws! The discovery of such a snare is of too great importance to
their safety, to allow me to conceal it from them.

In the next place the Hierophant proceeds from the art of diminishing
wants in order to operate the independence of nations, to the duty of
diffusing what he calls light. "He on the contrary (those are his words)
"who wishes to render mankind free, teaches them how to refrain from the
acquisition of

<span id="page_484">p. 484</span>

things which they cannot afford: he enlightens them, he infuses into
them boldness and inflexible manners. He that teaches them sobriety,
temperance, and œconomy, is more dangerous to the throne than the man
who openly preaches regicide.—If you cannot diffuse at the same instant
this degree of light among all men, at least begin by enlightening
yourself, and by rendering yourself better. *Serve, assist, and mutually
support each other; augment our numbers; render yourselves at least
independent, and leave to time and posterity the care of doing the
rest*. When your numbers shall be augmented to a certain degree, when
you shall have acquired strength by your union, *hesitate no longer, but
begin to render yourself powerful and formidable to the wicked* (that is
to say to all who will resist their plans); the very circumstance of
your being sufficiently numerous to talk of force, and that you really
do talk of it, that circumstance alone makes the prophane *and wicked*
tremble—That they may not be overpowered by numbers, many will become
good (like you) of themselves, and will join your party.—*You will soon
acquire sufficient force to bind the hands of your opponents, to
subjugate them and to stifle wickedness in the embryo*." That is to say,
as it may be understood in future, you will soon be able to stifle every
principle of law, of government, of civil or political society, whose
very institution in the eyes of an Illuminee is the germ of all the
vices and misfortunes of human nature. "The mode of diffusing universal
light, is not to proclaim it at once to the whole world, *but to begin
with yourself; then turn toward your next neighbour; you two can
enlighten a third and fourth; let these in the same manner extend and
multiply the number of the children of light, until numbers and force
shall throw power into our hands*." <span
id="fr_151"></span>[10](#fn_151.md)

I observe in the ritual of this degree, that should the Hierophant be
fatigued by the length of this discourse, he may take breath, and let
one of the adepts continue the instruction of the proselyte. <span
id="fr_152"></span>[11](#fn_152.md) Our readers also may avail themselves
of this permission, and they have copious matter for reflection in what
they have hitherto read. They may perhaps be inclined to ask, to what
degree the people must [diminish](errata.htm#34.md) their wants not to
stand in need of laws? They will perceive that bread itself must be
denied them; for as long as fields are cultivated, laws will be
necessary to protect the crops and to restrain men from reaping that
which they have not sown; and if on the first view the Sophism appears
wicked, the reader will soon perceive that it is but folly in the garb
of Sophistry.

The better to form their judgments on the lessons of the Hierophant,
they will have to compare that Revolution, *which is to be the effect of
instruction alone, and which is insensibly to take place without the
least shock or rebellion*, with that period when the adepts shall have
acquired *numbers*, *force*, and power, enabling them to *bind the hands
of their opponents*, and to subjugate all who may still show any
affection for their laws, or for that civil order in society which the
Sect wishes to suppress.

<span id="page_485">p. 485</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[484:1](mhj310.htm#fr_142.md) Philo to Spartacus.
Instructions for this degree.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[484:2](mhj310.htm#fr_143.md) Instruction for this
degree.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[485:3](mhj310.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="page_485">p. 485</span> Ibid. Further instructions on the admission
to the degree of Priest.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[485:4](mhj310.htm#fr_145.md) Ibid. Further
instructions on the admission to the degree of Priest.

<span id="fn_146"></span>[485:5](mhj310.htm#fr_146.md) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Part 2.

<span id="fn_147"></span>[485:6](mhj310.htm#fr_147.md) Last works of Philo
and Spartacus, from Page 10 to 70, and certificates of Philo at the
beginning of this degree.

<span id="fn_148"></span>[485:7](mhj310.htm#fr_148.md) I have compared the
two editions of this discourse. The first gives it just as Weishaupt
composed and pronounced it at his first initiations. The second has been
corrected by his adept the Baron Knigge, known by the characteristic of
Philo. All the difference that I could observe was, a slight refinement
of the style in some parts, while prolix passages had been added in
others. I remarked, that the Compiler Knigge had literally copied all
the impious, seditious, and frantic lessons of the original—I have given
the preference to the original. In place of adding, I shall rather
retrench, and only mention the most striking passages, making such
reflexions as circumstances may require. Weishaupt, according to the
idiom of the German language, always addressed the Candidate in the
third person plural: in this particular, we have followed Knigge's
correction, as more suitable with our language.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[485:8](mhj310.htm#fr_149.md) Orig. Writ. Vol. II.
Let 18, from Weishaupt to Zwack.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[485:9](mhj310.htm#fr_150.md) Darum sind wilde,
and im höchsten grad aufgeklärte, vieleicht, die einzige freye menschen.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[485:10](mhj310.htm#fr_151.md) See Discourse on
the lesser Mysteries of Illuminism.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[485:11](mhj310.htm#fr_152.md) This Discourse
actually requires at least two hours to read it. That part from which I
have made extracts extends in Vol. II. of the *Original Writings*, from
Page 44 to 93, and in the *Last works of Philo and Spartacus*, (which
are in much smaller print) from Page 10 to 48. I mean to abridge the
remaining part still more; but shall be scrupulously exact in the
translation of all remarkable passages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Continuation of the Discourse on the Lesser
Mysteries](mhj311.md)
