[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj315)  [Next](mhj317) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_541">p. 541</span>

### CHAP. XV.

#### Instructions for the Regent or Prince Illuminee, on the Government of the Order.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> prominent feature of all the
instructions given by the Illuminizing Legislator to his Epopts is the
consecration of their degree to the perversion of the public opinion,
and to the attainment of the empire of sciences, that he may direct them
all to the support of his disorganizing Equality and Liberty and to
universal anarchy. This mission of perversion requires an assiduity to
which not many men are equal; but adepts may be found, who, unable to
distinguish themselves in such missions, may yet be endowed with a
sufficient zeal and with the necessary talents for the superintendance
and direction of the Brethren. There are others again whose disastrous
successes are to be recompensed by the higher employments in the Order;
and it is from these *two classes of Epopts* that the Order *selects its
Regents*. It is also for their instruction that the Legislator descends
into all the gubernatory minutiæ of his Illuminism.—His instructions are
comprised under four different heads. I. General System of Government
for the Order.—II. Instructions for the degree of Regent.—III.
Instructions for the Prefects or Local Superiors.—IV. Instructions for
the Provincial. <span id="fr_226"></span>[1](#fn_226)

I have, it is true, been obliged to anticipate many parts of this Code
when unfolding the artifices of the lower degrees; but as a confirmation
of what has already been exposed, in order to bring the different
objects within one point of view, and to show the dangers of his
disastrous combinations, let us attend to the Legislator when treating
of the whole collectively. What particularly endeared this degree of
Regent to Weishaupt was, that part of his instruction which takes a
general view, and which lays open the progressive plan to be observed in
the government of the Brethren. The reader perusing the instructions in
the same order in which Weishaupt has written them, will more easily
conceive the cause of his predilection.

#### *Instruction A. Plan of the General Government of the Order.*

"I. The most high and excellent Superiors of the illustrious Order of
*true Freemasonry* do not immediately attend to the minutiæ of the
edifice.—They

<span id="page_542">p. 542</span>

must not, however, on that account be considered as contributing less to
our happiness, by their counsels, their lessons, their plans, and the
many and powerful resources with which they furnish us.

"II. These excellent and most gracious Superiors have established a
class of Masons to whom they have entrusted the whole plan of our Order.
This class is that of the *Regents*. . . . .

"III. In this plan our Regents hold the first dignities. Until admitted
to this degree, no person can hold the office of *Prefect* or of *Local
Superior*.

"IV. Every country has its national Superior, who holds an immediate
correspondence with our *Fathers*, at the head of whom is a General who
holds the helm of the Order.

"V. Under the *National* and his *Assistants* are the *Provincials*, who
each govern their Circle or their Province.

"VI. Every Provincial is surrounded by his Counsellors.

"VII. Each Provincial also commands a certain number of Prefects, who
may in like manner have their coadjutors in their districts. All these,
as well as the *Dean*, belong to the class of Regents.

"VIII. All these offices are for life, excepting in cases of deposition
or ejectment.

"IX. The Provincial is to be chosen by the *Regents* of his province and
the *National Superiors*, and approved by the *National*.—\[I do not
understand how the Code distinguishes between the several *National
Superiors* and the *National* in chief; unless it be, that it denotes in
this place as *Superiors* those who are called a little higher up
*Assistants* (*Gehulfen*) of this chief.\]

"X. The whole success of Illuminism depending on the *Regents*, it is
but just that their domestic wants should be provided for. They shall
therefore be the first supplied from out of the funds of the Order.

"XI. The Regents of each Province form a particular body immediately
under the Provincial, whom they are to obey. . . . . .

"XII. The offices of Illuminism not being considered in the light of
dignities, nor of *places of honour*, but as mere *employments* freely
accepted, the Regents must be always ready to labour for the good of the
Order, each according to his situation and to his talents. Age is never
to be set forth as a title. It may often happen, that the youngest is
chosen Provincial, and the eldest only a Local Superior or Counsellor,
should the one live in the center, while the other only inhabits the
extremity of the Province; or, should the former, on account of his
natural activity or his station in life, be more fitted for the place of
Superior than the latter, though far more eloquent. In many cases, for
example, a Regent is not to think it beneath his dignity to offer
himself to discharge any of the lesser offices in the *Minerval
churches* (lodges) in [which](errata.htm#72) he may be useful.

"XIII. That the Provincial may not be overburdened with too extensive a
correspondence, all the *Quibus Licets*, and all the letters of the
Regents, shall pass through the hands of the Prefect, unless the
Provincial gives Orders to the contrary.

<span id="page_543">p. 543</span>

"XIV. But the Prefect shall not open the letters of the *Regents*. Those
he must transmit to the Provincial, who will forward them to their
proper destination.

"XV. The Provincial has the power of convoking the whole of his Regents,
or merely those whom he may think proper, considering the exigencies of
the Province. He who cannot attend according to his summons must give
the proper notice at least four weeks prior to the meeting. Beside, he
is always to be ready to give in an account of what he has done for the
Order until that period, and show willingness to fulfil the intentions
of his Provincial and of his high Superiors. The convocation of Regents
must take place at least once a year.

"XVI. The following instruction (B) will point out more particularly to
the Regents those objects to which they must chiefly attend.

"XVII. It has been already observed, that great attention is to be paid
to the gradually procuring of funds for the Order. This may be
accomplished by attending to the following rules:

"Each province is to be entrusted with the expenditure of its own
monies, and only remit small contributions to the Superiors for the
expences of postage. Each Lodge also is to enjoy the *full propriety* of
its funds (*eigenthümlich*)—when *for any great enterprize* the assembly
of the Regents levy contributions on the funds of the different Lodges,
they shall be considered but as loans, and shall be made good to the
Lodges with full interest."

Has the Illuminizing Legislator then forgotten, that it was <span
class="smallcaps">property</span> which gave the first *deadly blow to
Equality and Liberty*? Certainly not; but more than <span
class="smallcaps">one</span> *great enterprize* will be necessary to
prepare the <span class="smallcaps">last</span>, which is to *annihilate
all property* whatsoever; meanwhile the Order is glad to enjoy its own,
and to make the inferior Lodges believe that they are not to be pillaged
of any thing that belongs to them.

"The Provincial has no fund allotted to him, but he has an exact return
of all those of his province."

"The general *receipts* will consist—1°. In the contributions paid on
the receptions of Masons (*freymaurer-receptions-gelder*)—2°. In the
over-plus of the monthly contributions—3°. In voluntary
subscriptions—4°. In fines—5°. In legacies and donations—6°. In our
commerce and traffic (*handel und gewerbe*)."

"The *expences* are—1°. The expences of the meetings, postage,
decorations, and some few [journeys](errata.htm#73)—2°. Pensions to the
poor brethren who have no other means of subsistence—3°. Sums paid for
the *promotion of the grand object of the Order*—4°. Sums paid for the
encouraging of talents—5°. The expences of experiments and trials—6°.
For widows and children—7°. For foundations."

Thus terminates the first part of the instructions for the Regent. After
the reading of this, which takes place on the day of his inauguration,
his attention is called to the following:

<span id="page_544">p. 544</span>

#### *Instruction B for the whole degree of Regent*

The reader has seen (*ut supra*, art. xvi.) the Regent forewarned to pay
a particular attention to this second part of the instructions. Let the
reader also profit of the hint. He will see that many of the *arcana* of
the Sect still remain to be revealed.

"I. The object of the Order being to render man more happy, virtue more
attractive, and vice less powerful, it is necesssary that our brethren,
the *teachers and governors of mankind*, should publicly assume an
unimpeachable character. A Regent of Illuminism therefore will be the
most perfect of men. He will be prudent, provident, ingenious,
irreproachable, and of manners so urbane that his company shall be
courted with avidity. He is to acquire the reputation of being
enlightened, benevolent, honest, disinterested, and full of ardour for
great and extraordinary enterprises, all contributing to the general
good."

It would be useless to recall to the mind of my reader what is to be
understood, in the language of Illuminism, by virtue, vice, or public
good. He will therefore on reflection be the less surprised at perusing
the following instructions framed for these *virtuous teachers and
governors* of mankind.

"II. The Regents are to study the means of ruling and governing without
betraying any such intention. <span id="fr_227"></span>[2](#fn_227)
Under the mask of humility, but of a real and candid humility, grounded
on the persuasion of their own weakness, and on the conviction that
their *whole strength rests on our union*, they must exercise an
absolute and boundless dominion, <span id="fr_228"></span>[3](#fn_228)
and must direct every thing toward the attainment of the views of the
Order."

"Let them avoid a pedantic reserve, at once disgusting and ridiculous in
the eyes of the sage. Let them give the example of a respectful
submission to the Superiors. Should they be possessed of the advantages
of birth, it will be an additional reason for showing their obedience to
a Superior born in a lower station of life—Let their conduct vary
according to the persons with whom they have to deal. Let the Regent be
the confidant of one, the father of another, the scholar of a third;
very seldom a severe and inexorable Superior, and even on such occasions
let him show with how much unwillingness he exercises such severity. He
will say, for example, that he sincerely wishes the Order had given so
disagreeable a commission to some other person; and that he is weary of
acting the part of schoolmaster with a man who should long since have
known how to conduct himself.

"III. The grand object of our *sacred legions spread throughout the
universe* being the triumph of virtue and of wisdom, every Regent must
endeavour to establish *a certain equality* among men.—Let him take the
part of those who are too much debased, and humble the proud. Let him
never suffer the fool to lord it too much over the man of wit, the
wicked over the good, the ignorant over the learned, nor the weak over
the strong, though the latter should in reality be in the wrong. <span
id="fr_229"></span>[4](#fn_229)

<span id="page_545">p. 545</span>

"IV. The means of acquiring an ascendancy over men are incalculable. Who
could enumerate them all?. . . They must vary with the disposition of
the dines. At one period it is a taste for the marvellous and
extraordinary that is to be wrought upon. At another the lure of secret
societies is to be held out. "*For this reason it is very proper to make
your inferiors believe, without telling them the real state of the case,
that all other secret societies, particularly that of Freemasonry, are
secretly directed by us. Or else, and it* <span class="smallcaps">is
really the fact in some states, that potent Monarchs are governed by our
Order</span>. *When any thing remarkable or important comes to pass,
hint that it originated with our Order.—Should any person by his merit
acquire a great reputation, let it be generally understood that he is
one of us*."

How smoothly flows this combination of artifice from the pen of the
Illuminizing Legislator! But I hope that my reader will not expect to
find a method in my translation, where the Legislator has disdained
method. It is easy to perceive, that to heap artifice upon artifice is
much more his object, than to give a studied connection to principles
with which he supposes his adepts to be sufficiently impressed. Or may
it not be said, that this disorder is the effect of studied art? But let
us proceed and trace the steps of Weishaupt.

"With no other object than to give your orders the appearance of coming
from a mysterious hand, you may, for example, put a letter under the
plate of an adept when dining at an inn, though it might have been a
much less trouble to forward it to him at his own lodgings—You may
attend large and commercial towns during the time of fairs in different
characters, as a *Merchant*, an *Officer*, an *Abbé*. Every where you
will personate an extraordinary man having important business on your
hands.—But all this must be done with a great deal of art and caution,
lest you should have the appearance of an adventurer. It is to be well
understood, that these characters are not to be assumed in towns where
you are likely to be discovered either by the Police or the
standers-by.—At other times, you may write your orders with a chemical
preparation of ink, which disappears after a certain time.

"V. A Regent is as much as possible to hide from his inferiors all his
weaknesses, even his ill-health, or disgusts; at any rate, he is never
to complain.

"VI. Here he repeats the instruction on the art of flattering and
gaining over women to their cause, already transcribed, page 43.

"VII. You must also gain over to the Order the <span
class="smallcaps">common people</span>. The great plan for succeeding in
this is to *influence the Schools*. You may also attempt it by
liberalities, or by great show and splendour; at other times by making
yourself popular, and even tolerating, with an *air of patience,
prejudices which may hereafter be gradually eradicated*.

"VIII. When you have succeeded any where in making yourself master of
the public authority and government, you will pretend not to have the
least power, for fear of awakening the attention of those who may oppose
us. But, on the contrary, when you find it impossible to succeed, you
will assume the

<span id="page_546">p. 546</span>

character of a person who has every thing at his command. That will make
us both feared and sought after, and of course will strengthen our
party.

"IX. All the ill success or disgusts which may befall the Order are to
be concealed with the utmost caution from the inferiors.

"X. It is the duty of the Regents to supply the wants of the Brethren,
*and to procure the best employments* for them, after having given the
proper intimation to the Superior.

"XI. The Regents shall be particularly cautious and discreet in their
discourse;—but shall carefully avoid any thing denoting the least
perplexity of mind—There are even some occasions whereon an extensive
genius is to be affected; on others, they may pretend that their
friendship has made them say a word too much; by these means the secrecy
of the inferior is put to the test. They may also spread certain reports
among our people, which may prepare them to receive ideas which the
Order wishes to infuse into their minds. On all doubtful occasions, the
Regent will consult his Superiors by means of a *Quibus Licet*."

"XII. Whatever rank or station a Regent may hold in the Order, he will
seldom answer the questions of the inferiors verbally, but generally in
writing, that he may have time to reflect or even consult on the answers
he should give."

"XIII. The Regents will unceasingly attend to every thing relating to
the grand interests of the Order, to the *operations of commerce*, or
such things as may in any way contribute to augment the *power* of the
Order. They will transmit all plans of that nature to the Provincial.
Should it be a case requiring expedition, he will give him advice of it
by some other channel than the *Quibus Licets*, which the Provincial has
not the power of opening.

"XIV. They will follow the same line of conduct with respect to every
thing that tends to influence the Order in general; and find means of
putting its united forces in motion at one and the same time.

"XV. When an author sets forth principles true in themselves, *but which
do not as yet suit our general plan of education for the world; or
principles the publication of which is premature; every effort must be
made to gain over the author; but should all our attempts fail, and we
should be unable to entice him into the Order, let him be discredited by
every possible means*."

"XVI. *If a Regent should conceive hopes of succeeding in suppressing
any religious houses*, and of applying their revenues to our object, for
example, *to the establishment of proper* <span
class="smallcaps">country schools</span>; he may depend on it, that such
a project would be particularly grateful to the Superiors.

"XVII. The Regents will also turn their attention toward a solid plan
for establishing a fund to support the widows of the brethren.

"XVIII. *One of our most important objects must be, to hinder the
servile veneration of the people for Princes from being carried too
far*. All such abject flattery tends only to make those men worse who
are already for the most part of very common and weak understandings.
You [will](errata.htm#74) show an example of the proper conduct to be
held in this respect. Shun all familiarity with them; behave to

<span id="page_547">p. 547</span>

them politely, *but without constraint, that they may honour and fear
you*. Write and speak of them as you would of other men, that they may
be made to recollect that they are but men like other people, and that
their authority is a thing purely conventional. <span
id="fr_230"></span>[5](#fn_230)

"XIX. When there happens to be a man of merit among our adepts but
little known by or entirely unknown to the public, no pains are to be
spared to acquire celebrity for him. *Let our disguised brethren* every
where sound the trumpet of his praises, and force envy and party spirit
to be silent.

"XX. The essay of our principles and of our schools is most easily and
most successfully made in small states. The inhabitants of capitals and
commercial towns are too corrupt, too much a prey to their passions, and
think themselves too much enlightened, to submit to our lessons.

"XXI. It is useful to send visitors from time to time, or to give a
Regent that is travelling the commission to visit the meetings, to ask
for the minutes, and to call on the brethren in order to examine their
papers or journals, and receive their complaints.—These
Plenipotentiaries, presenting themselves in the name of the high
Superiors, may correct many faults, and boldly suppress abuses which the
Prefects had not the courage to reform, though ready to enforce the
commands of the visitor.

"XXII. If our Order cannot establish itself in any particular place with
all the forms and regular progress of our degrees, *some other form may
be assumed. Always have the object in view; that is the essential point.
No matter what the cloak may be, provided you succeed; a cloak is
however always necessary, for in secrecy our strength principally
lies*."

"XXIII. For this reason we should always conceal ourselves under the
name of some other association. <span class="smallcaps">The inferior
lodges of Freemasonry are the most convenient cloaks</span> *for our
grand object*, (*das schickliche kleid für unsere höhere zwecke*)
because the world is already familiarized with the idea that nothing of
importance, or worthy of their attention can spring from Masonry.—The
name of a literary society is also a proper mask for our first classes.
Under such a mask, should our assemblies be discovered, we may
confidently assert, that the reason of our holding secret assemblies was
partly to give a greater interest and charm to our pursuits; partly to
keep off the crowd, and not to expose ourselves to the bantering and
jealousy of others; in short to hide the weakness of an association as
yet but in its infancy."

"XXIV. It is of the utmost importance for us to study the constitutions
of other secret societies and to *govern* them. The Regent is even
bound, after having obtained leave of his superiors, to gain admittance
into those societies, but he must not undertake too many engagements.
This is an additional reason why our Order should remain secret.

"XXV. The higher degrees must always be hidden from the lower. *A person
more willingly receives orders from a stranger than from men in whom he
gradually discovers a multitude of defects*. By this precaution one may
keep the inferiors in a more proper awe; for they naturally pay greater
attention to their behaviour when they think themselves surrounded by
persons who are

<span id="page_548">p. 548</span>

observing them; at first, their virtue may be the effect of constraint,
but custom will soon make it habitual."

"XXVI. Never lose sight of the military schools, of the academies,
printing presses, libraries, cathedral chapters, or any public
establishments that can influence education or government. Let our
Regents perpetually attend to the various means, and form plans for
making us masters of all these establishments." <span
id="fr_231"></span>[6](#fn_231)

"XXVII. In general, and independent of their particular employment, the
grand object of our Regents must be an habitual and constant application
to every thing which can in any way add to the perfection and to the
power of our Order, that it may become for future ages the most perfect
model of government that can enter the mind of man;" or, in other words,
that it may be hereafter said, such was the famous association which, by
perpetually perfecting its laws and governments, at length taught
mankind to cast off every law and every government. It would be useless
for me to think of adducing farther proofs to
[demonstrate](errata.htm#75) that such is the real object of the
pretended perfection of Illuminism. The mysteries of the Sect have been
too clearly laid open for us to harbour the smallest doubt of their
intention. But to acquire this perfection and power for the Sect,
Weishaupt has modelled still farther laws for his Regents, according to
the different offices they hold in the Hierarchy of the Order. <span
id="fr_232"></span>[7](#fn_232)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_226"></span>[548:1](mhj316.htm#fr_226) Last works of Philo
and Spartacus, degree of Regent.

<span id="fn_227"></span>[548:2](mhj316.htm#fr_227) Die Regenten sollen
die kunst studieren zu herschen, ohne das ansehen davon zu haben.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[548:3](mhj316.htm#fr_228) Sollen sie
unumschränkt regieren.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[548:4](mhj316.htm#fr_229) Er soll nicht leiden
dass der dümmere über den klügern—der Schwächere über den stärkern, auch
wenn dieser unrecht haben sollte, zu sehr den meister spiele.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[548:5](mhj316.htm#fr_230) Eine unserer
vornehmsten sorgen muss auch seyn, unter das volke sclavische fürsten
verehrung nicht zu hoch steigen zu lassen, &c. &c.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[548:6](mhj316.htm#fr_231) Militair-schulen,
academien, Buchdruckereyen, Buchläden, Dom-capitel, und alles was ein
einfluss auf bildung und regierung hat, muss nie aus den augen gelassen
werden; und die Regenten sollen unaufhörlich plane entwerfen, wie man es
anfangen könne, über dieselben gewalt zu bekommen.

<span id="fn_232"></span>[548:7](mhj316.htm#fr_232) For the whole of the
Second Part of this Chapter see the *Instruction B for the Degree of
Regent*, of which it is nearly a literal translation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Continuation of the Instructions on the Government
of the Illuminees](mhj317)
