[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj311)  [Next](mhj313) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

### CHAP. XI.

#### Eighth Part of the Code of Illuminees—The Regent, or the Prince Illuminee.

"<span class="smallcaps">When</span> one of our Epopts has sufficiently
distinguished himself to bear a part in the political government of our
Order; that is to say, when he unites prudence with *the liberty of
thinking and of acting*; when he knows how to temper boldness with
precaution, resolution with complaisance; subtlety with good nature;
loyalty with simplicity; singularity with method; transcendency of wit
with gravity and dignity of manners; when he has learned opportunely to
speak or to be silent, how to obey or to command; when he shall have
gained the esteem and affection of his fellow-citizens, though feared by
them at the same time; when his heart shall be entirely devoted to the
interests of our Order, and the common welfare of the universe shall be
uppermost in his mind; then, and only then, let the Superior of the
province propose him to the National Inspector as worthy of being
admitted to the degree of *Regent*."

Such are the qualities required by the Sect for the admission of its
adepts to the degree which in the Code is sometimes termed *Regent*, at
others the *Prince Illuminee*. Such are the very words to be found in
the preamble of the rules of this degree.

"Three things of the utmost consequence (says the Code) are to be
observed. In the first place, the greatest reserve is necesssary with
respect to this degree. Secondly, those who are admitted into it must be
as much as possible *free men and independent of all Princes*: they must
indeed have clearly manifested their *hatred for the general
constitution* or the actual state of mankind; have shown how ardently
they wish for a change in the government of the world; and how much the
hints thrown out in the degree of Priest has inflamed their wishes for a
better order of things."

If all these requisites are to be found in the Candidate, then let the
National Inspector once more examine, in his records, every thing
relative to the conduct and character of the new adept, let him inspect
the divers questions which have been put to him, and discover where he
has shown his strong or his weak side. According to the result of this
examination, let the Inspector propose some new questions on those
articles on which the Candidate may have shown the greatest reserve. For
example, some of the following: <span id="fr_163"></span>[1](#fn_163)

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

"I. Would you think a society objectionable, which should (till nature
shall have ripened its grand revolutions) place itself in a situation,
that would deprive Monarchs of the power of doing harm, though they
should wish it; a society whose invisible means should prevent all
governments from abusing their power? Would it be impossible, through
the influence of such a society, to form a new state in each state,
*status in statu*;" that is to say, would it be impossible to subject
the rulers of every state to this Illuminizing Society, and to convert
them into mere tools of the Order even in the government of their own
dominions?

"II. Were it to be objected, that such a society would abuse its power,
would not the following considerations do away such an objection?—Do not
our present rulers daily abuse their power? And are not the people
silent, notwithstanding such an abuse? Is this power as secure from
abuse in the hands of Princes, as it would be in those of our adepts
whom we train up with so much care? If then any government could be
harmless, would it not be our’s, which would be entirely founded on
morality, foresight, wisdom, liberty, and virtue?"

"III. Though this universal government, founded on morality, should
prove chimerical, would it not be *worth while to make an essay of it?*"

"IV. Would not the most sceptical man find a sufficient guarantee
against any abuse of power on the part of our Order, in the liberty of
abandoning it at pleasure; in the happiness of having Superiors of tried
merit, who, unknown to each other, could not possibly support each other
in their treasonable combinations against the general welfare;
Superiors, in short, who would be deterred from doing harm by the fear
of the existing chiefs of empires?"

"V. Should there exist any other secret means of guarding against the
abuse of that authority entrusted by the order to our Superiors, what
might they be?"

"VI. Supposing despotism were to ensure, would it be dangerous in the
hands of men who, from the very first step we made in the Order, teach
us nothing but science, liberty, and virtue? Would not that despotism
lose its sting, in the consideration that those chiefs who may have
conceived dangerous plans will have begun by disposing a machine in
direct opposition to their views." <span id="fr_164"></span>[2](#fn_164)

To understand the tendency of these questions, let us reflect on the
meaning given by the Sect to *liberty* and *general welfare*. Above all,
let us not forget the lesson already given to the adepts on morality;
the art of teaching men to shake off the yoke of their minority, to set
aside Princes and Rulers, and to learn to govern themselves. This lesson
once well understood, the most contracted understanding must perceive,
in spite of the insidious tenour of these questions, that their sole
tendency is to ask, whether "a Sect would be very dangerous who, under
pretence of hindering the chiefs of nations, Kings, Ministers, and
Magistrates, from hurting the people, should begin by mastering the
opinions of all those who surrounded Kings, Ministers, or Magistrates;
or should seek by invisible means to captivate all the councils, and the
agents of

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

public authority, in order to reinstate mankind in the rights of their
pretended majority; and to teach the subject to throw off the authority
of his Prince, and learn to govern himself; or, in other words, to
destroy every King, [Minister](errata.htm#40), Law, Magistrate, and
public authority whatever?" The Candidate, too well-trained to the
spirit of Illuminism not to see the real tendency of these questions,
but also too much perverted by it to be startled at them, knows what
answers he is to give to obtain the new degree. Should he still harbour
doubts, the ceremonies of his installation would divest him of them.
These are not theosophical or insignificant ceremonies;—every step
demonstrates the disorganizing genius, and the hatred for all authority,
which irritates the spleen of their impious author; and it is therefore
that Weishaupt, when writing to Zwack, represents them *as infinitely
more important* than those of the preceding degree. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[3](#fn_165)

When the admission of the new adept is resolved on, he is informed,
"that as in future he is to be entrusted with papers belonging to the
Order, of far greater importance than any that he has yet had in his
possession, it is necessary that the Order should have further
securities. He is therefore to make his will, and insert a particular
clause with respect to any private papers which he may leave in case of
sudden death. He is to get a formal and

juridical receipt of that part of his will from his family, or from the
public Magistrate, and he is to take their promises in writing that they
will fulfil his intentions." <span id="fr_166"></span>[4](#fn_166)

This precaution taken, and the day for the initiation fixed, the adept
is admitted into an antichamber hung with black. Its furniture consists
in a skeleton elevated on two steps, at the feet of which are laid a
crown and a sword—There he is asked for the written dispositions he has
made concerning the papers with which he may be entrusted, and the
juridical promise he has received that his intentions shall be
fulfilled. His hands are then loaded with chains, as if he were a slave;
and he is thus left to his meditations. <span
id="fr_167"></span>[5](#fn_167) The Provincial who performs the
functions of Initiator is alone in the first saloon, seated on a throne.
The Introducer, having left the Candidate to his reflections, enters
this room, and in a voice loud enough to be heard by the new adept, the
following Dialogue takes place between them.

"*Provincial*. Who brought this slave to us?"

"*Introducer*. He came of his own accord; he knocked at the door."

"*Prov*. What does he want?"

"*Introd*. He is in search of Liberty, and asks to be freed from his
chains."

"*Prov*. Why does he not apply to those who have chained him?"

"*Introd*. They refuse to break his bonds; they acquire too great an
advantage from his slavery."

"*Prov*. Who then is it that has reduced him to this state of slavery?"

"*Introd*. Society, governments, the sciences, and false religion." *Die
geselschaft, der staat, die gelehrsamkeit, die falsche religion*.”

"*Prov*. And he wishes to cast off this yoke to become a seditious man
and a rebel?"

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

"*Introd*. No; he wishes to unite with us, to join in our fights against
the constitution of governments, the corruption of morals, and the
profanation of religion. He wishes through our means to become powerful,
that he may attain the grand ultimatum."

"*Prov*. And who will answer to us, that after having obtained that
power he will not also abuse it, that he will not be a tyrant and the
author of new misfortunes?"

"*Introd*. His heart and his reason are our guarantees—the Order has
enlightened him. He has learned to conquer his passions and to know
himself. Our Superiors have tried him."

"*Prov*. That is saying a great deal—Is he also superior to prejudice.
Does he prefer the general interest of the universe to that of more
limited associations?"

"*Introd*. Such have been his promises."

"*Prov*. How many others have made similar promises who did not keep
them? Is he master of himself? Can he resist temptation? Are personal
considerations of no avail with respect to him? Ask him, whether the
skeleton he has before him is that of a king, a nobleman, or a beggar?"

"*Introd*. He cannot tell; nature has destroyed all that marked the
depraved state of inequality; all that he sees is, that this skeleton
was man like us; and the character of man is all that he attends to."

"*Prov*. If such be his sentiments, let him be free at his own risk and
peril. But he knows us not. Go and ask him why he implores our
protection? <span id="fr_168"></span>[6](#fn_168)

This dialogue ended (and the reader will not be at a loss to perceive
the drift of it), the Introducer returns to the Candidate, and says,
\`Brother, the knowledge you have acquired can no longer leave you in
doubt as to the grandeur, the importance, the disinterestedness and
lawfulness of our great object. It must therefore be indifferent to you
whether you are acquainted with our Superiors or not; nevertheless, I
have some information to impart to you on that subject."

This information is nothing more than a summary of a pretended history
of Masonry, going back to the deluge; and of what the Sect calls the
fall of man, the loss of his dignity, and of the true doctrine. The
story then continues to Noah and the few who escaped the deluge in the
ark; these, he says, were a few Sages or Freemasons, who have maintained
the true principles in their secret schools. It is for that reason, says
the Instructor, that Masonry has preserved the denominations of
*Noachists* and *Patriarchs*—Then comes a recapitulation of what had
been said in the degree of *Epopt* on the pretended views of Christ, on
the decline of Masonry, and on the honour reserved to Illuminism to
preserve and revive these true and ancient mysteries—"When questioned
(says the Instructor) as to whom we are indebted to for the actual
constitution of our Order, and the present form of the inferior degrees,
the following is the answer we give:

"Our founders, without doubt, had extensive knowledge, since they have
transmitted so much to us.—Actuated by a laudable zeal for the general

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

welfare, they formed a code of laws for our Order; but, partly through
prudence, and partly to guard against their own passions, they left the
direction of the edifice they had raised to other hands, and retired.
Their names will for ever remain in oblivion—The chiefs who govern the
Order at present are not our founders; but posterity will doubly bless
those unknown benefactors who have despised the vain glory of
immortalizing their names. Every document which could have thrown light
on our origin has been committed to the flames."

"You will now be under the direction of other men; men who, gradually
educated by the Order, have at length been placed at the helm. You will
soon make one of their number—Tell me only, whether you still harbour
any doubt as to the object of the Order."

The Candidate, who has long since been past all possibility of doubt,
advances with his Introducer toward another saloon; but, on opening the
door, several of the adepts run and oppose their entrance. A new
dialogue takes place in the style of the first—Who goes there? Who are
you?—Is it a slave who fled from his masters—No slave shall enter
here—He has fled that he might cease to be a slave; he craves an asylum
and protection—But should his master follow?—He is safe, the doors are
shut.—But should he be a traitor? He is not one, he has been educated
under the eyes of the Illuminees. They have imprinted the divine seal on
his forehead.—The door opens, and those who opposed the Candidate's
entrance escort him to the third saloon. Here new obstacles occur, and
another dialogue takes place between an adept in the inside and the
Introducer. In the mean time the Provincial has left his former station,
and has seated himself upon a throne in this third room. \[It is worthy
of remark that these enemies of thrones are themselves always seated on
a throne.\] The Provincial gives orders that the Candidate may be
admitted, and desires to see whether he really bears the print of the
seal of liberty. The Brethren accompany the new adept to the foot of the
throne,

"*Prov*. Wretch! You are a slave: and yet dare enter an assembly of free
men! Do you know the fate that awaits you? You have passed through two
doors to enter this; but you shall not go hence unpunished, if you
prophane this sanctuary."

"*Introd*. That will not happen; I will be his guarantee. You have
taught him to thirst after liberty; and now keep your promise."

"*Prov*. Well, Brother, we have subjected you to various trials. The
elevation of your sentiments has made us conceive you to be both proper
and worthy of being admitted into our Order. You have thrown yourself
with confidence and without reserve into our arms: and it is time to
impart to you that liberty which we have painted to you in such
bewitching colours. *We have been your guide during all the time that
you stood in need of one. You are now strong enough to conduct yourself,
be then in future your own guide, be it at your own peril and risk. Be
free; that is to say, be a man, and a man who knows how to govern
himself, a man who knows his duty, and his imprescriptible rights; a man
who serves the universe alone; whose actions are solely directed to the
general benefit of the world* 

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

*and of human* [*nature*](errata.htm#41). *Every thing else is
injustice—Be free and independent; in future be so of yourself.—Here,
take back the engagements you have hitherto contracted with us. To you
we return them all*."

As he pronounces these words, the [Provincial](errata.htm#42) returns
him all the writings which concern him, such as his oaths, his promises,
the minutes of his admission to the preceding degrees, the history of
his life which he had transmitted to the Superiors, and all the notes
taken by the Scrutators concerning him.

This perhaps is one of the most delicate traits of policy of the Sect.
The chiefs have had full leisure to pry into the most secret recesses of
his [heart](errata.htm#43), and the Scrutators have no further
discoveries to make. The Candidate may take back his oaths and his
secrets, but recollections (perhaps copies) still remain, and the
Initiator may well continue: "In future you will owe us nothing but that
which your heart shall dictate. We do not tyrannize over men, we only
enlighten them. Have you found contentment, rest, satisfaction,
happiness, among us? You will not then abandon us. Can we have mistaken
you, or can you have mistaken us! It would be a misfortune for you; but
you are free. Remember only that men free and *independent* do not
offend each other; on the contrary, they assist and mutually protect
each other. Remember, that to offend another man, is to give him the
right of defending himself. Do you wish to make a noble use of the power
we give to you? rely on our word: you shall find zeal and protection
among us. Could a disinterested zeal for your brethren glow in your
heart, then labour at the grand object, labour for unfortunate human
nature, and thy last hour shall be blest. We ask nothing else from you,
we ask nothing for ourselves. Question your own heart, and let it say
whether our conduct to you has not been noble and disinterested. After
so many favours, could you be ungrateful, your heart should avenge us,
and chastise you. But no; many trials have proved you to be man of
constancy and resolution. Be such your character, and in future govern
with us oppressed man, and labour at rendering him virtuous and free."

"Oh, Brother! what a fight, what hopes! when one day happiness,
affection, and peace shall be the inhabitants of the earth! when misery,
error, and oppression, shall disappear with superfluous wants! when,
each one at his station labouring only for the general good, every
father of a family shall be sovereign in his [tranquil](errata.htm#44)
cot! when *he that wishes to invade these sacred rights shall not find
an asylum on the face of the earth*! when idleness shall be no longer
suffered! *when the clod of useless sciences shall be cast aside*, and
none shall be taught but those which contribute to make man better, and
to reinstate him in his primitive freedom, his future destiny! when we
may flatter ourselves with having forwarded that happy period, and
complacently view the fruits of our labours! when, in fine, each man
viewing his brother in his fellow-creature, shall extend a succouring
hand—with us and ours you shall find happiness and peace, should you
continue faithful and attached to us. You will also remark, that the
sign of this degree consists in extending your arms to a brother with
your hands open, to show that they are not sullied by injustice

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

and oppression, and the *gripe* is to seize the brother by the two
elbows, as it were to hinder him from falling. The *word* is
*redemption*."

The foregoing [passages](errata.htm#45) so clearly demonstrate the
meaning of this word *redemption*, that the reader must be surprised at
learning that there still remain further mysteries to be revealed. The
candidate is not yet admitted into the highest class. He is only the
Prince Illuminee, and has to gain admission to the two degrees of
*Philosopher*, and of the *Man King*. He is invested in his new
principality by receiving a buckler, boots, a cloak, and a hat. The
words pronounced at the investiture are worthy of the reader's
attention.

*On presenting the* [*buckler*](errata.htm#46), the Initiator says, "Arm
thyself with fidelity, truth, and constancy; *be a true Christian*, and
the shafts of calumny and misfortune shall not pierce thee." *Be a
Christian!* *(und sey ein Christ)!!* What a strange Christian; what a
wicked wretch then must be the Initiator who dares carry his
dissimulation to such lengths, and prophane that sacred name in
mysteries so evidently combined for the eradication of every trace of
Christianity! But the adepts smiles, or his stupidity must be beyond
expression if he does not see through so miserable a cant.

*On presenting the boots*: "Be active in the service of the good, and
fear no road which may lead to the propagation or discovery of
happiness." This will recall to our minds the principle, *whatever may
be the means*, fear not to employ them when they lead to what the Sect
calls happiness.

*On giving the cloak*: "*Be a prince over thy people*; that is to say,
be sincere and wise, the benefactor of thy brethren, and teach them
science." The reader will not be at a loss to understand what science.

The formula of the *hat* is, "Beware of ever exchanging this hat of
liberty (*diesen frey heitshut*) for a crown."

Thus decorated, the Prince Illuminee receives the fraternal embrace.—He
then hears read the instructions for his new degree; but as they
entirely relate (like those of the preceding degree) to the government
of the brethren, they will be treated of in the last part of the code.
It is now time to proceed to the Grand Mysteries.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_163"></span>[501:1](mhj312.htm#fr_163) Instructions for
conferring the degree of Regent, Nos. 1, 2, 3. Last works of Philo and
Spartacus.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[501:2](mhj312.htm#fr_164) Instructions for
conferring the degree of Regent, Nos. 1, 2, 3. Last works of Philo and
Spartacus.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[501:3](mhj312.htm#fr_165) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Letter 24, from Weishaupt to Cato.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[501:4](mhj312.htm#fr_166) Instructions for
conferring this degree, No. 5.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[501:5](mhj312.htm#fr_167) Ritual of this
degree, No. 1.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[501:6](mhj312.htm#fr_168) Ritual of this
degree, No. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XII. Class of Grand Mysteries; the Mage or the
Philosopher, and the Man King](mhj313)
