[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj313)  [Next](mhj315) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

### CHAP. XIII.

#### Tenth and Last Part of the Code of the Illuminees.—Government of the Order—General Idea of that Government, and of the Share which the Inferior Classes of Illuminism bear in it.

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is not enough for the founder of a
Sect of Conspirators to have fixed the precise object of his plots, the
trials and degrees through which his adepts are to rise insensibly to
the acquisition of his profoundest mysteries. His accomplices must form
but one body animated by one spirit; its members must be moved by the
same laws, under the inspection and government of the same chiefs, and
all must tend toward the same object. Such a genius as Weishaupt's could
not be suspected of having overlooked in his Code so important a means
of success. From what I have already said, the reader will have observed
what connection and subordination subsisted in the gradation of his
mysteries; how all the adepts of a given town formed, notwithstanding
the inequality of their degrees, but one and the same academy of
Conspirators, while each one laboured separately at the overthrow of
religion and the laws in the state in which he lived. In this academy
the *Candidate* and the *Novice* are under the direction of the
*Insinuator*, who introduces them into the *Minerval Lodges*; these
Lodges are governed by the *Minor Illuminees*, who in their turn are
inspected by the *Major Illuminees*. Next to these preparatory degrees
follow the intermediary or Masonic degree, called the *Scotch Knight*;
and his power extends on the one side over the *Major Illuminees*, and
on the other over the Illuminized Masons; or, in general, over all that
part of the Order stiled in the Code the *lower part of the edifice*.
After these we meet the *Epopts* and *Regents* or *Princes* of the
lesser mysteries, and lastly, in the higher mysteries, the *Mage* and
*Man-King*.

The aggregate of all these degrees forms a complete academy of
Conspirators, and impendent ruin threatens the country where such a one
exists. The Magistrate and the Citizen may expect to see their property
and their religion annihilated. The Sect recognizes no country but the
universe, or rather acknowledges none; the very term country is a
blasphemy against the rights of man, against Equality and Liberty. What
each member in his particular academy performs by himself, is performed
throughout all of them by the Sect in general, and the combined efforts
of the whole are regularly directed toward the concerted plan of
devastation. The Miners have received

<span id="page_526">p. 526</span>

their instructions, that each may bore his subterraneous galleries, and
lodge the chamber of his mines in such a manner that partial explosions
may forward the views of the Sect, without endamaging the grand chamber,
which shall involve the whole world in the premeditated explosion of
universal destruction. To produce this [effect](errata.htm#64), general
laws and mutual communications, common chiefs and directors are
requisite. Each Conspirator, wherever his field of action may lie, must
be certain that he acts in concert with his Brethren, that he will not
be crossed in his plans, but on the contrary meet every where with
support and corresponding agents.

Weishaupt was aware, that the farther the sphere of disorganization was
to extend the more perfect should be the organization of his power. The
more eager he was to call down universal anarchy, and make it take place
of all laws, the more did he wish to establish subordination, and
concentrate the forces of the Order, the better to direct its motions.
To accomplish this, the oath of implicit obedience to Superiors was not
enough. It was not sufficient for the adept to have blindly submitted
his life and fortune to the despotic power of unknown chiefs, should
they ever suspect him of treachery or rebellion. The Superiors
themselves were to be bound by laws and principles common to all, that
they might proceed in all points by a regular and uniform impulse.

It cost Weishaupt much meditation before he could perfect his plan of
government as he wished. Five years after the establishment of the Sect,
he writes "*This machine of ours must be so perfectly simple that a
child could direct it*;" and still later he writes, "allow me time to
digest my speculations, that I may properly marshal our forces." <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_196)

So preoccupied was Weishaupt with his speculations on the government of
the Sect, that all his letters written to his principal adepts are
replete with his maxims and political councils. One must have heard or
read them one's self to credit the deep-laid villany of his means and
his infernal policy. Here is an example:

In the same letter which I have [just](errata.htm#65) quoted of the 15
Asphandar 1151 he gives two rules to be inserted among the instructions
of the Areopagites—The one, to be on the reserve with Candidates *from
among the class of the rich*, because that sort of men, *proud,
ignorant, averse to labour, and impatient of subordination*, only seek
admission to our mysteries in order to make them an object of ridicule
and mockery; the other, not to take the smallest pains to prove, that
Illuminism is in the sole possession of the true Masonry, *because the
best possible demonstration is to give none*. Let Weishaupt himself
explain a third law, which is to make a part of his political
collection.

"*That we may be uncontrolled in our discourse, let our pupils remark,
that the Superiors enjoy a great latitude in that respect; that we
sometimes speak in one way, sometimes in another*; that we often
question with great assurance only to sound the opinions of our pupils,
and to give them an opportunity of showing it by their answers. This
subterfuge repairs many errors. Let us always say, that the end will
discover which of our observations conveys our true sentiments.—Thus we
may speak sometimes in one way, at others in a quite different one, that
we may never be embarrassed, and that our real sentiments

<span id="page_527">p. 527</span>

may always be impenetrable to our inferiors. Let this be also inserted
in the instructions, *etiam hoc inseratur instructioni*. It would still
have a better effect, if you gave in charge to our *Major Illuminees* to
vary their conversation with their inferiors, for the above reasons, *ex
rationibus supra dictis*." These insertions of Latin are from Weishaupt,
who frequently makes use of that language in his letters. It is
immediately after having given these principles of government to the
Areopagites, the chief superiors of his Illuminism, that Weishaupt adds,
"I entreat that the maxims which are so often to be found in my letters
may not be lost. Collect them for the use of our Areopagites, as they
are not always present in my mind. With time they might form an
excellent *political* degree. *Philo* has long since been employed about
it. Communicate also your private instructions to each other, which may
in time grow into an uniform Code. Read them attentively, that they may
become familiar to you. Though I know them well and practise them (*und
auch darnach handle*) they would take me too much time to digest them
systematically. These maxims once engraved in your mind, you will enter
better into my plans, and you will proceed more
[conformably](errata.htm#66) to my mode of operation." <span
id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_197)

Let the reader also profit of these instructions. They must bear
evidence in my behalf while revealing all the monstrous artifices of the
remaining part of the Illuminized Code. From these long meditated
combinations, sprang forth that chain of laws which was to direct each
Illuminée in all his [proceedings](errata.htm#67).

We first remark in this government, as a means of subordination, a
general division of command, as well as of locality. Each department has
a particular *Lodge* for its adepts; each *Minerval* Lodge has a
Superior from among the preparatory class, under the inspection of the
intermediary class. In the second place, we find the division into
districts which contain several Lodges, all which as well as the Prefect
are under the direction of the superior of the district whom the Order
calls *Dean*. He is also subjected to the *Provincial*, who has the
inspection and command over all the lodges and deanries of the province.
Next in rank comes the *National Superior*, who has full powers over all
within his nation, Provincials, Deans, Lodges, &c. &c. Then comes the
supreme council of the Order, or the *Areopagites*, presided by the real
*General* of Illuminism.

The same hierarchy is preserved in their communications. The simple
Illuminee corresponds with his immediate superior, the latter with his
Dean, and thus gradually ascending to the National Superiors. These
latter are in direct correspondence with the Areopagites; and they alone
are acquainted with their residence. In this council there is always a
member whose particular office is to receive and answer their letters,
and to transmit orders, which gradually descend to the person or persons
who are the objects of them. The Areopagites alone are entrusted with
the name and residence of the General, excepting in cases which I have
already noticed, where particular confidence or remarkable services have
gained for an adept the signal honour of knowing and approaching the
modern Spartacus.

<span id="page_528">p. 528</span>

It is easy to perceive, from the very regulations of the first degrees,
how voluminous this correspondence must be. Each brother, in the first
place, as the *natural Scrutator* of his co-adepts and of the prophane,
is bound to transmit at least one letter each month, with a statement of
all the observations he has made, whether favourable or detrimental to
the Order. He is also to give an account of the progress which himself
and his brethren have made; of the orders he has received, and of their
execution; and he is each month to inform his higher superiors whether
he is pleased with the conduct of his immediate superior. Each brother
Insinuator is to report the progress of his Candidates, and the prospect
he has of adding to their number. Next, to swell the volume, come all
the portraits of the adepts, the extracts of tablets or daily
observations made on the friends or enemies of the Order: also the
minutes of initiations, the characters and lives of the initiated, the
returns made by the Lodges, those by the superiors, and an infinity of
other articles which the Illuminee is bound to make known to his chiefs.
All this occurs without noticing the numberless orders and instructions
which are perpetually transmitting to the inferiors.

Beside the secret language already explained, and of which the grand
object was to render this correspondence unintelligible to the prophane,
the Sect had secret means of transmitting their letters, lest they might
be intercepted. The Order styles these letters relative to their
illuminism *Quibus Licet's* (or to those who have a right). The origin
of this appellation is the direction of these letters which consists of
the two words *Quibus Licet* or simply the initials Q. L. When,
therefore, we find in the Original Writings, that such an adept has been
fined in such a month for having neglected his Q. L., it must be
understood that he let such a month pass without writing to his
superiors. <span id="fr_198"></span>[3](#fn_198)

When the letter contains secrets or complaints which the adept chooses
to keep from the knowledge of his immediate superior, he adds to the
direction *Soli* or *Primo* (to him alone, to the first); this letter
will then be opened by the *Provincial*, the *National Superior*, or
will reach the *Areopagites*, or *General*, according to the rank of the
person from whom it comes.

Next to these general means of graduated correspondence, come the
meetings proper to each degree, and their respective powers. We have
already seen, that those of the *Minerval* academy are regularly held
twice a month. The *Minor* Illuminees, who are the magistrates of this
degree, and the *Major* Illuminee, or the *Scotch Knight*, who presides
in them, have no direct share in the government, farther than to inspect
the studies and watch over the conduct of the young *Minervals*, and
report to the lodges of the *Major* Illuminees. It is in that degree
that the authority begins to extend beyond the limits of the assembly.
It is to the *Major* Illuminees that all the tablets or instructions
relative to the brethren of *Minerva* are sent. Here these statements
are digested, and receive additions and notes, before they are forwarded
to the assembly of the next superior degree. Here are judged and
determined the promotions of the *Novices*, *Minervals*, and *Minor*
Illuminees; and also all differences and contests which may arise in the
inferior degrees, unless the importance of the debate be such as to
require the interference of a higher tribunal. They are the guardians of
the first tablets and reversal letters of the

<span id="page_529">p. 529</span>

brethren.—As to what [knowledge](errata.htm#68) a Major Illuminee may
have acquired either relative to other secret societies, or to
employments or dignities which might be obtained for adepts, he is bound
to report it to his lodge, which will note it, and inform the assembly
of the *Directing* Illuminees or *Scotch Knights*. <span
id="fr_199"></span>[4](#fn_199)

When treating of the intermediary degree of *Scotch Knight*, I gave an
account of their particular functions, and especially their *charge of
superintending the Masonic Lodges*. The part they act in the general
government of the Order chiefly consists in hearing all the *Quibus
Licets* of the preparatory classes read in their chapters, even those of
the Novices which had already been opened by the officers of the
Minerval school: the latter having only the power of deciding
provisionally on these letters.

The authority which the *Scotch Knights* exercise over this
correspondence seems to give still more propriety to their denomination
of intermediary degree. Their *Quibus Licets* are directly sent to the
Provincial Lodge, which is composed entirely of adepts initiated in the
mysteries of the Order. But the Knights read all letters coining from
the preparatory class which have not the distinction of *Primo* or
*Soli*. They classify and make extracts from all the *Quibus Licets* of
lesser importance coming from the inferior degrees, and send the general
extract to the Provincial. To these extracts they subjoin a
circumstantial account of every thing that is going forward in the
lodges of the preparatory class, to which they transmit all the orders
coming from the adepts initiated in the mysteries, even from those of
the highest degrees with the very names of which they are unacquainted,
and thus constitute a link between the two extremities. <span
id="fr_200"></span>[5](#fn_200)

Both the intermediary and preparatory classes, however, form but the
lower part of the edifice. The Prefects of the *Chapters* of the *Scotch
Knights* are rather tools than superiors; they receive their impulse
from the higher mysteries. It is there that the grand polity of the
Order is to be sought for in the instructions laid down for the Epopt
and the Regent, and these are the instructions which, beginning with
those of the Epopt, demand our utmost attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_196"></span>[529:1](mhj314.htm#fr_196) Letters to Cato,
15th March 1781, and 16th February 1782.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[529:2](mhj314.htm#fr_197) Letter to Cato, 15th
March, 1781.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[529:3](mhj314.htm#fr_198) Vol. II. Let. 2,
from Spartacus to Cato.

<span id="fn_199"></span>[529:4](mhj314.htm#fr_199) Degree of Major
Illuminée, Instruction 4th.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[529:5](mhj314.htm#fr_200) See this degree,
Instruction the 2d, No. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Of the Government and Political Instructions for the
Epopts](mhj315)
