[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Sub Rosa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mhj308)  [Next](mhj310.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0021YV3F4/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Code of the Illuminati: Part III of Memoirs Illustrating the History of
Jacobinism*, by A Barruel, tr. Robert Edward Clifford \[1798\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

### CHAP. VIII.

#### Sixth Part of the Code of the Illuminees. Intermediary Class—The Scotch Knight of Illuminism; or Directing Illuminee.

<span class="smallcaps">Under</span> the appellation of *Intermediary
Class* of Illuminism might be comprehended all the Degrees which
Weishaupt had borrowed from Freemasonry. In that case we should comprize
under this denomination the three degrees of *Apprentice*,
*Fellow-Craft*, *and Master*. But it has been already said, that these
degrees are simply a passport for the Sect into the Masonic Lodges; and
that its object may be less conspicuous, it leaves them in their
original Masonic state. This, however, is not the case with the higher
degrees of Scotch Masonry. The Sect shrewdly surmised that the views of
these degrees coincided with their own: beside, it wanted some of these
superior degrees, either for the direction of those Masonic Lodges which
it composed of its own members, or who were to gain admittance,
dominate, and preside over other Lodges which were not devoted to
Illuminism. The great veneration in which the *Scotch Knights* are
generally held by Masons, more strongly determined the Baron Knigge to
make himself master of this degree, and engraft it on Illuminism. The
Sect has constituted this into both an *intermediary* and a *stationary*
degree. It is *stationary* for those into whom it despairs of ever
infusing the principles required for a [further](errata.htm#21.md)
admission to the mysteries; but it is only *intermediary* for those who
have shown dispositions more accordant with the pursuits of the
Sect. <span id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md)

Whatever may be his destiny, no Brother is ever admitted into this new
degree, until he has previously given proofs of the progress he has made
in the arts of *Scrutator*, whose code must have been his chief study
since his admission to the degree of Major Illuminee. The secret Chapter
of the Knights has had the precaution to propose certain questions to
him to ascertain how far he is capable of judging *of the state of the
mind by exterior appearances*. He will have had to answer, for example,
to the following ones:—"What is the character of a man whose eyes are
perpetually in motion, and whose countenance is changeable? What
features denote voluptuousness, melancholy, and pusillanimity?" <span
id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123.md)

As a further proof of the progress he has made, he is to transmit to his
superiors another dissertation on the life of the hero whose name he
bears for

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

his characteristic. The history of his own life, which he had delivered
in the antecedent degree, had laid open the whole of his existence, and
all his actions through life. This new dissertation will show the Order
what he admires or disapproves of in others, and will particularly
demonstrate whether he has discovered those qualities in his patron
which the Order wished he should imbibe and imitate when it gave him his
characteristic. <span id="fr_124"></span>[3](#fn_124.md) Should any part of
his life have escaped the vigilance of the Scrutators, he is still at
liberty to give a new proof of his confidence in the Order; and this is
described as a meritorious act; but he may reserve it for the cognizance
of the Superior of the Order only. <span id="fr_125"></span>[4](#fn_125.md)
He is then to declare under his hand-writing, that he looks upon the
Superiors of Illuminism as the *secret* and *unknown* though
*legitimate* Superiors of *Freemasonry*; that he adheres and always will
adhere to the illuminized system of Masonry, as the best and most useful
existing; that he utterly renounces every other association; that he is,
in short, so persuaded of the excellence of Illuminism, that he fully
adopts its principles, and firmly believes himself bound to labour,
under the direction of his superiors, *at the object and according to
the intentions of the Order* for the happiness of mankind. <span
id="fr_126"></span>[5](#fn_126.md)

After having received these numerous pledges, the Scotch Knights invite
the new Brother to a *secret Chapter*, for such is the name given to the
Lodges of this degree. It is hung with green, richly decorated and
brilliantly lighted. The Prefect of the Knights, booted and spurred, is
seated on a throne erected under a canopy all of the same colour. On his
apron a green cross is seen, and on his breast the star of the Order; he
wears the riband of St. Andrew in salter from right to left, and holds a
mallet in his hand. On his right stands the brother sword-bearer,
holding the sword of the Order; on his left the master of the ceremonies
with a stick in one hand, and the ritual in the other. The Knights
assembled are all booted and spurred, each girt with a sword, and all
wear the cross suspended at their necks by a green riband. The Officers
of the Order are to be distinguished by a plumage, and a priest of the
Order compleats the Lodge. The Prefect then delivers himself as follows
to the Candidate:

"You here behold a part of those unknown legions which are united by
indissoluble bonds to combat for the cause of humanity. Are you willing
to make yourself worthy of watching with them for the sanctuary? Your
heart must be pure, and a heavenly ardour for the dignity of nature must
fire your breast. The step you are taking is the most important one of
your life. Our games are not vainly ceremonial. In creating you a knight
we expect of you that you will perform exploits grand, noble, and worthy
of the title you receive. Long life to you, if you come to us to be
faithful; if honest and good you answer our expectations. Should you
prove a false Brother, be both cursed and unhappy, and may the grand
Architect of the Universe hurl you into the bottomless pit! Now bend thy
knee, and on this sword take the oath of the Order."

At these words the Prefect seats himself, the Knights are standing with
their swords drawn, and the Candidate pronounces the following oath:—

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

"I promise obedience to the excellent Superiors of the Order. In as much
as it shall depend upon me, I engage—never to favour the admission of
any unworthy member into these holy degrees—to labour at rendering the
Ancient Masonry triumphant over the false systems which have crept into
it—to succour, like a true Knight, innocence, poverty, or oppressed
honesty—*Never to be the flatterer of the great, nor the slave of
Princes*;—to combat courageously, though prudently, in the cause of
*Virtue, Liberty, and Wisdom*—to resist boldly, both for the advantage
of the Order and of the world, *Superstition and Despotism*. I never
will prefer my own private interest to that of the Order. I will defend
my Brethren against calumny. *I will dedicate my life to the discovery
of the true Religion and real doctrines of Freemasonry, and I will
impart my discoveries to my Superiors*. I will disclose the secrets of
my heart to my Superiors as to my best friends. So long as I shall
remain in the Order I shall look upon the being a Member of it as a
supreme felicity. I also engage to look upon all my domestic, civil, and
social duties as most sacred. So help me God, both for the happiness of
my life, and for the peace of my mind."

In return for this oath the Prefect declares to the Candidate that he is
going to create him a Knight of St. Andrew, according to the ancient
usage of the Scotch—"*Rise*," he says, "and in future beware of ever
bending thy knee before him who is only man like thyself." <span
id="fr_127"></span>[6](#fn_127.md)

To these ceremonies the adept Knigge added a certain number of others
which were mere derisions of the rites of the Church. Such, for example,
was the triple benediction which the Priest pronounced over the new
Knight, such the atrocious mockery of the last supper, which terminated
the ceremony. But, impious as is the imitation, Weishaupt declares it to
be *disgusting* because it is still *religious*, *theosophical*, and
*borrowed from superstition*. <span id="fr_128"></span>[7](#fn_128.md) But
what perfectly coincided with the views of the Bavarian founder were,
the instructions given to the new Knight. He is enraptured with that
discourse, where one may observe the Illuminizing Orator selecting the
most impious, artful, and disorganizing systems of Masonry, to make them
at once the mysteries of their Masonic Lodges, and an immediate
preparation for those of Illuminism.

Let the reader recal to mind what was said in the Second Volume of these
Memoirs <span id="fr_129"></span>[8](#fn_129.md) concerning the Apocalypse
of the Martinists, entitled *Of Errors and of Truth*. He will there have
read of a time when man, disengaged from the senses and free from
matter, was still more free from the yoke of the laws and from political
bondage, to which he was only subjected by his fall. He will there have
seen, that the daily efforts of man should tend to the overthrow of
Governments, that he may recover his former purity and ancient liberty,
and thus retrieve his fall. I might there have demonstrated that absurd
*Idealism* reducing our senses to vain fictions, that the prostitution
of them might be but a chimerical crime; <span
id="fr_130"></span>[9](#fn_130.md) there, in short, I might have shown,
according to the Martinist, that in all ages this system of corruption
and disorder has been the doctrine and secret of true Philosophy. This
intermediary degree was destined by Weishaupt to serve as a point of
union between the Masonic Lodges and Illuminism. It was but natural that
the should have selected the most

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

monstruous and most artful system of the Craft. Let not the reader
therefore be astonished when he sees the Antitheosophist, the Atheist,
the Materialist Weishaupt borrowing in this degree the doctrines of the
Martinists on the twofold principle or double spirit. But let it be also
remembered, that whenever, in consequence of this artifice, he is
obliged to use the words *spirit* or *soul*, he informs the candidate,
that such words are employed in the Code only to conform to the *vulgar
expression*. This precaution taken, the Initiator may without
apprehension repeat the sophisticated lessons on the twofold principle.
And indeed one might be tempted to think, that the doctrines he lays
down as the grand object of Free Masonry had all been copied from the
Martinist system. He begins by deploring a great Revolution which had in
former ages deprived man of his primitive dignity. He then represents
man as having had the faculty of recovering his ancient splendour; but
that by the abuse of his faculties he had again immersed himself still
deeper in his defiled and degraded station. The very senses are blunted,
and said to lead him into error on the nature of things. Every thing
that he beholds in its actual state is *falsehood*, *show*, and
*illusion*; and he lays particular stress on those schools of sages
which had, ever since the time of the grand Revolution, preserved the
secret principles of the antique doctrines, or of true Masonry. Nor does
the [monstrous](errata.htm#22.md) Hierophant blush at placing <span
class="smallcaps">Jesus of Nazareth</span> among those sages, and
blasphemously numbering the God of the Christians among the Grand
Masters of Illuminism. But soon was the doctrine of Christ falsified,
and Priests and Philosophers raised on these divine foundations an
edifice of *folly, prejudice, and self-interest. Soon also does the
tyranny of Priesthood and the Despotism of Princes coalesce in the
oppression of suffering humanity*. Free Masonry opposes these disastrous
attempts, and endeavors to preserve the true doctrine; but it has
[overburdened](errata.htm#23.md) it with symbols, and its lodges gradually
subside into seminaries of ignorance and error.—The Illuminees alone are
in possession of the real secrets of Masonry; many of them are even
still to be the objects of their researches; and the new Knight is to
devote all his attention to their discovery. He is particularly
recommended *to study the doctrines of the ancient Gnostics and
Manichæans, which may lead him to many important discoveries on this
real Masonry*. He is also told, that the great enemies which he will
have to encounter during this investigation will be ambition and other
vices which make humanity *groan under the oppression of Princes and of
the Priesthood*. <span id="fr_131"></span>[10](#fn_131.md)

The obscurity which enwraps these lessons on the new and grand
Revolution which is to counteract the ravages of the former, is not the
slightest of Weishaupt's artifices. With respect to Princes, this is the
last degree to which they are admitted. They are to be persuaded, that
the antique Revolution was no other than the coalition of the powers of
the earth with the Priesthood, in order to support the empire of
religious prejudice and superstition; and that the new Revolution to be
effected is the re-union of Princes with Philosophy, to overthrow that
empire and ensure the triumph of reason. Should the serene adept be
startled at his having sworn *never to flatter the great, nor to be a
slave of Princes*, he will be reconciled again by the latter part

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

of the oath, where he *engages to look upon his domestic, civil, and
social duties as most sacred*. But let him form what opinion he may as
to his initiation, he has nevertheless sworn, that he will protect the
Brotherhood from superstition and despotism; *that he will obey the most
excellent superiors of the Order*; that he will favour its progress with
all his power, and that he believes it alone to be in possession of the
secrets of real Masonry.

In the less important class of adepts, should any still hanker after
their *Theosophical* ideas, that is to say, should Weishaupt despair of
ever infusing into them its Anarchical and Atheistical principles, they
are condemned to become *stationary* in this degree; and he imposes on
them as a task the explication of all the Hieroglyphics of Masonry,
which they may set to the tune of the grand Revolution. Under pretence
of discovering a more perfect religion, he persuaded them that
Christianity was at this day nothing more than superstition and tyranny.
He has infused into them his hatred for the Priesthood and the existing
forms of Government. That will suffice to procure him agents of
destruction; as to [re-edification](errata.htm#24.md), he has not so much
as mentioned it to them.

But should there be found among the number of Knights men who of
themselves dive into the meaning of that great Revolution which only
deprived man of his primitive dignity by subjecting him to the laws of
civil society, should they have comprehended the meaning of this other
Revolution, which is to restore every thing by re-establishing man in
his primitive independence, such men will be pointed out by the
Scrutators. It is at them that the Code particularly aims when it says,
*Let the Scotch Knights seriously reflect, that they are presiding over
a grand establishment, whose object is the happiness of mankind*. In
short, these Knights have to act the parts of Superiors in the Order;
they are the Inspectors or the *Directors* of all the preparatory class.
They have on that account assemblies peculiar to themselves, called
*Secret Chapters*. The first duty of these chapters is to watch over the
interests of the Order within their district. "The Scotch Knights," says
their first instruction, "are to pay particular attention to the
*discovery of any plans which may contribute to fill the coffers of the
Order. It were much to be wished that they could devise means of putting
the Order into possession of some considerable revenues in their
province.—He that shall have rendered so signal a service must never
hesitate at believing that these revenues are employed in the most noble
purposes.—The whole must labour with all their might to consolidate the
edifice little by little within their district, until the finances of
the Order shall be found to be competent to its views*." <span
id="fr_132"></span>[11](#fn_132.md)

The second part of the Code entrusts these Knights with the government
of the preparatory class. Each Knight is to correspond with a certain
number of Brethren who have the direction of the *Minerval* academies.
The Code contains instructions which point out to them upon what objects
they are permitted to decide; what Brethren they are to forward or
thwart in their promotion; and what reports they are to make to their
Superiors. In their correspondence with their Inferiors they make use of
the common cypher, but when they write to the chiefs they employ a
peculiar character which may truly be called Hieroglyphic.

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

They are particularly charged with the inspection of the Major
Illuminees. "The Scotch Knights," says the Code, "shall be particularly
attentive that the Major Illuminees do not neglect to mention in their
monthly letters such employments as they may have to dispose of." <span
id="fr_133"></span>[12](#fn_133.md)

I have shown, in the foregoing chapter, how useful and indeed how
necessary this precaution proved for recompensing the zeal of the
Brethren. The adept Knigge wished to demonstrate that it might be
equally useful for princes, when combined with the scrutinizing Code.
"Let us suppose," says he, "that a Prince, having an Illuminee for his
Minister, wishes to find a proper person to fill any vacant office; by
means of the *Scrutators*, the Minister may immediately present the
faithful portrait of divers personages, from among whom the Prince will
only have to make his election." <span
id="fr_134"></span>[13](#fn_134.md)—But every reader, I hope, will
recollect, that in consequence of the oath that has been taken by the
Minister to dispose of all places in favour of the Brethren, and that
according to the direction of the Knights, he will only present such
adepts for those offices as the Order shall have chosen; and thus will
Illuminism soon dispose of all benefices, employments, and dignities,
and have the entire direction of the whole power of the State.

Meanwhile, until the Sect shall exert this influence over Courts, the
Scotch Knights are to acquire an absolute sway in the Masonic Lodges.
Their laws on this head deserve particular attention. We shall select
the following:

"In every town of any note situated within their district, the Secret
Chapters shall establish Lodges for the three ordinary degrees, and
shall cause men of sound morals, of good repute, and of easy
circumstances, to be received in these Lodges. Such men are much to be
sought after, and are to be made Masons, *even though they should not be
of any service to Illuminism in its ulterior projects*." <span
id="fr_135"></span>[14](#fn_135.md)

"If there already exists a Lodge in any given town, the Knights of
Illuminism must find means of establishing a more legitimate one; at
least, they should spare no pains to gain the ascendancy in those which
they find established, *either to reform or to destroy them*." <span
id="fr_136"></span>[15](#fn_136.md)

"They must strongly exhort the members of our lodges not to frequent
(without leave of their Superiors) any of those pretended constituted
lodges, *who hold nothing of the English but their diplomas, and some
few symbols and ceremonies which they do not understand*. All such
Brethren are perfectly ignorant of true Masonry, of its grand object,
and its real patrons. Though some of the greatest merit are to be found
in such lodges, we nevertheless have strong reasons for not readily
allowing them to visit ours." <span id="fr_137"></span>[16](#fn_137.md)

"Our Scotch Knights must pay great attention to the regularity of the
subordinate lodges, *and must above all things attend to the preparation
of candidates*. It is here that *in a private intercourse* they will
show a man that they have probed him to the quick. *Surprise him by some
ensnaring question* in order to observe whether he has any presence of
mind. If he be not staunch to his principles, and should expose his weak
side, make him feel how great his necessities are, and how necessary it
is for him to be guided entirely by us." <span
id="fr_138"></span>[17](#fn_138.md)

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

"The Deputy Master of the Lodge (who is generally the auditor of the
accounts) must also be a member of our Secret Chapter. *He will persuade
the lodges that they alone dispose of their funds; but he will take care
to employ them according to the views of the Order*. Should it at any
time be necesssary to help one of our brethren, the proposition is made
to the lodge; though the brother should not even be a Mason, *no matter,
some expedient must be found to carry the point*."

"No part of the capital, however, must in any case be alienated, *that
hereafter we may find the necessary funds for the most important
undertakings*. The tenth part of the subscriptions of these lodges must
be annually carried to the Secret Chapter. The treasurer to whom these
funds must be transmitted, shall collect them, and endeavour *by all
kinds of expedients to augment them*." <span
id="fr_139"></span>[18](#fn_139.md)

"But before any part of our own funds are appropriated to the help of
any of our Brethren, every effort shall be made to procure the necessary
succours from the funds belonging to lodges which do not pertain to our
system.—*In general, the money which these lodges spend in a useless
manner, should be converted to the advancement of our grand
object*." <span id="fr_140"></span>[19](#fn_140.md)

"Whenever a learned Mason shall enter our Order, he must be put under
the immediate direction of our Scotch Knights." <span
id="fr_141"></span>[20](#fn_141.md)

From what code can Weishaupt, or his compiler Knigge, have selected such
laws as these for their Scotch Knights? Many readers will be ready to
answer, that they must have learned them from a Mandrin, a Cartouche, or
some hero of the gibbet. But it is no such thing:—their own ingenuity
was sufficient to invent such doctrines. Weishaupt lays down as a
principle, that *the end justifies the means*: he made the application
of it when he taught his adepts to rob the libraries of Princes and
Religious Orders; his compiler Knigge applies the same principle to the
funds of the honest Masons; and we shall soon see what use they made of
those funds. It will be in vain for the Illuminee (more zealous for the
honour of his founder than for that of the compiler Knigge) to object,
that Weishaupt never approved of the degree of *Scotch Knight*. It is
true, he never much admired it. But it is not the system of theft
(evidently deduced from his own principles) that he reprobates; not a
single expression in any of his letters can denote that he did so; for
Knigge might have answered, *what do those fools of Masons do with that
money?* just as Weishaupt had written *what do those rascals of Monks do
with their rare books?* He blamed it not for its principles, but because
he thought it *a miserable composition: der elende Scottische ritter
grade* are the terms in which he expresses his contempt. When he
corrected this degree, the thefts were not the parts which he expunged;
they were too serviceable to the order. Weishaupt, however, consented to
let this degree (such as it was) serve as a preparation for the
mysteries of his *Epoptes*; that is to say, for his *priests* of
Illuminism; and when considered in that light it may be truly said, that
the *Knights brigands* were but pitiful and miserable indeed. I will,
however, give the reader an opportunity of judging for himself.

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span> <span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_122"></span>[468:1](mhj309.htm#fr_122.md) Original Writings,
Vol. II. Part I. Sect. 11.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[468:2](mhj309.htm#fr_123.md) See this degree,
Sect. 4, No. 2 and 3.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[468:3](mhj309.htm#fr_124.md) See second
Instruction for this degree, No. 8.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[468:4](mhj309.htm#fr_125.md) Ibid.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[468:5](mhj309.htm#fr_126.md) Ibid. Reversal
Letters.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[468:6](mhj309.htm#fr_127.md) Ibid. Sect. 7.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[468:7](mhj309.htm#fr_128.md) See the Last word of
Philo, Page 100.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[468:8](mhj309.htm#fr_129.md) Chap. XI.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[468:9](mhj309.htm#fr_130.md) When treating in the
Second Volume of the religious and political tenets of the Martinists, I
did not extend my [researches](errata.htm#25.md) to their doctrine of
*Idealism*, and I frankly confess that I did not sufficiently understand
that part of their Apocalypse. Since the publication of that Volume,
however, I have met with a Gentleman [perfectly](errata.htm#26.md) capable
of comprehending any intelligible system whatever; I mean the Abbé
Bertins, residing at present at Oxford. He reproached me in terms
similar to those in which some other people had reproached me respecting
the Rosicrucians. *What you have written, said he, is ALL true, but you
have not told the WHOLE truth*. I had indeed said a great deal of those
gentry, and I never will advance any point which I cannot prove. The
Abbé Bertins condescended to give me some little insight into the
doctrines of this famous St. Martin. It fully confirmed every thing
which I had advanced on the tenets of the Martinists, with respect to
the nature of the soul, and to the pretended origin of that soul forming
*a part of God, of the essence of God, and of the same substance*—But
what I had not said was, that according to the same system matter has no
real existence, or at least has such a separate existence, and is so
entirely null with respect to the soul, that there neither is nor can be
any relation whatever between it and the soul; in fine, that *it is*,
with respect to us, as *if it were not*. I had surmised these
consequences in a [conversation](errata.htm#27.md) which I had had with an
estimable young man, the Vicomte de Maimbourg, whom the Martinists had
endeavoured to taint with their erroneous doctrines. When they came to
treat of the pleasure of the senses, *throw that to the fire*, they say
in their treatise of morality; *to the fire: give to the fire all it
asks; that is not the spirit, all that does not affect the soul; and
this fire is matter; it is the senses, the body*. It is not in the same
sense that the Martinist tells us, "It is in vain that the enemy pursues
me with his illusions. Matter shall not have remembrance of me here
below. Does man taste the pleasures of matter? When the senses feel pain
or pleasure, is it not easy to perceive that it is not man that feels
this pain or pleasure?" (No. 235, *of the Man of Desire, by the Author
of a work On Errors and on Truth*). How frightful is this enigmatical
language! If all the passions and senses are foreign to man, if he may
gratify them with affecting his soul either for the better or for the
worse, what monstrous consequences must ensue to morals! And indeed a
Danish Martinist was consulted by the Viscount, who, more candid than
the recruiting Brethren, answered, "Beware, dear Sir, of ever entering
into our mysteries;—I am unfortunately engaged, and should in vain
attempt to withdraw myself from them. I could not succeed; but, for your
part, take care never to deliver yourself over to those men." The
Viscount followed his advice. As to the Abbé Bertins, he was too much
for Mr. de St. Martin, who had to argue with a man that perpetually
objected—if my soul is part of God, and of the substance of God, my soul
must be God. After three months lessons, which the reader will readily
suppose the Abbé Bertins only submitted to through curiosity, the
learned teacher violently exclaimed, "*I see I never shall be able to
convince*  <span id="page_468">p. 468</span> *a Divine:*" and thus Mr.
de St. Martin took leave of a scholar far more fitted to teach him real
knowledge than to receive his sophisticated lessons.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[468:10](mhj309.htm#fr_131.md) See this degree,
Art. 8. Instruction on the Masonic Hieroglyphics.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[468:11](mhj309.htm#fr_132.md) See First
Instruction for this degree.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[468:12](mhj309.htm#fr_133.md) Second Instruction,
No. 12.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[468:13](mhj309.htm#fr_134.md) Last Observations
of Philo, Page 95.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[468:14](mhj309.htm#fr_135.md) Third Instruction
for the same degree, No. 1.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[468:15](mhj309.htm#fr_136.md) Third Instruction
for the same degree, No. 3.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[468:16](mhj309.htm#fr_137.md) Ibid. No. 5.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[468:17](mhj309.htm#fr_138.md) Ibid. No. 9.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[468:18](mhj309.htm#fr_139.md) Third Instruction
for the same degree, No. 12.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[468:19](mhj309.htm#fr_140.md) Ib. 13.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[468:20](mhj309.htm#fr_141.md) Third Instruction
for the same degree, No. 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Lesser Mysteries; The Epopt or Priest of
Illuminism](mhj310.md)
