[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za05)  [Next](za07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXPERIMENT 1.

A boat, with a flag-staff, the top of the flag 5 feet above the surface
of the water, was directed to sail from a place called "Welche's Dam" (a
well-known ferry passage), to another called "Welney Bridge." These two
points are six statute miles apart. The author, with a good telescope,
went into the water; and with the eye about 8 inches above the surface,
observed the receding boat during the whole period required to sail to
Welney Bridge. *The flag and the boat were distinctly visible throughout
the whole distance!* There could be no

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

mistake as to the distance passed over, as the man in charge of the boat
had instructions to lift one of his oars to the top of the arch the
moment he reached the bridge. The experiment commenced about three
o'clock in the afternoon of a summer's day, and the sun was shining
brightly and nearly behind or against the boat during the whole of its
passage. Every necessary condition had been fulfilled, and the result
was to the last degree definite and satisfactory. The conclusion was
unavoidable that *the surface of the water for a length of six miles did
not to any appreciable extent decline or curvate downwards from the line
of sight*. But if the earth is a globe, the surface of the six miles
length of water would have been 6 feet higher in the centre than at the
two extremities, as shown in diagram fig. 2; but as the telescope was
only 8 inches above the

<span id="img_fig02"></span> ![FIG. 2.](img/fig02.jpg)  
FIG. 2.

water, the highest point of the surface would have been at one mile from
the place of observation; and below this point the surface of the water
at the end of the remaining five miles would have been 16 feet.

Let A B represent the arc of water 6 miles long, and A C the line of
sight. The point of contact with the arc would be at T, a distance of
one mile from the observer at A. From T to the bridge at B would be 5
miles, and the curvature from T to B would be 16 feet 8 inches. The top
of the flag on the boat (which was 5 feet high) would have been 11 feet
8 inches below

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

the horizon T, and altogether out of sight. Such a condition was not
observed; but the following diagram, fig. 3, exhibits the true state of
the case--A, B, the line of sight, equi-distant.

<span id="img_fig03"></span> ![FIG. 3.](img/fig03.jpg)  
FIG. 3.

from or parallel with the surface of the water throughout the whole
distance of 6 milts: From which it is concluded that the surface of
standing water is *not convex*, but *horizontal*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Experiment 2](za07)
