[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za06)  [Next](za08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### EXPERIMENT 2.

Along the edge of the water, in the same canal, six flags were placed,
one statute mile from each other, and so arranged that the top of each
flag was 5 feet above the surface. Close to the last flag in the series
a longer staff was fixed, bearing a flag 3 feet square, and the top of
which was 8 feet above the surface of the water--the bottom being in a
line with the tops of the other and intervening flags, as shown in the
following diagram, Fig, 4.

<span id="img_fig04"></span> ![FIG. 4.](img/fig04.jpg.md)  
FIG. 4.

On looking with a good telescope over and along the flags, from A to B,
the line of sight fell on the lower part of the larger flag at B. The
altitude of the point B above the water at D was 5 feet, and the
altitude of the telescope at A above

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

the water at C was 5 feet; and each intervening flag had the same
altitude. Hence the surface of the water C, D, was equidistant from the
line of sight A, B; and as A B was a right line, C, D, being parallel,
was also a right line; or, in other words, the surface of the water, C,
D, was for six miles *absolutely* horizontal.

If the earth is a globe, the series of flags in the last experiment
would have had the form and produced the results represented in the
diagram, Fig. 5. The water curvating from

<span id="img_fig05"></span> ![FIG. 5.](img/fig05.jpg.md)  
FIG. 5.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> C to D, each flag
would have been a given amount below the line A, B. The first and second
flags would have determined the direction of the line of sight from A to
B, and the third flag would have been 8 inches below the second; the
fourth flag, 32 inches; the fifth, 6 feet; the sixth, 10 feet 8 inches;
and the seventh, 16 feet 8 inches; but the top of the last and largest
flag, being 3 feet higher than the smaller ones, would have been 13 feet
8 inches *below* the line of sight at the point B. The rotundity of the
earth would necessitate the above conditions; but as they cannot be
found to exist, the doctrine must be pronounced as only a simple theory,
having no foundation in fact--a pure invention of misdirected genius;
splendid in its comprehensiveness and bearing upon natural phenomena;
but, nevertheless, mathematical and logical necessities compel its
denunciation as *an absolute falsehood*.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

The above-named experiments were first made by the author in the summer
of 1838, but in the previous winter season, when the water in the "Old
Bedford" Canal was frozen, he had often, when lying on the ice, with a
good telescope observed persons skating and sliding at known distances
of from four to eight miles. He lived for nine successive months within
a hundred yards of the canal, in a temporary wooden building, and had
many opportunities of making and repeating observations and experiments,
which it would only be tedious to enumerate, as they all involved the
same principle, and led to the same conclusions as those already
described. It may, however, interest the reader to relate an instance
which occurred unexpectedly, and which created such a degree of
con-fusion, that he was repeatedly tempted to destroy the many memoranda
he had previously made. Up to this time all his observations had been
made in the direction of Welney, the bridge there affording a
substantial signal point; but on one occasion, a gentleman who resided
within a few miles of the temporary residence already alluded to, and
with whom conversations and discussions had been repeatedly held,
insisted upon the telescope being directed upon a barge sailing in an
opposite direction to that previously selected. Watching the slowly
receding vessel for a considerable time, it suddenly disappeared
altogether! The gentleman co-observer cried out in a tone of exultation,
"Now, sir, are you satisfied that the water declines?" It was almost
impossible to say anything in reply. All that could be done was to "gaze
in mute astonishment" in the direction of the lost vessel--

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

compelled to listen to the jeers and taunts of the apparent victor.
After thus wonderingly gazing for a considerable time, with still
greater astonishment the vessel was seen to suddenly come again into
view? Obliged to admit the reappearance of the vessel; neither of us
could fairly claim the victory, as both were puzzled and equally in an
experimental "fix." This condition of the question at issue lasted for
several days, when, one evening conversing with a "gunner" (a shooter of
wild fowl), upon the strange appearance referred to, he laughingly
undertook to explain the whole affair. He said that at several miles
away, beyond the ferry-house, the canal made a sudden bend in the shape
of the letter V when lying horizontally, and that the vessel disappeared
on account of its entering into one side of the triangle, and reappeared
after passing down the other side and entering the usual line of the
canal! After a time a large map of the canal was found in a neighbouring
town, Wisbeach, and the "gunner's" statement fully verified.

The following diagram will explain this strange, and for a time
confounding, phenomenon.

<span id="img_fig06"></span> ![FIG. 6.](img/fig06.jpg.md)  
FIG. 6.

A, represents the position of the observer, and the *arrows* the
direction of the vessel, which, on arriving at the point B, suddenly
entered the "reach" B, C, and disappeared, but which, on arriving at C,
became again visible, and remained

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

so after entering and sailing along the canal from C to D. The
ferry-house and several trees, which stood on the side of the canal,
between the observer and the "bend," had prevented the vessel being seen
during the time it was passing from B to C. Thus the "mystery" was
cleared away; the author was the real victor; and the gentleman referred
to, with many others of the neighbourhood, subsequently avowed their
conviction that the water in the "Bedford Level" at least, was
horizontal, and they therefore could not see how the earth could
possibly be a globe.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Experiment 3](za08.md)
