[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za17)  [Next](za19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### EXPERIMENT 13.

The following sketch, fig. 34, represents a contracted section of the
London and North-Western Railway, from London to

<span id="img_fig34"></span> ![FIG. 34.](img/fig34.jpg)  
FIG. 34.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Liverpool, through
Birmingham. The line A, B, is the surface, with its various inclines and
altitudes, and C, D, is the *datum* line from which all the elevations
are measured; H, is the station at Birmingham, the elevation of which is
240 feet above the datum line C, D, which line is a continuation of the
level of the River Thames at D, to the level of the River Mersey, at C.
The direct length of this line is 180 miles; and it is a right or
absolutely straight line, in a vertical sense, from London to Liverpool.
Therefore, the station at Birmingham is 240 feet above the level of the
Thames, continued as a right line throughout the whole length of the
railway. But if the earth is a globe, the *datum* line will be the
*chord* of the arc D, D, D, fig. 35, and the summit of the arc at D,
will be 5400 feet above

<span id="img_fig35"></span> ![FIG. 35](img/fig35.jpg)  
FIG. 35

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the *chord* at C; added to the altitude of the station H, 240 feet, the
Birmingham station, H, would be, if the earth is a globe, 5640 feet
above the horizontal *datum* D, D, or vertically above the Trinity high
water mark, at London Bridge. It is found, practically, and in fact, not
to be more than 240 feet; hence the theory of rotundity must be a
fallacy. Sections of all other railways will give similar proofs that
the earth is in. reality a plane.

The tunnel just completed under Mont Fréjus, affords a very striking
illustration of the truth. that the earth is a plane, and not globular.
The elevation above the sea-level of the entrance at Fourneaux, on the
French side of the Alps, is 3946 feet, and of the entrance on the
Italian side, 4381 feet. The length of the tunnel is 40,000 feet, or
nearly eight English statute miles. The gradient or rise, from the
entrance on the French side to the summit of the tunnel, is 445 feet;
and on the opposite side, 10 feet. It will be seen from the following
account, given by M. Kossuth, <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) that the
geodetic operations were carried on in connection with a right line, as
the axis of the tunnel, and therefore with a horizontal *datum* which is
quite incompatible with the doctrine of rotundity. That the earth is a
plane is involved in all the details of the survey, as the following
quotation will show:--

<span class="small">"The observatories placed at the two entrances to
the tunnel were used for the necessary observations, and each
observatory contained an instrument constructed for the purpose. This
instrument was placed on a pedestal of masonry, the top of which was
covered with a horizontal slab of marble, having</span>

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

engraved upon its surface two intersecting lines, marking a point which
was exactly in the vertical plane containing the axis of the tunnel. The
instrument was formed of two supports fixed on a tripod, having a
delicate screw adjustment. The telescope was similar to that of a
theodolite provided with cross-webs, and strongly illuminated by the
light from a lantern, concentrated by a lens and projected upon the
cross-webs. In using this instrument in checking the axis of the gallery
at the northern entrance, for example; after having proved precisely
that the vertical plane, corresponding with the point of intersection of
the lines upon the slab, also passed through the centre of the
instrument, a visual line was then conveyed to the station at Lochalle
(on the mountain), and on the instrument being lowered, the required
number of points could be fixed in the axis of the tunnel. In executing
such an operation, it was necessary that the tunnel should be free from
smoke or vapour. The point of collimation was a plummet, suspended from
the roof of the tunnel by means of an iron rectangular frame, in one
side of which a number of notches were cut, and the plummet shifted from
notch to notch, in accordance with the signals of the operator at the
observatory. These signals were given to the man whose business it was
to adjust the plummet, by means of a telegraph or a horn. The former was
found invaluable throughout all these operations.

"At the Bardonnecchia (Italian) entrance, the instrument employed in
setting out the axis of the tunnel was similar to the one already
described, with the exception that it was mounted on a little carriage,
resting on vertical columns that were erected at distances 500 metres
apart in the axis of the tunnel. By the help of the carriage, the
theodolite was first placed on the centre line approximately. It was
then brought exactly into line by a fine adjustment screw, which moved
the

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="small">eye-piece without shifting the carriage. In order to
understand more clearly the method of operating the instrument, the mode
of proceeding may be described. In setting out a prolongation of the
centre line of the tunnel, the instrument was placed upon the last
column but one; a light was stationed upon the last column, and exactly
in its centre; and 500 metres ahead a trestle frame was placed across
the tunnel. Upon the horizontal bar of this trestle several notches were
cut, against which a light was placed, and fixed with proper adjusting
screws. The observer standing at the instrument, caused the light to
move upon the trestle frame, until it was brought into an exact line
with the instrument and the first line; and then the centre of the light
was projected with a plummet. In this way the exact centre was found. By
a repetition of similar operations the vertical plane containing the
axis of the tunnel was laid out by a series of plummet lines. During the
intervals that elapsed between consecutive operations with the
instrument, the plummets were found to be sufficient for maintaining the
direction in making the excavation. To maintain the proper gradients in
the tunnel, it was necessary, at intervals, to establish fixed levels,
deducing them by direct levelling from standard bench marks, placed at
short distances from the entrance. The fixed level marks, in the inside
of the tunnel, are made upon stone pillars, placed at intervals of 25
metres, and to these were referred the various points in setting out the
gradients."</span>

The theodolite "was placed on a pedestal of masonry, the top of which
was covered with a *horizontal* slab of marble, having engraved upon its
surface two intersecting lines, marking a point which was exactly in the
vertical plane containing the axis of the tunnel." This slab was the
starting point--the *datum* which determined the

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

gradients. Its horizontal surface, prolonged through the mountain,
passed 445 feet below the summit of the tunnel, and 435 feet below the
entrance on the Italian side. This entrance was 4381 feet above the sea,
and 435 feet above the horizontal marble slab on the French side. But,
if the earth is a globe, the *datum* line from this horizontal slab
would be a tangent, from which the sea-level would curvate downwards to
the extent of 42 feet; and the summit of the tunnel, instead of being 10
feet above the Italian entrance, would, of necessity, be 52 feet above
it. *It is not so*, and therefore the *datum* line is not a tangent, but
runs parallel to the sea; the sea-level not convex, and the earth not a
globe. This will be rendered plain by the following diagram, fig. 36.

<span id="img_fig36"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
36.](tn/fig36.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig36.jpg)  
FIG. 36.  
</span>

Let A represent the summit of the tunnel, and A, T, the axis or centre
determined by the theodolite T; S, the marble

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

slab; and D, S, the *datum* line, running parallel with the sea-level H,
H. B, the Italian entrance, at an elevation of 435 feet above D, S, and
4381 feet above the surface of the sea, H, H; A, the summit of the
tunnel, 445 feet above the French entrance at T, the same above the
*datum* line D, S; and 4391 feet above the sea-line, H, H. If the earth
is a globe, the line, D, S, would be a tangent to the sea at H, S, from
which point the sea surface would curvate 52 feet downwards, as shown in
diagram, fig. 37. Hence, the elevation of the tunnel at B,

<span id="img_fig37"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
37.](tn/fig37.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig37.jpg)  
FIG. 37.  
</span>

would be 52 feet higher above the sea at H, than it is known to be;
because taking D, S, as a tangent, and the length of the tunnel being 8
miles--8<sup>2</sup> miles x 8 inches = 52 feet.

Thus, in a length of 8 statute miles of the most skilful engineering
operations, carried on by the most accomplished

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

scientific men, there is a difference between theory and practice of 52
feet! Rather than such a reproach should attach to some of the most
eminent practical engineers of the day--those especially who have, with
such consummate skill and perseverance, completed one of the most
gigantic undertakings of modern times--let the false idea of rotundity
in the earth be entirely discarded, and the simple truth acknowledged,
*that the earth is a plane*. It is adopted in practice, why should it be
denied in the abstract? Why should the education given in our schools
and universities include a forced recognition of a theory which, when
practically applied, must ever be ignored and contradicted?

The completion of the great ship canal, which connects the Mediterranean
Sea with the Gulf of Suez, on the Red Sea, furnishes another instance of
entire discrepancy between the theory of the earth's rotundity and the
results of practical engineering. The canal is 100 English statute miles
in length, and is entirely without locks; so that the water within it is
really a continuation of the Mediterranean Sea to the Red Sea. "The
average level of the Mediterranean is 6 inches above the Red Sea; but
the flood tides in the Red Sea rise 4 feet above the highest, and its
ebbs fall nearly 3 feet below the lowest in the Mediterranean." The
*datum* line is 26 feet below the level of the Mediterranean, and is
continued horizontally from one sea to the other; and throughout the
whole length of the work, the surface of the water runs parallel with
this *datum*, as shown in the following section, fig. 38, published by
the authorities. A, A, A, A, is the

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

<span id="img_fig38"></span> ![FIG. 38.](img/fig38.jpg)  
FIG. 38.

surface of the canal, passing through several lakes, from one sea to the
other; D, D, the bed of the canal, or horizontal datum line to which the
various elevations of land, &c., are referred, but parallel to which
stands the surface of the water throughout the entire length of the
canal; thus proving that the half-tide level of the Red Sea, the 100
miles of water in the canal, and the surface of the Mediterranean Sea,
are a continuation of one and the same horizontal line. If the earth is
globular, the water in the centre of the canal, being 50 miles from each
end, would be the summit of an arc of a circle, and would stand at more
than 1600 feet above the Mediterranean and Red Seas (50<sup>2</sup> x 8
inches = 1666 feet 8 inches), as shown in diagram, fig. 39. A, the
Mediterranean Sea; B, the Red

<span id="img_fig39"></span> ![FIG. 39.](img/fig39.jpg)  
FIG. 39.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sea; and A, C, B,
the arc of water connecting them; D, D, the horizontal *datum*, which,
if the earth is globular, would really be the chord of the arc, A, C, B.

The bed of the Atlantic Ocean, from Valencia (western coast of Ireland)
to Trinity Bay, Newfoundland, as surveyed for the laying of the cable,
is another illustration or

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

proof that the surface of the great waters of the earth is horizontal,
and not convex, as will be seen by the following diagram, contracted
from the section, published October 8,

<span id="img_fig40"></span> ![FIG. 40.](img/fig40.jpg)  
FIG. 40.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1869, by the
Admiralty. C, D, is the horizontal *datum* line, and A, B, the surface
of the water, for a distance of 1665 nautical, or 1942 statute miles. At
about one-third the distance from A, Newfoundland, the greatest depth is
found--2424 fathoms; the next deepest part is 2400 fathoms; at about
two-thirds the distance from A, towards B, Ireland, while in the centre,
the depth is less than 1600 fathoms; whereas, if the water of the
Atlantic is convex, the centre would stand 628,560 feet, or nearly 120
miles, higher than the two stations, Trinity Bay and Valencia; and the
greatest depth would be in the centre of the Atlantic Ocean, where it
would be 106,310 fathoms, instead of 1550 fathoms, which it is proved to
be by actual soundings. Fig. 41 shows the arc of water which would
exist,

<span id="img_fig41"></span> ![FIG. 41.](img/fig41.jpg)  
FIG. 41.

in relation to the horizontal *datum* line, between Ireland and
Newfoundland, if the earth is a globe. Again, if the

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

water in the Atlantic Ocean is convex--a part of a great sphere of
25,000 miles circumference--the *horizontal datum line* would be a chord
to the great arc of water above it; and the distance across the bed of
the Atlantic would therefore be considerably less than the distance over
the surface. The length of the cable which was laid in 1866,
notwithstanding the known irregularities of the bed of the Ocean, would
be less than the distance sailed by the paying-out vessel, the "Great
Eastern;" whereas, according to the published report, the distance run
by the steamer was 1665 miles, while the length of cable payed out was
1852 miles.

It is important to bear in mind that all the foregoing remarks and
calculations are made in connection with the fact that the *datum* line,
to which all elevations and depressions are referred, is *horizontal*,
and not an arc of a circle. For many years past, all the great surveys
have been made on this principle; but that no doubt may exist in the
mind of the reader, the following extract is given from the Standing
Orders of the Houses of Lords and Commons on Railway Operations, for the
Session of 1862: <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)--

<span class="small">"The section shall be drawn to the same *horizontal*
scale as the plan, and to a vertical scale of not less than one inch to
every one hundred feet; and shall show the surface of the ground marked
on the plan, the intended level of the proposed work, the height of
every embankment, and the depth of every cutting, and a *datum
horizontal line*, which shall be *the same throughout the whole length
of the work;* or any branch thereof</span>

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span class="small">respectively; and shall be referred to some fixed
point . . . . near either of the termini. (See line D, D; fig.
2.)"</span>

On the page opposite that of the above Standing Order, a section is
given to illustrate the meaning of the words of the order--special
reference being made to the line D, D, as showing what is intended by
the words "*datum horizontal line*." The drawing of the section there
given, and which is insisted upon by Government, is precisely the same
as the sections recently published of all the great railways, of the
Suez Canal, of the bed of the Atlantic Ocean, taken for the purposes of
laying the Electric Cable, and of many other works connected with
railways deep-sea ordnance, and other surveying operations. In all these
extensive surveys the doctrine of rotundity is, of necessity, entirely
ignored; and the principle that the earth is a plane is practically
adopted, and found to be the only one consistent with the results, and
agreeing with the plans of the great surveyors and engineers of the day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[48:1](za18.htm#fr_4) Daily News, September 18,
1871.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[56:1](za18.htm#fr_5) Publishers, Vacher & Sons,
29, Parliament Street, Westminster.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Experiment 14](za19)
