[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za22)  [Next](za24) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

# CHAPTER V.

### THE TRUE DISTANCE OF THE SUN.

IT is now demonstrated that the earth is a plane, and therefore the
distance of the sun may be readily and most accurately ascertained by
the simplest possible process. The operation is one in plane
trigonometry, which admits of no uncertainty and requires no
modification or allowance for probable influences. The principle
involved in the process may be illustrated by the following diagram,
fig. 56.

<span id="img_fig56"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG
56.](tn/fig56.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig56.jpg)  
FIG 56.  
</span>

Let A be an object, the distance of which is desired, on the opposite
side of a river. Place a rod vertically at the point C, and take a piece
of strong cardboard, in the shape of a right-angled triangle, as B, C,
D. It is evident that placing the

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

triangle to the eye, and looking along the side D, B, the line of sight
D, B, H, will pass far to the left of the object A. On removing the
triangle more to the right, to the position E, the line E, F, will still
pass to the left of A; but on removing it again to the right, until the
line of sight from L touches or falls upon the object A, it will be seen
that L, A, bears the same relation to A, C, L, as D, B, does to B, C, D:
in other words, the two sides of the triangle B, C, and C, D, being
equal in length, so the two lines C, A, and C, L, are equal. Hence, if
the distance from L to C is measured, it will be in reality the same as
the desired distance from C to A. It will be obvious that the same
process applied vertically is equally certain in its results. On one
occasion, in the year 1856, the author having previously delivered a
course of lectures in Great Yarmouth, Norfolk, and this subject becoming
very interesting to a number of his auditors, an invitation was given to
meet him on the sea-shore; and among other observations and experiments,
to measure, by the above process, the altitude of the Nelson's Monument,
which stands on the beach near the sea. A piece of thick cardboard was
cut in the form of a right-angled triangle, the length of the two sides
being about 8 inches. A fine silken thread, with a pebble attached,
constituted a plumb line, fixed with a pin to one side of the triangle,
as shown at P, . The purpose of this plumb line was to enable the
observer to keep the triangle in a truly vertical position; just as the
object of the rod C, in [fig. 56](#img_fig56) was to enable the base of
the triangle to be kept in one and the same line by looking along from E
and L towards C. On looking over the triangle held vertically, and one
side parallel with the plumb line P, from the position A, the line of
sight fell upon the point B; but on walking gradually backwards, the top
of the helmet D, on the head of the figure of Britannia, which surmounts
the column, was at length visible

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

from the point C. On prolonging the line D, C, to H, by means of a rod,
the distance from H to the centre of the Monument at O, was measured,
and the altitude O, D, was affirmed to be

<span id="img_fig57"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
57.](tn/fig57.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig57.jpg)  
FIG. 57.  
</span>

the same. But of this no proof existed further than that the principle
involved in the triangulation compelled it to be so. Subsequently the
altitude was obtained from a work published in Yarmouth, and was found
to differ only one inch from the altitude ascertained by the simple
operation above described. The foregoing remarks and illustrations are,
of course, not necessary to the mathematician; but may be useful to the
general reader, showing him that plane trigonometry, carried out on the
earth's plane or horizontal surface, permits of operations which are
simple and perfect in principle, and in practice fully reliable and
satisfactory.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

The illustrations given above have reference to a fixed object; but the
sun is not fixed; and therefore a modification of the process, but
involving the same principle, must be adopted. Instead of the simple
triangle and plumb line, represented in [fig. 57](#img_fig57), an
instrument with a graduated arc must be employed, and two observers, one
at each end of a north and south base line, must at the same moment
observe the under edge of the sun as it passes the meridian; when, from
the difference in the angle observed, and the known length of the base
line, the actual distance of the sun may be calculated. The following
case will fully illustrate this operation, as well as its results and
importance:

<span class="small">The distance from London Bridge to the sea-coast at
Brighton, in a straight line, is 50 statute miles. On a given day, at 12
o'clock, the altitude of the sun, from near the water at London Bridge,
was found to be 61 degrees of an arc; and at the same moment of time the
altitude from the sea-coast at Brighton was observed to be 64 degrees of
an arc, as shown in [fig. 58](#img_fig58). The base-line from L to B, 50
measured statute miles; the angle at L, 61 degrees; and the angle at B,
64 degrees. In addition to the method by calculation, the distance of
the under edge of the sun may be ascertained from these elements by the
method called "construction." The diagram, [fig. 58](#img_fig58), is the
above case "constructed;" that is, the base-line from L to B represents
50 statute miles; and the line L, S, is drawn at an angle of 61 degrees,
and the line B, S, at an angle of 64 degrees. Both lines are produced
until they bisect or cross each other at the point S. Then, with a pair
of compasses, measure the length of the base-line B, L, and see how many
times the same length may be found in the line L, S, or B, S. It will be
found to be</span>

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

 

<span id="img_fig58"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
58.](tn/fig58.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig58.jpg)  
FIG. 58.  
</span>

 

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="small">sixteen times, or sixteen times 50 miles, equal to
800 statute miles. Then measure in the same way the vertical line D, S,
and it will be found to be 700 miles. Hence it is demonstrable that the
distance of the sun over that part of the earth to which it is vertical
is only 700 statute miles. By the same mode it may be ascertained that
the distance from London of that part of the earth where the sun was
vertical at the time (July 13th, 1870) the above observations were
taken, was only 400 statute miles, as shown by dividing the base-line L,
D, by the distance B, L. If any allowance is to be made for
refraction--which, no doubt, exists where the sun's rays have to pass
through a medium, the atmosphere, which gradually increases in density
as it approaches the earth's surface--it will considerably diminish the
above-named distance of the sun; so that it is perfectly safe to affirm
that the under edge of the sun is considerably less than 700 statute
miles above the earth.</span>

 

The above method of measuring distances applies equally to the moon and
stars; and it is easy to demonstrate, to place it beyond the possibility
of error, so long as assumed premises are excluded, that the moon is
nearer to the earth than the sun, and that all the visible luminaries in
the firmament are contained within a vertical distance of 1000 statute
miles. From which it unavoidably follows that the magnitude of the sun,
moon, stars, and comets is comparatively small--much smaller than the
earth from which they are measured, and to which, therefore, they must
of necessity be secondary. and subservient. They cannot, indeed, be
anything more than "centres of action," throwing down light, and
chemical products upon the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. The Sun's Motion, Concentric With the Polar
Centre](za24)
