[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za23)  [Next](za25.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

### THE SUN'S MOTION, CONCENTRIC WITH THE POLAR CENTRE.

As the earth has been proved to be fixed, the motion of the sun is a
visible reality. If it be observed from any latitude a few degrees north
of the line called the "Tropic of Cancer," and for any period before or
after the time of southing, or passing the meridian, it will be seen to
describe an arc of a circle. The following simple experiment will be
interesting as demonstrating the fact that the sun's path is concentric
with the centre of the earth's surface. Let the observer take his stand,
half-an-hour before sunrise (in the month of June, or any of the summer
months will be better than winter, as the results will be more
striking), on the head of either the old or the new pier at Brighton, in
Sussex. Let him draw a line due north and south; and a second line due
east and west, across the first. Now stand with his back to the north.
Being thus at his post and ready for observation, let him watch
carefully for the sun's first appearance above the horizon; and he will
find that the point where the sun is first observed is considerably to
the north of east, or the line drawn at right angles to north and south.
If he will continue to watch the sun's progress until noon, it will be

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

seen to ascend in a curve southwards until it reaches the meridian; and
thence to descend in a westerly curve until it arrives at the horizon,
and to set considerably to the north of due west, as shown in the
following diagram, fig. 59. An object which moves in an arc of a circle,
and

 

<span id="img_fig59"></span> ![FIG. 59.](img/fig59.jpg.md)  
FIG. 59.

returns to a given point in a given time, as the sun does to the
meridian, must, of necessity, have completed a circular path in the
twenty-four hours which constitute a solar day. To place the matter
beyond doubt, the observations of Arctic navigators may be referred to.
Captain Parry and several of his officers, on ascending high land near
the arctic circle repeatedly saw, for twenty-four hours together, the
sun describing a circle upon the southern horizon. Captain Beechy writes

<span class="small">"Very few of us had ever seen the sun at midnight;
and this night happening to be particularly clear, his broad red disk,
curiously distorted by refraction, and sweeping majestically along the
northern horizon, was an object of imposing grandeur, which rivetted to
the deck some of our crew, who would perhaps have beheld with
indifference the less imposing effect of the icebergs. The rays were too
oblique to illuminate more than</span>

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="small">the irregularities of the floes, and falling thus
partially on the grotesque shapes either really assumed by the ice, or
distorted by the unequal refraction of the atmosphere, so betrayed the
imagination, that it required no great exertion of fancy to trace in
various directions, architectural edifices, grottos, and caves, here and
there, glittering as if with precious metals.</span>

In July, 1865, Mr. Campbell, United States Minister to Norway, with a
party of American gentlemen, went far enough north to see the sun at
midnight. It was in 69 degrees north latitude, and they ascended a cliff
1000 feet above the arctic sea. The scene is thus described:--

<span class="small">"It was late, but still sunlight. The arctic ocean
stretched away in silent vastness at our feet: the sound of the waves
scarcely reached our airy look-out. Away in the north the huge old sun
swung low along the horizon, like the slow beat of the tall clock in our
grandfather's parlour corner. We all stood silently looking at our
watches. When both hands stood together at twelve, midnight, the full
round orb hung triumphantly above the wave--a bridge of gold running due
north,, spangled the waters between us and him. There he shone in silent
majesty which knew no setting. We involuntarily took off our hats--no
word was said. Combine the most brilliant sunrise you ever saw, and its
beauties will pall before the gorgeous colouring which lit up the ocean,
heaven, and mountains. In half an hour the sun had swung up perceptibly
on its beat; the colours had changed to those of morning. A fresh breeze
had rippled over the florid sea; one songster after another piped out of
the grove behind us--we had slid into another day." <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_15"></span>[107:1](za24.htm#fr_15.md) "Brighton Examiner,"
July 1st, 1870.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Sun's Path Expands and Contracts Daily for Six
Months Alternately](za25.md)
