[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za25)  [Next](za27) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

# CHAPTER VIII.

### CAUSE OF DAY AND NIGHT, WINTER AND SUMMER; AND THE LONG ALTERNATIONS OF LIGHT AND DARKNESS AT THE NORTHERN CENTRE.

IT is a well-established fact that light and heat radiate equally in all
directions. When the sun is on the outer circle, B, fig. 60, as it is on
the 21st of December, it is known that the light gradually diminishes,
until at or about 20 degrees from the northern centre, it shades almost
imperceptibly into twilight and darkness. If, then, we take from B
([fig. 60](za25.htm#img_fig60)), to the arctic circle, 1, 2, 3, as
radius, and describe the circle 4, 5, 6, we have represented the whole
extent of sun or daylight at a given moment on the shortest day. When,
as on the 21st of June, the sun by gradually contracting its path, has
arrived at the inner circle, A, the same length of radius will produce
the circle 7, 8, 9, which represents the extent of daylight on the
longest day. It will be seen by the diagram that, on the shortest day,
the light terminates at the arctic circle 1, 2, 3, leaving all beyond in
darkness; and as the sun moves forward in the direction of the arrows,
the edge of the circle of light continues, during the whole of its
course, to fall short at this circle. Hence. although it is daylight

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

all over the rest of the earth in twenty-four hours, the centre, N, is
left in continual darkness. But when, in six months afterwards, the sun
is on the *inner* circle, A, the light extends *beyond* the arctic
circle, 1, 2, 3; and as it moves in its course, the centre, N, is
continually illuminated. These changes will be better understood by
reference to the diagrams, figs. 61 and 62.

<span id="img_fig61"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
61.](tn/fig61.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig61.jpg)  
FIG. 61.  
</span>

In fig. 61, the circle A, A, A, represents the sun's daily

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

path on December 21st, and B, B, B, the same on June 21st; N, the
northern centre; S, the sun; and E, the position of Great Britain; the
figures, 1, 2, 3, the arctic

<span id="img_fig62"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
62.](tn/fig62.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig62.jpg)  
FIG. 62.  
</span>

circle; and 4, 5, 6, the extent of sun-light at noon of that day. The
sun, S, describes the circle A, A, A, on the 21st of December in one
day, or twenty-four hours. Hence, in that period, mid-day and midnight,
and morning and evening twilight, occur to every part of the earth
*except* within the *arctic circle*, 1, 2, 3. There it is more or less

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

in darkness for several months in succession, or until the sun, by
gradually coming nearer to the inner circle, throws his light more and
more over the centre. The arc of light at 4, is the advancing or morning
twilight, and 6, the receding or evening twilight. At every place
underneath a line drawn across the circle of the sun's light, 4, 5, 6,
through S, to N, it is noonday; and beyond the northern centre, on the
same line, it is midnight.

It will now be readily understood that as the sun moves in the direction
of the arrows, or from right to left, and completes the circle, A, A, A,
in twenty-four hours, it will produce in that period, and where its
light reaches, morning, noon, evening, and night, on all parts of the
earth in succession. As the sun's path now begins to contract every day
for six months, or until the 21st of June, when it becomes the circle,
B, B, B, it is evident that the same extent of sunlight as that which
radiates from the outer circle, A, A, A, will reach over or beyond the
northern centre, N, as shown in the diagram, [fig. 62](#img_fig62); when
morning, noon, evening, and night, occur as before; but the light
continuing, during the daily motion of the sun, to reach over the
northern centre, that centre will, be continually illuminated for
several months together, as before it was in constant darkness. It will
be seen also by reference to the diagram that when the sun is on the
outer path, A, the portion of the disc of light which passes over
England is much smaller than when it is on the inner path, B. Hence, the
short days and winter season from the first position, and the longer
days and summer season from the second. Thus day and night, long and
short

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

days and nights, morning and evening twilight, winter and summer, the
long periods of alternate light and darkness at the northern or polar
centre of the earth, arise from the expansion and contraction of the
sun's path, and are all a part of one and the same general phenomenon.

The whole of these explanations have reference only to the region
between the sun and the northern centre. It is evident that in the great
encircling oceans of the south, and the numerous islands and parts of
continents, which exist beyond that part of the earth where the sun is
vertical, cannot have their days and nights, seasons, &c., precisely
like those in the northern region. The north is a centre, and the south
is that centre radiated or thrown out to a vast oceanic circumference,
terminating in circular walls of ice, which form an impenetrable frozen
barrier. Hence the phenomena referred to as existing in the north must
be considerably modified in the south, For instance, the north being
central, the light of the sun advancing and receding, gives long periods
of alternate light and darkness at the actual centre; but in the far
south, the sun, even when moving in his outer path, can only throw its
light to a certain distance, beyond which there must be perpetual
darkness. No evidence exists of there being long periods of light and
darkness regularly alternating, as in the north. In the north, in
summer-time, when the sun is moving in its inner path, the light shines
continually for months together over the central region, and rapidly
develops numerous forms of animal and vegetable life.

<span class="small">"Beyond the 70th degree of latitude not a tree meets
the</span>

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

eye, wearied with the white waste of snow; forests, woods, even shrubs
have disappeared, and given place to a few lichens and creeping woody
plants, which scantily clothe the indurated soil. Still, in the farthest
north, Nature claims her birthright of beauty; and in the brief and
rapid summer she brings forth numerous flowers and grasses, to bloom for
a few days, to be again blasted by the swiftly-recurring winter." <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

"The rapid fervour of an arctic summer had already (June 1st) converted
the snowy waste into luxuriant pasture-ground, rich in flowers and
grass, with almost the same lively appearance as that of an English
meadow." <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17)

Wrangell tells us that "Countless herds of reindeer, elks, black bears,
foxes, sables, and grey squirrels, fill the upland forests; stone foxes
and wolves roam over the low grounds; enormous flights of swans, geese,
and ducks, arrive in spring, and seek deserts where they may moult, and
build their nests in safety. Eagles, owls, and gulls, pursue their prey
along the sea-coast; ptarmigan run in troops among the bushes; little
snipes are busy among the brooks and in the morasses; the social crows
seek the neighbourhood of men's habitations; and when the sun shines in
spring, one may even sometimes hear the cheerful note of the finch, and
in autumn, that of the thrush."

Thus it is a well ascertained fact that the constant sunlight of the
north develops, with the utmost rapidity, numerous forms of vegetable
life, and furnishes subsistence for millions of living creatures. But in
the south, where the sunlight never dwells, or lingers about a central
region, but rapidly sweeps over sea and land, to complete in

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

twenty-four hours the great circle of the southern circumference, it has
not time to excite and stimulate the surface; and, therefore, even in
comparatively low southern latitudes, everything wears an aspect of
desolation.

<span class="small">"On the South Georgias, in same latitude as
Yorkshire in the north, Cook did not find a shrub big enough to make a
toothpick. Captain Cook describes it as 'savage and horrible. The wild
rocks raised their lofty summits till they were lost in the clouds, and
the valleys lay covered with everlasting snow. Not a tree was to be
seen; not a shrub even big enough to make a toothpick. Who could have
thought that an island of no greater extent than this (Isle of Georgia),
situated between the latitude of 54 and 55 degrees, should, in the *very
height of summer*, be in a manner wholly covered many fathoms deep with
frozen snow? The lands which lie to the south are doomed by Nature to
perpetual frigidness--never to feel the warmth of the sun's rays; whose
horrible and savage aspect I have not words to describe.' The South
Shetlands, occupying a corresponding latitude to their namesakes in the
north, present scarcely a vestige of vegetation. Kerguelen, as low as
latitude 50 degrees south, boasts eighteen species of plants, of which
only one, a peculiar kind of cabbage, has been found useful, in eases of
scurvy; while Iceland, 15 degrees nearer to the pole in the north,
boasts 870 species. Even marine life is sparse in certain tracts of vast
extent, and the sea-bird is seldom observed flying over such lonely
wastes. The contrast between the limits of organic life in arctic and
antarctic zones is very remarkable and significant. Vegetables and land
animals are found at nearly 80 degrees in the north; while, from the
parallel of 58 degrees in the south, the lichen, and such like plants
only clothe the rocks, and sea-birds and the cetaceous</span>

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

<span class="small">tribes alone are seen upon the desolate beaches."
"M‘Clintoch describes heads of reindeer--a perfect forest of antlers,
moving north in the summer. . . . The eider duck and the brent goose
through the air; the unwieldly family of the cetacea through the waters;
the arctic bear upon the ice; the musk ox and reindeer along the
land--all wend their way northward at certain seasons. . . . Now these
indications are absent from the southern zone, as is also the
inhabitation of man. The bones of musk oxen, killed by the Esquimaux,
were found north of the 79th parallel; while in the south, man is not
found above the 56th parallel of latitude." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18)</span>

These differences in the north and south could not exist if the earth
were a globe, turning upon axes underneath a non-moving sun. The two
hemispheres would at the same latitudes have the same degree of light
and heat, and the same general phenomena, both in kind and degree. The
peculiarities which are found in the south as compared with the north,
are only such as could exist upon a stationary plane, having a northern
centre, concentric with which is the path of the moving sun. The subject
may be placed in the following syllogistic form.

The peculiarities observed in the south as compared with the north,
could not exist upon a globe.

They do exist, therefore the earth is not a globe.

They are such as could and must exist upon a plane.

They do exist, therefore the earth is a plane.

It will also be seen by a careful study of the diagram [fig.
61](#img_fig61), that, as the sun-light has to sweep over the great

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

southern region in the same time, 24 hours, that it takes to pass over
the smaller region of the north, the passage of the light must of
necessity be proportionably more rapid; and the morning and evening
twilight more abrupt. In the north the light on summer evenings seems as
it were unwilling to terminate; and at midsummer, for many nights in
succession, the sky is scarcely darkened. The twilight continues for
hours after visible sunset. In the south, however, the reverse is the
case, the day ends suddenly, and the night passes into day in a few
seconds. A letter from a correspondent in New Zealand, dated, "Nelson,
September 15th, 1857," contains the following passages:

<span class="small">"Even in summer, people here have no notion of going
without fires in the evening; but then, though the days are very warm
and sunny, the nights are always cold. For seven months last summer, we
had not one day that the sun did not shine as brilliantly as it does in
England in the finest day in June; and though it has more power here,
the heat is not nearly so oppressive. . . But then there is not the
*twilight* which you get in England. Here it is light till about eight
o'clock, then, in a few minutes, it becomes too dark to see anything,
and the change comes over in almost no time."</span>

In a pamphlet by W. Swainson, Esq., Attorney General for New Zealand,
(Smith, Elder, & Co., Cornhill, London, 1856,) among other peculiarities
referred to, it is said that at Auckland, "of twilight there is little
or none."

Captain Basil Hall, RN., F.R.S., in his narration says:

<span class="small">"Twilight lasts but a short time in so low a
latitude as 28</span>

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

<span class="small">degrees, and no sooner does the sun peep above the
horizon, than all the gorgeous parade by which he is preceded is shaken
off, and he comes in upon us in the most abrupt and unceremonious way
imaginable."</span>

The motion of the sun over the vast southern region, wherein lies
Australia and New Zealand, would also give shorter days in the south
than in the north, and this is fully corroborated by experience. In the
pamphlet above referred to, by Mr. Swainson, the following words occur:

<span class="small">"The range of temperature is limited, there being no
excess of either heat or cold; compared with the climate of England, the
summer of New Zealand is but very little warmer though considerably
longer. . . . The seasons are the reverse of those in England. Spring
commences in September, summer in December, autum in April, and winter
in June. . . . The days are an hour *shorter* at each end of the day in
summer, and an hour longer in the winter than in England."</span>

From a work on New Zealand, by Arthur S. Thompson, Esq., M.D., the
following sentences are quoted:---

<span class="small">"The summer mornings, even in the warmest parts of
the colony, are sufficiently fresh to exhilarate without chilling; and
the seasons glide imperceptibly into each other. The days are an hour
shorter at each end of the day in summer, and an hour longer in winter
than in England."</span>

In the Cook's Strait Almanack for 1848, it is said:

<span class="small">"At Wellington, New Zealand, December 21st, sun
rises 4 h. 31 m., and sets at 7 h. 29 m., the day being 14 hours 58
minutes. June 21st, sun rises at 7 h. 29 m., and sets at 4 h.</span>

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">31 m., the day being 9 hours and 2 minutes. In England the
longest day is 16 hours 34 minutes, and the shortest day is 7 hours 45
minutes. Thus the longest day in New Zealand is 1 hour and 36 minutes
*shorter* than the longest day in England; and the shortest day in New
Zealand is 1 hour and 17 minutes *longer* than the shortest day in
England."</span>

Another peculiarity is, that though the days are "warm and sunny, the
nights are always cold:" showing that although the altitude of the sun
is greater, and therefore calculated to give greater heat, its velocity
and mid-night distance are much greater than in England, and hence the
greater cold of the nights. It is again insisted upon that these various
peculiarities could not possibly exist in the southern region, if the
earth were a globe and moved upon axes, and in an orbit round the sun.
If the sun is fixed, and the earth revolves underneath it, the same
phenomena would exist at the same distance on each side of the equator;
but such is not the case! What can operate to cause the twilight in New
Zealand to be so much more sudden, or the nights so much colder than in
England? The southern "hemisphere" cannot revolve more rapidly than the
northern! The latitudes are about the same, and the distance round a
globe would be the same at 50° south as at 50° north, and as the whole
would revolve once in twenty-four hours, the surface at the two places
would pass underneath the sun with the same velocity, and the light
would approach in the morning, and recede in the evening in exactly the
same manner, yet the very contrary is the fact! The differences are
altogether incompatible with the doctrine of the earth's

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

rotundity; but "the earth a plane," and they are simple "matters of
course." Upon a fixed plane underneath a moving sun, these phenomena are
what must naturally and inevitably exist; but upon a globe they are
utter impossibilities.

Some have objected to the conclusion here drawn, on the ground that the
latitude of New Zealand is considerably less than that of England; but
the objection falls before. the fact that the abruptness of twilight and
the coldness. of the summer nights are observed far out south beyond New
Zealand. The author cannot here quote from any recognised work, but he
has often been assured that this, is the common experience of
navigators, and especially of whaling crews, who often wander over the
vast waters beyond the latitude of 50 degrees. A remarkable illustration
of this experience occurred some years ago in Liverpool. At the
termination of a lecture, in which this subject had been discussed, a
sailor requested leave to speak, and gave the following story:--

<span class="small">"I was once confined on an island in South Tasmania,
and had long been very anxious to escape; one morning I saw a whaling
vessel in the offing, and being a good swimmer, I dashed into the sea to
reach it. Being observed from the ship, a boat was sent out to pick me
up. Immediately I got on board, we sailed away directly southwards.
There happened to be a scarcity of hands, and I being able-bodied, was
at once put to work. In the evening I was ordered aloft, and the captain
cried out 'Be quick, Jack, or you'll be in the dark!' Now the sun was
shining brightly, and it seemed far from the time of sunset, and I
remember well that I looked at the captain, thinking he must be</span>

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="small">a little the worse for grog. However, I went aloft,
and before I had finished the order, which was a very short time, I was
in pitch darkness,--the sun seemed all at once to drop behind or below
the sea. I noticed this all the time we were in the far south, whenever
the sun was visible and the evening fine; and I only mention it now as
corroborating the lecturer's statement. Any mariner, who has been a
single season in the southern whaling grounds, will tell you the same
thing."</span>

The question, "how is it that the earth is not at all times illuminated
all over its surface, seeing that the sun is always several hundred
miles above it?" may be answered as follows:--

First, if no atmosphere existed, no doubt the light of the sun would
diffuse over the whole earth at once, and alternations of light and
darkness could not exist.

Secondly, as the earth is covered with an atmosphere of many miles in
depth, the density of which gradually increases downwards to the
surface, all the rays of light except those which are vertical, as they
enter the upper stratum of air are arrested in their course of
diffusion, and by refraction bent downwards towards the earth; as this
takes place in all directions round the sun--equally where density and
other conditions are equal, and *vice versâ*--the effect is a
comparatively distinct disc of sun-light.

<span id="img_goatsep"></span> ![](img/goatsep.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[116:1](za26.htm#fr_16) "Arctic Explorations."
By W. & R. Chambers. Edinburgh.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[116:2](za26.htm#fr_17) *Ibid*.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[118:1](za26.htm#fr_18) "Polar Explorations."
Read before the Royal Dublin Society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. Cause Of Sunrise And Sunset.](za27)
