[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za26)  [Next](za28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

# CHAPTER IX.

### CAUSE OF SUNRISE AND SUNSET.

ALTHOUGH the sun is at all times above the earth's surface, it appears
in the morning to ascend from the north-east to the noonday position,
and thence to descend and disappear, or set, in the north-west. This
phenomenon arises from the operation of a simple and everywhere visible
law of perspective. A flock of birds, when passing over a flat or marshy
country, always appears to descend is it recedes; and if the flock is
extensive, the first bird appears lower or nearer to the horizon than
the last, although they are at the same actual altitude above the earth
immediately beneath them. When a balloon sails away from an observer,
without increasing or decreasing its altitude, it appears to gradually
approach the horizon. In a long row of lamps, the second--supposing the
observer to stand at the beginning of the series---will appear lower
than the first; the third lower than the .second; and so on to the end
of the row; the farthest away always appearing the lowest, although each
one has the same altitude; and if such a straight line of lamps could be
continued far enough, the lights would at length descend, apparently, to
the horizon, or to a level with the eye of the observer, as shown in the
following diagram, fig. 63.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span id="img_fig63"></span> ![FIG. 63.](img/fig63.jpg.md)  
FIG. 63.

<span class="small">Let A, B, represent the altitude throughout of a
long row of lamps, standing on the horizontal ground E, D; and C, H, the
line of sight of an observer at C. The ordinary principles of
perspective will cause an apparent rising of the ground E, D, to the
eye-line C, H, meeting it at H; and an apparent descent of each
subsequent lamp, from A, to H, towards the same eye-line, also meeting
at H. The point H, is the horizon, or the true "vanishing point," at
which the last visible lamp, although it has really the altitude D, B,
will disappear.</span>

Bearing in mind the above phenomena it will easily be seen how the sun,
although always above and parallel to the earth's surface, must appear
to *ascend* from the morning horizon to the noonday or meridian
position; and thence to *descend* to the evening horizon.

In the diagram, fig. 64, let the line E, D, represent the

<span id="img_fig64"></span> ![FIG. 64.](img/fig64.jpg.md)  
FIG. 64.

surface of the earth; H, H, the morning and evening horizon; and A, S,
B, a portion of the true path of the sun. An observer at 0, looking to
the east, will first see the sun in the morning,

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

not at A, its *true* position, but in its apparent position, H, just
emerging from the "vanishing point," or the morning horizon. At nine
o'clock, the sun will have the apparent position, 1, gradually appearing
to *ascend* the line H, 1, S; the point S, being the meridian or noonday
position. From S, the sun will be seen to gradually *descend* the line
S, 2, H, until he reaches the horizon, H, and entering the "vanishing
point," disappears, to an observer in England, in the west, beyond the
continent of North America, as in the morning he is seen to rise from
the direction of Northern Asia. An excellent illustration of this
"rising" and "setting" of the sun may be seen in a long tunnel, as shown
in diagram, fig. 65. The top of the tunnel,

<span id="img_fig65"></span> ![FIG. 65.](img/fig65.jpg.md)  
FIG. 65.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 1, 2, and, the
bottom, 3, 4, although really equi-distant throughout the whole length,
would, to an observer in the centre, C, *appear* to approach each other,
and converge at the points, H, H; and a lamp, or light of any kind,
brought in, and carried along the top, close to the upper surface 1, 2,
would, when really going along the line, 1, S, 2, appear to *ascend* the
inclined plane H, S, to the centre, S, and after passing the centre, to
*descend* the plane S, H; and if the tunnel were sufficiently long, the
phenomena of sunrise and of sunset would be perfectly imitated.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

A very striking illustration of the convergence of the top and bottom,
as well as the sides, of a long tunnel, has been observed in that of
Mont Cenis. M. de Porville, when in the centre of the tunnel, noticed
that the entrance had apparently become so small that the daylight
beyond it seemed like a bright star. "Before us, at an apparently
prodigious distance, we beheld a small star at the entrance of the
gallery. Its vivid light contrasted strangely with the red glare of the
lamps. Its brightness increased as the horses dashed on the way. In a
short time its proportions were more clearly defined, and its volume
increased. The illusion was quickly dispelled as we got over some
kilometres. This soft white light is the extremity of the
gallery." <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md)

We have seen that "sunrise" and "sunset" are phenomena dependent
entirely upon the fact that horizontal lines, parallel to each other,
appear to approach or converge in the distance. The surface of the earth
being horizontal, and the line of sight of the observer and the sun's
path being over and parallel with it, the rising and setting of the
moving sun over the immovable earth are simply phenomena arising
necessarily from the laws of perspective.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[127:1](za27.htm#fr_19.md) "Morning Advertiser,"
September 16th, 1871.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. Cause of Sun Appearing Larger When Rising and Setting
Than at Noonday](za28.md)
