[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za31)  [Next](za33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

# CHAPTER XIV.

### EXAMINATION OF THE SO-CALLED "PROOFS" OF THE EARTH'S ROTUNDITY.--WHY A SHIP'S HULL DISAPPEARS BEFORE THE MAST-HEAD.

IT has already been proved that the astronomers of the Copernican school
merely assumed the rotundity of the earth as a doctrine which enabled
them to explain certain well-known phenomena. "What other explanation
can be imagined except the sphericity of the earth?" is the language of
Professor de Morgan, and it expresses the state of mind of all who hold
that the earth is a globe. There is on their part an almost amusing
innocence of the fact, than in seeking to explain phenomena by the
assumption of rotundity, another assumption is necessarily involved,
viz., that nothing else will explain the phenomena in question but the
foregone and gratuitous conclusion to which they have committed
themselves. To argue, for instance, that because the lower part of an
outward-bound vessel disappears before the mast-head, the water *must*
be round, is to assume that a *round surface only* can produce such an
effect. But if it can be shown that a simple law of perspective in
connection with a plane surface necessarily produces this appearance,
the assumption of rotundity is not required, and all the misleading
fallacies and confusion involved in or mixed up with it may be avoided.

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

Before explaining the influence of perspective in causing-the hull of a
ship to disappear first when outward bound, it is necessary to remove an
error in its application, which artists and teachers have generally
committed, and which if persisted in will not only prevent their giving,
as it has hitherto done, absolutely correct representations of natural
things, but also deprive them of the power to understand the cause of
the lower part of any receding object disappearing to the eye before any
higher portion--even though the surface on which it moves is admittedly
and provably horizontal.

<span class="small">In the first place it is easily demonstrable that,
as shown in the following diagrams, fig. 71, lines which are
equi-distant</span>

<span id="img_fig71"></span> ![FIG. 71.](img/fig71.jpg.md)  
FIG. 71.

<span class="small">"The range of the eye, or diameter of the field of
vision, is</span>

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">110°; consequently this is the *largest* angle under which
an object can be seen. The range of vision is from 110° to 1°. . . . The
*smallest* angle under which an object can be seen is upon an average,
for different sights, the sixtieth part of a degree, or *one minute* in
space; so that when an object is removed from the eye 3000 times its own
diameter, it will only just be distinguishable; consequently the
greatest distance at which we can behold an object like a shilling of an
inch in diameter, is 3000 inches or 250 feet." <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94.md)</span>

The above may be called the *law of perspective*. It may be given in
more formal language, as the following:. when any object or any part
thereof is so far removed that its greatest diameter subtends at the eye
of the observer, an angle of one minute or less of a degree, it is no
longer visible.

From the above it follows:--

1.--That the larger the object the further will it require to go from
the observer before it becomes invisible.

2.--The further any two bodies, or any two parts of the same body, are
asunder, the further must they recede before they appear to converge to
the same point.

3.--Any distinctive part of a receding body will be-come invisible
before the whole or any larger part of the same body.

The first and second of the above propositions are self-evident. The
third may be illustrated by the following diagram, fig. 73.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

<span id="img_fig73"></span> ![FIG. 73.](img/fig73.jpg.md)  
FIG. 73.

Let A represent a disc of wood or card-board, say one foot in diameter,
and painted black, except one inch diameter in the centre. On taking
this disc to about a hundred feet away from an observer at A, the white
centre will appear considerably diminished--as shown at B--and on
removing it still further the central white will become invisible, the
disc will appear as at C, entirely black. Again, if a similar disc is
coloured black, except a segment of say one inch in depth at the lower
edge, on moving it forward the lower segment will gradually disappear,
as shown at A, B, and C, in diagram fig. 74. If the

<span id="img_fig74"></span> ![Fig. 74.](img/fig74.jpg.md)  
Fig. 74.

disc is allowed to rest on a board D, the effect is still more striking.
The disc at C will appear perfectly round--the white segment having
disappeared.

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

The erroneous application of perspective already referred to is the
following:--It is well known that on looking along a row of buildings of
considerable length, every object *below* the eye appears to *ascend*
towards the eye-line; and every thing *above* the eye appears to
*descend* towards the same eye-line; and an artist, wishing to represent
such a view on paper, generally adopts the following rule:--draw a line
across the paper or canvas at the *altitude of the eye*. To this line,
as a vanishing point, draw *all other lines* above and below it,
irrespective of their distance, as in the diagram 75.

<span id="img_fig75"></span> ![Fig. 75.](img/fig75.jpg.md)  
Fig. 75.

Let A, B, and C, D, represent two lines parallel but not equi-distant
from the eye-line E, H. To an observer at E, the vanishing point of C,
D, would be at H, *because* the lines C, D, and E, H, would come
together at H, at an angle of *one minute* of a degree. But it is
evident from a single glance at the diagram that H cannot be the
vanishing point of A, B, *because* the distance E, A, being greater than
E, C, the angle A, H, E, is also greater than C, H, E--is, in fact,
considerably *more* than one minute of a degree. Therefore the line A,
B, cannot possibly have its vanishing point on the line E, H, unless it
is carried forward towards W. Hence the line A, W, is the true
perspective line of A, B, forming an angle of one minute at W, which is
the true vanishing point of A, B, as H is the vanishing point of C, D,
and G, H, because these two lines are equidistant from the eye-line.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

The error in perspective, which is almost universally committed,
consists in causing lines dissimilarly distant from the eye-line to
converge to one and the same vanishing point. Whereas it is demonstrable
that lines most distant from an eye-line must of necessity converge less
rapidly, and must be carried further over the eye-line before they meet
it at the angle one minute, which constitutes the vanishing point.

A <span class="small">very good illustration of the difference is given
in fig. 76. False or prevailing perspective would bring the lines A, B,
and C, D, to the same point H; but the true or natural
perspective</span>

<span id="img_fig76"></span> ![Fig. 76.](img/fig76.jpg.md)  
Fig. 76.

<span class="small">brings the line A, B, to the point W, because
*there* and there *only* does A, W, E, become the *same angle* as C, H,
E. It *must be* the *same angle* or it is not the vanishing
point.</span>

The law represented in the above diagram is the "law of nature." It may
be seen in every layer of a long wall; in every hedge and bank of the
roadside, and indeed in every direction where lines and objects run
parallel to each other; but no illustration of the contrary perspective
is ever to be seen in nature. In the pictures which abound in our public
and private collections, however, it may too often be witnessed, giving
a degree of distortion to paintings and drawings--otherwise beautifully
executed, which

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

strikes the observer as very unnatural, but, as he supposes,
artistically or theoretically correct.

The theory which affirms that *all* parallel lines converge to one and
the same point on the eye-line, is an error. It is true only of lines
*equi-distant* from the eye-line; lines more or less apart *meet the
eye-line at different distances*, and the point at which they meet is
that only where each forms the angle of one minute of a degree, or such
other angular measure as may be decided upon as the vanishing point.
This is the true law of perspective as shown by nature herself; any idea
to the contrary is fallacious, and will deceive whoever may hold and
apply it to practice.

In accordance with the above law of natural perspective, the following
illustrations are important as representing actually observed phenomena.
In a long row of lamps, standing on horizontal ground, the pedestals, if
short, gradually diminish until at a distance of a few hundred yards
they seem to disappear, and the upper and thinner parts of the lamp
posts appear to touch the ground, as shown in the following diagram,
fig. 77.

<span id="img_fig77"></span> ![Fig. 77.](img/fig77.jpg.md)  
Fig. 77.

The lines A, B, and C, D, represent the actual depth or length of the
whole series of lamps, as from C to A. An observer placing his eye a
little to the right or left of the point E, and

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

looking along the row will see that each succeeding pedestal appears
shorter than the preceding, and at a certain distance the line C, D,
will appear to meet the eye-line at H--the pedestals at that point being
no longer visible, the upper portion of each succeeding lamp just
appears to stand *without pedestal*. At the point H where the pedestals
disappear the upper portions of the lamps seem to have shortened
considerably, as shown by the line A, W, but long after the pedestals
have entered the vanishing point, the tops will appear above the line of
sight E, H, or until the line A, W, meets the line E, H, at an angle of
one minute of a degree. A row of lamps such as that above described may
be seen in York Road, which for over 600 yards runs across the south end
of Regent's Park, London.

On the same road the following case may at any time be seen.

<span id="img_fig78"></span> ![Fig. 78.](img/fig78.jpg.md)  
Fig. 78.

Send a young girl, with short garments, from C on towards D; on
advancing a hundred yards or more (according to the depth of the limbs
exposed) the bottom of the frock or longest garment will seem to touch
the ground; and on arriving at H, the vanishing point of the lines C, D,
and E, H, the limbs will have disappeared, and the upper part of the
body would continue visible, but gradually shortening until the line A,
B, came in contact with E, H, at the angle of one minute.

If a receding train be observed on a long, straight, and horizontal
portion of railway, the bottom of the last carriage will seem to
gradually get nearer to the rails, until at about the

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

distance of two miles the line of rail and the bottom of the carriage
will seem to come together, as shown in fig. 79.

<span id="img_fig79"></span> ![Fig. 79.](img/fig79.jpg.md)  
Fig. 79.

The south bank of the Duke of Bridgewater's canal (which passes between
Manchester and Runcorn) in the neighbourhood of Sale and Timperley, in
Cheshire, runs parallel to the surface of the water, at an elevation of
about eighteen inches, and at this point the canal is a straight line
for more than a statute mile. On this bank eight flags, each 6 ft. high,
were placed at intervals of 300 yards, and on looking from the towing
path on the opposite side, the bank seemed in the distance to gradually
diminish in depth, until the grass and the surface of the water
converged to a point, and the last flag appeared to stand not on the
bank but in the water of the canal, as shown in the diagram fig. 80.

<span id="img_fig80"></span> ![Fig. 80.](img/fig80.jpg.md)  
Fig. 80.

The flags and the bank had throughout the whole length the altitude and
the depth represented by the lines respectively A, B, and C, D.

Shooting out into Dublin Bay there is a long wall about three statute
miles in length, and at the end next to the sea stands the Poolbeg
Lighthouse. On one occasion the author sitting in a boat opposite "Irish
Town," and three miles from the sea end

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

of the wall, noticed that the lighthouse seemed to spring from the
water, as shown in the diagram fig. 81.

<span id="img_fig81"></span> ![Fig. 81.](img/fig81.jpg.md)  
Fig. 81.

The top of the wall seemed gradually to decline towards the sea level,
as from B to A; but on rowing rapidly towards A the lighthouse was found
to be standing on the end of the wall, which was at least four feet
vertical depth above the water. as seen in the following diagram, fig.
82.

<span id="img_fig82"></span> ![Fig. 82.](img/fig82.jpg.md)  
Fig. 82.

From the several cases now advanced, which are selected from a great
number of instances involving the same law, the third proposition (on
page [203](#page_203).md) that "any distinctive part of a body will become
invisible before the whole or any larger part of the same body," is
sufficiently demonstrated. It will therefore be readily seen that the
hull of a receding ship obeying the same law must disappear on a plane
surface, before the mast head. If it is put in the form of a syllogism
the conclusion is inevitable:--

Any distinctive part of a receding object becomes invisible before the
whole or any larger part of the same object.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

The hull is a distinctive part of a ship.

*Ergo*, the hull of a receding or outward bound ship must disappear
before the whole, inclusive of the mast head.

To give the argument a more practical and nautical character it may be
stated as follows:

That part of any receding body which is nearest to the surface upon
which it moves, contracts, and becomes in-visible before the parts which
are further away from such surface--as shown in figs.
[63](za27.htm#img_fig63), [64](za27.htm#img_fig64.md),
[65](za27.htm#img_fig65), [66](za28.htm#img_fig66.md),
[67](za30.htm#img_fig67), [68](za30.htm#img_fig68.md),
[69](za31.htm#img_fig69), and [70](za31.htm#img_fig70.md).

The hull of a ship is nearer to the water--the surface on which it
moves--than the mast head.

*Ergo*, the hull of an outward bound ship must be the first to
disappear.

This will be seen mathematically in the following diagram, fig. 83.

<span id="img_fig83"></span> ![Fig. 83.](img/fig83.jpg.md)  
Fig. 83.

<span class="small">The line A, B, represents the altitude of the mast
head; E, H, of the observer, and C, D, of the horizontal surface of the
sea. By the law of perspective the surface of the water appears to
ascend towards the eye-line, meeting it at the point H, which is the
horizon. The ship appears to ascend the inclined plane C, H, the hull
gradually becoming less until on arriving at the horizon H it is
apparently so small that its vertical depth subtends an angle, at the
eye of the observer, of less than one minute of a degree, and it is
therefore invisible; whilst the</span>

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="small">angle subtended by the space between the mast-head
and the surface of the water is considerably more than one minute, and
therefore although the hull has disappeared in the horizon as the
vanishing point, the mast-head is still visible above the horizon. But
the vessel continuing to sail, the mast-head gradually descends in the
direction of the line A, W, until at length it forms the same angle of
one minute at the eye of the observer, and then becomes
invisible.</span>

Those who believe that the earth is a globe have often sought to prove
it to be so by quoting the fact that when the ship's hull has
disappeared, if an observer ascends to a higher position the hull again
becomes visible. But this, is logically premature; such a result arises
simply from the fact that on raising his position the eye-line recedes
further over the water before it forms the angle of one minute of a
degree, and this includes and brings back the hull within the vanishing
point, as shown in fig. 84.

<span id="img_fig84"></span> ![Fig. 84.](img/fig84.jpg.md)  
Fig. 84.

<span class="small">The altitude of the eye-line E, H, being greater,
the horizon or vanishing point is formed at fig. 2 instead of at fig. 1,
as in the previous illustration.</span>

Hence the phenomenon of the hull of an outward bound vessel being the
first to disappear, which has been so universally quoted and relied upon
as proving the rotundity of the earth, is fairly, both logically and
mathematically, a proof of the very contrary, that the earth is a plane.
It

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

has been misunderstood and misapplied in consequence of an erroneous
view of the laws of perspective, and the unconquered desire to support a
theory. That it is valueless for such a purpose is now completely
demonstrated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_94"></span>[203:1](za32.htm#fr_94.md) "Wonders of Science," by
Mayhew, p. 357.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Perspective on the Sea](za33.md)
