[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za34)  [Next](za36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### HOW THE EARTH IS CIRCUM-NAVIGATED.

Another "proof" of the earth's rotundity is supposed to be found in the
fact that mariners by sailing continually

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

due east or west, return home in the opposite direction. This is called
"The Circum-navigation of the Globe." Here, again, a supposition is
involved, viz., that on a globe *only* can a ship continue to sail due
east and come home from the west, and *vice versâ*. But when the process
or method adopted is understood, it will be seen that a plane can as
readily be circum-navigated as a sphere.

<span class="small">In the following diagram, fig. 86, let N, represent
the. northern centre, near to which lies the "magnetic pole."
Then</span>

<span id="img_fig86"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Fig.
86.](tn/fig86.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig86.jpg)  
Fig. 86.  
</span>

<span class="small">the several arrows marked A, S, are all pointing
northwards; and those marked E, W, are all due east and west. It is
evident from the diagram, that A, S, are *absolute* directions--north
and south; but that E, W, east and west, are only *relative*, that is
they are directions at right angles to north and south. If it were not
so then, taking the line N, A, S, as representing</span>

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span class="small">the meridian of Greenwich, and W, E, on that
meridian as due east and west, on moving due west to the meridian 3, 4,
N, it is evident that a vessel represented by the arrow 1, 2, would be
at angle with the meridian 3, 4, N, much greater than 90 degrees, and if
it continued to sail in the same straight line 2, 1, 5, it would get
farther and farther away from the centre N, and therefore could never
complete a path concentric with N. East and west, however, are
directions relative to north and south. Hence, on a mariner arriving at
the meridian 3, 4, N, he must of necessity turn the head of his vessel
in the direction indicated by the arrow 6, 7, and thus continuing to
keep the vessel's head square to the compass, or at right angles to
north and south, he will at length arrive at 90 degrees of meridian from
N, A, S, when the head of the vessel will be in the direction of E, W,
8. Continuing his course for 90 degrees more his path will be E, W, 9.
The same course continued will in the next 90 degrees become E, W, 10,
and on passing over another 90 degrees the ship will have arrived again
at the meridian of Greenwich N, A, S, having then *completed a
circle*.</span>

Hence it is evident that sailing westerly, or in a direction square to
the compass, on passing from one meridian to another, the path must of
necessity be an *arc of a circle*. The series of arcs on completing a
passage of 360 degrees form a circular path concentric with the magnetic
pole, and necessarily, on a plane surface, brings the ship home from the
east; and on the contrary, sailing out east, the vessel cannot do
otherwise than return from the west.

A very good illustration of the circum-navigation of a plane will be
seen by taking a round table, and fixing a pin in the centre to
represent the magnetic pole. To this central pin attach a string drawn
out to any distance towards the

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

edge of the table. This string may represent the meridian of Greenwich,
extending due north and south. If now a pencil or other object is placed
across, or at right angles to the string, at *any* distance between the
centre and the circumference of the table, it will represent a vessel
standing due east and west. Now move the pencil and the string together
in either direction, and it will be seen that by keeping the vessel (or
pencil), square to the string it must of necessity describe a circle
round the magnetic centre and return to the starting point in the
opposite direction to that in which it first sailed.

If it is borne in mind what is really meant by sailing due east or due
west, which practically is neither more nor less than keeping the head
of a ship at right angles to the various meridians over which it sails,
there can be no difficulty in understanding how it is that the path of a
circumnavigator is the circumference of a circle, the radius of which is
the latitude or distance of the ship from the centre of a plane. But if,
in addition to this, the leading facts connected with the subject are
considered, it will be seen that the circumnavigation of a globe by the
mariners' compass is an impossibility. For instance, it is known that
the "dipping needle" is horizontal or without "dip" at the equator; and
that the "dip" increases on sailing north and south: and is greatest at
the magnetic centre.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="small">Let C, fig. 87, represent a dipping needle on the
"equator"</span>

<span id="img_fig87"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![FIG.
87](tn/fig87.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/fig87.jpg)  
FIG. 87  
</span>

<span class="small">of a globe. A mere inspection of the diagram is
sufficient to make it demonstrated that the needle C cannot be
horizontal, and at the same time pointing towards the north pole N. If a
ship sailed east or west on the equator where the compass is horizontal,
it is evident that its north or south end would describe a circle in the
heavens equal in magnitude to the circumference of the earth at the
equator--as shown by D, E, F.</span>

If any small object to represent a ship is placed on the equator of an
artificial globe and kept at right angles to the meridian lines, it will
at once be seen that it cannot be otherwise than as above stated; and
that the two facts that the compass always points towards the pole and
yet on the equator lies without dip, cannot possibly co-exist on a
globe. They do co-exist in nature, and are well ascertained and easily
proved to do so, *therefore* the earth cannot possibly be a globe. They
*can* co-exist on a plane with a northern or central region: they do
beyond doubt

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

co-exist, *therefore*, beyond doubt the earth is a plane. So far, then,
from the fact of a vessel sailing due west coming home from the east,
and *vice versâ*, being a proof of the earth's rotundity, it is simply a
result consistent with and dependent on its being a plane. Those who
hold that it is a globe because it has been circumnavigated, have an
argument which is logically incomplete and fallacious. This will be seen
at once when it is placed in the syllogistic form:--

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

A globe *only* can be circumnavigated.  
The earth has been circumnavigated.  
*Ergo*--The earth is a globe.

</div>

It has been shown that a *plane* can be circumnavigated, and therefore
the first or major proposition is false; and being so, the conclusion is
equally false.

This part of the subject furnishes a striking instance of the necessity
of at all times proving a proposition by direct and independent
evidence; instead of quoting a given result as a proof of what has
previously been only assumed. But a theory will not admit of this
method; and therefore the Zetetic process--inquiry before conclusion--is
the only course which can lead to simple unalterable truth. Whoever
creates or upholds a theory, claims or adopts a monster which will
sooner or later betray and enslave him, and make him ridiculous in the
eyes of practical observers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_96"></span>[223:1](za34.htm#fr_96) "Scientific Review."
April, 1866. Page 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Loss of Time on Sailing Westward](za36)
