[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za37)  [Next](za39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE "DIP SECTOR."

One of the most plausible and yet most fallacious arguments for the
earth's rotundity is that supposed to be drawn from observations with an
instrument called a "Dip Sector." Sir John F. W. Herschel, <span
id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97.md) considers it one of the most important
proofs afforded by geometry; and therefore it must be specially
examined. The following are his words:--

<span class="small">"Let us next see what obvious circumstances there
are to help us to a knowledge of the *shape* of the earth. Let us first
examine what we can actually *see* of its shape. . . . If we sail out of
sight of land, whether we stand on the deck of the ship or climb the
mast, we see the surface of the sea--not losing itself in distance and
mist, but terminated by a sharp clear, well-defined line, or *offing* as
it is called, which runs all round us in a circle, having our station
for its centre. That this line is really a circle we conclude, first,
from the perfect apparent similarity of all its parts: and, secondly,
from the fact of all its parts appearing at the same distance from us,
and that evidently a moderate one; and, thirdly, from this, that its
apparent *diameter*, measured with an instrument called the *dip
sector*, is the same, in whatever direction the measure is taken,
properties which belong only to the circle among geometrical figures. If
we ascend a high eminence the same holds good. . . From Ætna, Teneriffe,
Mowna Roa, in those few and rare occasions when the transparency of the
air will permit the real boundary of the horizon, the true
sea-line</span>

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

<span class="small">to be seen--the very same appearances are witnessed,
but with this remarkable addition, viz.: that the angular *diameter* of
the visible area, as measured by the dip sector, is materially *less*
than at a lower level; or in other words, that the *apparent size* of
the earth has sensibly diminished as we have receded from its surface,
while yet the *absolute quantity* of it seen at once has been increased.
The same appearances are observed universally in every part of the
earth's surface visited by man. Now the figure of a body which, however
seen, appears always *circular* can be no other than a sphere or globe.
A diagram (which is here simplified from the original) will elucidate
this. Suppose the .earth to be represented by the sphere L, H, N, Q, fig
89. Let</span>

<span id="img_fig89"></span> ![FIG. 89.](img/fig89.jpg.md)  
FIG. 89.

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> <span
class="small">A, B, be two different stations at different elevations.
From each of them let lines be drawn, tangents to the surface, as A, H,
and A, N; B, L, and B, Q; then will these lines represent</span>

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

<span class="small">the visual rays along which the spectators at A, and
at B, will see the visible horizon; and as the tangent A, H, sweeps
round from H, through O, to N, the circle formed is the portion of the
earth's surface visible to a spectator at A, and the angle H, A, N,
included between the two extreme visual rays, is the measure of its
apparent angular diameter. This is the angle measured by the dip sector.
Now it is evident, that as A, is more elevated than B, the visible area,
and the distance of the visible horizon A, H, or A, N, are greater than
the area and horizon represented by B, L, or B, Q, and that the angle H,
A, N, is *less obtuse* than L, B, Q, or in other words the apparent
angular diameter of the. earth is less, being nowhere so great as 180°,
or two right angles, but falling short of it by some sensible quantity;
and that more and more the higher we ascend."</span>

The above quotation involves two distinct phenomena. First, that "from
the deck of a ship we see the surface of the sea, and the sharp, clear,
well-defined line called the *offing* running round us in a
[circle](errata.htm#6.md), having our station for its centre;" and
secondly, that the "dip" to the offing or horizon increases with
increase of altitude. The first statement is simply a truism; but as it
has been shown by several experiments that the apparent rising of the
water to a level of the eye is the result of a law of perspective
operating in connection with a plane surface; it is logically and
geometrically a proof that the water is horizontal, and a disproof of
convexity. The second statement is the very reverse of all the practical
observations recorded in experiments 10 and 11, pp.
[35](za14.htm#page_35.md) to 40, and in experiment 15, [p.
60](za20.htm#page_60.md) of this work. At every altitude where special
observations have been made, the sea surface

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

has been found to ascend to a line of sight at right angles to a plumb
line; and that unless some telescopic instrument is used *no dip
whatever is required to meet the sea horizon*. Here then are two
directly antagonistic statements; and it would be well if all the
affirmations found in scientific works were brought to the same
condition face to face with fact and experiment. Truth and falsehood are
always of this distinctly opposite character; and it only requires that
practical as against theoretical evidence be obtained to distinguish one
from the other.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[232:1](za38.htm#fr_97.md) "Treatise on Astronomy,"
pp. 15 to 18.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Variability of Pendulum Vibrations](za39.md)
