[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za46)  [Next](za48.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GREAT CIRCLE SAILING.

AMONG landsmen a great amount of misconception prevails as to what is
really meant by the so-called "great circle sailing;" and
notwithstanding that the subject is very imperfectly understood, the
"project" or hypothesis--for it is nothing more--is often very earnestly
advanced as an additional proof of the earth's rotundity. But, like all
the other "proofs" which have been given, there is no necessary
connection between the facts adduced and the theory sought to be proved.
Although professional mariners are familiar with several modes of
navigation--"parallel sailing," "plane sailing," "traverse sailing,"
"current sailing," "middle latitude sailing," "Mercator sailing," and
"great circle sailing," the "Mercator" and "great circle" methods are
now the favourites. Nearly all the above systems necessitated the
sailing by, or in relation to, Rhumb-lines, or lines at right angles to
the meridian lines; and whether the earth is a plane or a globe, these
are not geometrically at right angles to lines of latitude, except at
the equator. Hence Mercator's projection, on account of its lines of
latitude and longitude being square to each other, has been almost
universally employed. But previous to the general adoption of Mercator's
plan, many leading navigators saw that Rhumb-line sailing upon a globe
was [practically](errata.htm#10.md) a series of small circles, and
conceived

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

of a method very similar to that which is now called the "*great*
circle" system. As early as 1495 Sebastian Cabot suggested the adoption
of this method. It was also advocated in 1537 by Numez, and in 1561, and
subsequently by Cortez, Zamarano, and others. After lying dormant for a
long time, the system was revived by Mr. Towson, of Devonport, who read
a paper before the Society of Arts, in May, 1850, and afterwards
presented his "tables to facilitate the practice of great circle
sailing," to the Lords Commissioners of the Admiralty, who "ordered them
to be printed for the use of all mariners."

Many persons suppose that the words "great circle sailing" simply mean
that the mariner, instead of sailing in a direct line from one place to
another, on the same latitude, takes a circuitous path to the south or
north of this direct line, where the degrees of longitude being smaller,
the distance passed over, although apparently greater, is actually
*less*. It is then falsely argued that as "the greatest distance round
is the nearest path," the degrees of longitude *must* be smaller, and
therefore the earth *must* be a globe. This is another instance of the
self-deception practised by many of the advocates of rotundity. It is
really painful to reflect upon the manner in which a merely fanciful
hypothesis has reduced its advocates to mental prostitution. The poor
dawdling creature, who vaguely wanders in search of anything or
everything which will satisfy her longings, is only a type of the
philosophical wanderer who seeks for, and pounces upon, whatever will
prove, or only seem to prove, his one idea--his uncontrolled and often
uncontrollable longing for something to confirm

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

his notions, and satisfy his desire to be wise and great. The motive
which actuates the greater number of modern philosophers, cannot be less
or other than the love of distinction. If it were a love of truth and of
human progress and welfare they would scrupulously examine the premises
on which their theories are founded. But this the advocates of the
earth's rotundity and motion have seldom or never done. There is no
single instance recorded where even the necessity for doing so is
admitted. Hence it is that whilst to question the groundwork is
forbidden, they abruptly seize upon everything which gives colour to
their assumptions, although in many cases neither pertinent nor
logically consistent. In the case before us the contraction or
convergence of the degrees of longitude beyond the equator is unproved;
and again if they were convergent there could not be a single inch of
gain in taking a so-called great circle course between any two places
east and west of each other. Let the following experiment be tried in
proof of this statement. On an artificial globe mark out a great circle
path, between say Cape Town and Sydney, or Valparaiso and Cape Town.
Take a strip of sheet lead, and bend it to the form of this path; and
after making it straight measure its length as compared with the
parallel of latitude between the places. The result will fully satisfy
the experimenter that *this* view of great circle sailing is contrary to
known geometrical principles. Strictly speaking, it is not "great circle
sailing" at all which Mr. Towson and the Lords of the Admiralty have
recommended. The words *great circle* are only used in comparison with
the *small circles* which are described in sailing upon a Rhumb-line
track.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span class="small">"The fundamental principle of this method is that
axiom of spherical geometry, that the shortest distance between any two
points on the surface of a sphere lies on the line of a great circle;
or, in other words, of a circle passing through the centre of a sphere.
But maps and charts, being *flat* representations of the surface of a
*globe*, are of necessity distorted, and are only correct near the
equator, the distortion increasing as the poles are approached; and
hence it follows that the course which on the *globe* is the *shortest*,
is on the *chart* made to appear very much the longest, and the reverse.
This was clearly shown to be the case by the comparison on a chart and
on a globe of the course between Van Dieman's Land and Voldivia, on the
western coast of South America: the course, which by the chart appeared
to be a straight line, when laid down upon the. globe was found to be
very circuitous, whilst the line of a great circle, cutting the two
points, appeared on the chart as a loop of great length." <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md)</span>

"Mercator and parallel sailing conduct the ship by a *circuitous route*
when *compared* with the track of a *great circle*." <span
id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130.md)

In nautical language Rhumb-line sailing, which was almost universally
practised before the recent introduction of great circle sailing,
consists in following parallels at right angles to the meridian lines,
and as these meridian lines are supposed to be convergent, it is evident
that the course of a ship so navigated is not the most direct; a great
circle path is one at angles less than 90° north and

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

south of the meridian. If the reader will draw a series of Rhumb-lines
on a map of "the globe," he will at once see that the course is
circuitous. But if he draws lines at a slight angle north in the
northern, and south in the southern region, to the above-named
Rhumb-lines, he will readily notice that the ship's course is more
direct, and therefore the mariner adopting the so-called "great circle''
method, must of necessity save both time and distance, but *only in
comparison* with the *Rhumb-line* path. It is not absolutely the
shortest route; as the earth is a plane, the degrees of longitude in the
south must diverge or expand, and spread out as the latitude increases;
and the parallels or lines of latitude must be circles concentric with
the northern centre. Hence there is in reality a still shorter path than
either the Rhumb-line or the great circle course.

This will at once be evident on trying the following simple experiment.
Place a light, to represent the sun, at an elevation of say two feet on
the centre of a round table. Draw lines from the centre to the
circumference to represent meridian lines. Mark any two places to
represent Cape Town and Melbourne; now take any small object to
represent a ship sailing from one of these places to the other, and, on
moving it forward, keeping the light at *the same altitude* all the way
the line of latitude or path of the ship will be seen to be an arc of a
circle, which practically is a great circle route, whilst the Rhumb-line
and greater route would be represented by a series of tangents to the
meridian lines between the two places. The nearest route geometrically
possible is the chord or

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

straight line joining the ends of the arc which forms the line of
latitude. Let this line or chord be drawn, and all argument will be
superfluous, the proposition will be immediately self-evident.

Thus we have seen that great circle sailing is not the shortest route
possible, but merely shorter than several other routes, which have been
theoretically suggested and adopted; and to affirm that the results are
confirmatory or demonstrative of the earth's rotundity, is in the
highest degree illogical.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[282:1](za47.htm#fr_129.md) "From "A Paper on the
Principles of Great Circle Sailing," by Mr. J. T. Towson, of Devonport,
in the "Journal of the Society of Arts," for May, 1850.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[282:2](za47.htm#fr_130.md) "Treatise on
Navigation," p. 50. By. J. Greenwood, Esq., of Jesus College, Cambridge.
Weale, 59, High Holborn, London.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Motion of Stars North and South](za48.md)
