[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za50)  [Next](za52) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LUNAR ECLIPSE A PROOF OF ROTUNDITY.

ALTHOUGH the subject of lunar eclipses has already been discussed, it is
again briefly noticed because it forms one of the category of supposed
evidences of the earth's rotundity. Those who hold that the earth is a
globe will often affirm, with marked enthusiasm, that in an eclipse of
the moon there is "proof positive" of rotundity. "Is not the shadow of
the earth, on the moon, always round?" "Could anything but a globe cast
a shadow which at all times, and in all positions, is visibly circular?"
"Would

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

not a plane sometimes cast a shadow edgewise, which, on the moon, would
appear as a bar or straight line across it?" Notwithstanding the
plausibility of these questions, the essential requirements of an
argument are wanting. That the eclipsor of the moon is a shadow at all
is assumption--no proof whatever is offered. That the moon receives her
light from the sun, and that therefore her surface is darkened by the
earth intercepting the sun's light, *is not proved*. It *is not proved*
that the earth moves in an orbit round the sun, and therefore, by being
in different positions, conjunction of sun, earth, and moon, 'Day
some-times occur. The contrary has been clearly proved--that the moon is
*not eclipsed* by a *shadow*; that she is *self-luminous*, and not
merely a reflector of solar light, and therefore could not possibly be
obscured or eclipsed by *a shadow* from any object whatever; and that
the earth is devoid of motion, either on axes or in an orbit through
space. Hence to call that an argument for the earth's rotundity, where
every necessary proposition is only assumed, and in relation to which
direct and practical evidence to the contrary is abundant, is to
stultify the judgment and every other reasoning faculty.

Thus we have seen that in every instance where the attempt is made to
*prove* the rotundity of the earth, the premises do not warrant the
conclusion, which is premature--drawn before the whole subject is fairly
stated and examined, and when other and visible causes are amply
sufficient to explain the phenomena, for explanation of which the theory
of rotundity was originally framed.

The same charge may be made against the few instances

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

which have been adduced as proofs of the earth's motion. To explain day
and night, the earth was *assumed* to revolve once in twenty-four hours.
The only *direct proofs* offered are the peculiarities attending the
oscillations of a long pendulum, and the tendency of railway carriages
to be thrown off the rails when running on lines in a due northerly or
southerly direction. In the early part of the year 1851 the scientific
journals, and nearly all the news-papers published in Great Britain, and
on the continents of Europe and America, were occupied in recording and
discussing certain experiments with the pendulum, first made by M.
Foucault, of Paris; and the public were startled by the announcement
that the results furnished a practical proof of the earth's rotation.
The subject was referred to in the *Literary Gazette* in the following
words:--

<span class="small">"Everybody knows what is meant by a pendulum in its
simplest form, a weight hanging by a thread to a fixed point. Such was
the pendulum experimented upon long ago by Galileo, who discovered the
well-known law of isochronous vibrations, applicable to the same. The
subject has since received a thorough examination, as well theoretical
as practical, from mathematicians and mechanicians; and yet, strange to
say, the most remarkable feature of the phenomenon has remained
unobserved and wholly unsuspected until within the last few weeks, when
a young and promising French physicist, M. Foucault, who was induced, by
certain reflections, to repeat Galileo's experiments in the cellar of
his mother's house at Paris, succeeded in establishing the existence of
a fact connected with it, which gives an immediate and visible
demonstration of the earth's rotation.</span>

303

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>

Suppose the pendulum already described to be set moving in a *vertical
plane from north to south*; the plane in which it vibrates, to ordinary
observation, would appear to be stationary. M. Foucault, however, has
succeeded in showing that this is not the case, but that the plane is
itself slowly moving round the fixed point as a centre, in a direction
contrary to the earth's rotation, i.e., with the apparent heavens, from
east to west. His experiments have since been repeated in the hall of
the observatory, under the superintendence of M. Arago, and fully
confirmed. If a pointer be attached to the weight of a pendulum
suspended by a long and fine wire, capable of *turning round in all
directions*, and nearly in contact with the floor of a room, the line
which this pointer appears to trace on the ground, and which may easily
be followed by a chalk mark, will be found to be slowly, but visibly,
and constantly moving round, like the hand of a watch dial. . . . The
subject has created a great sensation in the mathematical and physical
circles of Paris.

"It is proposed to obtain permission from the Government to carry on
further observations by means of a pendulum suspended from the dome of
the Pantheon, length of suspension being a desideratum, in order to make
the result visible on a larger scale, and secure greater constancy and
duration in the experiments."

Subsequently experiments were made at the Pantheon, and repeated in
almost every part of the civilised world, but with results so variable,
and in many instances the very contrary to the anticipations suggested
by theory, that many of the same Newtonian school of philosophy differed
with each other, remained dissatisfied, and raised very serious
objections both to the value of the experiments

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

themselves, and to the supposed proof which they furnished of the
earth's rotation. One writer in the *Times* newspaper of the period, who
signs himself "B. A. C.," says:--

<span class="small">"I have read the accounts of the Parisian
experiment, as they have appeared in many of our papers, and must
confess that I still remain unconvinced of the reality of the
phenomenon."</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Supposed Manifestation of the Rotation of the Earth](za52)
