[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za54)  [Next](za56) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GOOSE ROASTING BY REVOLVING FIRE.

As an instance of the logical dilemma produced by theory and false
doctrine, it may be mentioned that when it is proved by the most direct
and practical evidence that the earth is stationary, and that the sun
and stars move over its surface in concentric paths, immediately, and
regardless of all considerations but defence of opinion and hypothesis,
the cry is raised--Is it likely, is it consistent with all that we see
and know of economy in the application of power, that a vast body like
the sun, 850,000 miles in diameter, should revolve round a mere speck
like the earth? If, in roasting a goose, the "spit" were made fast, and
the fire so contrived as to be carried round it, would not such an
arrangement be sheer folly? And would not the great sun revolving round
the little insignificant earth be quite as foolish and improbable? The
author of a recently published pamphlet advances the subject a little
more learnedly, perhaps, in the following words:--

<span class="small">"It is certain, from the change in the appearance of
the starry heavens at different seasons of the year, that either the sun
moves round the earth once in twelve months, or the earth round the sun.
After what we have ascertained of the enormous magnitude of the sun as
compared with the earth, 850,000</span>

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

<span class="small">against less than 8000 miles, we shall be prepared
to admit that it is infinitely more reasonable that the little dark
earth should move round the great and glorious sun, than that that
magnificent and self-luminous globe should have to revolve round our
small, and comparatively insignificant, planet. It would be, according
to the old homely simile, making the whole fire-place and kitchen and
house turn round the joint of meat."</span>

Another writer (Arago) says:--

<span class="small">"In the first place, if we compare the earth, we
shall not say merely with the globes of our system, but with the
infinity of stars which, as we have seen, are nothing else than suns at
least as large as ours, and probably centres of as many planetary
systems, we must own that it is but an imperceptible point when
contrasted with these enormous masses; and it will no doubt appear
monstrous that an atom should be the centre round which circulate so
many immense globes. Our amazement will be vastly enhanced if we think
of the incredible velocity with which these bodies must move to
describe, in such brief times, incommensurable circles; and as this
velocity must augment with the distance, it will be necessary to admit
that the earth attracts all the stars with a force the greater the
further they are from it. We must, therefore, abandon a notion which
would lead to such conclusions as these, and put the question to
ourselves, whether this apparent revolution of the heavens may not be
the effect of an illusion of our senses. Thus we shall be led to
*suppose* the movement of the earth; and this *supposition* being
*admitted*, the phenomena will be explained logically and
easily."</span>

The only argument contained in the above remarks is that founded upon
analogy and probability. It certainly

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

would seem very foolish, and contrary to creative genius and consistency
to make a body 850,000 miles in diameter, and, at a distance of
91,000,000 of miles, move round an object only 8000 miles in diameter,
merely for the purpose of giving it light and heat, and causing day and
night. But when it is demonstrated that such distance and magnitude are
purely fanciful, that the sun is only a few hundred miles from the
earth, and is, therefore, much the smallest object, all such tawdry
notions and counterfeit reasonings must fall to the ground.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Difference in Solar and Sidereal Times](za56)
