[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za59)  [Next](za61.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE PLANET NEPTUNE.

FOR some years the advocates of the earth's rotundity, and of the
Newtonian philosophy generally, were accustomed to refer, with an air of
pride and triumph, to the supposed discovery of a new planet, to which
the name of "Neptune" was given, as an undeniable evidence of the truth
of their system or theory. The existence of this luminary was said to
have been predicated from calculation only, and for a considerable
period before it was seen by the telescope. The argument was, "That the
system by which such a discovery was made, must, of necessity, be true."
An article which appeared in the "Illustrated London Almanack," for
1847, contained the following words:--

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

<span class="small">"Whatever view we take of this noble discovery, it
is most gratifying, whether at the addition of another planet to our
list, whether at the proving the correctness of the theory of universal
gravitation, or in what view soever, it must be considered as a splendid
discovery, and the merit is chiefly due to theoretical astronomy. This
discovery is perhaps the greatest triumph of astronomical science that
has ever been recorded."</span>

If such things as criticism, experience, and comparative observation did
not exist, the tone of exultation in which the above-named writer
indulges might still be shared in by the astronomical student; but let
the following summary of facts and extracts be carefully read, and it
will be seen that such a tone was premature and unwarranted.

<span class="small">"In the year 1781, Uranus was discovered by Sir
William Herschel. . . . Between 1781 and 1820, it was very frequently
observed; and it was hoped that at the latter time sufficient data
existed to construct accurate tables of its motions. . . . It was found
utterly impossible to construct tables which would represent all the
observations. . . . Consequently it was evident that the planet was
under the influence of some unknown cause. Some persons talked of a
resisting medium, others of a great satellite which might accompany
Uranus; some even went so far as to suppose that the vast distance
Uranus is from the sun caused the law of gravitation to lose some of its
force; others thought of the existence of a planet beyond Uranus, whose
disturbing force caused the anomalous motions of the planet; but no one
did otherwise than follow the bent of his inclination, and did not
support his assertion by any positive considerations. Thus was the
theory of Uranus surrounded with difficulties, when M. Le Verrier, an
eminent French mathematician, undertook to investigate the</span>

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

<span class="small">irregularities in its motions. . . . The result of
these calculations was the discovery of a new planet in the place
assigned to it by theory, whose mass, distance, position in the heavens,
and orbit it describes round the sun, were all approximately determined
before the planet had ever been seen, and all agrees with observations,
so far as can at present be determined." <span
id="fr_142"></span>[1](#fn_142.md)</span>

The first paper by M. Le Verrier appeared on the 10th of November, 1845,
and a second on June 1st, 1846; and "on the 23rd of September, Dr.
Galle, at Berlin, discovered a star of the eighth magnitude, which was
proved to be the planet," so it was thought; and hence, had it been
true, the Newtonian philosophers had good cause to be proud of the
theory which had apparently led to such grand results; and, as in the
other "great discovery" by the celebrated French mathematician, M.
Foucault, of the earth's motion by the vibrations of a pendulum, the
peals of triumph rung by mathematicians were for months ringing in the
ears of the whole civilised community. The whole of this scientific
rejoicing was, however, suddenly arrested by the appearance, two years
afterwards, of a paper by M. Babinet, read before the French Academy of
Sciences, in which great errors in the calculations of M. Le Verrier
were disclosed, as will be seen by the following letter:--

"Paris, September 15, 1848.

<span class="small">"The only sittings of the Academy of late in which
there was anything worth recording, and even this was not of a practical
character, were those of the 29th ult., and the 11th inst. On</span>

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

the former day M. Babinet made a communication respecting the planet
Neptune, which has been generally called M. Le Verrier's planet, the
discovery of it having, as it was said, been made by him from
theoretical deductions which astonished and delighted the scientific
public. What M. Le Verrier had inferred from the action on other planets
of some body which ought to exist was verified--at least, so it was
thought at the time--by actual vision. Neptune was actually seen by
other astronomers, and the honour of the theorist obtained additional
lustre. But it appears, from a communication of M. Babinet, that this is
not the planet of M. Le Verrier. He had placed his planet at a distance
from the sun equal to thirty-six times the limit of the terrestrial
orbit. Neptune revolves at a distance equal to thirty times of these
limits, which makes a difference of nearly *two hundred millions of
leagues!* M. Le Verrier had assigned to his planet a body equal to
thirty-eight times that of the earth; Neptune has only *one-third* of
this volume! M. Le Verrier had stated the revolution of his planet round
the sun to take place in two hundred and seventeen years; Neptune
performs its revolutions in one hundred and sixty-six years! Thus, then,
Neptune is not M. Le Verrier's planet, and all his theory as regards
that planet falls to the ground! M. Le Verrier may find another planet,
but it will not answer the calculations which he had made for Neptune.

"In the sitting of the 14th, M. Le Verrier noticed the communication of
M. Babinet, and to a great extent admitted his own error. He complained,
indeed, that much of what he said was taken in too absolute a sense, but
he evinces much more candour than might have been expected from a
disappointed explorer. M. Le Verrier may console himself with the
reflection that if he has not been so successful as he thought he had

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

been, others might have been equally unsuccessful; and as he has still
before him an immense field for the exercise of observation and
calculation, we may hope that he will soon make some discovery which
will remove the vexation of his present disappointment." <span
id="fr_143"></span>[1](#fn_143.md)

"As the data of Le Verrier and Adams stand at present, there is a
discrepancy between the predicted and the true distance, and in some
other elements of the planet. . . . It 'would appear from the most
recent observations, that the mass of Neptune, instead of being, as at
first stated, one nine thousand three hundredth, is only one
twenty-three thousandth that of the sun; whilst its periodic time is now
given with a greater probability at 166 years, and its mean distance
from the sun nearly thirty. Le Verrier gave the mean distance from the
sun thirty-six times that of the earth, and the period of revolution 217
years." <span id="fr_144"></span>[2](#fn_144.md)

Thus we have found that "a discovery which was incontestably one of the
most signal triumphs ever attained by mathematical science, and which
marked an era that must be for ever memorable in the history of physical
investigation," and which "some years ago excited universal
astonishment," <span id="fr_145"></span>[3](#fn_145.md) was really worse
than no discovery at all; it was a great astronomical blunder. An error
of six hundred millions of miles in the planet's distance, of two thirds
in its bulk, and of fifty-one years in its periodic time, ought at least
to make the advocates of the Newtonian theory less positive, less
fanatical and idolatrous--for many of them are as greatly so as the
followers

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

of Juggernauth--and more ready to acknowledge what they ought never to
forget--that, at best, their system is but hypothetical, and must sooner
or later give place to a practical philosophy, the premises of which are
demonstrable, and which is, in all its details, sequent and consistent.
Will they never learn to value the important truth, that a clear
practical recognition of one single fact in nature is worth all the
gew-gaw hypotheses which the unbridled fancies of wonder-loving
philosophers have ever been able to fabricate?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_142"></span>[330:1](za60.htm#fr_142.md) "Illustrated London
Almanack" for 1847.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[332:1](za60.htm#fr_143.md) "Times" Newspaper of
Monday, September 18, 1848.

<span id="fn_144"></span>[332:2](za60.htm#fr_144.md) "Cosmos," by Humboldt,
p. 75.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[332:3](za60.htm#fr_145.md) "How to Observe the
Heavens," by Dr. Lardner, p. 173.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Moon's Phases](za61.md)
