[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za63)  [Next](za65.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### SHADOWS ON THE MOON.

THERE seems to be a thorough conviction in the minds of the Newtonian
theorists that many of the dark places on the moon are the shadows of
mountains, and very graphic descriptions are given of the manner in
which these dark places lengthen and shorten, and change their
direction, as the sun is high or low, or on the right or left of certain
parts. Hitherto, or in the preceding pages of this work, a spirit of
antagonism has been maintained towards the Newtonian astronomers. The
Zetetic process has forced a direct denial of every part of their
system; but in the present instance there are certain points of
agreement. There is at present no reliable evidence against the
statements of the following quotation

<span class="small">"As the moon turns towards the sun, the tops of her
mountains being the first to catch his rays, are made to stand out
illuminated, like so many bright diamonds on her unilluminated black
surface. And if watched with a pretty good telescope the light of the
sun may be seen slowly descending the mountain sides, and at length to
light up the plains and valleys below; thus making those parts which but
a short time before were intensely black, now white as the snows of
winter. And in those basin-like mountains (the craters) the shadows on
one</span>

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

<span class="small">side may be seen descending far down on the opposite
side, thereby revealing their vast proportions and mighty depths. As the
time of the full moon approaches the shadows shorten, and when the rays
of the sun fall perpendicularly on her surface (as, at full moon) they
cease altogether. But now, if still watched, just the opposite
appearances will take place, as the enlightened face of the moon begins
to turn from the sun the lower parts are the first to lose his rays and
pass into darkness, which will be observed to creep gradually up the
mountain sides, and at last their tips will appear to pass out of the
sun's light as the last spark of a lighted candle. The enlightened parts
of the moon, however, no sooner begin to turn from the sun than the
shadows of the mountains again come into view, but on the opposite side
to that on which they were seen when the moon was on the increase, and
gradually to increase in length so long as the parts up which they are
thrown are in the light of the sun." <span
id="fr_156"></span>[1](#fn_156.md)</span>

That such changes of light and shade in the varying positions of the
moon, as those above described, are observed may be admitted; but that
they arise from the interposition of immense mountain ranges is of
necessity denied. If the Newtonians would be logically modest, the only
word they could use would be that *prominences* exist on the moon's
surface. To say that mountains and valleys and extinct volcanic craters
exist, is to insult the understanding and the common sense of mankind.
What possibility of proof exists that such is the character of the moon?
Let them be content with that which is, alone warranted by the
appearances which have been observed--that the moon's surface is
irregular, having

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

upon it prominences and indentations of various forms and sizes, and
running in many different directions. This is the common property of all
observers, and is not to be seized and perverted, or interpreted by any
one class of philosophical arrogants as proving an essential part of
their illogical hypothesis.

It has been demonstrated by more than sufficient matter-of-fact evidence
that the moon is self-luminous, semi-transparent, admitted to be
globular, observed to have prominences and irregularities upon her
surface, and moves in a path always above the earth, and at a distance
less than that of the sun, and, therefore, that she is a comparatively
small body, and simply a satellite and light-giver to the earth. If we
choose to reason at all from the facts which appear in evidence, we must
necessarily conclude that the moon is a cold, semi-transparent,
crystalline mass, more like a spherical ice-berg than anything else,
shining with a peculiar delicate phosphorescent light of her own, but,
in certain positions, her own light is overcome by the stronger and more
violent light of the sun, which causes her protuberances to darken the
various indentations adjoining them. This is all that any human being
can possibly say without presuming on the ignorance of his fellow men,
and daring to obtrude his own wild imaginings where only fact and reason
and modest anxiety to know the simple truth ought to exist. This said
and submitted to, we are able to illustrate and corroborate it by
corresponding facts on earth. It is a well-known fact that often, when
passing over the sea during a summer's night, the wake of a vessel--of a
steam-ship in particular--is strongly

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

luminous as far as the eye can see. It is also a fact often observed
that some kinds of fish will shine with a peculiar light for hours after
they are taken out of the water; and it is known that, collect this
light by concave reflectors to what extent we may, it will not, to
whatever degree of brilliancy we may bring it by concentration to a
focus, increase the temperature, as indicated by the most delicate
thermometer. This is precisely what we find as to the character of
moon-light. The following experiment will also illustrate the
subject:--Take a partially transparent ball, such as are prepared and
sold by the cautchouc toy manufacturers, or a very thin bladder well
blown out until it is semi-transparent. To represent the many
protuberances, &c., place small patches of gum arabic or isinglass in
various directions over one half its surface. Now rub the whole of this
half surface with a solution of phosphorus in oil of almonds, and carry
it into a dark room. It will give, by turning it slowly round, all the
peculiar appearances and phases of the moon; but now bring into the
apartment a lighted ordinary tallow candle, and at certain distances it
will not overcome the comparatively feeble phosphorescent light, but
will cause the places immediately behind the gum arabic or isinglass
protuberances to be darkened, on account of the light of the candle
being intercepted; thus imitating all the peculiarities which' are known
to belong to the moon. Hence, it is repeated, that observation, fact,
experiment, and consistent reasoning, all lead us to the conclusion that
the moon is a comparatively small body, only a few hundred miles above
the earth, that her surface is irregular, that her substance is
crystalised

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

and semi-transparent, and that she shines with a delicate phosphorescent
light of her own, but is subject to the action of the light of the sun,
which, when in certain positions, causes those peculiar manifestations
of light and shade which dreamy and prepossessed philosophers have
assigned to the interposition of immense and peculiar mountain
structures. Surely the night of dreams is coming to an end, and the
sleepers will awake ere long to open their eyes and apply their talents,
not for the interpretation of what they have for so long a period been
simply dreaming, but for the discovery of the real and tangible causes
of the numerous beautiful phenomena constantly occurring in the world
around them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_156"></span>[342:1](za64.htm#fr_156.md) "Spherical Form of the
Earth, a reply to 'Parallax,' by J. Dyer, p. 34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Conclusion](za65.md)
