[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Earth Mysteries](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](za64)  [Next](za66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766149455/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Zetetic Astronomy*, by 'Parallax' (pseud. Samuel Birley Rowbotham),
\[1881\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

Every point of importance has now been fairly considered, and shown to
be either unconnected or inconsistent with the assumption of the earth's
rotundity and diurnal and orbital motions. It is most important to the
reader that he should thoroughly understand the bearings of the various
explanations which have been given of the phenomena which the Newtonian
philosophers have hitherto relied on as proofs of their hypothesis. They
have assumed certain conditions to exist in order to explain certain
phenomena; and because the explanations of such phenomena have appeared
plausible, they have thought themselves justified in concluding that
their assumptions must be looked upon as veritable facts. The contrary,
or Zetetic process, has necessitated that the foundations be
demonstrated; that the earth be proved by special and direct experiments
to be a plane, irrespective

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

of all consequences, regardless of whether numerous or any phenomena can
be understood in connection with it or not. An endeavour has been made
in the preceding pages to explain the various phenomena without
assumption, but in connection with the undoubtedly demonstrated fact
that water is horizontal, and that the earth as a whole is not a globe,
but a vast "discular" plane. The. reader must properly bear in mind that
if any one, or even the whole, of these explanations are unsatisfactory
to him, he is not to jump abruptly to the conclusion that therefore the
earth cannot be a plane, but must be a globe. Apart from, and totally
independent of, all consequences or success in explaining phenomena, the
proposition of the. earth's plane or discular form must be admitted, or
shown to be fallacious. Wherever doubt shall exist as to the.
sufficiency of the phenomenal explanations offered, the mind must at
once fall back upon the grand reserved proposition that *water is
horizontal*, and, therefore, any want of satisfaction in explaining
phenomena must be met by further efforts in that direction, and not by
the mentally suicidal process of denouncing a proved foundation. Once
for all it may be said that, whatever explanation is proved, or thought
to be, unsatisfactory, a better must be sought for, but still in
connection with the same ground-work or datum. Whoever objects to this
procedure, and is unable to see its logical justice and necessity, is
most certainly not a reasoner, and, quite as clearly, cannot be a
philosopher.

<span id="img_flowsep"></span> ![](img/flowsep.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV. General Summary--Application--Cui Bono](za66)
