[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Confucianism](../index) [Shinto](../../shi/index) [Index](index) [Previous](tasj2005.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

## VOLUME V. SINCERITY.

 

<span class="small">THE MOON THE MEMENTO OF THE GENERATIONS.</span>

   When the year was more than half gone and the autumn scenery was
come, the cool wind piercing the body, after long absence the friends
gathered again at the house of the Old Man. They made the customary
inquiries and were taking leave when he stopped them saying,—"The moon
is very fine to-night. Do not go. Stop awhile and have some wine." So
obediently they all sat down. And as the talk went on the people of the
house set out food and wine, and the guests soon felt the influence of
the wine and became interesting. One with his cup in his hand recited a
verse of Rihaku<span id="fr_1"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">1</span></sup>](#note_1.md) in praise of the moon, another
capped it, and a third continued and a fourth, and last of all the Old
Man;—"The men of to-day see not the moon of long ago: The moon of to-day
shines not upon the men of long ago: The men of to-day and the men of
long ago, Are like the flowing water. All are alike as they see the
moon, With verse and wine their one desire is that, The Moon shine long
upon he metal cask;" so he made an end of it. But the drinking went on,
and as they drank still more until the mountains seemed to fall, the Old
Man continued:

   You all unite in praising the moon in verse and my heart is comforted
as I see it. An emotion that ceases not arises, for the moon is the
comfort of old age. I have many thoughts, and will give you one of them.
When a child I was once sitting alone in the corner at the wine drinking
on the fifteenth of the eighth month when a samurai, who was wholly
illiterate, looked long at the moon and asked,—"How wide <span
id="page_126">p. 126</span> is it?" Then another like him said, "It is
cut off from something. How deep is it?" All who heard it ate their
tongues, and even as a child I thought it absurd. But really, are most
men so different, as they praise the moon for its clear light and love
its pure reflection and meet together to eat, drink and sing? And the
poets ornament their verses as they see the moon and labour over their
form, and yet after all, aesthetic as it all seems, they are merely
amused with the appearance of the moon and know not its profound
"feeling."

   What I said of "the emotion that ceases not" refers to the love of
the ancients, the study of their books as we know their hearts and the
pain of separation from the world. It is the moon which lights
generation after generation and now too shines in the sky. So may we
call it the Memento of the Generations. As we look upon it and think of
the things of old, we seem to see the reflection of the forms and faces
of the past. Though the moon says not a word, yet it speaks. If we have
forgotten, then it recalls the ages gone by. This verse of Rihaku is the
best of all the poetry about the moon, for it lets the mere appearance
go and unites past and present in one spirit, all "Are like the flowing
water." Yet there is something wanting, for it does not speak of waiting
for the coming age, and this is supplied in the ancient writing called
So,—

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>"The men who are gone come not to me<br />
The men of the future hear me not,"</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

and as I read it my admiration knows no bounds. For this is Kushi's<span
id="fr_2"></span>[<sup><span class="small">2</span></sup>](#note_2.md)
thought: "No one knows me, none of my own generation; and the men of the
past who were one in heart with me, with whom I would speak, are beyond
my reach; and the men of the coming age who will be of like <span
id="page_127">p. 127</span> spirit, hear me not and know me not." So is
it with every one who has a heart: it is not Kushi only who thus
laments. I too see the moon with such a spirit and mourn. The present is
the past to the future, and in that age some one like me will grieve as
he looks upon the moon.

 

<span class="small">TO FORSAKE THE WORLD BUT NOT ONE'S SELF.</span>

   When the celebrated priest Saigyō went on pilgrimage through the east
he came to Kamakura and went with others to Tsurugaoka. There Yoritomo
noticed the superiority of his company and called him to his house,
asked him of horsemanship, archery and poetry. Without fear of the
splendour of Yoritomo or of the presence of his famous followers, Saigyō
freely uttered his opinions. Yoritomo greatly admired him, but was
unable to detain him or give him anything except a silver cat, and this
Saigyō threw to the children in the street as he went away. Nor was it
known whither he went.

   There was, at that time, a very bad priest at Takao, named Bungaku.
He was very proud of his power, which was given him at Kamakura, and he
hated Saigyō's character and said, "If I meet him I'll insult him to his
face." Once Saigyō came to Takao and Bungaku asked him to spend the
night with him, full of joy at the opportunity. He said to his
followers, "See! When he comes I'll strike him!" and waited with
clenched fist. All were in troubled suspense, but when Saigyō came
Bungaku's courage failed and he greeted him respectfully. So,
afterwards, the followers said to Bungaku, "Why did you not strike
Saigyō?" But Bungaku replied, "See the spirit of his face! He should
strike me!" How apparent was Saigyō's high pure character and wonderful
spirit! Our only grief is that Confucianism was not yet made known to
the world and so even such a man knew not the truth. With a clear pure
character, he disliked the ways of the world and became a priest. Truly
that was lamentable!

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

   To forsake parent and lord that one may save himself by becoming a
priest is indeed to forsake the world; but instead of parent and lord it
is not to forsake one's self. Unless we forsake our self we forsake not
the world. The desire for fame and gain in the world, and the forsaking
of the world in the hope of paradise, these differ as the pure and the
impure, yet both alike are from the desire for one's own happiness.
Buddhism regards our human relationships as "borrowed" and so teaches
that parent and lord may be forsaken. Not so! If we are to desert
anything, first cast away reputation, gain and pleasure! Then there will
be no need to flee the world. But in the celebrated doctrine there is
place for natural pleasure. It is not necessary to forsake the human
relationships or anything. But to forsake these through the desire for
paradise is a shameful exhibition of the craving for happiness.

   There was once a woman who was ready to die of grief because of the
death of her husband, and she refused to be comforted. But the priest
reproved her: "You may well love your husband; Buddhism does not
interfere with that, for it is most natural. But separated from him,
with the marriage tie cut, in lonliness and for yourself to grieve, that
is selfishness. It is a great increase of guilt. Consider this doctrine
as you weep." So she repented and stopped her grief, It was wise advice,
but the priest did not consider how it applied to himself. From of old
all, high and low, men and women, who have clung to Buddhism have found
the sole origin for faith in regard for their own happiness. Even the
wise among them have not the wisdom of this woman. How have countless
generations wasted their precious bodies! And the future too will show
like waste! My grief I have put into this verse:

   "For an hundred generations the universe flows on; Literature and the
'Way' are now destroyed, Our thoughts are sad; Who knows? Above the
heavens just the one round moon, Long shines upon the lasting grief of
man. <span id="page_129">p. 129</span> The Way of truth is cast away!
With whom then shall I speak? False principles and new heresies come
forth day by day; The clear moon knows the grief of a thousand
generations, And kindly shines upon the old white head."

   The guests together repeated the verse, and just then the moon sank
in the west and the morning broke; and all went home.

 

<span class="small">ECONOMY.</span>

   To the samurai first of all is righteousness, next life, then silver
and gold. These last are of value, but some put them in the place of
righteousness! But to the samurai even life is as dirt compared to
righteousness.

   Until the middle part of the middle ages customs were comparatively
pure though not really righteous. Corruption has come only during this
period of government by the samurai. A maid servant in China was made
ill with astonishment and fled home in dismay when she saw her mistress,
soroban in hand, arguing prices and values. So as it once with the
samurai. They knew nothing of trade, were economical and content.

   An old man told me this story of Hine Bichu no Kami. When he went to
Korea he borrowed money for his expenses and on his return sent to
return it. His creditor, Kuroda Josui, directed the servants to take off
the flesh from some tai which had been sent in as a present and to make
soup of the bones for his guests. As this severe economy was observed,
the guests were filled with apprehension as to the probable demand for
high interest on the loan. But after the wine when they offered to make
payment Kuroda Josui would not take the principal. He was economical
beyond expression, even with his fish that had been given him, even in
the feasting of his friends, but did not hesitate to give an hundred
silver pieces when his friend had need. That is an <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> admirable illustration of the character of
the samurai of those days, simple and economical, yet unforgetful of
righteousness and strong of heart.

   Even in the days of my youth young folks never mentioned the price of
any thing; and their faces reddened if the talk was of women. Their joy
was in talk of battles and of plans for war. And they studied how
parents and lords should be obeyed and the duty of samurai. But nowadays
the young men talk of loss and gain, of dancing girls and harlots and
gross pleasures. It is a complete change from the customs of fifty or
sixty years ago. In those days I had a friend Kurando, whose father was
a Kaga samurai named Aochi Unimi. Aochi said to his son, "There is such
a thing as trade. See that you know nothing of it. In trade the profit
should always be on the other side. It differs from 'go' in that if we
win there is no peace in the victory." But now, men greatly rejoice if
they make a profit by exchange. To be proud of buying high priced
articles cheap is the good fortune of merchants, but should be unknown
to samurai. Let it not be even so much as mentioned. I remember the
remarks of Arai Chikugo no Kami some years ago:—Call no man stingy. If
one is stingy of money still more will he be stingy of life. Stinginess
is another name for cowardice." So he spoke as he expounded the books
before the Shōgun. It is the truth. And samurai must have a care of
their words and are not to speak of avarice, cowardice or lust.

.   .   .   .   .   .

   Nor must we waste our time. "Strength comes not twice. A day is not
twice to-morrow. At the time for labour we must toil. Years and months
wait not for man." Born with a love for learning, let us not think that
the age is without virtue and the future without reputation, and that we
perish as the trees and grass. Strive diligently everyday. There was a
Kaga man who was fond of the aesthetcism <span id="page_131">p.
131</span> of Rikiyu<span id="fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#note_3.md) and practiced the tea ceremonies
assiduously. When ordered to Edo he took his outfit with him and even in
the inns hung up his kettle and made his tea. His associates
remonstrated,—"Much as you like your tea, do take a vacation while en
route." But he replied,—"A day en route is no other; it too is one of
the days of my life! So it is not a day for omitting my ceremonious
tea." He made no difference nor stopped a day.

   So must scholars set their purpose on the "Way." It not to be
forsaken at all, and there is in all the life no day that is not for its
practice. Going or coming, there is no place without it. We should not
be in haste, lest we soon give it up. Not in haste and not in sloth must
we ever purse the "Way."

 

<span class="small">A WORD FOR THE OPENING YEAR. CONCLUSION.</span>

   Swiftly the days and months pass by. Day by day increases the
disease, old age, and labour is of no avail. It is the seventy-fifth
year, and not so long had the Old Man hoped to live with the billows of
old age rolling on. He was paralysized too, so that hand and foot were
not easily moved and with difficulty could he get up or down. For three
years the spring beauty of the garden had not been seen, but the voice
of the uguisu from the tree-top came to his bed awakening him from his
lingering dreams. Patiently did he remember the past as the perfume of
the plum blossoms visited his pillow.

   How blessed was he then that from his youth he had seen through the
windows of philosophy the value of the passing years; that he had
followed Tei-Shu and sought the manners of the Sages; that he had
admired the literary style of Kantaishi and Ōyōshu<span
id="fr_4"></span>[<sup><span class="small">4</span></sup>](#note_4.md) and
had learned haltingly to walk the "Way." What consolation was this for
his aged <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> wakefulness! Through so many
months and years well had he considered the passing, changing world,
with its alternating adversity and prosperity, its bloom and decay. Are
they all dreams and visions, "the clouds that float above the earth"?
Fortune and misfortune are twisted together like the strands of a rope.

   Among it all only the "Way" of the sages stands with Heaven and
Earth. Past and present it only changes not. Men should wonder at it and
praise. But the world knows it not. Men are in darkness as to
righteousness, though wise in gain and lust. The "Way" is forsaken and
customs deteriorate. Alas! Alas! but my low rank and feeble powers could
not reform the customs or restore the doctrine; as well might a gnat
move a tree or one dip out the ocean with a shell. Yet is it our duty as
scholars to grieve over the world and reform the people. We cannot give
this task to others. Why should aged teachers and men who are accounted
scholars desire false doctrines, mix them with the truth and thus
transform the "Way" of righteousness and virtue?

   I cannot agree to that. They work and argue, please the vulgar and go
with the times. Deplorable! As has been said of old,—"A corrupt learning
that flatters the world." Let it be so! Let customs change! I alone will
follow the "way" of benevolence and righteousness nor lose the pattern I
have learned! This is the sign of the scholar who honours the "Way." In
the New Year when men bless themselves with good wishes for a thousand
worlds, I will set my heart on the "Way" of the five virtues only and
will change not. This I think the rightful cause for congratulations. So
I write,—

   This spring too I go unchanged  
   Five times more than seventy seeking the "Way."

   This year I have been busy, from Spring to autumn, collecting and
writing my various talks with my disciples. I finished it in the autumn,
and though it is as worthless as the refuse gathered by fishermen, yet
if transmitted <span id="page_133">p. 133</span> to our company it may
be one-ten-thousandth help to those who study themselves. So at the end
I wrote my New Year's verse, ending yet beginning, and thus reveal an
endless heart.

   Kyō-hō Jin-shi no Toshi, Fuyu Jūgatsu (Winter, Decmber 1729).
(signed) Kyusō.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Confucianism](../index) [Shinto](../../shi/index) [Index](index.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_125">p. 125</span>

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1.md) Rihaku, a famous poet of the Tō
dynasty in China.

<span id="footnotes_page_126">p. 126</span>

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2.md) Kushi, the author of the couplet,
(Ku Yuan) was a minister who committed suicide, about B.C. 314. Mayers,
p. 107.

<span id="footnotes_page_131">p. 131</span>

<span id="note_3"></span>[3](#fr_3.md) "The Chrysanthemum," Vol. II., No.
5, pp. 198-200.

<span id="note_4"></span>[4](#fr_4.md) Ōyōshu; Ou-Yang Siu, celebrated
among the formost scholars and statesmen of the Sung dynasty. d. 1017
A.D. Mayers. p. 165.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
