[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Confucianism](../index) [Shinto](../../shi/index) [Index](index) [Next](tasj2002.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# A JAPANESE PHILOSOPHER.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

B<span class="small">Y</span> G<span class="small">EORGE</span> W<span
class="small">M.</span> K<span class="small">NOX</span>, D.D.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\[*Read January 20, 1892.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## INTRODUCTION.

   Previous to the recent introduction of western literature and
science, the intellectual development of the Japanese may be studied in
three periods, each characterized by a distinctive system of religion
and ethics.

   The first period came to an end in the eighth century of our era. It
was the period of Shintō and of pure native thought. It has been fully
treated in the Transactions of this society.<span
id="fr_1"></span>[<sup><span class="small">1</span></sup>](#note_1.md)

   The second period began with the introduction of Buddhism and, with
it, of the Chinese civilization in the sixth and seventh centuries A.D.
Thenceforth for a thousand years the new religion was supreme. "All
education was for centuries in Buddhist hands, Buddhism introduced art,
introduced medicine, moulded the folk-lore of the country, created its
dramatic poetry, deeply influenced its politics and every sphere of
social and intellectual activity."<span id="fr_2"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">2</span></sup>](#note_2.md) Religiously its highest
distinctively Japanese development was in the <span id="page_2">p.
2</span> thirteenth century, when the Nichiren and Shin sects were
founded. Its impress is deep upon the literary masterpieces of the
eleventh and twelfth centuries.<span id="fr_3"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">3</span></sup>](#note_3.md)

   The third period began with the establishment of peace under Tokugawa
Ieyasu and continued until the period of Meiji in which we live. It is
the period of the Chinese philosophy as interpreted by the great
scholars of the Sō (Sung) dynasty in China.

   These periods intermingle and overlap. Repeated instances of Chinese
influence are detected even in the earliest remains of pure Japanese
literature; in the second period the influence of the earlier remained
and the force of the Confucian teaching was strongly felt. And in the
third period not only did the influences of the three intermingle, but
they came to philosophical and religious self-consciousness and
conflict.

   The Confucian ethics came to Japan early in the Christian era, just
how early is uncertain. The wide influence of Chinese thought and
civilization date from the introduction of Buddhism; but the distinctive
triumph of the Chinese philosophy was in the seventeenth century of our
era. In Japan as in China the prevalent philosophy must be distinguished
from the traditional and dogmatic ethics.

 

<span class="small">PHILOSOPHY AND ETHICS.</span>

   This distinction often has been overlooked and the philosophy has
been identified with the teachings of the Sages. Then, as a second step,
these teachings are described as "an attempt to isolate the purely human
side of morals,"<span id="fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#note_4.md) finding its sole origin "in the
conviction that human moral life has its hasis and its safeguards in
human nature."<span id="fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#note_4.md) The words of Confucius and
Mencius appear to be "a set of moral truths—some would <span
id="page_3">p. 3</span> say truisms—of a very narrow scope and of dry
ceremonial observances, political rather than personal."<span
id="fr_5"></span>[<sup><span class="small">5</span></sup>](#note_5.md)
However true this characterization of the early Chinese teachings may
be, one dissents when it is set forth, finally, as "the creed of
educated Chinamen";<span id="fr_4"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">4</span></sup>](#note_4.md) nor, so far as my limited study
goes, can I find that it has satisfied "the Far-Easterns of China, Korea
and Japan."

   It is not necessary to linger over the efforts to prove the original
monotheism of the Chinese nor to recount the religious elements in the
teaching of Confucius.<span id="fr_6"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">6</span></sup>](#note_6.md) After his death there was a rapid
"degeneracy," for his "set of moral rules" left an open door for other
doctrine. In the time of Mencius scholars openly ridiculed the "Master,"
and in spite of Mencius's opposition Taoism gained in strength. Later on
for centuries Taoism had "the field pretty much to itself;"<span
id="fr_7"></span>[<sup><span class="small">7</span></sup>](#note_7.md)
until at a subsequent date this mystical system received "Buddhism with
open arms."<span id="fr_8"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">8</span></sup>](#note_8.md)

   As early as 65 A.D. the Imperial sanction was given to the Indian
religion, and thenceforth for centuries men were zealous for both
Confucius and Buddha.<span id="fr_9"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">9</span></sup>](#note_9.md) So in the time of the Eastern
Tsin "Buddhism was the chief religion, . . . and the doctrines of
Confucius were much esteemed;"<span id="fr_10"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">10</span></sup>](#note_10.md) and <span id="page_4">p.
4</span> again we read of the emperor Wuti of the Liang in the sixth
century: "Wuti did much to restore literature and the study of
Confucius; . . . In his latter days he was so great a devotee of
Buddhism that he retired to a monastery like Charles V."<span
id="fr_11"></span>[<sup><span class="small">11</span></sup>](#note_11.md)
This harmony continued with little to disturb it until the time of the
Sō (Sung).

   It was during this period of Buddhist supremacy that the Chinese
literature was brought to Japan, and here too it was honoured but made
no effort to disentangle itself from its ally; the Buddhist religion,
and not the Confucian ethics, bring characteristic of the period.

   When, however, under Tokugawa rule, Chinese thought a second time
made conquest of Japan, it was no longer friendly to Buddhism. While
Japan had slept its long sleep of centuries (from the twelfth to the
seventeenth) China had been awake. At last Confucianism had taken on the
form of a developed philosophy and with its new self-consciousness had
attacked and routed its quondam friend. This new philosophy has
satisfied the intellect of China and introduced into Japan won its way
here also at once. The ages of Buddhistic faith came to a close and the
intellect of Japan accepted in the place of the Indian religion the
pantheistic philosophy of Shushi (Chu Hi).<span
id="fr_12"></span>[<sup><span class="small">12</span></sup>](#note_12.md)

   The luxury and poetry of the Tō (Tang) were followed by the struggles
of the Sō (Sung, A.D. 970-1127, or including the "Southern Sung" until
1277). During the reigns of Chin-tsung and of his son Tin-tsung "a
violent controversy arose among the literati and officials as to the
best mode of conducting the government. Some of them, as Sz'ma Kwang the
historian, contended for the maintenance of the old principles of the
sages. Others, of whom Wang Ngan-shi was the distinguished leader,
advocated reform <span id="page_5">p. 5</span> and change to the entire
overthrow of existing institutions. For the first time in the history of
China two political parties peacefully struggled for supremacy, each
content to depend on argument and truth for victory. The contest soon
grew too bitter, however, and the accession of a new monarch,
Shin-tsung, enabled Wang to dispossess his opponents and to manage state
affairs as he pleased. After a trial of eight or ten years the voice of
the nation restored the conservatives to power, and the radicals were
banished beyond the frontier. A discussion like this, involving all the
cherished ideas of the Chinese, brought out deep and acute inquiry into
the nature and uses of things generally, and the writers of this
dynasty, at the head of whom was Chu Hi, made a lasting impression on
the national mind."<span id="fr_13"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">13</span></sup>](#note_13.md)

 

<span class="small">THE PHILOSOPHERS OF THE SŌ.</span>

   The best known of the "orthodox" philosophers of the Sō are Chow
Tun-i, (A.D. 1017-1073), the brothers Ch'eng (A.D. 1032-1085, and
1033-1107), and above all Chu Hi. Of the younger Ch'eng it is said,—"His
criticisms on the classics opened a new era in Chinese philosophy and
were reverently adopted by his great successor Chu Hi."<span
id="fr_14"></span>[<sup><span class="small">14</span></sup>](#note_14.md)
The names of Ch'eng and Chu are associated together, and the dominant
philosophy is called the system of Tei-Shu (Japanese pronunciation).

   These philosophers may be compared to the schoolmen of Europe. They
were no longer satisfied with the earlier unsystematic exposition of the
Confucian ethics, but called metaphysics to their aid and transformed
the groups of aphorisms and precepts into an ontological philosophy. As
the schoolmen mingled with the teachings of the prophets and apostles
elements drawn from Grecian and Eastern philosophy, so did these Chinese
schoolmen mingle elements drawn from Buddhism and Taoism in their system
based ostensibly on the classics. Their indebtedness to these two <span
id="page_6">p. 6</span> religions was none the less real because of
their vehement rejection of both as heretical. And as the teachings of
the schoolmen ruled European thought for centuries and were the medium
through which the words of Christ were studied, so were the teachings of
the Tei-Shu school supreme in the East and the medium through which
China and Japan studied and accepted the words of the Sages. To
disregard their philosophy and suppose that the earlier and simpler
teaching has remained supreme, is as if we should disregard the whole
historical development of theology and state that the synoptic gospels
have contented Europe for eighteen hundred years.

   Shushi was born in the year 1130 and died in the year 1200. He was
historian and statesman as well as commentator and philosopher. Educated
in Buddhism and Taoism, he rejected both and completed the system of
Ch'eng. He was repeatedly employed by the emperor in posts of high
importance, but finally died in retirement. His system has remained the
standard in China and no deviation from his teaching has been permitted
in the examinations. His commentary is the orthodox exposition and his
philosophy the accepted metaphysic.<span id="fr_15"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">15</span></sup>](#note_15.md) "The Sect of the Learned"
designates his followers.

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

 

<span class="small">SHUSHI'S SYSTEM.</span>

   The philosophy of Shushi (Chu Hi) is thus described by Eitel:—"Though
modern Confucianism has long discarded the belief in the one supreme
God, of which their classical writings still preserve a dead record, and
though they substituted for the personal God whom their forefathcrs
worshipped, an abstract entity, devoid of personality, devoid of all
attributes whatsoever, yet they look upon nature not as a dead inanimate
fabric, but as a living, breathing organism. They see a golden chain of
spiritual life running through every form of existence and binding
together, as in one living body, everything that subsists in heaven
above or on earth beneath. What has so often been admired in the natural
philosophy of the Greeks,—that they made nature live; that they saw in
every stone, in every tree, a living spirit; . . .—this poetical,
emotional and reverential way of looking at natural objects, is equally
a characteristic of natural science in China."

   There is a "child-like reverence for the living powers of nature," a
"sacred awe and trembling fear of the unseen," a "firm belief in the
reality of the invisible world and its constant intercommunication with
the seen and temporal."

   "Choo-He's mode of thinking has in fact been adopted by modern
Confucianism." According to him "there was in the beginning one abstract
principle or monad, called the 'absolute nothing,' which evolved out of
itself the 'great absolute.' This abstract principle or monad, the great
absolute, is the primordial cause of all existence. When it first moved,
its breath<span id="fr_16"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">16</span></sup>](#note_16.md) or vital energy congealing,
produced the great male principle. When it had moved to the uttermost
<span id="page_8">p. 8</span> it rested, and in resting produced the
female principle. After it had rested to the utmost extent, it again
moved, and thus went on in alternate motion and rest without cessation.
When this supreme cause divided itself into male and female that which
was above constituted heaven, and that which was beneath formed the
earth. Thus it was that heaven and earth were made. But the supreme
cause having produced by evolution the male and female principles, and
through them heaven and earth, ceased not its constant permutations, in
the course of which men and animals, vegetables and minerals, rose into
being. The same vital energy, moreover, continued to act ever since, and
continued to act through those two originating causes, the male and
female powers of nature, which ever since mutually and alternately push
and agitate one another, without a moment's intermission.

   Now, the energy animating the two principles is called in Chinese K'e
(Japanese Ki), or the breath of nature. When this breath first went
forth and produced the male and female principles and finally the whole
universe, it did not do so arbitrarily or at random, but followed fixed,
inscrutable, and immutable laws. These laws or order of nature, called
Li, were therefore abstractly considered prior to the issuing of the
vital breath, and must therefore be considered separately. Again,
considering this Li (Japanese Ri), or the general order of the universe,
the ancient sages observed that all the laws of nature and all the
workings of its vital breath are in strict accordance with certain
mathematical principles, which may be traced or illustrated by diagrams,
exhibiting, the numerical proportion of the universe called Su, or
numbers. But, . . these three principles are not directly cognizable to
the senses: they are hidden from view and only become manifest through
forms and outlines of physical nature."<span
id="fr_17"></span>[<sup><span class="small">17</span></sup>](#note_17.md)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

 

<span class="small">ITS JAPANESE OPPONENTS</span>

   This is the system which came to Japan in the 17th century and won
the adherence of all educated men. It displaced Buddhism at once and
finally in the regard of the higher classes. Buddhism indeed made no
defence but accepted its fate. Later on however the orthodox Chinese
philosophy encountered other enemies. The revival of an interest in
history, fostered by the Tokugawa, was followed by a revived interest in
Pure Shintō, a Shintō disentangled from its Buddhistic ally and restored
to its supposed early form. This religion was intensely national and
intensely anti-Chinese in spirit.<span id="fr_18"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">18</span></sup>](#note_18.md) It waged its war, not wholly
without effect, in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. It affected
somewhat the later writers of the Chinese school. But the followers of
Confucius, or better of Shushi, to the end commanded the assent of the
great majority of educated men. And this, too, in spite of still another
attack. This was made by the school of Ōyōmei \#\#\#. In opposition to
the "scientific philosophy" of Shu-shi it sought to substitute an
idealistic intuitionalism.

   Shushi attempted to agree with the differing schools of Chinese
thought, bringing them together in spite of their inherent differences.
He was to this extent an eclectic. He was strongly conservative and held
fast to the past, it being understood of course that his own
interpretation was to be accepted as the teaching of the past. He was
historian and commentator as well as philosopher. Already in his own
time his views met opposition in favour of a free development of
thought. And among the men of his time Rikusōsan<span
id="fr_19"></span>[<sup><span class="small">19</span></sup>](#note_19.md)
<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> insisted that his own heart, and not the
past should be the chief object of study. He however wrote little and
his first great follower was Ōyōmei.

 

<span class="small">ŌYŌMEI.</span>

   Ōyōmei was born in the year 1472 A.D. and died in the year 1528. He
was a provincial governor "and in this capacity gained high renown
through his conduct of military affairs. In 1518 he subdued an
insurrection in Kiang-si and in 1527, conducted a campaign against the
wild tribes in northern Kwang-si."<span id="fr_20"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">20</span></sup>](#note_20.md) He is famous for his humour and
for his fine literary style. His style is clear and intellectual, and no
one has since equalled it in China or Japan. He was peculiarly fond of
studies pertaining to war. He was also a poet of originality and power.
In China many scholars accepted his doctrine at once, but in Japan his
following has been small, for the Tokugawa government gave its patronage
wholly to the school of Shushi and forbade the public teaching of the
doctrines of Ōyōmei.

   Ōyōmei was not a repeater of past wisdom, nor a commentator: he
sought to find all truth within his own heart. He cared nothing for the
scientific investigation of the outer world, nor for the study of
history. He even thought that all reading might be dispensed with and
refused to commiserate a scholar who was lamenting the loss of his
sight, Ōyōmei assuring him that he should be content, since he bore all
truth within his own heart and needed not eyes to aid in studying that.

 

<span class="small">SPIRIT AND LAW.</span>

   Differing thus in method he also denied the fundamental positions of
the philosophy of Shushi. The latter, as we have <span id="page_11">p.
11</span> seen, taught the existence of both "ki" and "ri," spirit and
law. His conception of "ki" corresponded to the Stoic doctrine of
"pneuma."<span id="fr_21"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">21</span></sup>](#note_21.md) Ki by no means necessarily
implies personality. Sometimes it is described as if it were the
essence, the inner power, of all things. It is not "spiritual" in our
modern and defined use of the word. It is identified with the air. It
exists in all things. All things may be called "ki," the grass, the
trees, the human body. But man's heart is also "ki" and shows its nature
when the passions are aroused. From this point of view we might think
Shushi as strict a materialist as the Stoics, but then too we should
interpret matter in the Stoic and not in the modern sense. There are
formless ki and ki impalpable and invisible. Over against the ki is
placed the "ri," the law, the principle of nature. Ri is invisible and
is the same as the "Way," as reason. It is not however merely abstract,
for then would it be the same as the Buddhist "nature." Ri is an entity
as real as ki, indeed even more truly an entity for it (theoretically)
preceded ki and ki depends on it.<span id="fr_22"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">22</span></sup>](#note_22.md) Still in the actual world there
is no ki without ri and no ri without ki. Man's heart, his ki, is
polished and refined by the ri, so the ri must be studied and thus the
fundamental process is "the distinction of things."<span
id="fr_23"></span>[<sup><span class="small">23</span></sup>](#note_23.md)
If we do not thus "know," even the best action will not avail.<span
id="fr_24"></span>[<sup><span class="small">24</span></sup>](#note_24.md)

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

 

<span class="small">ŌYŌMEI'S IDEALISM.</span>

   Now Ōyōmei was an idealist and would have none of this distinction
into ki and ri. Outside of the heart itself there is no ri, no law, no
principle. The heart and the ri are identical. All the ri is contained
within the heart and there is no place for "the distinction of things."
The heart is the same as the "Way" and the "Way" is the same as
"Heaven." If a man knows his heart he knows the "Way" and if he knows
the "Way" he knows Heaven. All depends on purifying the heart. Good and
evil are all of it, and there is neither good nor evil apart from it.
Men are all good as Shushi, after Mencius, taught, and can all purify
their hearts if they will, though in this too there are natural
differences. All men are divided into three classes, and the highest
have an intuitive knowledge that is their own innate standard. This
innate knowledge is however in all men; make it clear and all is clear.
And it is purified by obedience to the five relations and the five
virtues. We gain nothing from without; all is already within and needs
only to be thus studied by obedience. To act is to know. If we say we
know, we already act or we do not truly know. Knowledge is the beginning
of action and action is the completion of knowledge.

   Thus ethical science is the only science and nothing else is worthy
of our attention or thought.<span id="fr_25"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">25</span></sup>](#note_25.md)

   Ōyōmei fully accepted idealism. He asserted that apart from our
hearts there is nothing. The flower comes into existence when it becomes
known and ceases to be when it passes out of our knowledge. But he also
teaches a cosmological idealism, as he asserts that there is this all
important innate knowledge, the best endowment of man, in everything, in
grasses, stones, trees, in Heaven and in Earth. <span id="page_13">p.
13</span> By virtue of it each thing is itself and all partake of the
same ethical law.

   Ōyōmei was in his early years a believer in Buddhism and his writings
show strong marks of its influence, but he rejected it as a system. He
taught that his purpose differed from the Buddhist. The end of his
doctrine was not self-absorption in mystic contemplation, but the
attainment of virtue, the attainment of the practical virtue needed by
men alive and of the world.

 

<span class="small">JAPANESE FOLLOWERS OF ŌYŌMEI.</span>

   The profound repugnance this system excited among the followers of
Shushi is well represented in the Shunda-Zatsuwa.<span
id="fr_26"></span>[<sup><span class="small">26</span></sup>](#note_26.md)
The government of the Shōgun forbade its propagation and permitted only
the orthodox teaching in its schools. Several well known scholars are
reputed followers of Ōyōmei, although their published writings do not
expreesly indicate the fact. Among others is Nakai Tōju (Ōmi Seijin). He
lived in the first half of the seventeenth century and was a voluminous
writer. In his writings on ethics he does not profess his dependence on
Ōyōmei, yet agrees with him in all the essentials of his system.

 

<span class="small">THE OKINA MONDŌ.</span>

   "How can we be sure then of the proper course of conduct? Hold fast
in our hearts the great principles of unselfishness and humility, cast
evil out of our hearts and follow truth."<span
id="fr_27"></span>[<sup><span class="small">27</span></sup>](#note_27.md)
His teaching aoes not expressly differ from the "orthodox" school, yet
his emphasis is different. He exalts "heart learning," insists upon the
supreme duty of "polishing the illustrious virtue" of our hearts and
proclaims the Confucian laws to be the "manifestation of the virtues of
the heart." To him the heart learning is in all, but the sage
intuitively beholds it <span id="page_14">p. 14</span> while others are
indebted to his teaching. Still may all, even the ignorant, attain the
blessedness of virtue, as the heart learning extends from lowest to
highest, and all go therein, yet with distinction of powers and place.
"The great highway is for all, but the travellers are not of equal
strength. There are men and women, old and young, weak and strong; for
every one there is a duty suited to his powers, and doing that he
fulfils the law of filial piety."<span id="fr_28"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">28</span></sup>](#note_28.md) "But," objects the questioner,
"this virtue is so broad that I cannot attain it." And the answer
is,—"That is the suggestion of a bad heart. You can attain it just
because it is so broad. The light of sun and moon goes everywhere, and
each one according to the strength of his eyes can use it; so every one,
man and woman, learned and unlearned alike, can obey this virtue
according to each one's ability. In Heaven it is called Heaven's 'Way'
and on earth, earth's 'Way.' Originally it had no name, but for the sake
of teaching the ignorant the Sages called it 'filial obedience'"<span
id="fr_29"></span>[<sup><span class="small">29</span></sup>](#note_29.md)
"It dwells in the universe as the spirit dwells in man. It has no
beginning nor end. Without it is neither time nor being. In all the
universe there is nothing without it. As man is the head of the
universe, its image in miniature, filial obedience is in both body and
spirit and is the pivot of his existence." "As a looking-glass reflects
many shapes and colours but is itself unchanged, so does filial
obedience reflect all the virtues, itself unchangeable. All the virtues,
all duties may be resolved into it, end it is called filial obedience,
because obedience to parents is the beginning of the 'Way.' Its essence
is to perceive that as our bodies are derived from our parents and are
yet one with them, so are their bodies derived from the spirit of heaven
and earth, and the spirit of heaven and earth is the offspring of the
spirit of the universe; thus my body is one with the universe and the
gods. Clearly perceiving this <span id="page_15">p. 15</span> truth and
acting in accordance with it is obedience to the 'Way.' This 'obedience
is like the great sea, and the various relationships are like vessels
with which we dip out the water; as the vessel is big or small, round or
square, so the water appears, but it is all alike the water of the great
sea."<span id="fr_28a"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">28a</span></sup>](#note_28a.md)

   It is this implicit dependence upon the intuitions of the heart that
gives the system of Ōyōmei its attractiveness to many Japanese. "His
followers were few, but were all strong men,"<span
id="fr_29a"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">29a</span></sup>](#note_29a.md) we are told. And on the other
hand,—"Shushi's teaching is admirable but it weakened and enervated the
spirit of the Japanese."<span id="fr_30"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">30</span></sup>](#note_30.md)

 

<span class="small">DIFFERENCES AND AGREEMENTS.</span>

   The two systems differ, but their points of agreement are more than
their divergencies. They are mere varieties of the Jukyō, "The Sect of
the Learned." Both rest upon the same fundamental ethical propositions,
however distinct, their more metaphysical principles. They are alike in
the belief that righteousness is life. The shortest time is sufficient,
is the "true long life," if spent in conformity to the 'Way.' A clear
perception of the 'Way' includes all the rest; this is the true long
life and wealth and peace, for if the heart be at rest outward
circumstances matter not. And an evil heart includes all the curses;
sights and sounds are painful; even without outward sorrow there is no
rest."<span id="fr_31"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">31</span></sup>](#note_31.md) Both rest their authority
ultimately upon the classics, though the Ōyōmei school put less stress
upon mere learning. "If one sentence of the Book of Changes be mastered
it will teach all that is in the classics. But the Book of Changes is
difficult <span id="page_16">p. 16</span> of comprehension, so Confucius
wrote the Classic of Filial Piety. This will suffice; but after it is
mastered, according to time and strength we are to go on to others."
This doubtless is a point of great practical difference, the orthodox
school recommending a study of the books that shall occupy the entire
life. Yet both agree in reprobating a scholarship that is apart from
morals, that is not expressed in action, that does not govern the life.
"True learning is disregard of self, obedience to the Way, and the
observance of the five relations. Its eye-ball is humility. Wide
learning applies all this to the heart. False learning desires the
honour of wide learning, envies those who excel, wishes only for fame
and makes pride its eye-ball. It has nothing to do with obedience and
the more one has the worse he is. Let us beware lest we tread the evil
way leading down to the brutes and the dominion of the devils. False
learning fosters this pride and never thinks of casting it away."<span
id="fr_32"></span>[<sup><span class="small">32</span></sup>](#note_32.md)
"Humble folk who obey but cannot read are taught by others; not reading
it is as if they read. That is heart-reading, for it conforms to the
heart of the Sages. Mere reading with the eye while the heart is far
away is not true reading; it is to read as if reading not. In the age of
the gods, imitation of the conduct of the Sages was true learning. Now
there are no Sages, and true learning consists in understanding the
classics and regulating conduct thereby. Thus may we polish the
illustrious jewel of our hearts. To cast away the classics and trust our
dark misled hearts, is to cast away the candle and seek in the dark for
that which is lost."<span id="fr_33"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">33</span></sup>](#note_33.md)

 

<span class="small">ATTACK ON BUDDHISM.</span>

   Both systems strongly express their hatred of Buddhism and ignore
their indebtedness to its teaching. "In India Shaka (Buddha) himself
never got beyond the outside <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> of things.
His purpose was indeed good but he was ignorant of the essential
principles. After his death even the semblance of truth disappeared, and
his system dissuaded from virtue and excited to evil. It is to be
classed with Taoism, and is a thorn in the 'Way,' an obstruction to the
gate of truth; it is to be avoided as one would flee an evil voice and
the temptations of lust."<span id="fr_34"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">34</span></sup>](#note_34.md)

   Ōmi Seijin was the first great writer on the Chinese philosophy in
Japan and his memory is still cherished as a man pure in life, strong in
influence and great in letters. He established a school and had many
followers, of whom Kumazawa Ryōkai is the best known. Later Ōshio
Heihachirō is the chief representative of the Ōyōmei school. He left
little in writing, but is everywhere known for fierce opposition to
Tokugawa and his connection with the Ōsaka insurrection of 1839.<span
id="fr_35"></span>[<sup><span class="small">35</span></sup>](#note_35.md)

 

<span class="small">THE ORTHODOX SCHOOL.</span>

   The scholar who is usually said to have been the first exponent of
the Chinese philosophy is Seiga. He wrote no books. The great scholars
of the orthodox school formed a group at the end of the seventeenth
century. Of these men the best known is Arai Hakuseki. With his name are
associated the names Ito Jinsai, Ogyu Sōrai<span
id="fr_36"></span>[<sup><span class="small">36</span></sup>](#note_36.md)
and Yamazaki Ansai.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

   These writers were transmitters of the wisdom of the Chinese and
worshipped at the shrine of Tei-Shu. No Western ever held more closely
to the plenary inspiration of the Bible as expounded by his favourite
commentator than these men to the Chinese Classics. They contain the
absolute, eternal truth of Heaven and Earth. By it the universe with all
its hosts were formed. This "Way" is the unchanging wisdom, the
everlasting reason, the Divine archetype. No deviation from it can go
unpunished and no variation in its exposition can be endured. It is not
more remarkable that the Japanese orthodoxy attempted no improvement, no
amendment in the Classics, than that our orthodox writers attempted no
improvement or change in our sacred text. As western writers on theology
fill their pages with Biblical references, these writers on the Chinese
philosophy fill their pages with allusions to the classics. Direct
quotations abound, and referencee and phrases, so that every sentence
has its classical colour.

   It is surprising that the Japanese scholars have attempted no
systematic exposition of either the orthodox or the heterodox
philosophy. They have been content to go to the writings of Shushi and
of his Chinese expositors. So too have his commentaries satisfied them.
There is not an original and valuable commentary by a Japanese writer.
They have been content to brood over the imported works and to accept
unquestioningly polities, ethics and metaphysics.<span
id="fr_37"></span>[<sup><span class="small">37</span></sup>](#note_37.md)

 

<span class="small">WANT OF ORIGINALITY.</span>

   This foreign system moulded the intellectual life of the nation.
Within its boundaries thought moved and was confined. As the new was
forbidden so was the old cast off. Buddhism and Shintō were as heretical
as the teaching <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> of Ōyōmei. Society,
government, education, literature, religion and ethics, all were
supplied from this one source. Buddhism, as we have seen, influenced the
thought of the Chinese philosophers, but it was permitted no new
influence, it was permitted to add no new ideas here in Japan where it
had been supreme for a thousand years. Shintō effected no modification.
And the Japanese produced no scholar who could do more than repeat what
he had been taught. Yet this philosophy in thus permeating the nation's
life could not fail to be modified. It felt the influence of the
national ideals. It varied from its original standard, yet not as
modified in statement or in system but as insensibly taking on a new
colour and feeling a new spirit.

   It follows that one cannot readily point out the distinguishing
characteristics of the Chinese philosophy in Japan. There is certainly a
difference. Here the samurai takes to himself the title reserved in
China for the literati and adds arms to letters. The vocation of arms
occupies thus the highest place of honour. So too does loyalty take
precedence of filial obedience and the ethical philosopher can praise
without qualification men who desert parents, wife and children for the
feudal lord.<span id="fr_38"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">38</span></sup>](#note_38.md) And with this loyalty is an
undue exaltation of a disregard of life, an exaltation that comes near
to canonizing those who kill themselves no matter how causelessly, no
matter though crime be the reason for an enforced suicide.<span
id="fr_39"></span>[<sup><span class="small">39</span></sup>](#note_39.md)
The impetuous, uncompromising, warlike, partisan character of the people
is reflected in their morals.

 

<span class="small">CONFUCIANISM AND THE PEOPLE.</span>

   The Confucian literature in Japan so far instructed the mass of the
people as to provide summaries of moral rules for them. But these moral
rules could exist in harmony <span id="page_20">p. 20</span> with a
prevailing Buddhism. And as in China for centuries and in Japan for a
thousand years the Chinese ethics knew no quarrel with the religion of
the Buddha, so even after the educated men in Japan had given up
Buddhism it still retained its full power over the lower classes and
could incorporate the Confucian ethics with itself.

   One effort, long continued, was made to win the people not merely to
the Confucian ethics but to the foreign philosophy. Toward the close of
the eighteenth century a school of popular preachers expounded the
rudiments of the Chinese system to the people. They made such
concessions to Buddhism as they thought the case demanded, but sought to
substitute their system for the people's faith. They continued in a
succession until the middle of the nineteenth century but their failure
was complete. They made no lasting impression upon the nation's mind.
The Chinese philosophy remained the exclusive possession of the higher
classes.<span id="fr_40"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">40</span></sup>](#note_40.md)

 

<span class="small">THE REJECTION OF BUDDHISM</span>

   The choice of the Chinese philosophy and the rejection of Buddhism
was not because of any inherent quality in the Japanese mind. It was not
the rejection of supernaturalism or of the miraculous. The Chinese
philosophy is as supernaturalistic as some forms of Buddhism. The
distinction is not between the natural and the supernatural in either
system but between the seen and the unseen. The Chinese philosophy does
not reject the extraordinary; it has a belief in an all-pervading
natural "law", but the wonderful and the prodigious are contained
therein. It too has its Theophanies <span id="page_21">p. 21</span> and
its faith-compelling signs. It was not the rejection of a religion for a
philosophy, for Buddhism can be as philosophical as Shushi or Ōyōmei, in
fact these drew much of their doctrine from its stores. And the Chinese
philosophy is as religious as the original teaching of Gautama. Neither
Shushi nor Gautama believed in a Creator, but both believed in gods and
demons. By the twelfth century A.D. the earlier belief in monotheism,
granting that once there was such belief in China, had disappeared. In a
single passage the Shundai Zatsuwa seems to indicate belief in one
personal God, but the expressions fade away, and there remains only a
belief in the Divinity of the immanent forces of the universe.<span
id="fr_41"></span>[<sup><span class="small">41</span></sup>](#note_41.md)
It holds to "a power not ourselves that makes for righteousness" and to
our constant dependence upon the Unseen. It has little place for prayer,
but has a vivid sense of the Infinite and the Unseen and fervently
believes that right conduct is in accord with the "eternal verities."
Its morality "is touched with emotion."

 

<span class="small">THE ETERNAL VERITIES.</span>

   In neither Shushi nor Ōyōmei is there firm grasp of the idea of
personality. As there is no personal Creator, man is the highest
expression of the forces of the universe. Even gods and devils fear his
"determined mind." But as in the makrokosm so in the mikrokosm: the
ultimate realities are force and law. Man has no immortal soul. He is
highest in the scale of existence, yet is he only one in the endless
series. The station is greater than the individual and it determines
him. His whole duty is to live as befits his station. The Buddhist
doctrine that a man may leave his station and become a priest is to be
abhorred. It comes from the false doctrine of "three worlds." Shaka
forsook his kingdom and became a hermit. He did not know fully the
truth. To the Confucianist such asceticism is the act of <span
id="page_22">p. 22</span> a madman. Every man is to follow the "Way"
with unshaken heart in the station in which he was born. To think
certain acts virtuous is the error of the ignorant and the
heretical."<span id="fr_42"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">42</span></sup>](#note_42.md)

 

<span class="small">THE ORIGIN OF EVIL.</span>

   For all evil is disarrangement. Confusion is the essence of evil.
Strictly speaking there is no other evil. "Nothing is bad by nature but
everything is good, yet with a distinction of rank." When this
distinction of rank is preserved all are good. But this ideal goodness
is rarely realized. "The gods are the activity of Heaven and Earth, the
excellent power of the In and Yō, and of the true 'law.' . . . . . But
as the gods come to the world there is both good and evil. For though
the working throughout the four seasons of the five elements is of . . .
. . no evil at all, still as that 'spirit' is scattered throughout the
universe and confused there arise unexpected winds, heat, cold and
storms."<span id="fr_43"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">43</span></sup>](#note_43.md) So is it with man and all that
is his. As a part of nature he too is good, originally good, but as his
"nature is individualized both good and evil appear."<span
id="fr_44"></span>[<sup><span class="small">44</span></sup>](#note_44.md)
Let him put himself in harmony with the true nature,—above all let him
obey with unshaken heart, and all will be well.

   So with the state, crime is "confusion." The ancient order has been
lost and therefore evil appears. "In the time of old the Sage was on the
throne; the Superior Man was next in authority and all who ruled were
wise, the stupid occupying their natural position below the rest. So
from highest to lowest wisdom determined the rank and there was none
evil. The only distinction was of superior and inferior."<span
id="fr_45"></span>[<sup><span class="small">45</span></sup>](#note_45.md)
And the Sage ruled by doing "nothing." It was enough that he was
enrobed, enthroned, with folded <span id="page_23">p. 23</span> arms.
Not by vain exertions and strife may the empire or the individual be
ruled. It is by doing nothing, by letting nature have its way that a
Divine excellence is attained.

 

<span class="small">THE DEEPER SELF.</span>

   Man's deepest "self" lies hidden far below his changing "self" of act
and thought and desire and will. In mysterious darkness it is nourished
and by doing naught. Let not man break in on that depth; let him not
direct and will and wish. The springs of his being reach down to the
springs of the universe itself. Without selfishness, without rash
self-determination, let the truer, deeper "self" be nourished and from
that strength the life will come and then in act and word there shall be
no danger of a fall.<span id="fr_46"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">46</span></sup>](#note_46.md) And at death man shall return
to the all pervading spirit, "as a vapour in the sky melts away, as a
drop mingles with the sea, as fire disappears in fire."<span
id="fr_47"></span>[<sup><span class="small">47</span></sup>](#note_47.md)
He can have no immortal soul. For his conscious self there is "nothing
beyond slipping into the grave." His highest hope is that his influence
for good may survive; and his greatest fear is that his memory may be
accursed.<span id="fr_48"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">48</span></sup>](#note_48.md) He worships his ancestors as
commanded by the Sages, but that worship does not necessarily imply the
doctrine of a conscious, personal immortality.<span
id="fr_49"></span>[<sup><span class="small">49</span></sup>](#note_49.md)
"The soul wholly dissolves <span id="page_24">p. 24</span> at death but
my spirit is one with the spirit of my ancestors. So though all other
spirits dissolve yet does the root of this remain and when I worship
their spirits gather again. So it was that the Sages enforced this
worship. And as my spirit is one with the spirit of my ancestors, so is
the spirit of the noble one with the spirit of his dominion, and when he
worships the spirits of the dead respond. When I speak of the universe
there is indeed only one spirit; when I speak of myself, my spirit is
the spirit of my ancestors and so it is that when I 'feel,' they
'respond.'

 

<span class="small">ADOPTED ON FAITH.</span>

   Without critical examination and upon faith Japan accepted the
Chinese philosophy. Once it had accepted the Chinese ethics in alliance
with the Buddhist religion; as trustingly it adopted the philosophy of
Tei-Shu with all its hostility to the Indian faith. Nor did the "eclipse
of faith" cost the scholars of the period of the Tokugawa any heart
burnings. Buddhism went at once at the bidding of this new comer and
left "not a wrack behind." In acceptance and rejection alike no native
originality emerges, nothing beyond a vigorous power of adoption and
assimilation. No improvements in the new philosophy were even attempted.
Wherein it was defective and indistinct, defective and indistinct it
remained. The system was not thought out to its end and independently
adopted. Polemics, ontology, ethics, theology, marvels, heroes, all were
enthusiastically adopted on faith. It is to be added that the new system
was superior to the old, and this much of discrimination was shown.

   It is not my purpose to discuss the Chinese philosophy, not even the
Tei-Shu philosophy as represented in Japan. <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> I desire to represent the spirit and thought of Old Japan, of
the educated men of the Tokugawa period. And a Japanese can best do
this, a Japanese who gives his account with undisturbed faith and who is
a recognized master among his countrymen. In the Shundai Zatsuwa of
Kyusō Murō we have the ruling ideas of the Japan that has forever passed
away.

 

<span class="small">MURŌ NAOKIYO.</span>

   Murō Naokiyo was born in Yanaka, in Musashi, on the 30th March, 1658.
From the home of his ancestors, Egagori in Bichu, he called himself Ega.
From his earliest childhood he was distinguished for his love of books
and unremitting diligence in study. His life was the wholly uneventful
career of a professional scholar. When fifteen years of age he went to
Kaga and was employed by the prince of that province. Here he lived in a
dismantled cottage which he named The Pigeon-nest, and from the cottage
he adopted the same name for himself, Kyu-sō, a name by which he was
thenceforth known, and that is inscribed on his tomb.

   Once when expounding The Great Learning before his prince the latter
was so greatly pleased that he sent Kyusō to Kyōto to continue his
studies in the school of the celebrated Kinoshita Jun-an. Here Kyusō
took first rank and made great progress both in acquirements and in
literary style.

   From the year 1711 until his death he was employed by the Tokugawa
Government and wrote several books at its command. He received the
highest honour the Government could bestow, and rose to great influence
and authority. He was the devoted advocate of the Tokugawa family and of
the orthodox school of Chinese philosophy, and made small attempt to
moderate his expressions when writing of their enemies. It was during
his life that the famous forty-seven ronin performed their exploit, and
Kyusō gave them the name by which they are still remembered, Gi-shi, the
Righteous Samurai.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

   He died on the 9th September, 1784, and was buried at his own request
in Edo, Odzuka, Tsukuba-yama-no-ushiro, his grave marked by a simple
stone engraved, "Kyusō Murō Sensei no Haka," the grave of the scholar
Kyusō Murō.<span id="fr_50"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">50</span></sup>](#note_50.md) Since his death his reputation
has increased, and he has taken a distinguished place among the scholars
of Japan, being especially remembered for his great learning.

 

<span class="small">THE SHUNDAI ZATSUWA.</span>

   The Shundai Zatsuwa, Suruga Dai Miscellany, thus named from Kyusō's
residence on Suruga Dai, is a posthumous work first published by his
grandson in the year 1750. It purports to be a collection of talks with
his friends and pupils. They would linger a while after Kyusō had
completed his exposition of the Chinese books, asking questions and
discussing themes suggested by the lecture. And these conversations
written down were made into this book. It belongs to the class called
"miscellanies," the works which best represent the spirit and the
attainments of the Japanese scholars.<span id="fr_51"></span>[<sup><span
class="small">51</span></sup>](#note_51.md)

   The Shundai Zatsuwa covers a somewhat wide range. It contains polemic
against the enemies of the faith, metaphysics, fundamental ethical
principles, politics, religion, the art of war, and the laws of
literature and poetry.

   It has not been necessary for my purpose to translate all. The
literary criticisms, the discussions of poetry and of military strategy
have been omitted. So too have many of the historical incidents. Where
these incidents illustrate <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> ethical
principles or the ideas of the school they have been retained. But Kyusō
felt moved to rescue the memory of the righteous dead from oblivion, and
relates incidents which add nothing to our understanding of his ethical
and philosophical views. Many Chinese allusions and illustrations have
been omitted. The book is famous for its learning, and abounds in
phrases and incidents that are of significance only to one throughly
versed in Chinese history and literature. Some liberty, therefore, in
the way of condensation has been taken. As the work is not a classic,
and as the purpose is to set forth the ruling ideas and spirit of the
Chinese philosophy in Japan, it has been thought wise to sacrifice
something of technical scholarship to intelligibility. And it may be
added, the retention of the literary and historical allusions in their
fulness would precisely defeat the author's purpose, his ornaments in
Japanese becoming blemishes in English. All that sets forth the
philosophy and religion, the ethics and politics both theoretical and
applied, with copious historical illustrations, have been translated.
Perhaps half of the text is represented here.

   The sacred memories of the past, the treasures of philosophy and
religion, the high aspirations after benevolence and righteousness, the
ideals of the individual and or the state stand in the Shundai Zatsuwa,
upon a literary background flowing, full, poetic. No attempt has been
made to transfer this literary flavour, and at the end of his labours,
comparing the result with the original, the barrenness and baldness of
the one with the richness and smoothness of the other, the translator
can only adopt as his own the author's lament;—"Though his philosophy is
the famous music of the world, yet now is it like Eikaku's Song of
Spring among a people of barbarous speech."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tasj2002.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_1">p. 1</span>

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1.md) "The Kō-ji-ki," translated by B. H.
Chamberlain, Vol. X. Appendix; "The Revival of Pure Shin-tau," by Ernest
Satow, Vol. III. Appendix; "Ancient Japanese Rituals," by the same,
Vols. VII, IX; also "The Classical Poetry of the Japanese" by B. H.
Chamberlain.

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2.md) "Things Japanese," by B. H.
Chamberlain, p. 71, 2nd Ed.

<span id="footnotes_page_2">p. 2</span>

<span id="note_3"></span>[3](#fr_3.md) James Troup's translations of the
Shin teaching, Vols. XIV, XVII of these Transactions.

<span id="note_4"></span>[4](#fr_4.md) "The International Journal of
Ethics," Vol. 1, No. 3, p. 307.

<span id="footnotes_page_3">p. 3</span>

<span id="note_5"></span>[5](#fr_5.md) "Things Japanese," 2nd Edition, p.
92.

<span id="note_6"></span>[6](#fr_6.md) See "The Religions of China,"
Lecture I; and Faber's "A Systematical Digest of the Doctrines of
Confucius," pp. 44-53.

<span id="note_7"></span>[7](#fr_7.md) "The Religions of China," p. 180.

<span id="note_8"></span>[8](#fr_8.md) "The China Review" Vol. VIII, No. 1,
p. 59.

<span id="note_9"></span>[9](#fr_9.md) Dr. Edkins ("The Phœnix" Vol. III,
pp. 47-49) divides the intellectual development of China into five
stages;—1, Struggles for Confucianism against various speculations, with
Taoist doctrine gaining yearly; 2, The "Han", when the tone of
speculation was predominantly Taoist; 3, The six dynasties, when
Buddhism was triumphant; 4, The "Tang," luxurious and poetical; 5, The "
Sung," and on to our day. In none of these periods was "the purely human
side of morals" the creed of educated Chinamen." Some addition was
always needed to satisfy their intellectual and religious natures.

<span id="note_10"></span>[10](#fr_10.md) The Middle Kingdom, Vol. II, p.
165.

<span id="footnotes_page_4">p. 4</span>

<span id="note_11"></span>[11](#fr_11.md) The Middle Kingdom, Vol. II, p.
166.

<span id="note_12"></span>[12](#fr_12.md) The Chinese philosophy is
sometimes called "agnostic," so "a friendly German critic" in "Things
Japanese," p. 94, and that too was once my opinion, "Ōsaka Conference,"
p. 115. It is not agnostic, but pantheistic, as will abundantly appear.

<span id="footnotes_page_5">p. 5</span>

<span id="note_13"></span>[13](#fr_13.md) The Middle Kingdom, Vol. II,
p.174.

<span id="note_14"></span>[14](#fr_14.md) Mayers's "Manual," p. 34.

<span id="footnotes_page_6">p. 6</span>

<span id="note_15"></span>[15](#fr_15.md) Shushi's name is variously
written by writers in China, Chu-hsi, Choo He, Chu He, Chu Hi and Ku
Hsi. Dr. Legge has used much of Shushi's commentary in connection with
his various translations. Accounts of his life are given by Mayer, p.
25; Meadows, The Chinese, Chap. XVIII; in the Chinese Repository, Vol.
XVIII, p. 206 f. A section of his writings has been translated by
Medhurst, Chinese Repository, Vol. XIII, pp. 552, 609 ff. Also by Canon
McClatchie,—"Chinese Cosmogony," being "Section Forty-Nine of the
Complete Works," with criticisms and defence in The China Review, Vol.
III, p. 342 f., Vol. IV, pp. 84, 342 ff. "The Middle Kingdom" has
various references to Shushi (Chu Hi), the most extended being Vol. I,
pp. 682-685. An interesting account of some points in his philosophy is
given by W. A. P. Martin, D.D.,—"The Cartesian Philosophy before
Descartes, (Extract from the Journal of the Peking Oriental Society)."
See also Faber's "Doctrines of Confucius," pp. 32-33. Rev. Griffith
John, Journal of the North China Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society,
Vol. II, No. I, pp. 37-44., "The Ethics of the Chinese."

<span id="footnotes_page_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="note_16"></span>[16](#fr_16.md) "Between heaven and earth there
is nothing so important, so almighty and omnipresent as this breath of
nature. . . Through it heaven and earth and every creature live and move
and have their being. Nature's breath is, in fact, but the spiritual
energy of the male and female principles." "Feng-shui," p. 45.

<span id="footnotes_page_8">p. 8</span>

<span id="note_17"></span>[17](#fr_17.md) "Feng-shui," pp. 5-9., See "Ki,
Ri and Ten" below. Also my "Comment" below for a further exposition,
differing somewhat from Eitel's.

<span id="footnotes_page_9">p. 9</span>

<span id="note_18"></span>[18](#fr_18.md) "The Revival of Pure Shin-tau,"
pp. 13-14, 21-34.

<span id="note_19"></span>[19](#fr_19.md) \#\#\# b. 1140 A.D. "In
opposition to the critical philosophical erudition of Chu-hsi, Lu
desires rectification of heart and life to be the main point, as the
commencement and aim of study. There is no doubt that in this Confucius
stands on his side." Faber's "Doctrines of Confucius," p. 33.

<span id="footnotes_page_10">p. 10</span>

<span id="note_20"></span>[20](#fr_20.md) Mayers's "Manual," p. 246. This
brief paragraph is all I have been able to find in English. A lecture
recently given by Prof. Inoue of the Imperial University is the
authority for my account of Ōyōmei and his philosophy. Printed in the
Rikugo Zasshi—Feb. 1892.

<span id="footnotes_page_11">p. 11</span>

<span id="note_21"></span>[21](#fr_21.md) Pneuma "is the totality of all
existence; out of it the whole, visible universe proceeds, hereafter to
be resolved into it again. . . . Out of it separated first the elemental
fire, and this again condenses into air; a further step in the downward
path derives water and earth from the solidification of air. . . . From
the elements the one substance is transformed into the multitude of
individual things." Enc. Brit., art. Stoics. Compare pp. 46-47 below.

<span id="note_22"></span>[22](#fr_22.md) For an example of the process of
this "reification of the concept" see [p. 47](tasj2002.htm#page_47.md)
below.

<span id="note_23"></span>[23](#fr_23.md) This method professes to rest
upon a phrase of Confucius. "the distinction of things." See [p. 43
note](tasj2002.htm#note_34.md), below.

<span id="note_24"></span>[24](#fr_24) [P. 72](tasj2003.htm#page_72.md)
below.

<span id="footnotes_page_12">p. 12</span>

<span id="note_25"></span>[25](#fr_25.md) Ōyōmei's system may be studied in
the \#\#\#, Den-shu-roku, the Zen-sho and Zen-shu, \#\#\#.

<span id="footnotes_page_13">p. 13</span>

<span id="note_26"></span>[26](#fr_26.md) Pp. 28 f. below.

<span id="note_27"></span>[27](#fr_27.md) Okina mondō. Vol. II p. 3.

<span id="footnotes_page_14">p. 14</span>

<span id="note_28"></span>[28](#fr_28.md) Okina Mondō, Vol. V. p. 35.

<span id="note_29"></span>[29](#fr_29.md) Okina Mondō, Vol. I. p. 3.

<span id="footnotes_page_15">p. 15</span>

<span id="note_28a"></span>[28a](#fr_28a.md) Okina Mondō, Vol. I. pp. 3-7.
The Okina Mondō is a posthumous work of Nakai Tōju printed in 1650 A.D.
I printed an abridged translation in "The Chrysanthemum," Vol. II., Nos
3, 4, 6, 8.

<span id="note_29a"></span>[29a](#fr_29a.md) Prof. T. Inoue.

<span id="note_30"></span>[30](#fr_30.md) The Rev. M. Uemura.

<span id="note_31"></span>[31](#fr_31.md) Okina Mondō, Vol. II., p. 34.

<span id="footnotes_page_16">p. 16</span>

<span id="note_32"></span>[32](#fr_32.md) Okina Mondō, Vol. III., pp.
10-12.

<span id="note_33"></span>[33](#fr_33.md) Okina Mondō, Vol. III., pp.
12-14. Compare [pp. 61](tasj2002.htm#page_61.md) below.

<span id="footnotes_page_17">p. 17</span>

<span id="note_34"></span>[34](#fr_34.md) Okina Mondō, Vol. IV., pp. 1-13.

<span id="note_35"></span>[35](#fr_35.md) During a time of scarcity Ōshio's
wrath was excited by the heartless conduct of an official in Ōsaka who
refused to remit the taxes. So Ōshio, influenced by his philosophical
views to a democratic disregard of official rank and right, led an
assault upon the government warehouses, took out the grain and
distributed it to the people. The rising was quickly put down and Ōshio
suffered death as a criminal. Another account says that en route to
Satsuma he was lost at sea—"Dai Ni Hon Jim-mei Ji-sho." Vol. I: \#\#\#
It is possible that the teachings of the Ōyōmei school were more
dangerous to the existing order than appears to a foreign student, and
that Tokugawa knew its own interests best as it forbade their
propagation.

<span id="note_36"></span>[36](#fr_36.md) Jinsu and Sōrai were not
orthodox. See Mr. Haga's "Note" below.

<span id="footnotes_page_18">p. 18</span>

<span id="note_37"></span>[37](#fr_37.md) The Ancient Learning School
"Kogaku" also rested upon the modern Chinese School.—Faber's Doctrines
of Confucius, p. 34; and Mr. Haga's "Note" below.

<span id="footnotes_page_19">p. 19</span>

<span id="note_38"></span>[38](#fr_38.md) Similar instances are found, of
course, in Chinese history.

<span id="note_39"></span>[39](#fr_39.md) [Pp. 41,
42](tasj2002.htm#page_41.md) below.

<span id="footnotes_page_20">p. 20</span>

<span id="note_40"></span>[40](#fr_40.md) Numerous translations of the
sermons of this school have been printed, among the earliest in A. B.
Mitford's "Tales of Old Japan" pp. 288-326. The sermons called Kyuō Dōwa
and Shingaku Michi no Hanashi are best known. Besides these there are
among others;—Shō-ō Michi no Hanashi, Dōni-ō Dō-wa, Shingaku-kyoyu-roku,
and Zoku-zoku Kyuō Dōwa.

<span id="footnotes_page_21">p. 21</span>

<span id="note_41"></span>[41](#fr_41) [P. 50](tasj2002.htm#page_50.md)
below.

<span id="footnotes_page_22">p. 22</span>

<span id="note_42"></span>[42](#fr_42.md) The Okina Mondō, Vol. V. pp.
17-18.

<span id="note_43"></span>[43](#fr_43) [P. 55](tasj2002.htm#page_55.md)
below.

<span id="note_44"></span>[44](#fr_44) [P. 55](tasj2002.htm#page_55.md)
below.

<span id="note_45"></span>[45](#fr_45.md) The Okina Mondō, Vol. II., p. 31.

<span id="footnotes_page_23">p. 23</span>

<span id="note_46"></span>[46](#fr_46) [P. 60](tasj2002.htm#page_60.md)
below. Compare a certain phase of Christian mysticism:—"Oh to be
nothing, nothing;" "A broken and empty vessel;" "Emptied, that He might
fill me;" "Broken, that so unhindered, His life through me might flow."

<span id="note_47"></span>[47](#fr_47.md) The Okina Mondō, Vol. V p. 26.

<span id="note_48"></span>[48](#fr_48) [P. 40](tasj2002.htm#page_40.md)
below.

<span id="note_49"></span>[49](#fr_49.md) The worship of ancestors remains
an inconsistency difficult of explanation in Shushi's philosophy. He
teaches (in the Gorui \#\#\#) that at death we are like the flame: it
ascends and disappears yet we cannot say that it has ceased to be. It is
the law that man's spirit (ki \#\#\#) dissolves at death, vanishes into
thin air; but there are exceptions. When men naturally, and, so to
speak, willingly die the spirit thus dissolves, but when they die
violently, with strong protest, the spirit remains for a time collected
and may return and show itself <span id="footnotes_page_24">p. 24</span>
and work harm. A man who was killed by his adulterous wife appeared to
her undoing, for his hatred held his spirit together until vengeance was
executed. But such exceptions are only for a time; finally all alike
return to the primeval spirit. Shushi thus saves his philosophy and his
orthodoxy.

<span id="footnotes_page_26">p. 26</span>

<span id="note_50"></span>[50](#fr_50.md) The \#\#\# is the authority for
these statements. His burial place is in the section of the city now
called Koishikawa. He wrote many books; among them the most celebrated
are the following: \#\#\#

<span id="note_51"></span>[51](#fr_51.md) Such collections are among the
most valuable of the writings of the Chinese also, Confucius and Shushi,
among others, using this method.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
