[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends/Sagas](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](lr06)  [Next](lr08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0486288706/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

# CHAPTER III: CLEVES TO THE LÖWENBURG

### Lohengrin

The tale or myth of the Knight of the Swan who came to the succour of
the youthful Duchess of Brabant is based upon motives more or less
common in folklore--the enchantment of human beings into swans, and the
taboo whereby, as in the case of Cupid and Psyche, the husband forbids
the wife to question him as to his identity or to look upon him. The
myth has been treated by both French and German romancers, but the
latter attached it loosely to the Grail legend, thus turning it to
mystical use.

As a purely German story it is found at the conclusion of Wolfram von
Eschenbach's *Parzival*, <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) from which
the following version is drawn. The name of the hero as written by
Wolfram (Loherangrîn) may possibly be traced to Garin le Loherin or
Garin of Lorraine. Wagner's version is taken from the same source, but
the mighty master of melody altered many of the details for dramatic and
other reasons.

The principal French versions of the romance are *Le Chevalier au Cygne*
and *Helyas*, and there are medieval English forms of these. <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md)

### The Knight of the Swan

In a dungeon in the castle of Cleves lay Elsa of Brabant, languishing in
captivity. Her father, the Duke of Brabant, had ere he died appointed
his most powerful

 

<span id="img_09200"></span>

[![THE CASTLE OF CLEVES&lt;br&gt; LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Facing page 92&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/09200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09200.jpg.md)  
THE CASTLE OF CLEVES  
LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.  
*Facing page 92*.  

 

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

vassal, one Frederick of Telramund, to be her guardian; but he, seeking
only the advancement of his own ends, shamefully abused the confidence
of his lord. Using his authority as Elsa's guardian, he sought to compel
her to become his wife, and threw her into prison to await the
wedding-day, knowing well that none would dare to dispute his action.

An appeal was made on Elsa's behalf to the Emperor, Henry I, who decreed
that she should choose a champion, so that the matter might be settled
by combat. But, alas! there was not a knight who would venture to match
his skill against that of Frederick, who was a giant in stature and an
expert in sword-play. In accordance with the Emperor's decree Telramund
sent out a herald at stated times to proclaim his readiness to do battle
with any who would champion the cause of Elsa.

Time passed, yet the challenge was not accepted, and at length the day
was fixed for the bridal. Behind her prison bars the lady wept
ceaselessly, and called upon the Virgin to save her from the threatened
fate. In her despair she beat her breast with her chaplet, whereon was
hung a tiny silver bell. Now this little bell was possessed of magic
properties, for when it was rung the sound, small at first as the
tinkling of a fairy lure, grew in volume the further it travelled till
it resembled the swelling of a mighty chorus. Rarely was its tone heard,
and never save when its owner was in dire straits, as on the present
occasion. When Elsa beat her breast with it, therefore, its magical
qualities responded to her distress, and its faint, sweet tinkle fell on
her ear.

Far away over hill and dale went the sound of the bell, growing ever
richer and louder, till at length it reached the temple where Parsifal
and his knights guarded the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Holy Grail. To
them it seemed that the swelling notes contained an appeal for help
directed to the Holy Vessel over which they kept vigil. While they
debated thereon a loud and mysterious voice was heard bidding Parsifal
send his son Lohengrin to the rescue of Elsa of Brabant, whom he must
take for his wife, yet without revealing to her his identity.

The awed knights recognized the voice as that of the Holy Grail, and
Lohengrin at once set out, bound he knew not whither. When he reached
the shores of the Rhine he found awaiting him a boat drawn by a stately
swan. Taking it as a sign from Heaven, he stepped into the little boat
and was carried up the Rhine, to the sound of the most exquisite music.

It was the day on which Elsa was to be wedded to her tyrant. She had
spent the night in tears and bitter lamentations, and now, weary and
distraught, too hopeless even for tears, she looked out from the bars of
her prison with dull, despairing eyes. Suddenly she heard the melodious
strains and a moment later saw the approach of a swan-drawn boat,
wherein lay a sleeping knight. Hope leapt within her, for she remembered
the prophecy of an old nun, long since dead, that a sleeping knight
would rescue her from grave peril. Directly he stepped ashore the youth
made his way to the place of her confinement and, espying her face at
the heavily barred window, knelt before her and begged that she would
take him for her champion.

At that moment the blast of a trumpet was heard, followed by the voice
of the herald as, for the last time, he challenged any knight to take up
arms on behalf of Elsa of Brabant. Lohengrin boldly accepted the
challenge, and Telramund, when the news reached him of the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

unexpected opposition, on the very day he had appointed for his wedding,
was surprised and enraged beyond measure, yet he dared not refuse to do
battle with the stranger knight, because of the Emperor's decree. So it
was arranged that the combat should take place immediately. News of it
reached the people of Cleves, and a great concourse gathered to witness
the spectacle, all of them secretly in sympathy with the persecuted
maiden, though these feelings were carefully concealed from the ruthless
Telramund.

Fierce indeed was the combat, for Lohengrin, though less powerfully
built than his gigantic opponent, was nevertheless tall and strong, and
well versed in the arts of war. At length he laid his enemy in the dust
with a well-aimed sword-stroke, and the crowd broke into cheers. The
combat was over, and Elsa was free!

Heeding not the acclamations of the people, Lohengrin strode toward Elsa
and again knelt at her feet. The blushing maiden bade him name his
reward, whereupon the knight begged her hand in marriage, confessing,
however, that he might only remain with her so long as she did not
question him with regard to his identity. It seemed a small condition to
Elsa, who willingly promised to restrain any curiosity she might feel
concerning his name and place of abode. The cheers of the populace were
redoubled when they learned that Elsa was to bestow her hand on the Swan
Knight.

In a few weeks the couple were married, and henceforth for a good many
years they lived together very happily. Three sons were born to them,
who grew in time to be handsome and chivalrous lads, of noble bearing
and knightly disposition. Then it was that Elsa, who had hitherto
faithfully kept her promise to her husband, began

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

to fancy that she and her sons had a grievance in that the latter were
not permitted to bear their father's name.

For a time she brooded in silence over her grievance, but at length it
was fanned into open rebellion by a breath of outside suspicion. Some of
the people looked askance at the knight whose name no one knew. So Elsa
openly reproached her husband with his secrecy, and begged that for the
benefit of their sons he would reveal his name and station. Even the
children of humble parents, the children of the peasants, of their own
retainers, had a right to their father's name, and why not her sons
also?

Lohengrin paled at her foolish words, for to him they were the sign that
he must leave his wife and family and betake himself once more to the
temple of the Holy Grail.

"Oh, Elsa," he said sorrowfully, "thou knowest not what thou hast done.
Thy promise is broken, and to-day I must leave thee for ever." And with
that he blew a blast on his silver horn.

Elsa had already repented her rash words, and right earnestly she
besought him to remain by her side. But, alas! her tears and pleadings
were in vain, for, even as her entreaties were uttered, she heard the
exquisite strains of music which had first heralded her lover's
approach, while from the window of the castle she espied the swan-boat
rapidly drawing toward the shore.

With grave tenderness Lohengrin bade farewell to his wife and family,
first, however, revealing to them his identity, and commending them to
the care of some of his trusty followers.

Tradition tells that Elsa did not long survive the loss of her beloved
husband, but her sons became brave knights, well worthy of the proud
name they bore.

 

<span id="img_09600"></span>

[![Lohengrin overcomes Telramund&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Ferd.
Lecke&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/09600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/09600.jpg.md)  
Lohengrin overcomes Telramund  
*Ferd. Lecke*.  

 

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### A Legend of Liége

A legend of Liége! and is not Liége itself now almost legendary? Its
venerable church, its world-famous library replete with the priceless
treasures of the past, "with records stored of deeds long since forgot,"
where are they?--but crumbling clusters of ruins fired by the barbarian
torch whose glow, we were told, was to enlighten an ignorant and
uncultured Europe! But one gem remains: the wonderful Hôtel de Ville,
type of the Renaissance spirit in Flanders. Liége may be laid in ruins,
but the memory of what it was can never die:

Athens in death is nobler far  
Than breathing cities of the West;

and the same may be said of those splendours in stone, those wonders of
medieval architecture, even the blackened walls of which possess a
dignity and beauty which will ever assist the imagination to re-create
the picture of what has been.

Liége is a city of the Middle Ages. Time was when the place boasted but
a single forge; and though bucklers were heaped beside the anvil, and
swords and spears lay waiting for repair, the blacksmith leant against
his door-post, gazing idly up the hill-side. Gradually he was aware of a
figure, which seemed to have grown into shape from a furze-bush, or to
have risen from behind a stone; and as it descended the slope he eyed
curiously the grimy face, long beard, and squat form of what he was half
unwilling to recognize as a human being. Hobbling awkwardly, and
shrugging his shoulders as though cold, the man came in time to the
smithy door.

"What! Jacques Perron--idle when work is to be done?

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Idle smith! idle
smith! The horse lacks the bit, and the rider the spur.

'Ill fares the hide when the buckler wants mending;  
Ill fares the plough when the coulter wants tending.'

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Idle smith! idle
smith!"

"Idle enough," quoth Jacques. "I'm as idle as you are ugly; but I can't
get charcoal any more than you can get beauty, so I must stand still,
and you be content with your face, though I'd fain earn a loaf and a cup
full enough for both of us this winter morning."

Though the strange man must have known he was horribly ugly--that is, if
he ever bent to drink of the clear bright waters of the lovely Meuse,
which reflected in those days every lily-bell and every grass-blade
which grew upon its banks, and gave a faithful portraiture in its cool
waters of every creature that leant over them--though he was certainly
the most frightful creature that had ever met the blacksmith's sight, it
was evident enough that he did not like being called Ugly-face. But when
the honest, good-natured smith spoke of earning a draught for his new
acquaintance as well as himself, he smacked his ugly lips and twisted
out a sort of smile which made him still more hideous.

"Ah, ah!" said he, "wine's good in winter weather, wine's good in winter
weather. Listen, listen! Jacques Perron! listen, listen! Go you up the
hill-side--yonder, yonder!" and he pointed with a yellow finger, which
seemed to stretch out longer and longer as the smith strained his eyes
up the slope, until the digit looked quite as long as the tallest
chimney that smoked over Liége. "Listen, listen!" and he sang in a voice
like the breath of a huge bellows:

       "'Wine's good in winter weather;  
          Up the hill-side near the heather  
          Go and gather the black earth,  
          It shall give your fire birth.  
Ill fares the hide when the buckler wants mending;  
Ill fares the plough when the coulter wants tending:  
          Go! Go!'

"Mind my cup of wine--mind my cup of wine!" As he ended this rude chant
Jacques saw the long finger run back into the shrivelled hand, as a
telescope slips back into its case, and then the hand was wrapped up in
the dingy garment, and with a dreadful shiver, and a chattering of teeth
as loud as the noise of the anvils now heard on the same spot, the ugly
man was wafted away round the corner of the building like a thick gust
of smoke from a newly fed furnace.

"Mind my cup of wine--mind my cup of wine!" rang again in the ears of
the startled Jacques, and after running several times round his house in
vain pursuit of the voice, he sat down on the cold anvil to scratch his
head and think. It was quite certain he had work to do, and it was as
certain as half a score searches could make it that he had not a single
coin in his pouch to buy charcoal to do it with. He was reflecting that
the old man was a very strange creature--he was more than half afraid to
think who he might be--when in the midst of his cogitation he heard his
three children calling out for their morning meal. Not a loaf had
Jacques in store, and twisting his hide apron round his loins, he
muttered, "Demon or no demon, I'll go," and strode out of the smithy and
up the hill-side as fast as though he feared that if he went slowly his
courage would not carry him as far up as the heather-bush which the long
yellow finger had pointed out.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

When the young wife of Jacques came to look for her husband, she saw him
returning with his apron full of black morsels of shining stone. She
smiled at him; but when he threw them on the furnace and went to get a
brand to set them alight, she looked solemn enough, for she thought he
had left his wits on the hill-top. Great was her surprise when *she saw
the stones burn!* But her joy was greater than her surprise when she
heard her husband's hammer ring merrily, and found the wage of the smith
all spared for home use, instead of being set aside for the
charcoal-burner. That night Jacques had two full wine-cups and, setting
them on the anvil, had scarcely said to himself, "I wonder whether
*He'll* come!" when in walked the Old Man and, nodding familiarly,
seated himself on the head of the big hammer. Jacques was a bold and
grateful as well as a good-natured fellow, and in a few minutes he and
his visitor were on excellent terms. No more shivering or chattering of
teeth was seen or heard in the smithy that night. The black stones
burned away merrily on the hearth, and the bright flames shone on the
honest face of the smith as he hobnobbed with his companion, and looked
as though he really thought the stranger as handsome as he certainly had
been useful. He sang his best songs and told his best stories, and when
the wine had melted his soul he told his new friend how dearly he loved
his wife and what charming, dear creatures his children were. "Demon or
no demon," he swore the stranger was a good fellow, and though the
visitor spoke but little, he seemed to enjoy his company very much. He
laughed at the jokes, smiled at the songs, and once rather startled
Jacques by letting out again his long telescope arm to pat him on his
shoulder when, with a mouth full of praises of his wife, a tear

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

sparkled in his eye as he told over again how dearly he loved his little
ones.

Day broke before the wine was exhausted or their hearts flagged, and
when the voice of the early cock woke the swan that tended her callow
brood amongst the sedges of the Meuse the Old Man departed. Jacques
never saw him again, although he often looked in all directions when he
went to the hill for a supply of fuel; but from that day Liége grew up
in industry, riches, and power. *Jacques had found coal*, and thus
became the benefactor of his native country, and the hero of this
favourite *Legend of the Liégeois*.

### The Sword-slipper of Solingen

In Solingen, where the forges rang to the making of sword-blades, many
smiths had essayed to imitate the falchions of Damascus, their trenchant
keenness and their wondrous golden inlaying. But numerous as were the
attempts made to recapture the ancient secret of the East, they all
signally failed, and brought about the ruin of many masters of the
sword-slipper's art.

Among these was old Ruthard, a smith grown grey in the practice of his
trade. He had laid aside sufficient savings to permit himself a year's
experiment in the manufacture of Damascus blades, but to no purpose. As
the months wore on he saw his hard-earned gold melting steadily away.
The wrinkles deepened on his brow, and his only daughter, Martha,
watched the change coming over him in sorrowful silence.

One evening--the evening of all evenings, the holy Christmas eve--Martha
entered the forge and saw the old man still hard at work. She gently
remonstrated with him, asking him why he toiled on such an occasion.

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

"You work, my father, as if you feared that to-morrow we might not have
bread," she said. "Why toil on this holy evening? Have you not
sufficient for the future? You must have laid by enough for your old
age. Then why fatigue yourself when others are spending the time by
their own hearths in cheerful converse?"

The old smith's only reply was to shake his head in a melancholy manner,
take some pieces of broken food in his hands, and leave the house. At
that moment Wilhelm, the smith's head apprentice, entered the room. He
seemed pale and disturbed, and related to Martha, to whom he was
betrothed, that he had asked Ruthard for her hand. The old man had
firmly told him that he could not consent to their union until he had
discovered the secret of making Damascus blades. This he felt was
hopeless to expect, and he had come to say "good-bye" ere he set out on
a quest from which he might never return. At the news Martha was greatly
perturbed. She rose and clung to the young man, her wild grief venting
itself in heartrending sobs. She begged him not to depart. But his mind
was fully made up, and, notwithstanding her tears and caresses, he tore
himself away and quitted the house and the town.

For nearly a fortnight the youth tramped over hill and valley with
little in his pouch and without much hope that the slender means of
which he was possessed would bring him to the land of the Saracens,
where alone he could hope to learn the great art of tempering the blades
of Damascus. One evening he entered the solitary mountain country of
Spessart and, unacquainted with the labyrinths of the road, lost himself
in an adjoining forest. By this time night had fallen, and he cast about
for a place in which to lay his head. But the inhospitable forest showed

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

no sign of human habitation. After wandering on, however, stumbling and
falling in the darkness, he at length saw a light burning brightly at a
distance. Quickly he made for it and found that it came from the window
of a cottage, at the door of which he knocked loudly. He had not long to
wait for an answer, for an old woman speedily opened and inquired what
he wanted at so late an hour. He told her that he desired food and
lodging, for which he could pay, and he was at once admitted. She told
him, however, that she expected another visitor. Whilst she cooked his
supper Wilhelm detailed to her the circumstances of his journey. After
he had eaten he retired to rest, but, tired as he was, he could not
sleep. Later a dreadful storm arose, through the din of which he heard a
loud noise, as if someone had entered the house by way of the chimney.
Peering through the keyhole into the next room, he perceived a man
seated at the table opposite his hostess whose appearance filled him
with misgiving. He had not much leisure for a detailed examination of
this person, however, for the witch--for such she was--came to the door
of his room, entered, and bade him come and be introduced to a stranger
from the East who could tell him the secret of forging Damascus blades.
Wilhelm followed the old woman into the other room and beheld there a
swarthy man seated, wrapped in a flame-coloured mantle. For a long time
the stranger regarded him steadily, then demanded what he wanted from
him. Wilhelm told him the circumstances of his quest, and when he had
finished the story the man laughed and, drawing from his pocket a
document, requested the youth to sign it. Wilhelm perceived that it was
of the nature of a pact with Satan, by which he was to surrender his
soul in return for the coveted secret. Nevertheless, he

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

set his signature to the manuscript and returned to his couch--but not
to sleep. The consequences of his terrible act haunted him, and when
morning came he set off on his homeward journey with a fearful heart,
carefully guarding a well-sealed letter which the mysterious stranger
had put into his hand.

Without further adventure he reached Solingen, and having acquainted
Ruthard with what had transpired, he handed him the letter. But the good
old man refused to unseal it.

"You must keep this until your own son and my grandson can open it," he
said to Wilhelm, "for over his infant soul the enemy can have no power."

And so it happened. Wilhelm married Martha, and in the course of a few
years a little son was born to them, who in due time found the letter,
opened it, and mastered the Satanic secret, and from that time the
blades of Solingen have had a world-wide renown.

### The Architect of Cologne Cathedral

Travellers on the Rhine usually make a halt at Cologne to see the
cathedral, and many inquire the name of its creator. Was the plan the
work of a single architect? they ask; or did the cathedral, like many
another in Europe, acquire its present form by slow degrees, being
augmented and duly embellished in divers successive ages? These
questions are perfectly reasonable and natural, yet, strange to relate,
are invariably answered in evasive fashion, the truth being that the
name of the artist in stone who planned Cologne Cathedral is unknown.
The legend concerning him, however, is of world-wide celebrity, for the
tale associated with the founding of the famous edifice is replete with
that grisly element which

 

<span id="img_10400"></span>

[![COLOGNE CATHEDRAL&lt;br&gt; LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Facing page 104&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/10400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10400.jpg.md)  
COLOGNE CATHEDRAL  
LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.  
*Facing page 104*.  

 

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

has always delighted the Germans, and figures largely in their medieval
literature, and more especially in the works of their early
painters--for example, Dürer, Lucas Cranach, and Albrecht Altdörfer.

It was about the time of the last-named master that a Bishop of Cologne,
Conrad von Hochsteden, formed the resolve of increasing the pecuniary
value of his diocese. He was already rich, but other neighbouring
bishops were richer, each of them being blest with just what Conrad
lacked--a shrine sufficiently famous to attract large numbers of wealthy
pilgrims able to make generous offerings. The result of his jealous
musing was that the crafty bishop vowed he would build a cathedral whose
like had not been seen in all Germany. By this means, he thought, he
would surely contrive to bring rich men to his diocese. His first
thought was to summon an architect from Italy, in those days the country
where beautiful building was chiefly carried on; but he found that this
would cost a far larger sum than he was capable of raising; so, hearing
that a gifted young German architect had lately taken up his abode at
Cologne itself, Conrad sent for him and offered him a rich reward should
he accomplish the work satisfactorily. The young man was overjoyed, for
as yet he had received no commissions of great importance, and he set to
work at once. He made drawing after drawing, but, being in a state of
feverish excitement, found that his hand had lost its cunning. None of
his designs pleased him in the least; the bishop, he felt, would be
equally disappointed; and thinking that a walk in the fresh air might
clear his brain, he threw his drawing-board aside and repaired to the
banks of the Rhine. Yet even here peace did not come to him; he was
tormented by endless visions of groined arches,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

pediments, pilasters, and the like, and having a stick in his hand, he
made an effort to trace some on the sand. But this new effort pleased
him no better than any of its predecessors. Fame and fortune were within
his reach, yet he was incapable of grasping them; and he groaned aloud,
cursing the day he was born.

As the young man uttered his fierce malediction he was surprised to hear
a loud "Amen" pronounced; he looked round, wondering from whom this
insolence came, and beheld an individual whose approach he had not
noticed. He, too, was engaged in drawing on the sand, and deeming that
the person, whoever he was, intended to mock his attempts at a plan for
the projected cathedral, the architect strode up to him with an angry
expression on his face. He stopped short, however, on nearing the rival
draughtsman; for he was repelled by his sinister aspect, while at the
same time he was thunderstruck by the excellence of his drawing. It was
indeed a thaumaturgic design, just such a one as the architect himself
had dreamt of, but had been unable to execute; and while he gazed at it
eagerly the stranger hailed him in an ugly, rasping voice. "A cunning
device, this of mine," he said sharply; and the architect was bound to
agree, despite the jealousy he felt. Surely, he thought, only the Evil
One could draw in this wise. Scarcely had the thought crossed his mind
ere his suspicion was confirmed, for now he marked the stranger's tail,
artfully concealed hitherto. Yet he was incapable of withholding his
gaze from the plan drawn so wondrously on the sand, and the foul fiend,
seeing that the moment for his triumph was come, declared his identity
without shame, and added that, would the architect but agree to renounce
all hopes of salvation in the next world, the peerless design would be
his to do with as he pleased.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

The young man shuddered on receiving the momentous offer, but continued
to gaze fixedly at the cunning workmanship, and again the Evil One
addressed him, bidding him repair that very night to a certain place on
a blasted heath, where, if he would sign a document consigning his soul
to everlasting damnation, he would be presented with the plan duly drawn
on parchment. The architect still wavered, now eager to accept the
offer, and now vowing that the stipulated price was too frightful. In
the end he was given time wherein to come to a decision, and he hurried
from the place at hot speed as the tempter vanished from his sight.

On reaching his dwelling the architect flung himself upon his bed and
burst into a paroxysm of weeping. The good woman who tended him observed
this with great surprise, for he was not given to showing his emotions
thus; and wondering what terrible sorrow had come to him, she proceeded
to make kindly inquiries. At first these were met with silence, but,
feeling a need for sympathy, the architect eventually confessed the
truth; and the good dame, horrified at what she heard, hurried off to
impart the story to her father-confessor. He, too, was shocked, but he
was as anxious as Bishop Conrad that the proposed cathedral should be
duly built, and he came quickly to the architect's presence. "Here," he
told him, "is a piece of our Lord's cross. This will preserve you. Go,
therefore, as the fiend directed you, take the drawing from him, and
brandish the sacred relic in his accursed face the moment you have
received it."

When evening drew near the architect hurried to the rendezvous, where he
found the Devil waiting impatiently. But a leer soon spread over his
visage, and he was evidently overjoyed at the prospect of wrecking a
soul.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He quickly
produced a weird document, commanding his victim to affix his signature
at a certain place. "But the beautiful plan," whispered the young man;
"I must see it first; I must be assured that the drawing on the sand has
been faithfully copied." "Fear nothing." The Devil handed over the
precious piece of vellum; and glancing at it swiftly, and finding it in
order, the architect whipped it under his doublet. "Aha! you cannot
outwit me," shrieked the fiend; but as he was laying hands upon the
architect the young man brought forth the talisman he carried. "A priest
has told you of this, for no one else would have thought of it," cried
the Devil, breathing flame from his nostrils. But his wrath availed him
naught; he was forced to retreat before the sacred relic, yet as he
stepped backward he uttered a deadly curse. "You have deceived me," he
hissed; "but know that fame will never come to you; your name will be
forgotten for evermore."

And behold, the fiend's prophecy was fulfilled. The cathedral was
scarcely completed ere the young architect's name became irrevocably
forgotten, and now this grisly tale is all that is known concerning his
identity.

### Cologne Cathedral: Its Erection

There are several other tales to account for the belief prevalent at one
time that Cologne Cathedral would never be completed. The following
legend attributes the unfinished state of the edifice to the curse of a
jealous architect. At the time the building was commenced a rival
architect was engaged in planning an aqueduct to convey to the city a
supply of water purer than that of the Rhine. He was in this difficulty,
however: he had been unable to discover the exact position of the spring
from which the

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

water was to be drawn. Tidings of the proposed structure reached the
ears of the builder of the cathedral, a man of strong passions and
jealous disposition, and in time the other architect asked his opinion
of the plans for the aqueduct.

Now it so happened that the architect of the cathedral alone had known
the situation of the spring, and he had communicated it to his wife, but
to no other living creature; so he replied boastfully:

"Speak not to me of your aqueduct. My cathedral, mighty as it will be,
shall be completed before your little aqueduct." And he clinched his
vainglorious assertion with an oath.

Indeed, it seemed as though his boast would be justified, for the
building of the sacred edifice proceeded apace, while the aqueduct was
not even begun, because of the difficulty of finding the spring. The
second architect was in despair, for of a certainty his professional
reputation was destroyed, his hopes of fame for ever dashed, were he
unable to finish the task he had undertaken.

His faithful wife strove to lighten his despondency, and at last,
setting her woman's wit to work, hit on a plan whereby the threatened
calamity might be averted. She set out to visit the wife of the rival
architect, with whom she was intimate. The hostess greeted her
effusively, and the ladies had a long chat over bygone times. More and
more confidential did they become under the influence of old memories
and cherry wine. Skilfully the guest led the conversation round to the
subject of the hidden spring, and her friend, after exacting a promise
of the strictest secrecy, told her its exact situation. It lay under the
great tower of the cathedral, covered by the massive stone known as the
'Devil's Stone.'

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Let me have your
assurance again," said the anxious lady, "that you will never tell
anyone, not even your husband. For I do not know what would become of me
if my husband learnt that I had told it to you."

The other renewed her promises of secrecy and took her leave. On her
return home she promptly told her husband all that had passed, and he as
promptly set to work, sunk a well at the spot indicated, and found the
spring. The foundations of the aqueduct were laid and the structure
itself soon sprang up. The architect of the cathedral saw with dismay
that his secret was discovered. As the building of the aqueduct
progressed he lost all interest in his own work; envy and anger filled
his thoughts and at last overcame him. It is said that he died of a
broken heart, cursing with his latest breath the cathedral which he had
planned.

### The Wager

An alternative story is that of the Devil's wager with the architect of
the cathedral. The Evil One was much irritated at the good progress made
in the erection of the building and resolved, by means of a cunning
artifice, to stop that progress. To this end he paid a visit to the
architect, travelling incognito to avoid unpleasant attentions.

The architect was a man of wit and good sense, as courteous as he was
clever; but he had one outstanding failing--a love of wagering. Satan,
who ever loves to find the joints in an opponent's armour, chose this
one weak spot as a point of attack. His host offered him meat and drink,
which the Devil declined as not being sufficiently high-seasoned for his
taste.

"I have come on a matter of business," said he briskly.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "I have heard of
you as a sporting fellow, a man who loves his wager. Is that correct?"

The architect indicated that it was, and was all eagerness and attention
in a moment.

"Well," said the other, "I have come, in a word, to make a bet with you
concerning the cathedral."

"And what is your wager?"

"Why, I'll wager that I bring a stream from Treves to Cologne before you
finish the cathedral, and I'll work single-handed, too."

"Done!" said the delighted architect. "But what's the wager?"

"If I win, your soul passes into my possession; if you win, you may have
anything you choose." And with that he was gone.

Next day the architect procured the services of all the builders that
were to be had on such short notice, and set them to work in real
earnest. Very soon the whole town was in a state of excitement because
of the unusual bustle. The architect took to dreaming of the wealth, or
the fame, or the honour he should ask as his due when the stakes were
won. Employing his imagination thus, he one day climbed to the top of
the highest tower, which by this time was completed, and as he feasted
his eyes on the beautiful landscape spread before him he happened to
turn toward the town of Treves, and lo! a shining stream was threading
its way to Cologne. In a very short time it would reach the latter city.

The Devil had won!

With a laugh of defiance the architect cast himself from the high tower
and was instantly killed. Satan, in the form of a black hound, sprang
upon him, but was too late to find him alive.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

But his death stopped for many years the progress of the cathedral; it
long stood at the same stage of completion as when the brook first
flowed from Treves to Cologne.

### The Fire-bell of Cologne

In one of the grand towers of Cologne Cathedral hangs a massive bell,
some 25,000 lb. in weight. No mellow call to prayer issues from its
brazen throat, no joyous chimes peal forth on gala-days; only in times
of disaster, of storm and stress and fire, it flings out a warning in
tones so loud and clamorous, so full of dire threatenings, that the
stoutest hearts quail beneath the sound. Because its awful note is only
to be heard in time of terror it is known as the Fire-bell, and a weird
tradition relates the story of its founding and the reason for its
unearthly sound.

Long ago, when bell-founding was looked upon as an art of the highest
importance, and especially so among the Germans, the civic authorities
of Cologne made it known that the cathedral was in need of a new bell.
There was no lack of aspirants for the honour of casting the bell, and
more than one exponent of the art imagined his handiwork swinging in the
grand tower of the cathedral, a lasting and melodious monument to its
creator's skill.

Among those whose ambitious souls were stirred by the statement of the
city fathers was one, a bell-founder named Wolf, a man of evil passions
and overbearing disposition, whose heart was firmly set on achieving
success. In those days, let it be said, the casting of a bell was a
solemn, and even a religious, performance, attended by elaborate
ceremonies and benedictions. On the day which Wolf had appointed for the
operation it seemed as though the entire populace had turned out to
witness the spectacle. Wolf, having prepared the mould, made ready to
pour into it the

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

molten metal. The silence was almost oppressive, and on it fell
distinctly the solemn words of the bell-founder, as in God's name he
released the metal. The bright stream gushed into the mould, and a cheer
broke from the waiting crowd, who, indeed, could scarce be restrained
till the bell had cooled, such was their curiosity to see the result. At
last the earthy mould was removed, they surged round eagerly, and lo!
from crown to rim of the mighty bell stretched a gaping crack!

Expressions of disappointment burst from the lips of the people, and to
Wolf himself the failure was indeed galling. But his ambitious spirit
was not yet completely crushed.

"I am not beaten yet," he said boastfully. "I shall make another, and
success shall yet be mine."

Another mould was made, once more the people came forth to see the
casting of the bell, once more the solemn invocation of God's name fell
on awed ears. The glowing metal filled the mould, cooled, and was
withdrawn from its earthy prison. Once more cries of disappointment were
heard from the crowd; again the massive bell was completely riven!

Wolf was beside himself. His eyes glowed with fury, and he thrust aside
the consolations of his friends.

"If God will not aid me," he said fiercely, "then the Devil will!"

The crowd shrank back from the impious words; nevertheless on the third
occasion they attended in even greater numbers than before.

Again was all made ready for the casting of the huge bell. The mould was
fashioned as carefully as on the previous occasions, the metal was
heated in the great furnace, and Wolf, pale and sullen, stood ready to
release it. But when he spoke a murmur of astonishment, of horror, ran

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

through the crowd. For the familiar words "In the name of God!" he had
substituted "In the name of the Devil!" With fascinated eyes the people
watched the bright, rushing metal, and, later, the removal of the mould.

And behold! the bell was flawless, perfect in shape and form, and
beautiful to look upon!

Wolf, having achieved the summit of his ambition, cared little for the
means by which he had ascended. From among a host of competitors he was
chosen as the most successful. His bell was to hang in the belfry of
Cologne Cathedral, for the envy of other bell-founders and the
admiration of future generations.

The bell was borne in triumph through the streets and fixed high in the
tower. Wolf requested that he might be the first to try its tone, and
his request was granted. He ascended into the tower and took the rope in
his hands; the mighty bell swung forth, but ah! what a sound was that!
The people pressed their hands over their ears and shuddered; those in
the streets hurried to their homes; all were filled with deadly fear as
the diabolical bell flung its awful tones over the startled city. This,
then, was the result of Wolf's invocation of the Devil.

Wolf himself, high in the cathedral tower, was overcome with the brazen
horror of the sound, and, driven mad with remorse and terror, flung
himself from the tower and fell, a crushed and shapeless mass, on the
ground below.

Henceforth the bell was used only to convey warning in times of danger,
to carry a message of terror far and wide across the city, and to remind
the wicked at all times of the danger of trafficking with the Evil One.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

### The Archbishop's Lion

In 957 Cologne was constituted an imperial free city, having as its
nominal prince the archbishop of the see, but possessing the right to
govern its own affairs. The good bishop of that time acquiesced in the
arrangement, but his successors were not content to be princes in name
only, and strove hard to obtain a real influence over the citizens.
Being for the most part men of unscrupulous disposition, they did not
hesitate to rouse commonalty and aristocracy against each other, hoping
to step in and reap the benefits of such internecine warfare as might
ensue. And, indeed, the continual strife was not conducive to the
prosperity of the burghers, but rather tended to sap their independence,
and one by one their civil liberties were surrendered. Thus the scheming
archbishops increased their power and influence in the city of Cologne.
There came a time, however, in the civic history when the limit was
overstepped. In the thirteenth century Archbishop Engelbert, more daring
and ambitious than any of his predecessors, demanded that the municipal
treasure should be given up to him. Not content with taking away the
privileges of the burghers, he wished to lay his hands on the public
purse as well. This was indeed the last straw, and the sluggish blood of
the burghers was at length roused to revolt.

At this time the Burgomaster of Cologne, Hermann Grein by name, was an
honest, far-seeing, and diplomatic citizen, who had seen with dismay the
ancient liberties of his beloved city destroyed by the cunning of the
Archbishop. The latter's bold attempt at further encroachments gave him
the opportunity he sought, and with the skill of a born leader Hermann
Grein united nobles and commons in

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

the determination to resist their mutual enemy. Feuds were for the time
being forgotten, and with a gallant effort the galling yoke of the
Archbishop-prince was thrown off, and the people of Cologne were once
more free.

Grein performed his civic duties so firmly, albeit so smoothly and
gently, that he won the love and respect of all sections of the
populace. Old and young hailed him in their hearts as the deliverer of
their city from ecclesiastical tyranny. Only Engelbert hated him with a
deadly hatred, and swore to be revenged; nor was his resolve weakened
when a later attempt to subdue the city was frustrated by the foresight
of Grein. It became obvious to the Archbishop that force was unavailing,
for the majority of all classes were on the side of liberty, and were
likely to remain so while Hermann Grein was at their head. So he made up
his mind to accomplish by means of strategy the death of the good old
man.

Now there were in the monastery close by Cologne two canons who shared
Engelbert's hatred of Grein, and who were only too willing to share in
his revenge. And the plan was indeed a cunning one. Belonging to a small
collection of animals attached to the monastery was a fierce lion, which
had more than once proved a convenient mode of removing the Church's
enemies. So it was arranged that the Burgomaster should be asked to meet
the Archbishop there. The latter sent a suave message to his enemy
saying that he desired to treat with him on matters connected with the
civic privileges, which he was disposed to restore to the city, with a
few small exceptions. This being the case, would the Burgomaster consent
to dine with him at the monastery on a certain date?

 

<span id="img_11600"></span>

[![The Burgomaster and the Lion     116&lt;br&gt; &lt;i&gt;Hiram
Ellis&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/11600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/11600.jpg.md)  
The Burgomaster and the Lion     116  
*Hiram Ellis*.  

 

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

The Burgomaster consented heartily, for he was a man to whom treachery
was entirely foreign, and therefore not prone to suspect that vice in
others; nevertheless he took the simple precautions of arming himself
and making his destination known to his friends before he set out. When
he arrived at the monastery resplendent in the rich garments
countenanced by the fashion of the time, he was told that the Archbishop
was in the garden.

"Will you walk in our humble garden with his Highness?" the canons asked
the Burgomaster, and he, a lover of nature, bade them lead the way.

The garden was truly a lovely spot, gay with all manner of flowers and
fruit; but Grein looked in vain for his host. "His Highness," said the
wily canons, "is in the private garden, where only the heads of the
Church and their most honoured guests are admitted. Ah, here we are!
Enter, noble Burgomaster; we may go no farther."

With that they stopped before a strong iron-bound door, opened it, and
thrust the old man inside. In a moment the heavy door had swung to with
a crash, and Grein found himself in a narrow, paved court, with high,
unscalable walls on every side. And from a dark corner there bounded
forth to meet him a huge lion! With a pious prayer for help the
Burgomaster drew his sword, wrapped his rich Spanish mantle round his
left arm, and prepared to defend himself against his adversary. With a
roar the lion was upon him, but with wonderful agility the old man leapt
to one side. Again the great beast sprang, endeavouring to get the man's
head between its jaws. Again and again Grein thrust valiantly, and in
one of these efforts his weapon reached the lion's heart and it rolled
over, dead. Weak and exhausted from loss of blood, the Burgomaster lost
consciousness.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

Ere long he was roused from his swoon by the awe-inspiring tones of the
alarm-bell and the sound of a multitude of voices. A moment later he
recalled his terrible struggle with the lion, and uttered a devout
thanksgiving for his escape from death.

Meanwhile the people, growing anxious at his prolonged absence, and
fearing that some ill had befallen him, had hastened to the monastery.
The two canons, seeing the approaching crowd, ran out to meet them,
wringing their hands and exclaiming that the Burgomaster had strayed
into the lion's den and there met his death. The angry crowd, in nowise
deceived by their pretences, demanded to be shown the lion's den.
Arrived there, they broke down the door and, to their great joy, found
Grein alive, though wounded and much shaken. They bore him triumphantly
through the town, first crowning his hastily improvised litter with
flowers and laurels.

As for the monks, their priestly garb could not protect their persons
from the wrath of the mob, and they were hanged at the gate of the
monastery, which thereafter became known as the 'Priests' Gate.'

### The White Horses

The year 1440 was a memorable one throughout Germany, for the great
plague raged with fearful violence, leaving blanks in many families
hitherto unvisited by death. Among the victims was Richmodis, the
beloved wife of Sir Aducht of Cologne, who deeply mourned her loss.

The lady was buried with a valuable ring--her husband's gift--upon her
finger; this excited the cupidity of the sextons, who, resolved to
obtain possession of it, opened the tomb in the night and wrenched off
the coffin-lid. Their difficulties, however, were not at an end, for
when

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

they tried to possess themselves of the ring it resolutely adhered to
the finger of the corpse.

Suddenly, to their horror, the dead body gently raised itself, with a
deep sigh, as though the soul of Richmodis regarded this symbol of
wifely duty as sacred, and would resist the efforts of the thieves to
take it from her.

The dark and hollow eyes opened and met those of the desecrators, and a
threatening light seemed to come from them. At this ghastly sight the
terrified sextons fled in abject panic.

Richmodis recovered by degrees, and gradually realizing where she was,
she concluded that she must have been buried while alive. In her terror
she cried aloud for help. But nobody could hear her; it was the lone
hour of midnight, when all nature reposes.

Summoning strength, she resolved to make an effort to go to the husband
who had placed the ring upon her finger, and getting out of the coffin,
she made her way shivering toward their home.

The wind moaned dismally through the trees, and their foliage cast dark,
spectral shadows that swayed fitfully to and fro in the weird light of
the waning moon as Richmodis staggered along feebly, absorbed in the
melancholy thoughts which her terrible experience suggested.

Not a sound, save the soughing of the wind, was heard within God's
peaceful acre, for over the wrecks of Time Silence lay motionless in the
arms of Death.

The moon's pale rays illumined the buildings when Richmodis arrived at
her house in the New Market. She knocked repeatedly, but at first
received no response to her summons. After a time Sir Aducht opened the
window and looked out, annoyed at the disturbance at such an hour.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

He was about to speak angrily when the apparition looked up at him with
a tender regard of love and asked him to descend quickly and open the
door to receive his wife, nearly exhausted by cold and terror. The
bereaved husband refused to believe that the wife whom he had just
buried had come back to him, and he declared that he would as soon
expect his horses to climb upstairs as believe that his dead wife could
return to him alive.

He had hardly uttered the words when the trampling of his two horses on
the staircase was distinctly heard. A moment or two later he looked from
the casement and saw the steeds at an upper window, and he could doubt
no longer. Rushing to the door, he received his shivering wife into his
arms. The ring she still wore would have removed all doubts had there
been room for such.

Husband and wife spent many years together in domestic happiness, and in
memory of that remarkable night Sir Aducht fixed wooden effigies of two
horses' heads to the outside of the window, where they still remain for
all to see.

### The Magic Banquet

Another interesting tale of Cologne deals with the famous magician and
alchemist, Albertus Magnus, who at one time dwelt in the convent of the
Dominicans, not far from that city. It is recorded that on one occasion,
in the depth of winter, Albertus invited William of Holland to a feast
which was to be held in the convent garden. The recipients of the
curious invitation, William and his courtiers, were naturally much
amazed at the terms thereof, but decided not to lose the opportunity of
attending such a novel banquet.

In due course they arrived at the monastery, where all

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

was in readiness for the feast, the tables being laid amid the snow. The
guests had fortified themselves against the severe weather by wearing
their warmest clothing and furs. No sooner had they taken their seats,
however, than Albertus, exercising the magic powers he possessed, turned
the wintry garden into a scene of summer bloom and loveliness. The heavy
furs were laid aside, and the guests were glad to seek the shade of the
spreading foliage. Iced drinks were brought to allay their thirst, and a
sumptuous banquet was provided by their hosts; thus the hours passed
unheeded, till the *Ave Maria* was rung by the convent-bell. Immediately
the spell was broken, and once more snow and ice dominated the scene.
The courtiers, who had rid themselves of as much of their clothing as
court etiquette would permit, shivered in the bitter blast, and looked
the very picture of blank amazement--so much so that William forgot his
own suffering and laughed heartily at the discomfiture of his train.

This story has a quaint sequel. To show his approval of the magic feat
William granted to the convent a piece of land of considerable extent in
the neighbourhood of Cologne, and sent some of his courtiers to present
the deed of gift. The hospitable prior, anxious that the members of the
deputation should be suitably entertained, drew from the well-furnished
cellars of the monastery some choice Rhenish, which so pleased the
palates of the courtiers that they drank and drank and did not seem to
know when to stop. At length the prior, beholding with dismay the
disappearance of his finest vintage, privately begged the magician to
put a stop to this drain on the resources of his cellar. Albertus
consented, and once more the wine-cups were replenished. Imagine the
horror of the courtiers when each beheld ghastly flames

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

issuing from his cup! In their dismay they seized hold of one another
and would not let go.

Only when the phenomenon had disappeared did they discover that each
held his neighbour by the nose! and such was their chagrin at being seen
in this unconventional pose that they quitted the monastery without a
word, and never entered it again.

### Truenfels

At a place called Truenfels, near the Oelberg, and not very far from
Cologne, there lived at one time in the Middle Ages a knight named Sir
Balther. His schloss was known as The Mount, and there dwelt with him
here his only daughter, Liba, whose great beauty had won for her a vast
entourage of suitors. Each was equally importunate, but only one was in
any way favoured, Sir Sibert Ulenthal, and at the time the story opens
this Sir Sibert had lately become affianced to Sir Balther's daughter.

Now Sir Balther felt an ardent aversion to one of his neighbours, the
Bishop of Cologne, and his hatred of this prelate was shared abundantly
by various other knights and nobles of the district. One evening it
chanced a body of these were gathered together at The Mount; and after
Rhenish had circulated freely among them and loosened their tongues, one
and all began to vent wrath on the ill-starred Churchman, talking
volubly of his avarice and misdeeds in general. But why, cried one of
them, should they be content with so tame a thing as scurrilous speech?
Were not men of the sword more doughty than men of the robe? he added;
and thereupon a wild shout was raised by the revellers, and they swore
that they would sally forth instantly and slay him whom they all loathed
so passionately.

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

It happened that, even as they set out, the bishop was returning from a
visit to a remote part of his diocese; and being wholly unprepared to
cope with a gang of desperadoes like these, he fell an easy prey to
their attack. But the Church in medieval days did not take acts of this
sort passively, and the matter being investigated, and it transpiring
that The Mount had been the rallying ground of the murderers, a band of
troops was sent to raze Sir Balther's castle and slay its inmates. The
news, meanwhile, reached the fair Liba's *fiancé*, Sir Sibert, and
knowing well that, in the event of The Mount being stormed by the
avenging party, death or an equally terrible fate might befall his
betrothed, the lover felt sad indeed. He hastened to the King and
implored his intervention; on this being refused, he proposed that he
himself should join the besiegers, at the same time carrying with him a
royal pardon for Liba, for what concern had she with her father's
crimes? His Majesty was persuaded to give the requisite document to Sir
Sibert, who then hied him at full speed to The Mount, there to find the
siege going forward. The walls of the castle were strong, and as yet the
inmates were showing a good fight; but as day after day went past their
strength and resources began to wane, and anon it seemed as though they
could not possibly hold out longer. Accordingly the soldiers redoubled
their efforts to effect a breach, which being compassed ultimately, they
rushed upon the little garrison; and now picture the consternation of
Liba when she found that her own lover was among the assailants of her
home! Amid the din of battle he called to her loudly, once and again,
telling her that he carried a royal pardon for her, and that all she had
to do was to forsake her father and follow her betrothed instead. But in
the din of battle she did not

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

hear, or mistook the tenor of his words; and ere he could make himself
understood the garrison of the castle began to yield, and a moment later
the building was in flames. Many of the besieged were burnt to death,
but Liba and her father hastened to a little chamber at the base of the
schloss, and thence they won to a subterranean passage which was known
only to themselves, and which led to a distant place in the surrounding
wilds.

Gazing at the blackened ruins, Sir Sibert felt as though henceforth the
world held for him no joy whatsoever. He refused to be comforted, so
convinced was he that Liba had perished in the terrible fray; but one
stormy evening, wandering in the neighbourhood of the castle, he
perceived two figures who seemed to him familiar. True, both were
haggard and tattered, but as he drew near to them the knight's pulses
quickened of a sudden, for he knew that his beloved stood before him.
Would she listen to him now? he wondered; or would she still imagine him
perfidious, and scorn the aid which he offered? While he was debating
with himself the storm increased, and the great peals of thunder
sounding overhead made the lover's heart beat faster. He drew the
all-important document from within his doublet and approached the pair.
"Heart of my heart" . . . the words faltered to Sir Sibert's lips, but
he got no further; a great flash of lightning descended from on high,
and lo! Sir Balther and Liba lay stricken in death.

The broken-hearted lover built a chapel on the spot where his betrothed
had fallen, and here he dwelt till the end of his days. It would seem,
nevertheless, that those pious exercises wherewith hermits chiefly
occupy themselves were not his only occupation; for long after the
chapel itself had become a ruin its sight was marked by a great

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

stone which bore an inscription in rude characters--the single word
"Liba." Doubtless Sir Sibert had hewn this epitaph with his own hands.

### Rolandseck and Nonnenwerth

The castle of Rolandseck stands opposite Drachenfels. Below them, on an
island in the Rhine, is the convent of Nonnenwerth.

Roland, Charlemagne's nephew, whose fame had spread throughout the
world, while riding one day on the banks of the Rhine, sought the
hospitality of the Lord of Drachenfels.

Honoured at receiving such a distinguished guest, the lord of the castle
hastened to welcome him.

The ladies gave the brave knight as cordial a reception as their lord,
whose charming daughter seemed deeply impressed by the visitor's
knightly deportment. Roland's admiring glances lingered lovingly on the
fair maid, who blushed in sweet confusion, and whose tender looks alone
betrayed the presence of Cupid, who but waited for an opportunity to
manifest his power.

At his host's bidding Roland put off his armour, but even in his own
room a vision of maidenly beauty haunted him, thereby showing how subtly
the young girl's charms had wound themselves around the knight's heart.

Roland remained for some time with the Lord of Drachenfels, fascinated
more and more by the grace and beauty of his winsome daughter. Besides
being beautiful, she was a clever needlewoman, and he admired the
dexterity with which she embroidered ornamental designs on damask.

Only when asked by her to relate some deeds of daring, or describe the
wondrous countries through which he had

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

travelled, would Roland become eloquent. Then he grew enthusiastic, his
cheeks glowed, his eyes sparkled, and the enamoured maid would regard
her hero with admiration. She evinced a lively interest in his exploits,
their eyes would meet, then with a throbbing breast she would resume her
work by his side. From this blissful dream Roland was summoned to the
wars again.

The brave soldier prepared to depart, but he realized the joys he must
renounce. Once more he visited the favourite haunts where they had spent
such happy moments. The sound of someone weeping aroused him from his
reverie, and he beheld his lady-love seated in an arbour, sobbing
bitterly. Each knew the grief which separation must bring. Roland
consoled the maiden by promising to return soon, nevermore to part. Only
her tears betrayed how deeply the arrow of the winged god had sunk into
her heart.

A few days later they were betrothed, after which Roland departed in
quest of glory. Many victories were gained by him, and soon the enemy
was vanquished. Rejoicings were held to celebrate the event.

But at Drachenfels Castle sad faces and tearful eyes told a tale of
sorrow, for it had been announced that Roland was dead. The maid's rosy
cheeks grew pale with grief; nothing could console her; for was not her
hero departed from her for ever?

In the intensity of her anguish she sought relief in prayer and found a
refuge in religion. She entered the convent at Nonnenwerth, resolved to
dedicate her life to Heaven, since the joys of earth had fled.

Her afflicted parents reluctantly acquiesced in this proposal. Daily
they beheld their daughter waving her hand to them as she entered the
chapel.

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

Suddenly there appeared before the gates of Drachenfels a troop of
cavaliers, whose armour shone brilliantly in the sun. Roland had
returned home from the wars, crowned with glory, to claim his bride. But
when he heard that she had taken the veil his buoyant spirits sank. The
Lord of Drachenfels told him that they had believed the report of his
death to be true.

A cry of despair broke from the hero of a hundred fights. He crossed the
Rhine to the castle of Rolandseck, where he remained for many weeks,
abandoned to grief.

Frequently he looked toward the convent which held his beloved. One
evening he heard the bells tolling and saw a funeral procession of nuns
carrying a coffin to the chapel. His page told him that his love was
dead, but Roland had already divined that she who had mourned his
supposed death had died through grief for him who was still alive to
mourn her death.

Time rolled on and Roland went again to the wars and achieved greater
conquests, but at length he fell fighting against the Moors at
Roncevaux, dying on the battlefield as he had wished. His valorous deeds
and his glorious death were sung by minstrels throughout all
Christendom, and his fame will never die.

### LEGENDS OF AIX-LA-CHAPELLE

Aix-la-Chapelle was the ancient seat of the Empire of Charlemagne, and
many legends cluster around it, several of which have already been
noticed in connexion with its great founder. The following legends,
however, deal with the town itself, and not with any circumstance
connected with the mighty Karl.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

### The Hunchbacked Musician

In Aix-la-Chapelle dwelt two hunchbacked musicians. Friedel was a lively
fellow with a pleasant face and an engaging manner. Heinz had red hair,
green eyes, and a malevolent expression. Friedel was a better player
than Heinz; that, combined with his agreeable looks, made him a general
favourite.

Friedel loved Agathe, the daughter of a rich wine-merchant. The lovers'
prospects were not encouraging, for Agathe's father sought a son-in-law
from higher circles. The poor musician's plight was rendered desperate
by the wine-merchant compelling his daughter to accept a rich but
dissipated young man. When the hunchback approached the merchant to
declare his feelings toward the maiden, he was met with derision and
insult. Full of bitterness, he wandered about, till midnight found him
in the fish-market, where the Witches' Sabbath was about to take place.
A weird light was cast over everything, and a crowd of female figures
quickly gathered. A lady who seemed to be at the head of the party
offered the hunchback refreshment, and others handed him a violin,
desiring him to play for them. Friedel played, and the witches danced;
faster and faster, for the violin was bewitched. At last the violinist
fell exhausted, and the dancing ceased. The lady now commanded him to
kneel and receive the thanks of the company for his beautiful playing.
Then she muttered strange words over the kneeling hunchback.

When Friedel arose his hump was gone.

Just then the clock struck one, everything vanished, and the musician
found himself alone in the market-place. Next morning his looking-glass
showed him that he had

 

<span id="img_12800"></span>

[![AIX-LA-CHAPELLE&lt;br&gt; LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Facing page 128&lt;/i&gt;](tn/12800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/12800.jpg.md)  
AIX-LA-CHAPELLE  
LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.  
*Facing page 128*  

 

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

not been dreaming, and in his pocket he found a large sum of money,
which made him the equal of the richest in the town. Overjoyed at the
transformation, he lost no time in seeking Agathe's house. The sight of
his gold turned the scale in his favour, and the wine-merchant consented
to his suit.

Now Heinz was inflamed with jealousy, and tried to calumniate his
companion by spreading evil stories. Friedel's strange adventure leaked
abroad, and Heinz determined to try his fortune likewise. So at the next
witch-meeting he hastened to the fish-market, where at the outset
everything happened in exactly the same manner. Heinz was requested to
play, but his avaricious gaze was fixed on the golden vessels on the
table, and his thoughts were with the large reward he would ask.
Consequently his playing became so discordant that the indignant dancers
made him cease.

Kneeling down to receive his reward, he demanded the valuable
drinking-cups, whereupon with scornful and mocking words the lady who
was the leader of the band fixed on his breast the hump she had taken
from Friedel. Immediately the clock struck one, and all disappeared. The
poor man's rage was boundless, for he found himself now saddled with two
humps. He became an object of ridicule to the townsfolk, but Friedel
pitied him, and maintained him ever after.

### The Legend of the Cathedral of Aix-la-Chapelle

In former times the zealous and devout inhabitants of Aix-la-Chapelle
determined to build a cathedral. For six months the clang of the hammer
and axe resounded with wonderful activity, but, alas! the money which
had been supplied by pious Christians for this holy work became

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

exhausted, the wages of the masons were perforce suspended, and with
them their desire to hew and hammer, for, after all, men must have money
wherewith to feed their families.

Thus the cathedral stood, half finished, resembling a falling ruin.
Moss, grass, and wild parsley flourished in the cracks of the walls,
screech-owls already discovered convenient places for their nests, and
amorous sparrows hopped lovingly about where holy priests should have
been teaching lessons of chastity.

The builders were confounded. They endeavoured to borrow here and there,
but no rich man could be induced to advance the large sum required. The
collections from house to house produced little, so that instead of the
much-wished-for golden coins nothing was found in the boxes but copper.
When the magistracy received this report they were out of humour, and
looked with desponding countenances toward the cathedral walls, as
fathers look upon the remains of favourite children.

At this moment a stranger of commanding figure and something of pride in
his voice and bearing entered the council chamber and exclaimed: "*Bon
Dieu!* it is said that you are out of spirits. Hem! if nothing but money
is wanting, you may console yourselves, gentlemen. I possess mines of
gold and silver, and both can and will most willingly supply you with a
ton of them."

The astounded magistrates sat like a row of pillars, measuring the
stranger from head to foot. The Burgomaster first found his tongue. "Who
are you, noble lord," said he, "that thus, entirely unknown, speak of
tons of gold as though they were sacks of beans? Tell us your name, your
rank in this world, and whether you are sent from the regions above to
assist us."

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

"I have not the honour to reside there," replied the stranger, "and,
between ourselves, I beg most particularly to be no longer troubled with
questions concerning who and what I am. Suffice it to say I have gold
plentiful as summer hay!" Then, drawing forth a leathern pouch, he
proceeded: "This little purse contains the tenth of what I'll give. The
rest shall soon be forthcoming. Now listen, my masters," continued he,
clinking the coin; "all this trumpery is and shall remain yours if you
promise to give me the first little soul that enters the door of the new
temple when it is consecrated."

The astonished magistrates sprang from their seats as if they had been
shot up by an earthquake and rushed pell-mell into the farthest corner
of the room, where they rolled and clung to each other like lambs
frightened at flashes of lightning. Only one of the party had not
entirely lost his wits, and he collected his remaining senses and,
drawing his head out of the heap, uttered boldly: "Avaunt, thou wicked
spirit!"

But the stranger, who was no less a person than Master Urian, laughed at
them. "What's all this outcry about?" said he at length. "Is my offence
so heinous that you are all become like children? It is I that may
suffer from this business, not you. With my hundreds and thousands I
have not far to run to buy a score of souls. Of you I ask but one in
exchange for all my money. What are you picking at straws for? One may
plainly see you are a mere set of humbugs! For the good of the
commonwealth (which high-sounding name is often borrowed for all sorts
of purposes) many a prince would instantly conduct a whole army to be
butchered, and you refuse one single man for that purpose! Fie! I am
ashamed, O overwise counsellors, to hear you reason thus absurdly

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

and citizen-like. What, do you think to deprive yourselves of the kernel
of your people by granting my wish? Oh, no; there your wisdom is quite
at fault, for, depend on it, hypocrites are always the earliest church
birds."

By degrees, as the cunning fiend thus spoke, the magistrates took
courage and whispered in each other's ears: "What is the use of our
resisting? The grim lion will only show his teeth once. If we don't
assent, we shall infallibly be packed off ourselves. It is better,
therefore, to quiet him directly."

Scarcely had they given effect to this new disposition and concluded the
bargain when a swarm of purses flew into the room through doors and
windows. Urian now took leave, but he stopped at the door and called out
with a grim leer: "Count it over again for fear I may have cheated you."

The hellish gold was piously expended in finishing the cathedral, but
nevertheless, when the building was completed, splendid though it was,
the whole town was filled with fear and alarm at the sight of it. The
fact was that, although the magistrates had promised by bond and oath
not to trust the secret to anybody, one had prated to his wife, and she
had made it a market-place tale, so that one and all declared they would
never set foot within the walls. The terrified council now consulted the
clergy, but the good priests hung their heads. At last a monk cried out:
"A thought strikes me. The wolf which has so long ravaged the
neighbourhood of our town was this morning caught alive. This will be a
well-merited punishment for the destroyer of our flocks; let him be cast
to the devil in the fiery gulf. ’Tis possible the arch hell-hound may
not relish this breakfast, yet, *nolens volens*, he must swallow it.

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> You promised him
certainly a soul, but whose was not decidedly specified."

The monk's plan was plausible, and the magistrates determined to put the
cunning trick into execution. The day of consecration arrived. Orders
were given to bring the wolf to the principal entrance of the cathedral,
and just as the bells began to ring, the trap-door of the cage was
opened and the savage beast darted out into the nave of the empty
church. Master Urian from his lurking-place beheld this
consecration-offering with the utmost fury; burning with choler at being
thus deceived, he raged like a tempest, and finally rushed forth,
slamming the brass gate so violently after him that the ring cracked in
twain.

This fissure commemorates the priest's victory over the devices of the
Devil, and is still exhibited to travellers who visit the cathedral.

### A Legend of Bonn

The city of Bonn is one of the most beautiful of all those situated on
the banks of the Rhine, and being the birthplace of no less celebrated a
composer than Beethoven, it naturally attracts a goodly number of
pilgrims every year, these coming from many distant lands to do homage
at the shrine of genius. But Bonn and its neighbourhood have older
associations than this--associations which carry the mind of the
traveller far into the Middle Ages--for hard by the town is Rolandseck;
while a feature of the district is the *Siebengebirge* (Seven
Mountains), a fine serried range of peaks which present a very imposing
appearance when viewed from any of the heights overlooking Bonn itself,
and which recall a justly famous legend.

This story tells that in the thirteenth century there lived

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

at a castle in the heart of these mountains a nobleman called Wolfram
Herzog von Bergendorf; and being no freebooter like most of the other
German barons of the time, but a man of very pious disposition, he was
moved during the prime of his life to forsake his home and join a body
of crusaders. Reaching Palestine after a protracted journey, these
remained there for a long time, Wolfram fighting gallantly in every fray
and making his name a terror to the Saracens. But the brave crusader was
wounded eventually, and now he set out for Germany, thirsting all the
way for a sight of his beloved *Siebengebirge*, and dreaming of the
wind-swept schloss which was his home. As he drew nearer to it he
pictured the welcome which his fond Herzogin would give him, but
scarcely had the drawbridge been lowered to admit him to his castle ere
a fell piece of news was imparted to him. In short, it transpired that
his wife Elise had been unfaithful to him during his absence and, on
hearing that he was returning, had fled precipitately with her infant
son. It was rumoured that she had found refuge in a convent, but Wolfram
was quite unable to ascertain his wife's whereabouts, the doors of all
nunneries being impassable to men; while even the joy of revenge was
denied him, for, try as he might, he could not find out the name of the
person who had wronged him. So the Herzog was broken-hearted, and he
vowed that henceforth he would live a solitary life within his castle,
spending his time in prayer and seeing only his own retainers.

For many years this vow was piously observed, and Wolfram never stirred
abroad. In course of time, however, he began to chafe at the restraint,
feeling it the more acutely because he was an old soldier and had known
the

 

<span id="img_13400"></span>

[![THE KREUZBERG, BONN&lt;br&gt; LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.&lt;br&gt;
&lt;i&gt;Facing page 134&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/13400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/13400.jpg.md)  
THE KREUZBERG, BONN  
LOUIS WEIRTER, R.B.A.  
*Facing page 134*.  

 

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

excitement of warfare; and so it came about that he revoked his decision
and began to travel about the country as of old. It seemed also, to some
of his henchmen, that he was gradually becoming more like his former
self, and they sometimes said among themselves that he would marry again
and had quite forgotten his wrongs. But the very reverse was the truth,
and if Wolfram was growing more cheerful, it was because new hopes of
retribution were springing up in his heart. The chance would come, he
often told himself; surely the fates would one day confront him with his
wife's lover! And one day, as he rode through the village of Gudesburg,
these revengeful thoughts were uppermost in his mind. They engrossed him
wholly, and he took little heed of the passers-by; but an unexpected
stumble on the part of his horse caused him to look up, and of a sudden
his eyes blazed like live coals. Here, walking only a few yards away
from him, was a youth who bore an unmistakable resemblance to the
unfaithful Elise; and dismounting instantly, the Herzog strode up to the
stranger, hailed him loudly, and proceeded to question him concerning
his identity. The youth was surprised at the anger expressed on the
elder man's countenance; and being overawed, he answered all questions
without hesitation, unfolding the little he knew about his parentage.
Nor had Wolfram's instincts deceived him; the tale he heard confirmed
his suspicions, and drawing his sword, he slew the youth in cold blood,
denying him even a moment in which to repeat a paternoster.

A rude iron cross, still standing by the road at Gudesburg, is said to
mark the place where the ill-starred and unoffending young man met his
doom. Possibly this cross was erected by Wolfram himself because he
experienced

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

remorse, and felt that he had been unduly hasty in taking life; but be
that as it may, the story concludes by asserting that the Herzog once
more vowed that he would spend the rest of his days in solitude and
prayer, and that henceforth to the end his vow remained unbroken.

### The Treasure-seeker

This is a picturesque tale of the consequences of wealth attained by the
aid of the supernatural which hangs about the ancient village of
Endenich, near Bonn, where at the end of the seventeenth century there
dwelt a certain sheriff and his son, Konrad, who was a locksmith by
trade. They were poor and had lost everything in the recent wars, which
had also ruined Heribert, another sheriff, who with his daughter, the
beautiful Gretchen, eked out a frugal but peaceful existence in the same
neighbourhood. The two young people fell in love with each other, but
Gretchen's father, becoming suddenly and mysteriously very rich and
arrogant withal, desired a wealthy or highly placed official as his
son-in-law and not a poor lad with no expectations such as Konrad, the
locksmith. The lovers were therefore compelled to meet in secret, and it
was on one of these occasions that Heribert, surprising them together,
attacked Konrad and felled him to the ground in his rage that he should
dare to approach his daughter.

Spurred by his love and knowing that he could never hope to win Gretchen
without wealth, the unhappy youth decided to barter for gold the only
possession left to him--his soul.

Now there lived in the churchyard a Lapp wizard who made such bargains;
so in the dead of night Konrad took his way to this dreadful and
unfrequented spot and

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

exhorted the sorcerer to come forth. At the third cry a terrible
apparition appeared and demanded to know his wishes, to which the
terrified Konrad could only reply: "Gold." Thereupon the sorcerer led
the way deep into a forest and, pointing mysteriously to a certain spot,
disappeared. At this spot Konrad found a chest full of gold and silver
coins, and returning to Bonn, he bought a house the splendour of which
surpassed that of Heribert, who could no longer refuse his daughter to
so wealthy a suitor.

The young wife tried all her arts to solve the mystery of her husband's
wealth, and he was at length about to reveal it to her when he was
suddenly arrested and thrown into prison. Here he was put to torture by
the authorities, who suspected him of robbery, and at length he
confessed that he had found a treasure, while to his wife he confided
the gruesome details, all of which were overheard by his jailers.

He was released, but almost immediately re-arrested on the suspicion
that he had killed a Jew named Abraham, who had amassed great sums
during the wars as a spy. Tortured again, in his extremity he confessed
to the murder and named Heribert as his accomplice, whereupon both men
were sentenced to be hanged. Just as this doom was about to be carried
out a Jew who had arrived from a far country hurriedly forced his way
through the crowd. It was Abraham, who had returned in time to save the
innocent.

But his sin did not pass unpunished, for Konrad died childless; he
bequeathed his wealth to the Church and charities, in expiation of his
sin of having attained wealth by the aid of an evil spirit.

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

### The Miller's Maid of Udorf

Udorf is a little village on the left bank of the Rhine, not far from
the town of Bonn, and at no great distance from it stands a lonely mill,
to which attaches the following story of a woman's courage and
resourcefulness.

Hännchen was the miller's servant-maid, a buxom young woman who had been
in his service for a number of years, and of whose faithfulness both he
and his wife were assured.

One Sunday morning the miller and his wife had gone with their elder
children to attend mass at the neighbouring village of Hersel, leaving
Hännchen at the mill in charge of the youngest child, a boy of about
five years of age.

On the departure of the family for church Hännchen busied herself in
preparing dinner, but had scarcely commenced her task ere a visitor
entered the kitchen. This was no other than her sweetheart, Heinrich,
whom she had not seen for some time. Indeed, he had earned so bad a
reputation as a loafer and an idle good-for-nothing that the miller, as
much on Hännchen's account as on his own, had forbidden him the house.
Hännchen, however, received her lover with undisguised pleasure,
straightway set food before him, and sat down beside him for a chat,
judging that the miller's dinner was of small consequence compared with
her ill-used Heinrich! The latter ate heartily, and toward the end of
the meal dropped his knife, as though by accident.

"Pick that up, my girl," said he.

Hännchen protested good-humouredly, but obeyed none the less. As she
stooped to the floor Heinrich seized her by the neck and held another
knife to her throat.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

"Now, girl, show me where your master keeps his money," he growled
hoarsely. "If you value your life, make haste."

"Let me go and I'll tell you," gasped Hännchen; and when he had loosened
his grip on her throat she looked at him calmly.

"Don't make such a fuss about it, Heinrich," she said pleasantly. "If
you take my master's money, you must take me too, for this will be no
place for me. Will you take me with you, Heinrich?"

The hulking fellow was taken completely off his guard by her apparent
acquiescence, and touched by her desire to accompany him, which he
attributed, with the conceit of his kind, to his own personal
attractions.

"If I find the money, you shall come with me, Hännchen," he conceded
graciously. "But if you play me false------" The sentence ended with an
expressive motion of his knife.

"Very well, then," said the maid. "The money is in master's room. Come
and I will show you where it is concealed."

She led him to the miller's room, showed him the massive coffer in which
lay her master's wealth, and gave him a piece of iron wherewith to prise
it open.

"I will go to my own room," she said, "and get *my* little savings, and
then we shall be ready to go."

So she slipped away, and her erstwhile sweetheart set to work on the
miller's coffer.

"The villain!" said Hännchen to herself when she was outside the room.
"Now I know that master was right when he said that Heinrich was no fit
suitor to come courting me."

With that she slammed the door to and turned the key, shutting the thief
in a room as secure as any prison-cell. He threatened and implored her,
but Hännchen was

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

deaf to oaths and entreaties alike. Outside she found the miller's son
playing happily, and called him to her. "Go to father as quickly as you
can," she said, putting him on the road to Hersel. "You will meet him
down there. Tell him there is a thief in the mill."

The child ran as fast as his little legs would carry him, but ere he had
gone many yards a shrill whistle sounded from the barred window behind
which Heinrich was imprisoned.

"Diether," shouted the robber to an accomplice in hiding, "catch the
child and come and stop this wench's mouth." Hännchen looked around for
the person thus addressed, but no one was in sight. A moment later,
however, Diether sprang up from a ditch, seized the frightened boy, and
ran back toward the mill. The girl had but little time in which to
decide on a course of action. If she barricaded herself in the mill,
might not the ruffian slay the child? On the other hand, if she waited
to meet him, she had no assurance that he would not kill them both. So
she retired to the mill, locked the door, and awaited what fate had in
store for her. In vain the robber threatened to kill the child and burn
the mill over her head if she would not open to him at once. Seeing that
his threats had no effect, he cast about for some means of entering the
mill. His quick eye noted one unprotected point, an opening in the wall
connected with the big mill-wheel, a by no means easy mode of ingress.
But, finding no other way, he threw the frightened child on the grass
and slipped through the aperture.

Meanwhile Hännchen, who from the position of her upper window could not
see what was going on, was pondering how she could attract the attention
of the miller or any of their neighbours. At last she hit upon a plan.

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It was Sunday and
the mill was at rest. If she were to set the machinery in motion, the
unusual sight of a mill at work on the day of rest would surely point to
some untoward happening. Hardly had the idea entered her head ere the
huge sails were revolving. At that very moment Diether had reached the
interior of the great drum-wheel, and his surprise and horror were
unbounded when it commenced to rotate. It was useless to attempt to stop
the machinery; useless, also, to appeal to Hännchen. Round and round he
went, till at last he fell unconscious on the bottom of the engine, and
still he went on rotating. As Hännchen had anticipated, the miller and
his family were vastly astonished to see the mill in motion, and
hastened home from church to learn the reason for this departure from
custom. Some of their neighbours accompanied them. In a few words
Hännchen told them all that had occurred; then her courage forsook her
and she fainted in the arms of the miller's eldest son, who had long
been in love with her, and whom she afterward married.

The robbers were taken in chains to Bonn, where for their many crimes
they suffered the extreme penalty of the law.

### Rosebach and its Legend

The quiet and peaceful valley of Hammerstein is one of the most
beautiful in all Rhineland, yet, like many another lovely stretch of
country, this valley harbours some gruesome tales, and among such there
is one, its scene the village of Rosebach, which is of particular
interest, as it is typical of the Middle Ages, and casts a light on the
manner of life and thought common in those days. For many centuries
there stood at this village of Rosebach a monastery, which no longer
exists, and it was

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

probably one of its early abbots who first wrote down the legend, for it
is concerned primarily with the strange events which led to the founding
and endowment of this religious house, and its whole tenor suggests the
pen of a medieval cleric.

In a remote and shadowy time there lived at Schloss Rosebach a certain
Otto, Count of Reuss-Marlinberg of Hammerstein; and this Count's evil
deeds had made him notorious far and near, while equally ill-famed was
his favourite henchman, Riguenbach by name, a man who had borne arms in
the Crusades and had long since renounced all belief in religion. This
ruffian was constantly in attendance on his master, Otto; and one day,
when the pair were riding along the high-road together, they chanced to
espy a bewitching maiden who was making her way from a neighbouring
village to the convent of Walsdorf, being minded to enter the novitiate
there and eventually take the veil. The Count doffed his hat to the
prospective nun, less because he wished to be courteous than because it
was his habit to salute every wayfarer he encountered on his domain; and
Riguenbach, much amused by Otto's civility to one of low degree, burst
into a loud laugh of derision and called after the maiden, telling her
to come back. She obeyed his behest, and thereupon the two horsemen drew
rein and asked the damsel whither she was bound. "To Walsdorf," she
replied; and though Otto himself would have let her go forward as she
pleased, the crafty Riguenbach was not so minded. "There are many
dangers in the way," he said to the girl; "if you push on now that
evening is drawing near you may fall a prey to robbers or wolves, so you
had better come to the castle with us, spend the night there, and
continue your journey on the morrow." Pleased

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

by the apparently friendly offer, and never dreaming of the fate in
store for her, the girl willingly accepted the invitation. That night
the people around Schloss Rosebach heard piercing screams and wondered
what new villainy was on foot. But the massive stone walls kept their
secret, and the luckless maiden never again emerged from the castle.

For a time the Count's crime went unpunished, and about a year later he
commenced paying his addresses to Eldegarda, a lady of noble birth. In
due course the nuptials of the pair were celebrated. The bride had
little idea what manner of man she had espoused, but she was destined to
learn this shortly; for on the very night of their marriage an
apparition rose between the two.

"Otto," cried the ghost in weird, sepulchral tones, "I alone am thy
lawful spouse; through thee I lost all hopes of Heaven, and now I am
come to reward thee for thy evil deeds." The Count turned livid with
fear, and the blush on Eldegarda's cheek faded to an ashen hue; but the
spectre remained with them throughout the night. And night after night
she came to them thus, till at last Otto grew desperate and summoned to
his aid a Churchman who happened to be in the neighbourhood, the Abbot
Bernard of Clairvaux.

Now this Bernard enjoyed no small fame as a worker of miracles, but when
Otto unfolded his case to him the Abbot declared straightway that no
miracle would be justifiable in the present instance, and that only by
repentance and by complete renunciation of the world might the Count be
released from his nightly menace. Otto hung his head on hearing this
verdict, and as he stood hesitating, pondering whether it were possible
for him to forgo all earthly joys, his old henchman, Riguenbach,

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

chanced to enter, and learning his master's quandary, he laughed loudly
and advised the Count to eject Bernard forcibly. The Abbot met the
retainer's mirth with a look of great severity, and on Riguenbach
showing that he was still bent on insolence, the Churchman cried to him:
"Get thee behind me, Satan"; whereupon a flame of lightning darted
suddenly across the chamber, and the man who had long aided and abetted
the Count's wickedness was consumed to ashes.

For a moment Otto stood aghast at the awful fate of his retainer; and
now, beholding how terrible a thing is divine vengeance, he began at
last to feel truly repentant. He consented to have his marriage annulled
without delay, and even declared that he himself would become a monk. At
the same time he counselled his wife to take the veil, and they parted,
thinking never to see each other again. But one night, ere either of
them had taken the irrevocable vows, the Virgin Mary appeared to Abbot
Bernard and told him he had acted unwisely in parting the bride and
bridegroom in this wise, for was not Eldegarda wholly innocent? The
Churchman instantly returned to Otto's presence, and on the following
day the Count and his wife were duly remarried. The newly found piety of
the penitent found expression in the building and endowment of a
religious edifice upon his domains.

So it was, then, that the Abbey of Rosebach was founded, and though the
ruthless hand of time has levelled its walls, the strange events to
which they owed their being long ago are still remembered and recited in
the lovely vale of Hammerstein; for, though all human things must needs
perish, a good story long outlives them all.

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

### The Dancers of Ramersdorf

At Ramersdorf every Sunday afternoon the lads and lasses of the hamlet
gathered on the village green and danced gaily through the sunny hours.
But wild prophecies of the coming end of the world, when the year 1000
should break, were spreading throughout the countryside, and the spirit
of fear haunted the people, so that music died away from their hearts
and there was no more dancing on the village green. Instead they spent
the hours praying in the church for divine mercy, and the Abbot of
Löwenburg was well pleased.

The dreaded year came and went, yet the world had not ceased; the sun
still rose and set, life went on just the same. So fear passed from the
hearts of the people, and because they were happy again the young folk
once more assembled to dance the Sundays away on the village green. But
the abbot was wroth at this. When the music began he appeared among the
villagers, commanding them to cease from their revels and bethink
themselves of the House of God. But the lads and lasses laughed, and the
music went on as they footed it gaily. Then the abbot was angered; he
raised his hands to heaven and cursed the thoughtless crowd, condemning
the villagers to dance there unceasingly for a year and a day.

As they heard the dreadful words the young folk tried to stop, but their
feet must needs go on to the endless music. Faster and faster in giddy
round they went, day and night, rain and shine, throughout the changing
seasons, until the last hours of the extra day, when they fell in a
senseless heap in the hollow worn by their unresting feet. When they
awoke to consciousness all reason had passed from them. To the day of
their death they remained helpless

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

idiots. Henceforth the village green was deserted; no more were seen the
lads and lasses dancing there on the Sabbath day.

### The Löwenburg

Tradition asserts that on the summit of this mountain once stood a
castle, of which, however, not the slightest trace can be found at the
present day. There is also a story of the lord who dwelt there, Hermann
von Heinsberg, with whom, for his sins, the direct line of the family
became extinct.

Graf Hermann was possessed by one overmastering passion, that of the
chase. The greater part of his life was spent in the dense forests which
clothed the valleys and mountains about his castle. Every other interest
must, perforce, stand aside. The cornfields, vineyards, and gardens of
his vassals were oftentimes devastated in his sport, to the utter ruin
of many. If any dared complain he laughed at or reviled them; but if he
were in angry mood he set his hounds on them and hunted his vassals as
quarry, either killing them outright or leaving them terribly injured.
Needless to say, he was well hated by these people, also by his own
class, for his character was too fierce and overbearing even for their
tolerance. To crown his unpopularity, he was under the ban of the
all-powerful Church, for saints' days and Lord's Day alike he hunted to
his heart's content, and once, on receiving a remonstrance, had
threatened to hunt the Abbot of Heisterbach himself. So he lived,
isolated, except for his troop of jägers, from the rest of mankind. The
forest was his world, his only friends the hounds.

Once, on the eve of a holy festival, Hermann set out to

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

hunt in the ancient forest about the base of the Löwenburg. In the
excitement of the chase he outstripped his followers, his quarry
disappeared, and, overtaken by night, his surroundings, in the dim
light, took on such an unfamiliar aspect that he completely lost all
sense of direction. Up and down he paced in unrestrained yet impotent
anger, feeling that he was under some evil spell. Maddened by this idea,
he endeavoured to hack his way through the thick undergrowth, but the
matted boughs and dense foliage were as effectual as prison bars. He was
trapped, he told himself, in some enchanted forest, for the place seemed
more and more unfamiliar. He strove to bring back some recollection of
the spot, which surely he must have passed a thousand times. But no--he
could not distinguish any feature that seemed familiar. His spirits sank
lower and lower, his strength seemed on the point of failing, his brain
seemed to be on fire. Round and round he went like some trapped animal;
then he threw himself madly upon a mass of tangled underwood and
succeeded in breaking through to a more open space. This also seemed
unfamiliar, and in the dim light of the stars the tall trees shut him in
as if with towers of impenetrable shadow; silence seemed to lay
everything under a spell of terror, ominous of coming evil.

Wearied in body and mind, Hermann flung himself down on the sward and
quickly fell asleep. But suddenly a plunging in the brushwood aroused
him, and with the instinct of the huntsman he sprang up instantly,
seizing his spear and whistling to his dogs, which, however, crouched
nearer to the earth, their hair bristling and eyes red with fear. Again
their master called, but they refused to stir, whining, with eyes
strained and fixed on the undergrowth. Then Graf Hermann went forward
alone to the

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

spot whence proceeded the ominous sound, his spear poised, ready to
strike.

He was about to penetrate into the brushwood when suddenly there emerged
from it a majestic-looking man, who seemed as if hotly pursued. He was
dressed in ancient garb, carrying a large crossbow in his right hand. A
curved hunting-horn hung at his side, and an old-fashioned hunting-knife
was stuck in his girdle.

With a stately motion of the hand he waved Hermann aside, then he raised
the horn to his lips and blew upon it a terrible blast so unearthly in
sound that the forest and mountains sent back echoes like the cry of the
lost, to which the hounds gave tongue with a howl of fear. As if in
answer to the echoes, there suddenly appeared hundreds of skeleton
stags, of enormous size, each bestridden by a skeleton hunter. With one
accord the ghostly riders spurred on their steeds, which with lowered
antlers advanced upon the stranger, who, with a scream for mercy, sought
frenziedly for some means of evading his grisly pursuers.

For the space of an hour the dreadful chase went on, Graf Hermann rooted
to the spot with horror, overcome by a sense of helplessness. There in
the centre he stood, the pivot round which circled the infernal hunt,
unable to stay the relentless riders as with bony hands rattling against
their skeleton steeds they encouraged them to charge, gore, and trample
the hapless stranger, whose cries of agony were drowned by shrieks of
fiendish glee and the incessant cracking of whips. Overcome at last by
terror, the count fell senseless, his eyes dazed by the still whirling
spectres and their flying quarry.

When at last he slowly awaked from his swoon he looked around, fearing
to see again the hideous spectacle. All

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

but the stranger, however, had vanished. Graf Hermann shuddered as he
looked upon him, and only with difficulty could he summon sufficient
courage to address him. Indeed, it was only after the unwonted action of
crossing himself that he could speak.

"Who and what are you?" he asked in a hushed tone. But the stranger made
no reply, except to sigh mournfully. Again the count asked the question,
and again received but a sigh for answer.

"Then in the name of the Most High God I conjure you, speak!" he said
the third time.

The stranger turned to him, as if suddenly released from bonds.

"By the power of God's holy name the spell is broken at last. Listen now
to me!"

He beckoned Hermann to his side and in strange, stern tones he related
the following:

"I am your ancestor. Like you, I loved the chase beyond everything in
life--beyond our holy faith or the welfare of any human being, man,
woman, or child. To all that stood in my path I showed no mercy. There
came a time when famine visited the land. The harvest was destroyed by
blight and the people starved. In their extremity they broke into my
forests; famished with hunger, they destroyed and carried off the game.
Beside myself with rage, I swore that they should suffer for it--that
for every head of game destroyed I would exact a human life. I kept my
oath. Arming my retainers, servants, and huntsmen, I seized my
presumptuous vassals in the dead of night, and dragging them to the
castle, I flung them into the deepest dungeons. There for three days I
let them starve--for three days also I kept my hounds without food.
Meantime my huntsmen had caught a great number

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

of the largest and strongest deer in the forests. At the end of three
days the unfortunate wretches were brought out, diminished now by a full
hundred. My ready retainers bound them naked to the stags. My best
steeds were saddled. Then the kennels were thrown open and the famished
hounds rushed forth like a host of demons. Off went the deer like the
wind, each with his human burden, the dogs following, and then the
horsemen, shouting with glee at the new sport. By nightfall not a stag
or his rider was left alive. The hounds in their fury worried and tore
at both man and beast, and the last unfortunate wretch met a hideous
death on this spot where we now stand."

He paused as if overcome by the memory of his crime.

"God avenged that dreadful deed. That night I died, and I am now
suffering the tortures of the damned. Every night I am hunted by my
victims, as you have seen. I am now the quarry, hunted from the castle
court, on through the forest, to this hidden and haunted spot. Thousands
and thousands of times I have suffered this: I endure all the agonies I
made them suffer. I am doomed to undergo this to the last day, when I
shall be hunted over the wastes of hell by legions of demons."

Again he paused, his eyes terrible with the anguish of a lost soul. He
resumed in a sterner tone:

"Take warning by my fate. Providence, kinder to you than to me, has
guided you hither to-night that you might learn of my punishment. While
you still have time repent of your crimes and endeavour to make amends
for the suffering you have inflicted. Remember--the wages of sin is
death. Remember me--and my fate!"

The next moment the phantom had faded from view.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Only the hounds
were crouching near the count, panting fearfully. All else was silent
gloom and night. After a terrible vigil the morning came, and Graf
Hermann, now a changed man, returned to his castle in silence, and
henceforth endeavoured to profit by the warning and follow the advice of
his unhappy ancestor.

<div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[92:1](lr07.htm#fr_3.md) See my *Dictionary of
Medieval Romance*, articles 'Grail,' 'Parzival,' 'Perceval,' and
'Garin.'

<span id="fn_4"></span>[92:2](lr07.htm#fr_4.md) *Op. cit*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Drachenfels To Rheinstein](lr08.md)

</div>
