[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Miscellaneous](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fmma29)  [Next](fmma31) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Famous Men of the Middle Ages*, by John Henry Haaren, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

WILLIAM TELL  
AND ARNOLD VON WINKELRIED

 

I

 

FAR up among the Alps, in the very heart of Switzerland, are three
districts, or cantons, as they are called, which are known as the Forest
Cantons and are famous in the world's history. About two thousand years
ago the Romans found in these cantons a hardy race of mountaineers, who,
although poor, were free men and proud of their independence. They
became the friends and allies of Rome, and the cantons were for many
years a part of the Roman Empire, but the people always had the right to
elect their own officers and to govern themselves.

 

When Goths and the Vandals and the Huns from beyond the Rhine and the
Danube overran the Roman Empire, these three cantons were not disturbed.
The land was too poor and rocky to attract men who were fighting for
possession of the rich plains and valleys of Europe, and so it happened
that for century after century, the mountaineers of these cantons lived
on in their old, simple way, undisturbed by the rest of the world.

 

In a canton in the valley of the Rhine lived the Hapsburg family, whose
leaders in time grew to be very rich and powerful. They became dukes of
Austria and some of them were elected emperors. One of the Hapsburgs,
Albert I, claimed that the land of the Forest Cantons belonged to him.
He sent a governor and a band of soldiers to those cantons and made the
people submit to his authority.

 

In one of the Forest Cantons at this time lived a famous mountaineer
named William Tell. He was tall and strong. In all Switzerland no man
had a foot so sure as his on the mountains or a hand so skilled in the
use of a bow. He was determined to resist the Austrians.

 

Secret meetings of the mountaineers were held and all took a solemn oath
to stand by each other and fight for their freedom; but they had no arms
and were simple shepherds who had never been trained as soldiers. The
first thing to be done was to get arms without attracting the attention
of the Austrians. It took nearly a year to secure spears, swords, and
battle-axes and distribute them among the mountains. Finally this was
done, and everything was ready. All were waiting for a signal to rise.

 

<span id="img_62"></span> ![](img/62.jpg)

 

The story tells us that just at this time Gessler, the Austrian
governor, who was a cruel tyrant, hung a cap on a high pole in the
market-place in the village of Altorf, and forced everyone who passed to
bow before it. Tell accompanied by his little son, happened to pass
through the marketplace. He refused to bow before the cap and was
arrested. Gessler offered to release him if he would shoot an apple from
the head of his son. The governor hated Tell and made this offer hoping
that the mountaineer's hand would tremble and that he would kill his own
son. It is said that Tell shot the apple from his son's head but that
Gessler still refused to release him. That night as Tell was being
carried across the lake to prison a storm came up. In the midst of the
storm he sprang from the boat to an over-hanging rock and made his
escape. It is said that he killed the tyrant. Some people do not believe
this story, but the Swiss do, and if you go to Lake Lucerne some day
they will show you the very rock upon which Tell stepped when he sprang
from the boat.

 

That night the signal fires were lighted on every mountain and by the
dawn of day the village of Altorf was filled with hardy mountaineers,
armed and ready to fight for their liberty. A battle followed and the
Austrians were defeated and driven from Altorf. This victory was
followed by others.

 

<span id="img_63"></span> ![](img/63.jpg)

 

A few years later, the duke himself came with a large army, determined
to conquer the mountaineers. He had to march through a narrow pass, with
mountains rising abruptly on either side. The Swiss were expecting him
and hid along the heights above the pass, as soon as the Austrians
appeared in the pass, rocks and trunks of trees were hurled down upon
them. Many were killed and wounded. Their army was defeated, and the
duke was forced to recognize the independence of the Forest Cantons.

 

This was the beginning of the Republic of Switzerland. In time five
other cantons joined them in a compact for liberty.

 

II

 

ABOUT seventy years later the Austrians made another attempt to conquer
the patriots. They collected a splendid army and marched into the
mountains. The Swiss at once armed themselves and met the Austrians at a
place called Sempach. In those times powder had not been invented, and
men fought with spears, swords, and battle-axes. The Austrian soldiers
stood shoulder to shoulder, each grasping a long spear whose point
projected far in front of him. The Swiss were armed with short swords
and spears and it was impossible for them to get to the Austrians. For a
while their cause looked hopeless, but among the ranks of the Swiss was
a brave man from one of the Forest Cantons. His name was Arnold von
Winkelried. As he looked upon the bristling points of the Austrian
spears, he saw that his comrades had no chance to win unless an opening
could be made in that line. He determined to make such an opening even
at the cost of his life. Extending his arms as far as he could, he
rushed toward the Austrian line and gathered within his arms as many
spears as he could grasp.

 

"Make way for liberty!" he cried--  
Then ran, with arms extended wide,  
As if his dearest friend to clasp;  
Ten spears he swept within his grasp.  
"Make way for liberty!" he cried--  
Their keen points met from side to side.  
He bowed among them like a tree,  
And thus made way for liberty.

 

Pierced through and through Winkelried fell dead, but he had made a gap
in the Austrian line, and into this gap rushed the Swiss patriots.
Victory was theirs and the Cantons were free.

 

<span id="img_64"></span> ![](img/64.jpg)

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tamerlane. Lived From 1333-1405](fmma31)
