<span id="P2111_621192"></span> <sup>3</sup> Lit. "from," i.e., which,
*urged* by a heart which is that of a saint, even though on this
occasion it failed, the prophet dared.

<span id="P2114_621439"></span> <sup>4</sup> Libratur.

<span id="P2118_621550"></span> <sup>5</sup> "Tarshish," Eng. ver.;
perhaps Tartessus in Spain. For this question, and the "trustiness" of
Joppa (now Jaffa) as a port, see Pusey on Jonah i. 3.

<span id="P2120_621749"></span> <sup>6</sup> Ejusdem per signa Dei.

<span id="P2125_621957"></span> <sup>7</sup> i.e., the cloud.

<span id="P2148_622907"></span> <sup>8</sup> Ge*nit*us (Oehler);
*gemin*us (Migne) = "twin clamour," which is not inapt.

<span id="P2151_623080"></span> <sup>9</sup> M*a*ndare (Oehler). If this
be the true reading, the rendering in the text seems to represent the
meaning; for "mandare" with *an accusative*, in the sense of "to *bid*
the tardy coils tighten the girth's noose," seems almost too gross a
solecism for even so lax a Latinist as our present writer. Migne,
however, reads m*u*ndare-*to "clear" the tardy coils,* i.e., probably
from the wash and weed with which the gale was cloying them.

<span id="P2193_625295"></span> <sup>10</sup> Tunc Domini vates ingesta
Spiritus infit. Of course it is a gross offence against quantity to make
a genitive in "us" short, as the rendering in the text does. But a
writer who makes the first syllable in "clamor" and the last syllable of
gerunds in *do* short, would scarcely be likely to hesitate about taking
similar liberties with a genitive of the so-called fourth declension. It
is possible, it is true, to take "vates" and "Spiritus" as in
apposition, and render, "Then the seer-Spirit of the Lord begins to
utter words inspired," or "Then the seer-Spirit begins to utter the
promptings of the Lord." But these renderings seem to accord less well
with the ensuing words.

<span id="P2196_626030"></span> <sup>11</sup> Mundi.
