<span id="P2211_626692"></span> <sup>12</sup> i.e., apparently with
shells which had gathered about him as he lay in the deep.

<span id="P2226_627401"></span> <sup>13</sup> This seems to be the sense
of Oehler's "Nauta at tum Domino leti venerando timorem Sacrificat
grates"-"grates" being in apposition with "timorem." But Migne reads:
"Nautaelig; tum Domino laeti venerando timorem Sacrificant grates:"-

Gladly make grateful sacrifice of fear:"and I do not see that Oehler's
reading is much better.

<span id="P2238_628243"></span> <sup>14</sup> Comp. Matt. xii. 38-41;
Luke xi. 29,30.

<span id="P2240_628326"></span> <sup>15</sup> These words are not in the
original, but are inserted (I confess) to fill up the line, and avoid
ending with an incomplete verse. If, however, any one is curious enough
to compare the translation, with all its defects, with the Latin, he may
be somewhat surprised to find how very little alteration or adaptation
is necessary in turning verse into verse.

<span id="P2250_628899"></span> <sup>1</sup> Maris aequor.

<span id="P2259_629247"></span> <sup>2</sup> See Gen. ix. 21, 22, x.
8-17.

<span id="P2268_629537"></span> <sup>3</sup> Comp. 2 Pet. iii. 5-14.

<span id="P2280_630043"></span> <sup>4</sup> The expression, "sinners
against their own souls," in Num. xvi. 38 - where, however, the LXX.
have a very different version - may be compared with this; as likewise
Prov. viii. 36.

<span id="P2287_630482"></span> <sup>5</sup> Whether the above be the
sense of this most obscure triplet I will not presume to determine. It
is at least (I hope) *intelligible* sense. But that the reader may judge
for himself whether he can offer any better, I sugjoin the lines, which
form a sentence alone, and therefore can be judged of without their
context: -"Tempore sed certo Deus omnia prospectulatus,Judicat injustos,
patiens ubi criminis aetasCessandi spatium vis nulla coÃ«gerit irae."

<span id="P2291_631065"></span> <sup>6</sup> Comp. Heb. i. 14. It may be
as well here to inform the reader once for that prosody as well as
syntax is repeatedly set at defiance in these metrical fragments; and
hence, of course, arise some of the chief difficulties in dealing with
them.
