<span id="P2912_662351"></span> <sup>21</sup> These lines, again, are
but a guess at the meaning of the original, which is as obscure as
defiance of grammar can well make it. The sense seems to be, in brief,
that while the vast majority are, immediately on their death, shut up in
Hades to await the "decreed age," i.e., the day of judgment, some, like
the children raised by Elijah and Elisha, the man who revived on
touching Elisha's bones, and the like, are raised *to die again*. Lower
down it will be seen that the writer believes that the saints who came
out of their graves after our Lord's resurrection (see Matt. xxvii.
51-54) did *not* die again.

<span id="P2920_663320"></span> <sup>22</sup> Cf. Ps. xlix. 14 (xlviii.
15 in LXX.).

<span id="P2931_663778"></span> <sup>23</sup> i.e., the dust into which
our bodies turn.

<span id="P2952_664679"></span> <sup>24</sup> i.e., the surface or ridge
of the furrows.

<span id="P2954_664774"></span> <sup>25</sup> i.e., the furrows.

<span id="P2957_664877"></span> <sup>26</sup> "Some thirty-fold, some
sixty-fold, some an hundred-fold." See the parable of the sower.

<span id="P2967_665336"></span> <sup>27</sup> Mundo.

<span id="P2969_665396"></span> <sup>28</sup> Fuligine.

<span id="P2975_665624"></span> <sup>29</sup> Mundo.

<span id="P2977_665724"></span> <sup>30</sup> Virtutibus. Perhaps the
allusion is to Eph. ii. 2, Matt. xxiv. 29, Luke xxi. 26.

<span id="P2981_665919"></span> <sup>31</sup> Mundi.

<span id="P2992_666368"></span> <sup>32</sup> Vel quanta est. If this be
the right sense, the words are probably inserted, because the
conflagration of "the earth and the works that are therein" predicted in
2 Pet. iii. 10, and referred to lower down in this piece, is supposed to
have begun, and thud the "depths" of the earth are supposed to be
already diminishing.

<span id="P2995_666790"></span> <sup>33</sup> I have ventured to alter
one letter of the Latin; and for "quos reddere jussa do*c*ebit," read
"quos reddere jussa do*l*ebit." If the common reading be retained, the
only possible meaning seems to be "whom she will teach to render (to
God) His commands," i.e., to render obedience to them; or else, "to
render (to God) what they are bidden to render," i.e., an account of
themselves; and earth, as their mother, giving them birth our of her
womb, is said to teach them to do this. But the emendation, which is at
all events simple, seems to give a better sense: "being bidden to render
the dead, whom she is keeping, up, earth will grieve at the throes it
causes her, but will do it."

<span id="P2999_667590"></span> <sup>34</sup> Subitae virtutis ab alto.
