<span id="P3822_710090"></span> <sup>63</sup> I have followed Oehler's
"face" for the common "phase;" but what the meaning is I will not
venture to decide. It may probably mean one of two things: (*a*) that
Paul wrote *by torchlight*; (*b*) that the *light* which Paul holds
forth in his life and writings, is a *torch* to show the Corinthians and
others Christ.

<span id="P3828_710549"></span> <sup>64</sup> i.e., the legal passover,
"image" or type of "the true Passover," Christ. See 1 Cor. v. 6-9.

<span id="P3832_710785"></span> <sup>65</sup> Abraham. See Gen. xxii.
1-19.

<span id="P3834_710847"></span> <sup>66</sup> Isaac, a pledge to Abraham
of all God's other promises.

<span id="P3835_710937"></span> <sup>67</sup> Forte. I suppose this
means out of the ordinary course of nature; but it is a strange word to
use.

<span id="P3842_711253"></span> <sup>68</sup> Israel, wasted by the
severities of their Egyptian captivity.

<span id="P3845_711416"></span> <sup>69</sup> "Mu*lta*;" but "mut*a*" =
"mute" has been suggested, and is not inapt.

<span id="P3857_711935"></span> <sup>70</sup> I have given what appears
to be a possible sense for these almost unintelligible lines. They run
as follows in Oehler: -

I rather incline to alter them somehow thus : -

connecting these three lines with "non ignorantes," and rendering: -

That is, in brief, they all, in celebrating the type, looked forward to
the Antitype to come.

<span id="P3874_713552"></span> <sup>71</sup> Immensus.

<span id="P3883_713891"></span> <sup>72</sup> This, again, seems to be
the meaning, unless the passage (which is not probable) be corrupt. The
flesh, "foul" now with sin, is called the "stained image of the Lord,"
as having been originally in His image, but being now stained by guilt.

<span id="P3886_714212"></span> <sup>73</sup> Faith is called so, as
being the reflection of divine reason.

<span id="P3894_714615"></span> <sup>74</sup> i.e., the praise of Christ
Himself. See Matt. xi. 7-15, with the parallel passage, Luke vii. 24-30;
comp. also John v. 33-35.
