<span id="P5702_899853"></span> <sup>91</sup> Some read "slumbers" for
"all men."

<span id="P5703_901426"></span> <sup>92</sup> "Cling to" is another
reading.

<span id="P5707_902662"></span> <sup>93</sup> Otherwise read, "But how
great a fault it is."

<span id="P5708_903774"></span> <sup>94</sup> "To urge them" is the
reading in some text.

<span id="P5709_904775"></span> <sup>95</sup> "Of all men" is another
reading.

<span id="P5710_905309"></span> <sup>96</sup> Otherwise, "Hippona."

<span id="P5711_905359"></span> <sup>97</sup> Otherwise, "devote," and
other readings.

<span id="P5715_907513"></span> <sup>98</sup> \[A reverent allusion to
the Crucified, believed in and worshipped as God.\]

<span id="P5716_907885"></span> <sup>99</sup> \[Jer. xvii. 5-7.\]

<span id="P5717_908725"></span> <sup>100</sup> \[See Justin Martyr's
*Dialogue with Trypho*, chap. lxxxix. et seqq. vol. i. p. 244. S.\]

<span id="P5718_909189"></span> <sup>101</sup> \[See Reeves's
*Apologies* (ut supra), vol. ii. p. 144, note. S.\]

<span id="P5722_910569"></span> <sup>102</sup> By medicaments and
drinks.

<span id="P5726_912741"></span> <sup>103</sup> \[Fronto is called "*our*
Cirtensian" in cap. ix. *supra*; and this suggests that the Octavius was
probably written in Cirta, *circa* a.d. 210. See *supra*, p. 178.\]

<span id="P5730_916961"></span> <sup>104</sup> According to some
editions, "conscience."

<span id="P5734_920734"></span> <sup>105</sup> \[Minucius is blamed for
not introducing more Scripture! He relates his friend's argument with a
scoffing Pagan. How could Octavius have used the Scriptures with such an
antagonist?\]

<span id="P5735_921022"></span> <sup>106</sup> \[*Wars of the Jews*, b.
v. cap. 9, etc.\]

<span id="P5739_922094"></span> <sup>107</sup> This passage is very
indefinite, and probably corrupt; the meaning is anything but
satisfactory. The general meaning is given freely thus: "Further, it is
a vulgar error to doubt or disbelieve a future conflagration of the
world."

<span id="P5740_922666"></span> <sup>108</sup> This passage is very
variously read, without substantial alteration of the sense.

<span id="P5741_923226"></span> <sup>109</sup> Otherwise, "to God
Himself alone, the artificer."

<span id="P5742_924163"></span> <sup>110</sup> This is otherwise read,
"the work of the mimic or buffoon."

<span id="P5743_925125"></span> <sup>111</sup> *Scil*. "by burning."

<span id="P5744_925511"></span> <sup>112</sup> \[1 Cor. xv. 36, Job,
xiv. 7-15.\]

<span id="P5748_927075"></span> <sup>113</sup> pur swfronoun is an
expression of Clemens Alexandrinus, so that there is no need for the
emendation of "rapiens" instead of "sapiens," suggested by one editor.

<span id="P5749_928167"></span> <sup>114</sup> "Are known as" is another
reading.

<span id="P5753_929196"></span> <sup>115</sup> Fatus.

<span id="P5754_929653"></span> <sup>116</sup> Otherwise read, "both
more truly."

<span id="P5755_930064"></span> <sup>117</sup> Some read, "I will speak
at length."

<span id="P5756_930744"></span> <sup>118</sup> Probably a better reading
is "strive for them."

<span id="P5760_932269"></span> <sup>119</sup> "Arridens," but otherwise
"arripiens," *scil*. "snatching at," suggesting possibly the idea of the
martyrs chiding the delays of the executioners, or provoking the rush of
the wild beasts.

<span id="P5761_933846"></span> <sup>120</sup> Otherwise, "unhoped-for."
\[This chapter has been supposed to indicate that the work was written
in a time of persecution. Faint tokens of the same have been imagined
also, in capp. 29 and 33, *supra*.\]

<span id="P5762_934773"></span> <sup>121</sup> This passage is peculiar;
the original is, "Ut ingenium eorum perditae mentis licentiae potestatis
liberae nundinentur," with various modifications of reading.

<span id="P5766_938333"></span> <sup>122</sup> The probable reading here
is, "You apply to a lifeless person, either if he has feeling, a torch;
or, if he feels not, a garland."

<span id="P5767_939497"></span> <sup>123</sup> "We who do not," etc., is
a conjectural reading, omitting the subsequent "we."

<span id="P5774_941586"></span> <sup>124</sup> Otherwise read, "and I
believe concerning God."

<span id="P5775_941829"></span> <sup>125</sup> \[i.e., he will become a
*catechumen* on the morrow.\]
