[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pfs04)  [Next](pfs06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/141914135X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Philippine Folklore Stories*, by John Maurice Miller, \[1904\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### QUICOY AND THE ONGLOC

This story is known generally in the southern Islands. The Ongloc is
feared by the children just as some little boys and girls fear the Bogy
Man. The tale is a favorite one among the children and they believe
firmly in the fate of Quicoy.

Little Quicoy's name was Francisco, but every one called him Quicoy,
which, in Visayan, is the pet name for Francisco. He was a good little
boy and helped his mother grind the corn and pound the rice in the big
wooden bowl, but one night he was very careless. While playing in the
corner with the cat he upset the jar of lubi lana, and all the oil ran
down between the bamboo strips in the floor and was lost. There was none
left to put in the glass and light, so the whole family had to go to bed
in the dark.

Quicoy's mother was angry. She whipped him with her chinela and then
opened the window and cried:

"Ongloc of the mountains!  
 Fly in through the door.  
 Catch Quicoy and eat him,  
 He is mine no more."

Quicoy was badly frightened when he heard this, for the Ongloc is a big
black man with terrible long teeth, who all night goes searching for the
bad boys and girls that he may change them into little cocoanuts and put
them on a shelf in his rock house in the mountains to eat when he is
hungry.

So when Quicoy went to his bed in the corner he pulled the matting over
his head and was so afraid that he did not go to sleep for a long time.

The next morning he rose very early and went down to the spring where
the boys get the water to put in the bamboo poles and carry home. Some
boys were already there, and he told them what had taken place the night
before. They were all sorry that his mother had called the Ongloc, but
they told him not to be afraid for they would tell him how he could be
forever safe from that terrible man.

It was very easy. All he had to do was to go at dusk to the cocoanut
grove by the river and dig holes under two trees. Then he was to climb a
tree, get the cocoanut that grew the highest, and, after taking off the
husk and punching in one of the little eyes, whisper inside:

"Ongloc of the mountains!  
 Ongloc! Ugly man!  
 I'm a little cocoanut,  
 Catch me if you can!"

Then he was to cut the cocoanut in halves, quickly bury one piece in one
of the holes, and, running to the other tree, bury the remaining half in
the other hole. After that he might walk home safely, being sure not to
run, for the Ongloc has always to obey the call of the cocoanut, and
must hunt through the grove to find the one that called him. Should he
cross the line between the holes, the buried pieces would fly out of the
holes, snap together on him, and, flying up the tree from which they
came, would keep him prisoner for a hundred years.

Quicoy was happy to think that he could capture the Ongloc, and resolved
to go that very night. He wanted some of the boys to go with him, but
they said he must go alone or the charm would be broken. They also told
him to be careful himself and not cross the line between the holes or he
would be caught as easily as the Ongloc.

So Quicoy went home and kept very quiet all day. His mother was sorry
she had frightened him the night before, and was going to tell him not
to be afraid; but when she thought of the lubi lana spilled on the
ground, she resolved to punish him more by saying nothing to him.

Just at dark, when no one was looking, Quicoy took his father's bolo and
quietly slipped away to the grove down by the river. He was not afraid
of ladrones, but he needed the bolo because it is not easy to open a
cocoanut, and it takes some time, even with a bolo, to get the husk
chopped from the fruit.

Quicoy felt a little frightened when he saw all the big trees around
him. The wind made strange noises in the branches high above him, and
all the trees seemed to be leaning over and trying to speak to him. He
felt somewhat sorry that he had come, but when he thought of the Ongloc
he mustered up courage and went on until he found an open space between
two high trees.

He stopped here and dug a hole under each of the trees. Then he put his
feet in the notches and climbed one of the trees. It was hard work, for
the notches were far apart; but at last he reached the branches and
climbed to the top. The wind rocked the tree and made him dizzy, but he
reached the highest cocoanut, threw it to the ground, and then 'started
down the tree. It was easy to come down, though he went too fast and
slipped and slid some distance, skinning his arms and legs. He did not
mind that, however, for he knew he had the cocoanut that would capture
the Ongloc. He picked it up, chopped off the husk, punched in one of the
little eyes, and whispered inside:

"Ongloc of the mountains!  
 Ongloc! Ugly man!  
 I'm a little cocoanut,  
 Catch me if you can!"

He then chopped it in halves and buried one piece, and, running to the
other tree, buried the remaining piece. Just as he finished he thought
he heard a noise in the grove, and, instead of walking, he started to
run as fast as he could.

It was very dark now, and the noise grew louder and made him run faster
and faster, until suddenly a dreadful scream sounded directly in front
of him, and a terrible black thing with fiery eyes came flying at him.
He turned in terror and ran back toward the trees. He knew it was the
Ongloc answering the call of the cocoanut, and he ran like mad, but the
monster had seen him and flew after him, screaming with rage.

Faster and faster he ran, but nearer and nearer sounded the frightful
screams until, just as he felt two huge claws close on his neck, there
was a bump, a loud snap, and he felt himself being carried high in the
air. When the shock was over he found that he was squeezed tightly
between two hard walls, and he could hear the Ongloc screaming and
tearing at the outside with his claws. Then he knew what had happened.

He had crossed the line between the buried pieces and they had snapped
on him and carried him up the tree from which they came. He was badly
squeezed but he felt safe from the Ongloc, who finally went away in
disappointment; for, although he likes cocoanuts, he cannot take one
from a tree, but must change a boy or girl into the fruit if he wishes
to eat of it.

Quicoy waited a long, long time and then knocked on the shell in the
hope that some one would hear him. All that night and the next day and
the next he knocked and cried and knocked, but, though people passed
under the tree and found the bolo, he was so high up they did not hear
him.

Days and weeks went by and the people wondered what had become of
Quicoy. Many thought he had run away and were sorry for his poor mother,
who grieved very much to think she had terrified him by calling the
Ongloc. Of course the boys who had sent him to the grove could have told
something of his whereabouts, but they were frightened and said nothing,
so no one ever heard of poor little Quicoy again.

If you pass a cocoanut grove at night you can hear a noise like some one
knocking. The older people say that the cocoanuts grow so closely
together high up in the branches that the wind, when it shakes the tree,
bumps them together. But the children know better. They say, "Quicoy is
knocking to get out, but he must stay there a hundred years."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Passing of Loku](pfs06)
