[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr18)  [Next](corr20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER XXII. (LXXIV.)

#### OLDENBURG TO SPINOZA.

"\[*Oldenburg wishes to be enlightened concerning the doctrine of
fatalism, of which Spinoza has been accused. He discourses on man's
limited intelligence and on the incarnation of the Son of God*.\]

As you seem to accuse me of excessive brevity, I will this time avoid
the charge by excessive prolixity. You expected,

see, that I should set forth those opinions in your writings, which seem
to discourage the practice of religious virtue in your readers. I will
indicate the matter which especially pains them. You appear to setup a
fatalistic necessity for all things and actions; if such is conceded and
asserted, people

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

aver, that the sinews of all laws, of virtue, and of religion, are
severed, and that all rewards and punishment are vain. Whatsoever can
compel, or involves necessity, is held also to excuse; therefore no one,
they think, can be without excuse in the sight of God. If we are driven
by fate, and all things follow a fixed and inevitable path laid down by
the hard hand of necessity, they do not see where punishment can come
in. What wedge can be brought for the untying of this knot, it is very
difficult to say. I should much like to know and learn what help you can
supply in the matter.

As to the opinions which you have kindly disclosed to me on the three
points I mentioned, the following inquiries suggest themselves. First,
In what sense do you take *miracles* and *ignorance* to be synonymous
and equivalent terms, as you appear to think in your last letter?

The bringing back of Lazarus from the dead, and the resurrection from
death of Jesus Christ seem to surpass all the power of created nature,
and to fall within the scope of divine power only; it would not be a
sign of culpable ignorance, that it was necessary to exceed the limits
of finite intelligence confined within certain bounds. But perhaps you
do not think it in harmony with the created mind and science, to
acknowledge in the uncreated mind and supreme Deity a science and power
capable of fathoming, and bringing to pass events, whose reason and
manner can neither be brought home nor explained to us poor human
pigmies? "We are men;" it appears, that we must " think everything human
akin to ourselves." <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16)

Again, when you say that you cannot understand that God really took upon
Himself human nature, it becomes allowable to ask you, how you
understand the texts in the Gospel and the Epistle to the Hebrews,
whereof the first says, "The Word was made flesh," <span
id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_17) and the other, "For verily he took not on
him the nature of angels; but he took on him the seed of Abraham." <span
id="fr_18"></span>[3](#fn_18) Moreover, the whole tenor of the Gospel
infers, as I think, that the only begotten Son of God, the Word (who
both was God and was with God), showed Himself in human nature, and by
His passion and

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

death offered up the sacrifice for our sins, the price of the atonement.
What you have to say concerning this without impugning the truth of the
Gospel and the Christian religion, which I think you approve of, I would
gladly learn.

I had meant to write more, but am interrupted by friends on a visit, to
whom I cannot refuse the duties of courtesy. But what I have already put
on paper is enough, and will perhaps weary you in your philosophizing.
Farewell, therefore, and believe me to be ever an admirer of your
learning and knowledge.

London, 16 Dec., 1675.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_16"></span>[300:1](corr19.htm#fr_16) Terence, Heaut. I. i.
25.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[300:2](corr19.htm#fr_17) John i. 14.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[300:3](corr19.htm#fr_18) Heb. ii. 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter XXIII. To Oldenburg](corr20)
