[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr51)  [Next](corr53) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER LIV. (XLVIII.)

#### SPINOZA TO FABRITIUS.

\[*Spinoza thanks the Elector for his kind offer, but, owing to his
unwillingness to teach in public, and other causes, humbly begs to be
allowed time to consider it*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Distinguished Sir</span>,—If I had ever desired
to take a professorship in any faculty, I could not have wished for any
other than that which is offered to me, through you, by His Most Serene
Highness the Elector Palatine, especially because of that freedom in
philosophical teaching, which the most gracious prince is kind enough to
grant, not to speak of the desire which I have long entertained, to live
under the rule of a prince, whom all men admire for his wisdom.

But since it has never been my wish to teach in public, I have been
unable to induce myself to accept this splendid opportunity, though I
have long deliberated about it. I think, in the first place, that I
should abandon philosophical research if I consented to find time for
teaching

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

young students. I think, in the second place, that I do not know the
limits, within which the freedom of my philosophical teaching would be
confined, if I am to avoid all appearance of disturbing the publicly
established religion. Religious quarrels do not arise so much from
ardent zeal for religion, as from men's various dispositions and love of
contradiction, which causes them to habitually distort and condemn
everything, however rightly it may have been said. I have experienced
these results in my private and secluded station, how much more should I
have to fear them after my elevation to this post of honour.

Thus you see, distinguished Sir, that I am not holding back in the hope
of getting something better, but through my love of quietness, which I
think I can in some measure secure, if I keep away from lecturing in
public. I therefore most earnestly entreat you to beg of the Most Serene
Elector, that I may be allowed to consider further about this matter,
and I also ask you to conciliate the favour of the most gracious prince
to his most devoted admirer, thus increasing the obligations of your
sincere friend,

<span class="smallcaps">B. de. S.</span>

The Hague, 30 March, 1673.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LV. From Hugo Boxel](corr53)
