[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr72)  [Next](corr74) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER LXXIII. (LXVII.)

#### ALBERT BURGH TO SPINOZA.

\[*Albert Burgh announces his reception into the Romish Church, and
exhorts Spinoza to follow his example*. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_82)\]

I promised to write to you on leaving my country, if anything noteworthy
occurred on the journey. I take the opportunity which offers of an event
of the utmost importance, to redeem my engagement, by informing you that
I have, by God's infinite mercy, been received into the Catholic Church
and made a member of the same. You may learn the particulars of the step
from a letter which I have sent to the distinguished and accomplished
Professor Craanen of Leyden. I will here subjoin a few remarks for your
special benefit.

Even as formerly I admired you for the subtlety and keenness of your
natural gifts, so now do I bewail and deplore you; inasmuch as being by
nature most talented,

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

and adorned by God with extraordinary gifts; being a lover, nay a
coveter of the truth, you yet allow yourself to be ensnared and deceived
by that most wretched and most proud of beings, the prince of evil
spirits. As for all your philosophy, what is it but a mere illusion and
chimera? Yet to it you entrust not only your peace of mind in this life,
but the salvation of your soul for eternity. See on what a wretched
foundation all your doctrines rest. You assume that you have at length
discovered the true philosophy. How do you know that your philosophy is
the best of all that ever have been taught in the world, are now being
taught, or ever shall be taught? Passing over what may be devised in the
future, have you examined all the philosophies, ancient as well as
modern, which are taught here, and in India, and everywhere throughout
the whole world? Even if you have duly examined them, how do you know
that you have chosen the best? You will say: "My philosophy is in
harmony with right reason; other philosophies are not." But all other
philosophers except your own followers disagree with you, and with equal
right say of their philosophy what you say of yours, accusing you, as
you do them, of falsity and error. It is, therefore, plain, that before
the truth of your philosophy can come to light, reasons must be
advanced, which are not common to other philosophies, but apply solely
to your own; or else you must admit that your philosophy is as uncertain
and nugatory as the rest.

However, restricting myself for the present to that book of yours with
an impious title, <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_83) and mingling your
philosophy with your theology, as in reality you mingle them yourself,
though with diabolic cunning you endeavour to maintain, that each is
separate from the other, and has different principles, I thus proceed.

Perhaps you will say: "Others have not read Holy Scripture so often as I
have; and it is from Holy Scripture, the acknowledgment of which
distinguishes Christians from the rest of the world, that I prove my
doctrines. But how? By comparing the clear passages with the more
obscure I explain Holy Scripture, and out of my interpretations

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I frame dogmas, or
else confirm those which are already concocted in my brain." But, I
adjure you, reflect seriously on what you say. How do you know, that you
have made a right application of your method, or again that your method
is sufficient for the interpretation of Scripture, and that you are thus
interpreting Scripture aright, especially as the Catholics say, and most
truly, that the universal Word of God is not handed down to us in
writing, hence that Holy Scripture cannot be explained through itself, I
will not say by one man, but by the Church herself, who is the sole
authorized interpreter? The Apostolic traditions must likewise be
consulted, as is proved by the testimony of Holy Scripture and. Thus,

Fathers, and as reason and experience suggest. your first principles are
most false and lead to destruction, what will become of all your
doctrine, built up and supported on so rotten a foundation?

Wherefore, if you believe in Christ crucified, acknowledge your
pestilent heresy, reflect on the perverseness of your nature, and be
reconciled with the Church.

How do your proofs differ from those of all heretics, who ever have
left, are now leaving, or shall in future leave God's Church? All, like
yourself, make use of the same principle, to wit, Holy Scripture taken
by itself, for the concoction and establishment of their doctrines.

Do not flatter yourself with the thought, that neither the Calvinists,
it may be, nor the so-called Reformed Church, nor the Lutherans, nor the
Mennonites, nor the Socinians, &c., can refute your doctrines. All
these, as I have said, are as wretched as yourself, and like you are
dwelling in the shadow of death.

If you do not believe in Christ, you are more wretched than I can
express. Yet the remedy is easy. Turn away from your sins, and consider
the deadly arrogance of your wretched and insane reasoning. You do not
believe in Christ. Why? You will say: "Because the teaching and the life
of Christ, and also the Christian teaching concerning Christ are not at
all in harmony with my teaching." But again, I say, then you dare to
think yourself greater than all those who have ever risen up in the
State or Church of God, patriarchs, prophets, apostles, martyrs,
doctors,

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

confessors, and holy virgins innumerable, yea, in your blasphemy, than
Christ himself. Do you alone surpass all these in doctrine, in manner of
life, in every respect? Will you, wretched pigmy, vile worm of the
earth, yea, ashes, food of worms, will you in your unspeakable
blasphemy, dare to put yourself before the incarnate, infinite wisdom of
the Eternal Father? Will you, alone, consider yourself wiser and greater
than all those, who from the beginning of the world have been in the
Church of God, and have believed, or believe still, that Christ would
come or has already come? On what do you base this rash, insane,
deplorable, and inexcusable arrogance?

\*     \*     \*     \*     \*     \*

If you cannot pronounce on what I have just been enumerating (divining
rods, alchemy, &c.), why, wretched man, are you so puffed up with
diabolical pride, as to pass rash judgment on the awful mysteries of
Christ's life and passion, which the Catholics themselves in their
teaching declare to be incomprehensible? Why do you commit the further
insanity of silly and futile carping at the numberless miracles and
signs, which have been wrought through the virtue of Almighty God by the
apostles and disciples of Christ, and afterwards by so many thousand
saints, in testimony to, and confirmation of the truth of the Catholic
faith; yea, which are being wrought in our own time in cases without
number throughout the world, by God's almighty goodness and mercy? If
you cannot gainsay these, and surely you cannot, why stand aloof any
longer? Join hands of fellowship, and repent from your sins: put on
humility, and be born again.

\[*Albert Burgh requests Spinoza to consider:* (i.) *The large number of
believers in the Romish faith*. (ii.) *The uninterrupted succession of
the Church*. (iii.) *The fact that a few unlearned men converted the
world to Christianity*. (iv.) *The antiquity, the immutability, the
infallibility, the incorruption, the unity, and the vast extent of the
Catholic Religion; also the fact, that secession from it involves
damnation, and that it will itself endure as long as the world*. (v.)
*The admirable organization of the Romish Church*. (vi.) *The superior
morality of Catholics*. (vii.)

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *The frequent
cases of recantation of opinions among heretics*. (viii.) *The miserable
life led by atheists, whatever their outward demeanour may be*.\] \* \*
\* \*

I have written this letter to you with intentions truly Christian;
first, in order to show the love I bear to you, though you are a
heathen; secondly, in order to beg you not to persist in converting
others.

I therefore will thus conclude: God is willing to snatch your soul from
eternal damnation, if you will allow Him. Do not doubt that the Master,
who has called you so often through others, is now calling you for the
last time through me, who having obtained grace from the ineffable mercy
of God Himself, beg the same for you with my whole heart. Do not deny
me. For if you do not now give ear to God who calls you, the wrath of
the Lord will be kindled against you, and there is a danger of your
being abandoned by His infinite mercy, and becoming a wretched victim of
the Divine Justice which consumes all things in wrath. Such a fate may
Almighty God avert for the greater glory of His name, and for the
salvation of your soul, also for a salutary example for the imitation of
your most unfortunate and idolatrous followers, through our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, Who with the Eternal Father liveth and reigneth in
the Unity of the Holy Spirit, God for all Eternity. Amen.

Florence, III. Non. Sept. CI<u>C</u>I<u>C</u>CLXXV. (Sept. 3,
1675.) <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_84)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_82"></span>[410:1](corr73.htm#fr_83) The whole of this very
long letter is not given here, but only such parts as seemed most
characteristic, or are alluded to in Spinoza's reply.—\[<span
class="smallcaps">Tr.</span>\]

<span id="fn_83"></span>[411:1](corr73.htm#fr_84) "Tractatus
Theologico-Politicus."

<span id="fn_84"></span>[414:1](corr73.htm#fr_85) There is a kind of
affectation very consistent with the letter in the use of the classical
calendar and Roman numerals for the date. \[*The underlined 'Cs' in the
date are reversed in the original—JBH*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXXIV. To Burgh](corr74)
