[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr59)  [Next](corr61) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER LXII. (LVIII.)

#### SPINOZA TO \* \* \* \* \* <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_62) (The Hague, October, 1674).

\[*Spinoza gives his opinions on liberty and necessity*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Sir</span>,—Our friend, J. R. <span
id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_63) has sent me the letter which you have been
kind enough to write to me, and also the judgment of your friend <span
id="fr_65"></span>[4](#fn_64) as to the opinions of Descartes and myself
regarding free will. Both enclosures were very welcome to me. Though I
am, at present, much occupied with other matters, not to mention my
delicate health, your singular courtesy, or, to name the chief motive,
your love of truth, impels me to satisfy your inquiries, as far as my
poor abilities will permit. What your friend wishes to imply by his
remark before he appeals to experience, I

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

know not. What he adds, that *when one of two disputants affirms
something which the other denies*, both may be right, is true, if he
means that the two, though using the same terms, are thinking of
different things. I once sent several examples of this to our friend J.
R., <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_65) and am now writing to tell him
to communicate them to you.

I, therefore, pass on to that definition of liberty, which he says is my
own; but I know not whence he has taken it. I say that a thing is free,
which exists and acts solely by the necessity of its own nature. Thus
also God understands Himself and all things freely, because it follows
solely from the necessity of His nature, that He should understand all
things. You see I do not place freedom in free decision, but in free
necessity. However, let us descend to created things, which are all
determined by external causes to exist and operate in a given
determinate manner. In order that this may be clearly understood, let us
conceive a very simple thing. For instance, a stone receives from the
impulsion of an external cause, a certain quantity of motion, by virtue
of which it continues to move after the impulsion given by the external
cause has ceased. The permanence of the stone's motion is constrained,
not necessary, because it must be defined by the impulsion of an
external cause. What is true of the stone is true of any individual,
however complicated its nature, or varied its functions, inasmuch as
every individual thing is necessarily determined by some external cause
to exist and operate in a fixed and determinate manner.

Further conceive, I beg, that a stone, while continuing in motion,
should be capable of thinking and knowing, that it is endeavouring, as
far as it can, to continue to move. Such a stone, being conscious merely
of its own endeavour and not at all indifferent, would believe itself to
be completely free, and would think that it continued in motion solely
because of its own wish. This is that human freedom, which all boast
that they possess, and which consists solely in the fact, that men are
conscious of their own desire, but are ignorant of the causes whereby
that desire has been determined. Thus an infant believes that it desires
milk freely;

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

an angry child thinks he wishes freely for vengeance, a timid child
thinks he wishes freely to run away. Again, a drunken man thinks, that
from the free decision of his mind he speaks words, which afterwards,
when sober, he would like to have left unsaid. So the delirious, the
garrulous, and others of the same sort think that they act from the free
decision of their mind, not that they are carried away by impulse. As
this misconception is innate in all men, it is not easily conquered.
For, although experience abundantly shows, that men can do anything
rather than check their desires, and that very often, when a prey to
conflicting emotions, they see the better course and follow the worse,
they yet believe themselves to be free; because in some cases their
desire for a thing is slight, and can easily be overruled by the
recollection of something else, which is frequently present in the mind.

I have thus, if I mistake not, sufficiently explained my opinion
regarding free and constrained necessity, and also regarding so-called
human freedom: from what I have said you will easily be able to reply to
your friend's objections. For when he says, with Descartes, that he who
is constrained by no external cause is free, if by being constrained he
means acting against one's will, I grant that we are in some cases quite
unrestrained, and in this respect possess free will. But if by
constrained he means acting necessarily, although not against one's will
(as I have explained above), I deny that we are in any instance free.

But your friend, on the contrary, asserts that *we may employ our reason
absolutely, that is, in complete freedom;* and is, I think, a little too
confident on the point. *For who*, he says, *could deny, without
contradicting his own consciousness, that I can think with my thoughts,
that I wish or do not wish to write?* I should like to know what
consciousness he is talking of, over and above that which I have
illustrated by the example of the stone.

As a matter of fact I, without, I hope, contradicting my consciousness,
that is my reason and experience, and without cherishing ignorance and
misconception, deny that I can by any absolute power of thought think,
that I wish or do not wish to write. I appeal to the consciousness,
which he has doubtless experienced, that in dreams he has not

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

the power of thinking that he wishes, or does not wish to write; and
that, when he dreams that he wishes to write, he has not the power not
to dream that he wishes to write. I think he must also have experienced,
that the mind is not always equally capable of thinking of the same
object, but according as the body is more capable for the image of this
or that object being excited in it, so is the mind more capable of
thinking of the same object.

When he further adds, that the causes for his applying his mind to
writing have led him, but not constrained him to write, he merely means
(if he will look at the question impartially), that his disposition was
then in a state, in which it could be easily acted on by causes, which
would have been powerless under other circumstances, as for instance
when he was under a violent emotion. That is, causes, which at other
times would not have constrained him, have constrained him in this case,
not to write against his will but necessarily to wish to write.

As for his statement, that *if we were constrained by external causes,
no one could acquire the habit of virtue*, I know not what is his
authority for saying, that firmness and constancy of disposition cannot
arise from predestined necessity, but only from free will.

What he finally adds, that *if this were granted, all wickedness would
be excusable*, I meet with the question, What then? Wicked men are not
less to be feared, and are not less harmful, when they are wicked from
necessity. However, on this point I would ask you to refer to my
Principles of Cartesian Philosophy, Part II., chap. viii.

In a word, I should like your friend, who makes these objections, to
tell me, how he reconciles the human virtue, which he says arises from
the free decision of the mind, with God's pre-ordainment of the
universe. If, with Descartes, he confesses his inability to do so, he is
endeavouring to direct against me the weapon which has already pierced
himself. But in vain. For if you examine my opinion attentively, you
will see that it is quite consistent, &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[389:2](corr60.htm#fr_63) This letter is
addressed to G. H. Schaller, who had sent on Letter LXI. to Spinoza.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[389:3](corr60.htm#fr_64) John Rieuwerts, a
bookseller of Amsterdam.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[389:4](corr60.htm#fr_65) Tschirnhausen; the
"judgment" is Letter LXI.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[390:1](corr60.htm#fr_66) John Rieuwerts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter LXIII. From Anon. \[Tschirnhausen\]](corr61)
