[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Philosophy](../../index)  [Spinoza](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](corr02)  [Next](corr04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/048620250X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../tnspin.jpg)](index)  
*Correspondence*, by Benedict de Spinoza, \[1883\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LETTER III. (III.)

#### OLDENBURG TO SPINOZA.

\[*Oldenburg propounds several questions concerning God and His
existence, thought, and the axioms of Eth. I. He also informs Spinoza of
a philosophical society, and promises to send Boyle's book*.\]

<span class="smallcaps">Most Excellent Friend</span>, Your learned
letter has been delivered to me, and read with great pleasure.

I highly approve of your geometrical method of proof,

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

but I must set it down to my dulness, that I cannot follow with
readiness what you set forth with such accuracy. Suffer me, then, I beg,
to expose the slowness of my understanding, while I put the following
questions, and beg of you to answer them.

*First*. Do you clearly and indisputably understand solely from the
definition you have given of God, that such a Being exists? For my part,
when I reflect that definitions contain only the conceptions formed by
our minds, and that our mind forms many conceptions of things which do
not exist, and is very fertile in multiplying and amplifying what it has
conceived, I do not yet see, that from the conception I have of God I
can infer God's existence. I am able by a mental combination of all the
perfections I perceive in men, in animals, in vegetables, in minerals,
&c., to conceive and to form an idea of some single substance uniting in
itself all such excellences; indeed my mind is able to multiply and
augment such excellences indefinitely; it may thus figure forth for
itself a most perfect and excellent Being, but there would be no reason
thence to conclude that such a Being actually exists.

*Secondly*. I wish to ask, whether you think it unquestionable, that
body cannot be limited by thought, or thought by body; seeing that it
still remains undecided, what thought is, whether it be a physical
motion or a spiritual act quite distinct from body?

*Thirdly*. Do you reckon the axioms, which you have sent to me, as
indemonstrable principles known by the light of nature and needing no
proof? Perhaps the first is of this nature, but I do not see how the
other three can be placed in a like category. The second assumes that
nothing exists in the universe save substances and accidents, but many
persons would say that time and place cannot be classed either as one or
the other. Your third axiom, that things having different attributes
have no quality in common, is so far from being clear to me, that its
contrary seems to be shown in the whole universe. All things known to us
agree in certain respects and differ in others. Lastly, your fourth
axiom, that when things have no quality in common, one cannot be
produced by another, is not so plain to my groping intelligence as to
stand in need of no further illumination.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God has nothing
actually in common with created things, yet nearly all of us believe Him
to be their cause.

As you see that in my opinion your axioms are not established beyond all
the assaults of doubt, you will readily gather that the propositions you
have based upon them do not appear to me absolutely firm. The more I
reflect upon them, the more are doubts suggested to my mind concerning
them.

As to the first, I submit that two men are two substances with the same
attribute, inasmuch as both are rational; whence I infer that there can
be two substances with the same attribute.

As to the second, I opine that, as nothing can be its own cause, it is
hardly within the scope of our intellect to pronounce on the truth of
the proposition, that *substance cannot be produced even by any other
substance*. Such a proposition asserts all substances to be self-caused,
and all and each to be independent of one another, thus making so many
gods, and therefore denying the first cause of all things. This, I
willingly confess, I cannot understand, unless you will be kind enough
to explain your theory on this sublime subject somewhat more fully and
simply, informing me what may be the origin and mode of production of
substances, and the mutual interdependence and subordination of things.
I most strenuously beg and conjure you by that friendship which we have
entered into, to answer me freely and faithfully on these points; you
may rest assured, that everything which you think fit to communicate to
me will remain untampered with and safe, for I will never allow anything
to become public through me to your hurt or disadvantage. In our
philosophical society we proceed diligently as far as opportunity offers
with our experiments and observations, lingering over the compilation of
the history of mechanic arts, with the idea that the forms and qualities
of things can best be explained from mechanical principles, and that all
natural effects can be produced through motion, shape, and consistency,
without reference to inexplicable forms or occult qualities, which are
but the refuge of ignorance.

I will send the book I promised, whenever the Dutch Ambassadors send (as
they frequently do) a messenger to

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

the Hague, or whenever some other friend whom I can trust goes your way.
I beg you to excuse my prolixity and freedom, and simply ask you to take
in good part, as one friend from another, the straightforward and
unpolished reply I have sent to your letter, believing me to be without
deceit or affectation,

Yours most faithfully,  
HENRY OLDENBURG.

London, 27 Sept., 1661.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter IV. To Oldenburg](corr04)
