[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](eoc00)  [Next](eoc02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1410203565/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Ethics of Confucius*, by Miles Menander Dawson, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### FOREWORD

WHEN Confucius died, it is recorded that his last words were regrets
that none among the rulers then living possessed the sagacity requisite
to a proper appreciation of his ethical philosophy and teachings. He
died unhonoured,—died in his seventy-third year, 479 B.C., feeling in
the flickering beats of his failing heart that his inspiring pleas for
truth and justice, industry and self-denial, moderation and public duty,
though then without having awakened men's impulses, would yet stir the
depths of the social life of his land.

Only the future will tell how far his staunch guide-ropes to correct
conduct will be extended within China, and even be threaded through the
dark and dangerous passages of existence in the lands of the Occident to
lead humanity safely to that elevated plane which the lofty ideals of
the philosopher aimed at establishing. Not yet has the world, sagacious
as it is, appreciated the wealth of gentleness, the profound forces for
good, the uplifting influences embodied in the teachings of the ancient
sage, whose aim, reduced to its simplest definition, was to show "how to
get through life like a courteous gentleman."

A great step forward in the dissemination of the doctrine in foreign
lands is taken in "The Superior Man." Lofty as appear the ideals, in the
usual translations, they lose the effect on the average

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

reader that the application which Mr. Dawson has now given them must
create. Driving home the principles by careful compilation under
different headings, the author causes the scheme of ethical conduct to
attract and appeal; and the blessings it has bestowed in the vast
expanses of China may yet give comfort to many people in many other
lands.

Confucius strove to make the human being good—a good father, a good
mother, a good son, a good daughter, a good friend, a good citizen.
Though his truths were unpalatable at the time of their enunciation,
they have lived to bear good fruit, despite the desperate efforts of
Emperor Tsin Shi-hwang to destroy them by fire, and it is gratifying to
see that a still wider sphere is being more and more developed for them
in the West.

The movement that is now being energized in China to make the doctrine
more familiar to the people, may also find reflection in foreign lands.
"The Superior Man" will surely help the struggler in the mire of
complexity to find his way out to the clean, substantial foothold of
manliness and integrity.

<span id="img__00600"></span> ![signature of author](img/_00600.jpg)

SHANGHAI, CHINA,

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Introduction](eoc02)
