[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rvw01)  [Next](rvw03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### II

Jane Roe, [4](rvw13.htm#xref_4) a single woman who was residing in
Dallas County, Texas, instituted this federal action in March 1970
against the District Attorney of the county. She sought a declaratory
judgment that the Texas criminal abortion statutes were unconstitutional
on their face, and an injunction restraining the defendant from
enforcing the statutes.

Roe alleged that she was unmarried and pregnant; that she wished to
terminate her pregnancy by an abortion "performed by a competent,
licensed physician, under safe, clinical conditions"; that she was
unable to get a "legal" abortion in Texas because her life did not
appear to be threatened by the continuation of her pregnancy; and that
she could not afford to travel to another jurisdiction in order to
secure a legal abortion under safe conditions. She claimed that the
Texas statutes were unconstitutionally vague and that they abridged her
right of personal privacy, protected by the First, Fourth, Fifth, Ninth,
and Fourteenth Amendments. By an amendment to her complaint Roe
purported to sue "on behalf of herself and all other women" similarly
situated.

James Hubert Hallford, a licensed physician, sought and was granted
leave to intervene in Roe's action. In his complaint he alleged that he
had been arrested previously for violations of the Texas abortion
statutes and \[410 U.S. 113, 121\] that two such prosecutions were
pending against him. He described conditions of patients who came to him
seeking abortions, and he claimed that for many cases he, as a
physician, was unable to determine whether they fell within or outside
the exception recognized by Article 1196. He alleged that, as a
consequence, the statutes were vague and uncertain, in violation of the
Fourteenth Amendment, and that they violated his own and his patients'
rights to privacy in the doctor-patient relationship and his own right
to practice medicine, rights he claimed were guaranteed by the First,
Fourth, Fifth, Ninth, and Fourteenth Amendments.

John and Mary Doe, [5](rvw13.htm#xref_5) a married couple, filed a
companion complaint to that of Roe. They also named the District
Attorney as defendant, claimed like constitutional deprivations, and
sought declaratory and injunctive relief. The Does alleged that they
were a childless couple; that Mrs. Doe was suffering from a
"neural-chemical" disorder; that her physician had "advised her to avoid
pregnancy until such time as her condition has materially improved"
(although a pregnancy at the present time would not present "a serious
risk" to her life); that, pursuant to medical advice, she had
discontinued use of birth control pills; and that if she should become
pregnant, she would want to terminate the pregnancy by an abortion
performed by a competent, licensed physician under safe, clinical
conditions. By an amendment to their complaint, the Does purported to
sue "on behalf of themselves and all couples similarly situated."

The two actions were consolidated and heard together by a duly convened
three-judge district court. The suits thus presented the situations of
the pregnant single woman, the childless couple, with the wife not
pregnant, \[410 U.S. 113, 122\] and the licensed practicing physician,
all joining in the attack on the Texas criminal abortion statutes. Upon
the filing of affidavits, motions were made for dismissal and for
summary judgment. The court held that Roe and members of her class, and
Dr. Hallford, had standing to sue and presented justiciable
controversies, but that the Does had failed to allege facts sufficient
to state a present controversy and did not have standing. It concluded
that, with respect to the requests for a declaratory judgment,
abstention was not warranted. On the merits, the District Court held
that the "fundamental right of single women and married persons to
choose whether to have children is protected by the Ninth Amendment,
through the Fourteenth Amendment," and that the Texas criminal abortion
statutes were void on their face because they were both
unconstitutionally vague and constituted an overbroad infringement of
the plaintiffs' Ninth Amendment rights. The court then held that
abstention was warranted with respect to the requests for an injunction.
It therefore dismissed the Does' complaint, declared the abortion
statutes void, and dismissed the application for injunctive relief. 314
F. Supp. 1217, 1225 (ND Tex. 1970).

The plaintiffs Roe and Doe and the intervenor Hallford, pursuant to 28
U.S.C. 1253, have appealed to this Court from that part of the District
Court's judgment denying the injunction. The defendant District Attorney
has purported to cross-appeal, pursuant to the same statute, from the
court's grant of declaratory relief to Roe and Hallford. Both sides also
have taken protective appeals to the United States Court of Appeals for
the Fifth Circuit. That court ordered the appeals held in abeyance
pending decision here. We postponed decision on jurisdiction to the
hearing on the merits. 402 U.S. 941 (1971). \[410 U.S. 113, 123\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section III](rvw03)
