[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](rvw11)  [Next](rvw13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XII

Our conclusion that Art. 1196 is unconstitutional means, of course, that
the Texas abortion statutes, as a unit, must fall. The exception of Art.
1196 cannot be struck down separately, for then the State would be left
with a statute proscribing all abortion procedures no matter how
medically urgent the case.

Although the District Court granted appellant Roe declaratory relief, it
stopped short of issuing an injunction against enforcement of the Texas
statutes. The Court has recognized that different considerations enter
into a federal court's decision as to declaratory relief, on the one
hand, and injunctive relief, on the other. Zwickler v. Koota, 389 U.S.
241, 252-255 (1967); Dombrowski v. Pfister, 380 U.S. 479 (1965). We are
not dealing with a statute that, on its face, appears to abridge free
expression, an area of particular concern under Dombrowski and refined
in Younger v. Harris, 401 U.S., at 50 .

We find it unnecessary to decide whether the District Court erred in
withholding injunctive relief, for we assume the Texas prosecutorial
authorities will give full credence to this decision that the present
criminal abortion statutes of that State are unconstitutional.

The judgment of the District Court as to intervenor Hallford is
reversed, and Dr. Hallford's complaint in intervention is dismissed. In
all other respects, the judgment \[410 U.S. 113, 167\] of the District
Court is affirmed. Costs are allowed to the appellee.

It is so ordered.

\[For concurring opinion of MR. CHIEF JUSTICE BURGER, see post, p.
207.\]

\[For concurring opinion of MR. JUSTICE DOUGLAS, see post, p. 209.\]

\[For dissenting opinion of MR. JUSTICE WHITE, see post, p. 221.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Footnotes](rvw13)
