[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Legendary
Creatures](../../../lcr/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](cdm11) 
[Next](cdm13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766192504/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Celtic Dragon Myth*, by J.F. Campbell, \[1911\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

#### <span class="smallcaps">The Second Way.</span>

<span id="an_p_207">207</span>. Now, when the fisher's three sons parted
at the three ways, the middle brother took the middle road with his
black horse and his black dog, and his gold-hilted glaive by his side,
and he rode up a steep hill.

<span id="an_p_208">208</span>. He took the hill way, and when he got to
the top of the mountains he fell in with a great plain, and on he went
till he came to a place where a lion, a pigeon, and a rat were all three
quarrelling over a grain of corn. He was not much afraid of them, and
went to see the sight.

"Come hither, lad," said the lion, "and give just judgment between us
three. You will be the better for it if you do, but if you give unjust
judgment you shall be put to death."

"What think you of my being here?"

"Well," said he, "I have no very sure notion, but I think that you ought
rather to be about the banks of rivers."

Then the pigeon said: "And what think you of my being in this place?"

"I'm not sure what to think," said he, "but I have a notion that you
ought rather to be amongst boughs and banks and rocks," said he.

"And what think you of my being in such a place?" said the rat.

"I don't surely know," said the lad, "but I am sure of this, that you
ought to be gathering a shelter to keep ready for winter."

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

That pleased them well. Then the lad thought awhile, and spoke.

"You, lion," he said, "I wonder that you who have been raised above all
the beasts of the field, should think it worth while to quarrel with a
rat about a grain of barley. And you, pigeon, who can fly so far and
fast through the sky, and gather so much, I wonder that you should
dispute one grain of corn with a rat."

Then the lion spoke for the rest, and he said—

"Well hast thou judged. The rat has best right to the barley-corn. We
three were put under spells here to remain as lion, pigeon, and rat, and
we were to dispute about this barley-corn till some one should come to
give us right. Because of my might all that came before judged that I
had the right, and I slew them all. We are kings altogether, and you
have done us great service. Each of us will be a king again, and may go
to his own realm, and for your help to me your reward shall be that
whenever you think of me, you may be a lion, so that you may do a lion's
exploits."

Then the pigeon said: "You have done me great service, and my gift is:
If ever you need it, you need but to think of me and you will be in this
form."

Said the rat: "He has done me as great a service as to either of you,
and whenever he thinks of me he may be a rat, and though I be the
sorriest amongst you, it may well be that it will serve him as.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

well to be a rat as to be in the shape of either of you."

They went away, and he never asked what realm belonged to any one of
them.

<span id="an_p_209">209</span>. On he went and on he rode as swiftly as
ever his brother did, till he came to a realm that he did not know. To
all whom he met he spoke, and asked his road. All who knew it, answered.
All who did not, gave him a civil reply, and so he went, and hurried
till the evening was coming on, and he saw a great house before him, and
a big town, and they told him it was the house of the king.

<span id="an_p_210">210</span>. So when he saw the king's castle, he
came to the gate as a poor lad seeking service. He told his errand at
the gate, and word was sent in to the king that a sturdy lad was at the
gate seeking service. He was sent for, and it was settled that he should
serve in the kitchen under the hand of the great cook, and he was called
the little cook, and he was the best servant that the king ever had.

<span id="an_p_211">211</span>. He was there awhile, and he never saw a
woman at all in the place. So one day he asked the head cook if there
was ever a woman there at all.

"There is no woman here at all," said the head cook, "but the king's
daughter, and it is not everyone who can get to her room."

"And where may that room be?" said the cook's mate.

"It is at the northern end," said the cook, "in a tower."

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span id="an_p_212">212</span>. Now one day it so fell out that the king
had an errand, and the lad had to go to a house that was far away. The
king wanted to give him a horse, but he said:

<span id="an_p_213">213</span>. "I would rather be without a horse, for
I am not used to horses. But if you send a man on horseback I will be
back before him."

That the king would not credit, but he thought that he would try. So a
horseman was sent, and the little cook set off horseless to see who
could soonest get back with the king's errand.

<span id="an_p_214">214</span>. No sooner was the lad out of sight of
the castle than he thought of the pigeon, and he was a pigeon, and flew
to the journey's end and got the matter, and he was back before the
horseman had got half-way there. The king would not believe that he had
been there at all, till the rider returned.

<span id="an_p_215">215</span>. "And where is the thing that I sent you
to fetch?" said the king.

"They told me that the cook's mate got there before I did, and fetched
it," said the rider.

The king was amazed, and he was very fond of the lad after that.

<span id="an_p_216">216</span>. Nevertheless, he had to sleep in the
kitchen with a hound, and his company did not displease him, for he knew
that she would tell no tales.

<span id="an_p_217">217</span>. Now it so happened that the cook's mate
on his errands about the house saw the king's daughter, and spoke to
her; and one night he thought that he would pay her a visit in her
chamber.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> So he threw a
somersault out of heel and became a pigeon, and flew out of the window
to the northern end of the castle, and to the top of the chimney, and
down on to the floor, and then he was himself again in a trice.

<span id="an_p_218">218</span>. The king's daughter was sleeping sound,
so he crept to the bedside and tried to steal a ring off her finger.

<span id="an_p_219">219</span>. But the king's daughter awoke in a
fright and cried out, and all the guards and sentries and the king
himself came rushing to help her.

<span id="an_p_220">220</span>. But before they got the door open, he
thought of the rat, and was a rat, and fled under the bed and hid in an
old bacholl of a shoe.

<span id="an_p_221">221</span>. The king and all his guard came
clattering in and cried together: "What is the matter?"

<span id="an_p_222">222</span>. "Oh!" said the king's daughter, "there
is a man in the room. He came to my bedside and tried to steal the ring
off my finger, but I awoke and cried out."

<span id="an_p_223">223</span>. The guards searched and the king sought,
and they kicked the old shoe hither and thither, but the little lad lay
hid, and they found no one. When they were tired the king said:

"There is nobody in the room."

"Somebody was in this room when I called out," said she.

So the king and the guards sought again to see if there was any way to
get out when the door was locked, and they peeped up the chimney and
everywhere

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

else, and there was no place to get out of the room but the room door.

<span id="an_p_224">224</span>. So the king flew in great rage, and he
growled: "Daughter, if you ever dare to make such a disturbance and rout
about the house again, I will give it to you with my sword when I come
up."

So he marched out and locked the door behind him.

<span id="an_p_225">225</span>. When they were all gone, the lad came
out of the old shoe and turned heels over head, and was a lad again, and
he seized her hand and stole the ring.

<span id="an_p_226">226</span>. But since she did not dare to cry out
for fear of the king, she said softly

"Where were you when they were searching the room?"

"I was in the room all the time," said he.

"And who are you?" said she.

"I am your father's head-cook," said he.

"That you are not," said she, "but I should like to know who you are.
But since you can come here, if you come again I will give you a gift,
for such is the custom in this country." Away he went as he came, and
back to his kennel beside the dog who could tell no tales.

<span id="an_p_227">227</span>. After a few days the lad thought that he
would go the same way to see what might happen, and before he went away
from the room the lady gave him a waistcoat (*peiteag*) embroidered with
needlework, and told him to go with it to the fair at the big town next
day.

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

<span id="an_p_228">228</span>. He was a pigeon, and up the chimney and
in at the kitchen window, and into his kennel in a trice, but the
waistcoat he stowed in his box.

<span id="an_p_229">229</span>. Next morning the head-cook was making
himself smart for the fair, so the cook's mate began to wash his face.

"Are you going any way?" said the cook.

"I am going to the fair," said the other.

"You must not go," said the head-cook, "I am going."

The lad said never a word, but he opened his box, and took out the
waistcoat and put it on.

"Wherever did you get such a brave (*briagh*) waistcoat?" said the great
cook.

"No matter where, I have it," said the lad.

"I'd give you a good price for it to go to the fair in, if you would
give it to me," said the great cook.

<span id="an_p_230">230</span>. "Well," said the other, "I won't be hard
upon you. If you will give me seven bellyfuls before we go, and seven
bellyfuls when we come back, you shall have the waistcoat for the fair."

So the lad got lots to eat, and the cook got the waistcoat, and put it
on and went to the fair.

<span id="an_p_231">231</span>. When he was there, the king's daughter
came to look if she could see who wore the waistcoat, but when she saw
the cook with the waistcoat on, her hands fell down by her sides, and
she went home.

<span id="an_p_232">232</span>. When the cook came home, his mate met

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

him. "Well," said he, "did you see the king's daughter at the fair?"

"Yes," said he, "I saw her."

"Did she speak to you?" said the lad.

"She did not speak," said the great cook, "but as soon as ever she saw
me she turned home."

" She is in love with you," said the lad.

"That is exactly what I supposed," said the king's head-cook.

<span id="an_p_233">233</span>. That night, when everybody else went to
bed, the cook's mate and the dog went to their kennel, but they had not
been there long when the lad turned heels over head and was a pigeon,
and out of the window and up in the chimney, and down on the floor of
the north room, and there he stood as a handsome lad in the lady's room.

<span id="an_p_234">234</span>. "Why were you not at the fair?" said
she.

"Was I not?" said he.

"No," said she. "And I wish you would tell me who you are."

"Am I not your father's head-cook?" said he.

Not you," said she, and this time she gave him a pair of garters and
bade him wear them at the fair for her sake.

Back he went, and these he stowed in his box as before.

<span id="an_p_235">235</span>. Next morning it was the same story as
last day. The cook put on a pair of short breeks, as was the fashion of
Frenchmen in these days, <span id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_75) and the

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

cook's mate cleaned himself and produced his grand garters. Such garters
the head-cook had never seen, and he got a loan of them for the same
price seven good bellyfuls before he went to the fair and seven more
when he came back.

<span id="an_p_236">236</span>. He put on the garters and went. But when
the king's daughter saw the cook arrayed in the broidered waistcoat and
the grand gay garters, her arms drooped, and she had to go home for fear
she should faint.

<span id="an_p_237">237</span>. "Did you see the princess at the fair?"
said the lad, when he came home, "and did she speak to you to-day?"

"I saw her," said the head-cook, "and she saw me, and as soon as ever
she did her arms fell by her sides, and she went home."

"She must be in love with you," said the cook's mate.

"I rather think that she is," said the king's head-cook.

<span id="an_p_238">238</span>. That night it was the same story. The
lad went to see the princess, and before he went away she gave him a cap
(*biorraid*) to put on his head, and bade him wear it at the fair, for
it was the fashion in that country for ladies to give keepsakes to lads
whom they liked.

<span id="an_p_239">239</span>. Next morning it was the same thing
again. The head-cook got a loan of the grand cap, and the little cook
stayed at home and had plenty to eat. But when the princess saw the cook
with the grand

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

gay garters and the broidered vest and the biorraid on his head as grand
as a lord, she nearly fainted, and home she went as fast as she could.

<span id="an_p_240">240</span>. When the cook got home and told his
tale, his mate was sure that the princess had fallen in love with him;
and he rather thought that that was the case.

<span id="an_p_241">241</span>. A while after that there came a herald
(*teachdaire*) from the Turkish emperor, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_76) or from another powerful king. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_77) He came to seek the king's daughter, and
if she were not given at once, the Turkish emperor was to come to fight
him. The king gathered the nobles of the realm <span
id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_78) to get counsel from them, and he said:

"Daughter, I think it will be best to give you, for I have not got men
enough to fight the Turks. It will be best to send word to the emperor
that you will go."

<span id="an_p_242">242</span>. "It will be cast up to me afterwards,"
said she, "if it is said that the realm of France could not hold one
day's battle."

The high counsellors were gathered, and the king put the question before
them whether war or submission to the Turks was best, and the counsel
that they made out at last was that war was better than too easy
submission. So the king sent a herald to the Turkish emperor to say that
he would not give

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

up his daughter in spite of him. It was to be battle.

<span id="an_p_243">243</span>. The king gathered all his
people,—head-cook, little cook, and all—and he set out to meet the
Turks.

<span id="an_p_244">244</span>. But when he was near the field of
battle, they remembered that they had left their standard behind. They
could do no good without the flag, and there was but little time to
fetch it. The flag was in the bedroom of the king's daughter, at the top
of the castle, at the north end; and there was the king's armour <span
id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_79) too, hung up at the bedside, as men in the
isles hang their garments on a peg, for that too was forgotten.

<span id="an_p_245">245</span>. Now, if the king had these he thought
that he might win the battle. <span id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_80)

<span id="an_p_246">246</span>. "Oh," said the king, "is there any one
in the camp who will try to bring the flag and my armour before the
battle begins? If I gain, he shall have my daughter for reward, and my
realm when I die, but if he fails his head shall be cut off at once."

<span id="an_p_247">247</span>. There was no one who would leave the
field but the head-cook, and off he set in great haste homewards.

<span id="an_p_248">248</span>. But the cook's mate took a turn aside
and turned head over heels, and was a pigeon, and flew his best flight
to the castle, and was a man, and ran upstairs and he shouted to the
king's daughter—

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

<span id="an_p_249">249</span>. "Open quickly, for there is great haste
and need of the standard."

"I know your voice," said she. "I need not open the door, you have a way
of opening it; come in as you came before."

"I have no way of opening doors," said he.

"Whether or no," said she, "you have some way to come into this chamber,
so enter."

<span id="an_p_250">250</span>. When he saw that there was no help for
it, he turned over, and was a pigeon, and out of the window and up and
down the chimney, and there stood before her the handsome lad that came
to seek service at her father's castle, and not the head-cook.

"I see who you are now, lad," said she, "and how you got in, but where
were you when they sought you."

<span id="an_p_251">251</span>. "I was in yonder old bacholl of a shoe,"
said he; and he turned heels over head, and was a rat, and into the shoe
and out again and himself in a trice.

<span id="an_p_252">252</span>. "No one who could do all these tricks
but could do a third," said the princess. "Show me another trick."

"I am afraid you will be frightened," said he.

"I won't be frightened for you in any shape of seeming," said she.

So he turned over and was a great lion.

<span id="an_p_253">253</span>. But she took her shears, and shore a
lock from his shaggy beard, and kept it, and she gave him the flag and
armour.

<span id="an_p_254">254</span>. Then he took another turn and was a
pigeon,

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

and flew till he met the head-cook coming at about a third of the way
back.

<span id="an_p_255">255</span>. He met him and gave him the flag and
armour, and he was back at the camp in time.

<span id="an_p_256">256</span>. Then the fight began. The king put his
soldiers in order of battle, and the Turks went to meet them, and
victory was with the Turks.

<span id="an_p_257">257</span>. The French were fleeing at each place in
the field. So the little cook's mate stole into a thicket, and thought
of the lion, and he was a lion himself.

And, as the old lady in Berneray says, what should he do but turn back
all and whole of the king's foes. He tore and smashed and killed
everyone, and drove the field with the king. According to Macnair, he
also showed generalship, for he began at the Turks at the end that was
farthest off, and put them out of order of battle. The French rallied,
and the rout was on the Turks at the last. They fled to their ships, and
very few escaped alive on board. <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_81)

Then the head-cook, like Raja Vivata, said that he had gained the fight,
and he it was who brought the flag and the king's mail, and so he was to
have the princess, and be heir to the realm.

<span id="an_p_258">258</span>. The whole array marched back in triumph,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

and matters were set in order for a grand wedding.

<span id="an_p_259">259</span>. The nobles were asked, and all the realm
was gathered, and the cook sat at the end of the board, at the high end,
exceedingly proud. Drinking and music and joy were up, and word was sent
for a priest, so that the wedding knot might be tied.

<span id="an_p_260">260</span>. The priest came, and the cook was in
great haste to get it all over, for he was very tired and sleepy.

<span id="an_p_261">261</span>. Then the king's daughter stood up and
said: "There is one who ought to be here, and is not."

"All the household are here but the cook's mate," said the Grand
Kitchener, "and it does not signify whether he is here or not."

"No one of the household is to be absent from my wedding," said she.

<span id="an_p_262">262</span>. So a messenger was sent for him, but he
would not come.

<span id="an_p_263">263</span>. Then another and more honourable
messenger was sent, and he would not come.

<span id="an_p_264">264</span>. Then the bride herself went down to the
kitchen where the lad was.

"And why did you not come to be at my wedding?" said she.

<span id="an_p_265">265</span>. "I never was asked," said he, as his
brother said in the like case.

"You were asked," said she.

"You did not ask me," said he.

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

<span id="an_p_266">266</span>. Then she grasped his hand and said:
"Come up with me, then." And so he went.

When she got to the guests, she said:

"Here is one who can turn twists and play tricks that will cause you
wonder. Do one for me," she said to the lad.

"Perhaps you will be frightened," said he.

"No," they said that they would not.

<span id="an_p_267">267</span>. So the lad turned over and was a rat,
and he ran about the floor, and nibbled the ladies’ feet till they
screamed and yelled and laughed.

<span id="an_p_268">268</span>. Then he turned over again and was a
pigeon, and flew, and stood on the ladies’ knees, and all were pleased,
and stroked his feathers till they were like to hurt him; they were so
pleased with the pretty bird.

<span id="an_p_269">269</span>. But when he had been all round the
company, he flew up to the lights and flapped them out with his wings,
and then the ladies giggled and laughed, and said that they had never
before seen a man turn himself into a rat and a pigeon in this strange
fashion.

<span id="an_p_270">270</span>. Then all begged that he would play
another trick, and when the lights were lit once more, he gave another
turn, and was a lion, gaping and roaring all about the room, and the
ladies fled and tumbled about for fear, as did the Grand Kitchener, and
all but the king and his daughter.

<span id="an_p_271">271</span>. "Aha," said the king. "This is the man
who did the deeds this day, and not me."

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span id="an_p_272">272</span>. Then the princess fitted the yellow lock
in the lion's shaggy beard, and she told that this was the man who
fetched the flag, and that she had seen him play all the tricks.

<span id="an_p_273">273</span>. Then the lion turned over, and was a
very handsome lad, as likely to look upon as any in the whole realm, and
all allowed that such a lad ought to have the princess.

<span id="an_p_274">274</span>. So the cook's mate was married to the
daughter of the French king, and the herd's boy was married to the
daughter of the King of Greece, and the Lord High Grand Kitchener was
sad, and disagreed, and left the company.

<span id="an_p_275">275</span>. That wedding lasted for six days of the
week, with drink, and music, and great rejoicing, and there I left the
fisher's second son at the end of the second way.

<span id="an_p_276">276</span>. The third brother, when he parted from
the others, rode west, as it is said in Berneray, where all ways would
lead to the sea after a couple of miles, and he came to a great forest.

<span id="an_p_277">277</span>. Up he went into the forest, to try if he
could see houses or find any people of the place, but nothing could he
see but a tangled wilderness of wood and birds and fruits that he had
never seen before. At last, day was going, and night was coming.

<span id="an_p_278">278</span>. He thought that it would be well if he
could find some place or other where he might stay in the night, for he
was afraid wild beasts of this

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

forest might come *through the night* and slay him, and so he went
wandering on, thinking that he should like to find a place where he
might be safe in the night.

<span id="an_p_279">279</span>. As he went, he saw a great castle before
him, with a rampart wall about it. At first he feared to go on, for he
did not know whether peaceful people or fierce men were within, or
whether they might not slay him. But spite of danger, he risked going
on.

<span id="an_p_280">280</span>. He reached the castle, and he saw no one
at all. He went round about the rampart till he came to a gate, and he
went in by the gate, and looked all round, and still he saw no one.

<span id="an_p_281">281</span>. He saw an open door in the castle, and
he went in, but still he saw nobody there.

<span id="an_p_282">282</span>. He went in past other two doors, and
into a room where there was a fire.

<span id="an_p_283">283</span>. He sat at the fireside, and there he
stayed for awhile waiting, but he saw none living. <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_82)

<span id="an_p_284">284</span>. But a candle and a candlestick came into
the room where he sat, and the candle and candlestick stood upon the
board, and the candle gave light through the chambers.

<span id="an_p_285">285</span>. When he had sat for a long time and saw
no one, he began to be tired of waiting, and to long.

<span id="an_p_286">286</span>. He thought that food might do him good
if he could get it.

In an instant the board was spread, and his choice

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

of every food that was better than another was on it. He sat a while
staring at the board, but still he saw no one living; and he was very
hungry. At last he thought that he might as well eat part of the food,
whatever the matter might mean; so he sat by the side of the table, and
he ate till he had enough. Then he sat at the fireside again.

<span id="an_p_287">287</span>. When he had sat awhile by the fire, he
began to grow sleepy.

Then it seemed to him that if he had a bed he would go to rest.

<span id="an_p_288">288</span>. The candle and the candlestick that
stood upon the board went to the first door that was next to him, and
the candlestick with the candle in it, stood at the door. He sat awhile
looking at them, wondering at all he saw, but in time he took courage,
and got up and went where they were.

<span id="an_p_289">289</span>. They went when he came, till they came
to another door, and there they stood.

<span id="an_p_290">290</span>. It seemed to him that he might as well
follow to see where they should go. On they went, till they got to the
next door, and again he followed.

<span id="an_p_291">291</span>. The third door was opened, and in he
went to a wondrously gorgeous <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_83)
chamber with a bed in it, and the bedclothes were choice and ready for
going to bed. He stood awhile looking about him and looking at the bed,
and at last he came to think that as he could see no one, he might as
well go to bed. So he stripped off his clothes, and he lay down in

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

the bed, and put the clothes over his head and slept.

<span id="an_p_292">292</span>. The first time he awoke during the
night, he seemed to perceive something like a human creature near him.
This did not please him very well, so he moved from it as best he might,
and he slept again. The next time he awoke it was day, and no one living
was near him.

<span id="an_p_293">293</span>. He looked about him, as he usually did.
The chamber was very richly set in order. He lay awhile staring about,
and at last he got up to put on his clothes. But when he looked, there
was not a rag of his there. He sought backwards and forwards, and all
about, but he had no clothes to find. But there was a dress of other
clothes, and clothes that were very grand, lying just where he had laid
his own. Since he could not find his own, he put on the clothes he found
instead, and he went to the chamber where the fire was—the first in
which he sat when he came to the castle over night. He found it with
board decked and spread with each meat and drink that was best, so he
sat and ate his fill.

<span id="an_p_294">294</span>. When he had finished he looked about,
and there he saw every sort of sporting gear <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_84) that he ever had seen, and many sorts that
he never had seen before. He took what he understood the use of, and he
went out to shoot in the forest, and that day he killed a couple of
turkeys—which feat the old sailor

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

or one of his messmates may have performed in America. These he took to
the castle and cast on the ground, and when dinner-time came, one of
them was ready. He wandered about the castle till "the night came," and
when "the night came" he went in to the castle and to the chamber, where
he was the night before, and he sat at the fireside.

<span id="an_p_295">295</span>. Then came the candle and gave him light.

<span id="an_p_296">296</span>. When he wished for supper, the board was
decked. When he was sleepy, the candle led him from door to door, and he
followed her, and went to bed and slept.

<span id="an_p_297">297</span>. The first time he woke, he felt as
though a human creature lay on the bed, but he said never a word and
slept, and the next time he awoke "the day was there," and there was no
one with him in the bed but himself.

<span id="an_p_298">298</span>. He got up and found other and grander
garments, and this time he was not so loath to put them on as he was the
day before.

<span id="an_p_299">299</span>. He went to the quarter where he was used
to find food, and the fire was lit and the board decked, and when he had
eaten, he went out to sport, and that day he killed two hares. These he
took to the castle and cast on the floor. One he found ready for dinner,
and when the night came the candlestick with the candle in it came and
stood upon the board, and the candle gave him light.

<span id="an_p_300">300</span>. When he wished for supper, the supper

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

was ready upon the table, and when he had eaten and wished to go to bed,
the candle went before to show him the way, and he followed and lay
down.

<span id="an_p_301">301</span>. But he thought if anything should come
near him, as on the other two nights, that he would speak, happen what
might.

<span id="an_p_302">302</span>. When he woke, he felt as though a human
creature were near him, and he said:

"Who are you? and where am I?"

The thing that was near him said:

"I am the daughter of the king of the golden castle, and this is the
castle. Here you may be well off if you will beware of yourself, and do
that which is right, as you ought."

"If I knew what I ought to do I would do it," said he.

"What you ought to do," said she, "is to respect me, I am the candle and
candlestick that you saw. I was laid under spells to be a candlestick
with a lighted candle in it, till I should find some one to stay with
me, and lay no hand upon me to touch me, till the end of a year and a
day, as you are now doing. Then I shall be free of the spells, and you
shall marry me, and have half the realm while my father lives, and the
whole realm of the golden castle when he dies."

"If I may get that," said he, "I will stay here with you for a year and
a day, if I get what I need in the meantime."

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

"You shall have all you desire," said she, "a suit of new clothes every
day when you get up, your wish and choice of food, sporting gear and
sport when you desire it, leave to go out and in as you see fit, but you
will not see the face of man or woman here till my time of freedom
comes. I am the candle that gives you light, you may look at me, here
you may be when you wish to sleep, and here I will visit you, and talk
with you, but touch me not. You will never know when I come or go. If
you will live thus for a year and a day with me, you will do me great
service, and serve yourself."

"I will do all you say," said the fisher's son. "I will make myself
happy here, till you are freed from spells," and soon after he fell
asleep.

<span id="an_p_303">303</span>. When he awoke she was gone. All that
day, and from day to day he "put time past" without seeing a soul, but
when he awoke at night, the king's daughter was near him, and they
talked awhile, and every morning when he got up, his suit of clothes was
better and better, and so time was going past, till a year was nearly
gone from the time he had left his mother.

<span id="an_p_304">304</span>. Then his mother's spells and crosses
began to work on him, and he could not but think on those he left
behind.

<span id="an_p_305">305</span>. On a night of these nights, while he lay
chatting with the lady, he said that it was near a year and a day since
he went away, and that his mother

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

had laid crosses and spells upon him if he were alive and had the means
that he should go back to see her and tell her his tale.

"I could easily find you a way to go," said she, "but my counsel is to
stay."

But his mother's spells were always upon him, and so they talked and
talked a great deal, and told their stories over again …

<span id="an_p_306">306</span>. "I fear," said she at last, "that your
mother will play you a trick that will harm us both, but tell me before
you wish to start, and next day I will find you means to go."

<span id="an_p_307">307</span>. The night came, and when he said that he
must go, she said:

"When you rise you will find a new suit to put on, and food as usual,
and you will find a black palfrey standing in the stable door, bridled
and saddled, half in, half out, ready waiting for you. Mount, and she
will take you where you wish to be. You have but to take off the bridle
and let her go, and she will come home, but take good care not to lose
the bridle. When you want to come back here, you have but to go out and
shake the bridle, and the black palfrey will come for you."

<span id="an_p_308">308</span>. As she said, so it was. He mounted, and
he could not tell whether it was earth or air, till he arrived. But when
he looked about he did not know the place; it was so altered with new
houses.

<span id="an_p_309">309</span>. He met an old man that he used to know,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

but he did not recognise him. He asked him where the old fisher lived.

"Oh," said the old man, "that man is not a fisherman now, he is richer
than the king, and he has a house that is finer than the king's own."

Then he showed him the way, and as they went, the old man told the lad
all that he could know of the story over again, and all that the lady
had told the lad the night before, about the fisherman's changed life.

<span id="an_p_310">310</span>. When he got to the grand new house,
grooms came for the horse, but he said that he would stable the steed
himself. He took off the bridle, and no one knew where the steed went.

<span id="an_p_311">311</span>. Nobody knew him, but at last he showed
the hair of his brow, and his mother knew him by a mote and a scar that
were on his forehead, and then there was joy.

<span id="an_p_312">312</span>. The king asked them all to dinner, and
the king's eldest daughter fell in love with the fisher's son.

<span id="an_p_313">313</span>. His mother wished him to marry the
princess, but he would go back.

<span id="an_p_314">314</span>. But before he went, his mother made him
tell all his part of the story over again, and then she said:

"But have you seen what sort of creature she is?"

"No," said he, "I have not seen her. I have put my first sleep past
before I perceive that she is

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

near me, and I am in my sleep again when she goes away, and I never yet
have seen what she is like."

<span id="an_p_315">315</span>. "Well, my son," said the mother, "your
pains seem great to me. You don't know whether she is black or white,
nor what is her seeming. She may be legless for aught that you know, but
here is a candle, it will light if you breathe your breath on it; keep
it carefully till you get a chance, and when she is asleep, light it.
You will see whether it is worth your while to wait for her."

He took the candle, for he was glad to get it, and he put it next his
breast.

<span id="an_p_316">316</span>. Next morning he was up betimes, and went
out, and shook his bridle, and came in to breakfast. But before he was
well sat down, the black palfrey was beating on the door. He went out
and bridled her, and mounted and started, and no one knew the way he
went.

<span id="an_p_317">317</span>. The black palfrey reached the golden
castle, and he went in, and there he found the fire lit, and the board
decked, and the candlestick with the lighted candle in it standing upon
the board.

<span id="an_p_318">318</span>. All things happened as was usual on the
first night. On the second, when he awoke, he felt that something was
near, so he spoke and the lady answered, and then they told the whole of
their stories over again, so that no one might forget it, if repetition
would serve that end.

<span id="an_p_319">319</span>. "And now," said she, "beware of
yourself, for the time is nearly run out."

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

"I will take good care," said he.

<span id="an_p_320">320</span>. On the third night he took his candle
from his breast, and hid it under the pillow, and when he awoke and
spoke, none answered. Then he perceived that the lady slept, so he
sought his candle and blew upon it with his breath, and it lit, and he
saw the very sun-breath that was the most beautiful he ever had
seen <span id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_85) laid asleep outside the
clothes.

<span id="an_p_321">321</span>. He was in great haste for fear she
should wake, and he blew so hasty a blast at the candle that a spark
fell upon her, and she went from him.

<span id="an_p_322">322</span>. In an instant, each bed and castle and
thing that was there was gone, and he, stripped as he was, lay on the
ground with the seaman's clothes that he wore when he came beside him.

He had but to rise as fast as he could and put them on.

<span id="an_p_323">323</span>. The castle was gone, and there was no
knowing what had become of it.

The fisher's son was wandering far and wide about the wood, and he began
to repent that he had not married the princess at home, for had he
married her, he would not have lost thus both before and behind.

<span id="an_p_324">324</span>. All that day he wandered in that
wilderness of a wood, and when night came, he climbed a tree for fear
wild beasts should be in the forest.

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span id="an_p_325">325</span>. But when the night grew dark, the wild
beasts were growling and whining all about the foot of the tree, and he
feared that they would climb up and kill him. But no matter, that did
not happen.

<span id="an_p_326">326</span>. The second day he wandered about eating
wild fruits, and when night came he climbed another tree, and the wild
beasts growled and prowled about it.

<span id="an_p_327">327</span>. When the third day came, the beasts left
the root of the tree, and when daylight had come, he came down and set
out to see what he might see in the forest. But he could see nothing
save a wilderness of great trees.

<span id="an_p_328">328</span>. At last he came to a pretty green grassy
glade, and there he saw a lion, an eagle, and an ant at the carcase of
an old white horse. At first he turned to flee from the lion, but the
lion roared: "Stop, lad; you need not trouble to flee, for I could
speedily catch you, but come hither and make fair division of this
carcase between us three. If you judge fairly, you will profit and so
shall we; but if you fail, we shall suffer hereafter."

So the lad went to the dead horse, and there he found a lion, an eagle,
and an ant standing by the white carcase. He took his little rusty
seaman's knife that he used to have when he fished with his father to
split fish and make bait of limpets and buckies, and he thought awhile
as he looked at the old horse. At last he took his knife and cut off the
horse's head, and that he threw to the ant.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

"Here, you ant," said he, "is your share; here you have food and
shelter, store and store-house, and dwelling."

Then he took his knife again and ripped up the carcase and dragged out
the inside, and that he threw to the eagle.

"There, you eagle," said he, "it is fittest and softest for you to rive
and tear with beak and claws."

"And, you lion," said he, "take the rest, for you have most power and
pith to strip flesh from bones with teeth and nails."

Then said the lion: "Well have you done; you have given each that which
is fittest, and for that, if at any time you come to straits or peril
and need, you may be a lion three times."

Then said the eagle: "You have helped me likewise, and if you have need
and it will help you, you may be an eagle thrice."

Then said the ant: "He has aided me as much as either of you, and if
ever he has need to be in small space or creep through crannies, he may
be an ant thrice."

Then the three blessed him and he blessed the three, and he left them
with the white carcase of the dead horse in the forest glade.

<span id="an_p_329">329</span>. After this, one day, as he was wandering
about the great forest, he thought that if he were an eagle, he would
not be long ere he knew whether the house which held the daughter of the
king of the golden castle was in the forest where he was.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But no sooner did
he think of the eagle than he was an eagle himself. He sprang, and he
went upon his wings above the trees, and he wheeled and he wheeled
about, and he wheeled round about again, and he saw the castle.

<span id="an_p_330">330</span>. He flew away, and he perched upon the
top of the castle till the night came. When the darkness was there, down
he went and stood on the ground, and he went round about the castle and
saw no one. He went to the door, but it was shut and barred.

<span id="an_p_331">331</span>. He thought if he were as little as an
ant that he would creep through the keyhole to see if the lady was
there. But no sooner had he thought about the ant than he was one
himself.

<span id="an_p_332">332</span>. He climbed up the door and crept through
the keyhole, and down the door to the floor, and in to the room where he
used to find his food, but that room was dark, fireless, and without a
candle. Then he crept on, climbing doors and creeping through keyholes,
till he crept through three chambers to the bedroom where he used to
sleep, and there in the bed he heard a loud snore.

<span id="an_p_333">333</span>. Then he understood that some one had got
the place that he used to have.

<span id="an_p_334">334</span>. The king's daughter knew that he was in
the chamber, and she cried to a giant who was in the bed: "Get up, you
giant; something that is not right is in the house."

<span id="an_p_335">335</span>. The man who was in an ant climbed up the
bed and fled into the hole of a wood-louse (*réudan*).

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<span id="an_p_336">336</span>. "I'll get him if he is inside this
house," said the giant as he got up, "though he were no bigger than a
barley-corn."

But the giant sought within and without, and all round about, and never
thought that anyone could be in the hole of the wood-louse.

<span id="an_p_337">337</span>. While he was gone, the other came out
and took his own shape, and spoke to the lady and she to him. But they
had small time to talk, for the giant came back, and the fisher's son
had to go into the ant's shape and flee into the hole, and there he
stayed till next night.

But the giant came grumbling back and said, "I found nothing within but
what ought to be." And he went to sleep.

<span id="an_p_338">338</span>. Next night the giant came in and slept,
and the lady came in and laid herself where she was wont. Then the ant
crept out and touched her with his sting.

"Rise, rise, giant," she cried aloud. "There is something about this
castle that is not right, and unless you find it, it will harm either
you or me."

But the ant fled back into the hole of the woodlouse.

"There is no one that can harm me," said the giant.

"Search the castle within and without," said she, "unless you find him,
it will be the worse for you."

"There never was a man that could slay me," growled the giant, "but I'll
go to seek him for you,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

and I will find him if he is no bigger than a barleycorn." And off he
set to do the ransacking.

<span id="an_p_339">339</span>. When he was gone the ant crept out and
became a man, and he said:

"How do you do?" (*Cia mar a to thu*).

"Ill enough," said she. "Ill you have done to yourself and to me. Me you
have lost, and my lot is to take this giant against my will. Oh, if you
had been aware of yourself, it had been well with you and with me now,
but I must bear my lot since it has fallen upon me."

"It was my mother's fault," said he.

"I know that," said she, "but if you had taken my counsel, you might
have been married to me, with half the realm of the golden castle."

"Is there no way to get back?" said he.

"No, not while this giant lives," said she. And then they talked long
and sadly, and told the story all over again.

<span id="an_p_340">340</span>. "But," said the fisher's son, "perhaps I
might find a way to slay this giant."

"You cannot slay him," said she. "It is not in himself that his life is
at all."

"And where, then, is his life?" said the lad.

Said she: "It is in a lion that is in a thicket of oak, that is near the
house of a farmer, that is at the uttermost end of this forest. In the
lion's belly is a dove, and in the dove an egg. Nothing is that will
kill this giant but to smite him with that egg."

<span id="an_p_341">341</span>. Then they heard the clatter of the
giant's

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

feet coming, and the fisher's son had to be an ant a second time, and
flee into the wood-louse's hole. The giant came in and sought in the
room, and when he could find nothing, he went to bed and slept.

When the giant slept, the fisher's son crept out, for that was the last
time he could be an ant, and it would not do to stay longer there. He
thought the sooner he was out of the castle the better for him, so he
climbed down the bed, and crept over the floor, and crawled up the door
and through the keyhole, and down over the floors, and so from door to
door, and from room to room, till he was outside the walls of the
castle.

<span id="an_p_342">342</span>. Then he thought of the eagle, and sprang
and flew to the castle top, and there he sat till day.

<span id="an_p_343">343</span>. As soon as the day came, he went upon
his wrings to see if he could hit upon the farmer's house near the grove
where the lion was.

<span id="an_p_344">344</span>. *At the darkening of lateness* he got
there and took his own shape, and he beat upon the door, and the farmer
came out and said:

"Who are you, and whence?"

<span id="an_p_345">345</span>. "I am a poor sailor," said he, "my ship
was lost, and all on board were drowned but me; and since I cannot get
back, I am seeking service."

"Come in, lad," said the farmer, "your sort used to be hungry and
thirsty at times."

<span id="an_p_346">346</span>. In he went, and from less to more he
offered to be a herd. "We need one of your sort," said the farmer. A
lion is in a thicket of wood near us,

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

and each time the cattle go to that grove, the lion takes one of the
cows, and sometimes he takes the best, and sometimes he takes the herd."

"I will be herd," said the fisher's son, and they settled the bargain.

<span id="an_p_347">347</span>. Early in the morning he used to arise to
put out the cattle. He drove them out and went with them to pasture
where the grass was best, and at night he used to bring them home.

<span id="an_p_348">348</span>. One of the farmer's daughters was
dairymaid, and she fell in love with the herd, and she did not want him
ever to go to the forest with the cattle, for fear that he should be
slain by the lion.

<span id="an_p_349">349</span>. On a day of these days, the herd said to
the farmer: "I will go to the wood with the cattle today."

"Well, then, don't go too far in," said the farmer, "for fear that the
lion should happen upon you and take one of the herd."

"I will take care of that," said the herdsman. The dairymaid did not
wish him to go, but she was more afraid that the lion might take the
lad. But no matter and never mind, the thing that was done was driving
the cows to the wood.

<span id="an_p_350">350</span>. When the herdsman got to the grove,
instead of keeping the cows back, he drove them farther and farther into
the forest, till at last the lion came.

<span id="an_p_351">351</span>. He was going to seize a brindled heifer
that was there, but the herd got between them.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

<span id="an_p_352">352</span>. Then he thought on the lion that he
helped at the white horse, and in the twinkling of an eye, he was a lion
himself.

<span id="an_p_353">353</span>. The two lions struggled till the sun was
going west beneath the mountain at evening, without knowing which was
losing or winning.

<span id="an_p_354">354</span>. They could struggle no more, so they sat
and stared at each other.

<span id="an_p_355">355</span>. "If I had a draught of water I would
rive you to gobbets," said the forest lion.

<span id="an_p_356">356</span>. "If I had one of wine I would tear you
to tatters asunder," said the herd lion.

Then the forest lion got up and stalked back to the wood again, and then
the herd lion got up and made a herd of himself, and drove the cattle
home, singing a ditty tunefully.

<span id="an_p_357">357</span>. When he got home, the farmer said: "How
went it with you to-day?"

"Well," said he.

"Saw you the lion?" said the master.

"I saw him," said the herd.

"I wonder he did not take one of the cattle," said the farmer.

"He wanted to take one," said the herd, "but I would not let him."

<span id="an_p_358">358</span>. The cattle were sent to the byre, and
the dairymaid milked them.

<span id="an_p_359">359</span>. And she never got so much milk from them
before.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span id="an_p_360">360</span>. The herd got well taken to that night.
Joy and a feast were made for him.

<span id="an_p_361">361</span>. Next day the master said: "You need not
go to the wood with the beasts. A day now and again is enough. It is not
easy tó keep cows from the lion." The dairymaid said as much for fear of
the herd's life.

But he said:

"There is good grass in the groves, and it is best to hold on till the
cattle make it bare. I will keep off the lion."

<span id="an_p_362">362</span>. "Then I will go with you," said the
farmer's daughter, and she was ready to start, but he would not let her
go that day.

<span id="an_p_363">363</span>. He drove the cattle farther and farther
in, till the lion came as before, and tried at the brindled heifer.

<span id="an_p_364">364</span>. Then the herd ran between and thought on
the lion, and was a lion himself. The two lions struggled and tugged and
fought all day, till the sun was going down under the mountain at
evening, and then at last they paused and gazed.

<span id="an_p_365">365</span>. "If I had a draught of water," said the
forest lion, "I would tear you to tatters."

<span id="an_p_366">366</span>. "If I had a draught of wine," quoth the
lion-herd, "I would not be long about riving you asunder."

<span id="an_p_367">367</span>. Then they got up and went their ways as
before.

<span id="an_p_368">368</span>. "Saw you the lion?" said the farmer, as
he got home.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

"I saw him," said the herd, "and he wanted to take the brindled heifer,
but I hindered him."

"It's odd that he did not take you," said the master.

"If he could, he would have done that same," quoth the herd.

<span id="an_p_369">369</span>. So much milk they never got before.

<span id="an_p_370">370</span>. And the herd was feasted, and praised,
and well treated that night.

<span id="an_p_371">371</span>. Next morning the farmer said: "I rather
incline to think that you had better set the cattle on some other way
to-day. A day in the wood now and again is quite enough. It is rather
risky to go often to the forest with them, but that's no matter."

"The best grass is in the woods," said the herd, "and it is best to go
there that grass may grow elsewhere."

<span id="an_p_372">372</span>. The dairymaid did all she could to keep
the herd from the wood, for fear that he should be killed by the lion,
but no matter. To the wood they went.

<span id="an_p_373">373</span>. Instead of holding the cattle back, he
drove them farther and farther in, till the lion came, and he, as was
his wont, tried to take the best in the herd. The herdsman thought of
the lion for whom he divided the carcase, and was a lion for the third
time, and the two lions struggled. And they struggled, and fought, and
hauled, and pulled, and dragged, and bit, and roared, and growled, and
struggled again, till

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

the sun was almost near going under the hill, and neither knew which
should win or lose.

<span id="an_p_374">374</span>. Then they ceased struggling, and sat and
glowered.

<span id="an_p_375">375</span>. "If I had one draught of water, you
should never more keep me from taking a cow: I would tear you to
pieces," said the forest lion.

<span id="an_p_376">376</span>. "If I had a draught of wine, I would set
you so that you should never more come to take a cow that belonged to
another, for I would rive you to gobbets."

<span id="an_p_377">377</span>. Who should be at his back when he spoke
but the farmer's daughter coming to him with wine to freshen him up, for
it seemed to her that he was weary on the night before. And she gave him
the draught of wine.

<span id="an_p_378">378</span>. The forest lion rose and fled. The other
rose when he had drunk his wine, and he stretched out after him, and he
caught him, and killed him, and tore him to pieces. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_86)

<span id="an_p_379">379</span>. The pigeon came out of the lion's belly
and sprang away on her wings. But the lion-herd made an eagle of himself
for the third time, and spread his wings and darted after her, and he
caught her and killed her, and took the bits to pieces, and found the
egg.

<span id="an_p_380">380</span>. He never went back to the farmer's
daughter or to the cows, but on he flew to the

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

castle, where was the daughter of the king of the golden castle, and
when he got there, he got into his own shape.

<span id="an_p_381">381</span>. He went into the castle, and into the
room where he used to find food, but there was none there, and on he
went through the other chambers till he reached the bedroom.

<span id="an_p_382">382</span>. There lay the giant with *ich* and *och*
and *acain*, groaning in a miserable plight.

<span id="an_p_383">383</span>. When the fisher's son went into the
chamber where the giant was, he got up to be at grips with him. But he
cast the egg at him, and the egg struck the giant full in the front of
his face, and down tumbled the giant, dead.

<span id="an_p_384">384</span>. The hardest work the fisher's son ever
found to do, was to carry that giant out of the castle. He tried to lift
him, but he could not stir him. The thing which he had to do at last,
was to take his seaman's knife and cut him into four quarters, and carry
him out bit by bit, and bury him in a hole that he happened to find
somewhere outside.

<span id="an_p_385">385</span>. When that was done and the chamber
cleaned, he went and sat where he was wont, and there he sat till night.

<span id="an_p_386">386</span>. When the night darkened, the candlestick
with the lighted candle in it came and stood on the board as it used to
do. When he wished for food he had it instantly, and when he grew sleepy
and wished to rest, the candlestick and the candle showed him the way,
and he went to bed and slept.

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

<span id="an_p_387">387</span>. When he awoke he felt that some creature
was near him. He spoke, and the king's daughter answered.

"Are you to be mine if I make out the time?" said he.

"I am," said she, "but you must begin at the beginning and be as you are
for a year and a day. If you do that I shall be yours, and the golden
realm—all as you might have had it before, unless you think it too long
to wait."

"I am willing to wait if I get you then," said he.

"You will," said she, "if you wait, and you shall have all you wish for
here but me while you are waiting for me."

<span id="an_p_388">388</span>. "I'll do that," said he, and so he did.
Nothing worth telling happened for a year and a day, which seemed like
one day to a lonely man who saw no one. At the end of the time, as he
was wandering about in the castle, wearying, in came the most beautiful
darling of a woman that he ever had seen, and said—

<span id="an_p_389">389</span>. "I am the daughter of the king of the
golden castle, and now I am free of the spells that held me, but I must
be gone for three days."

<span id="an_p_390">390</span>. "I will take you to the realm where my
father is. This is not my castle, this is an enchanted castle, and we
must leave it soon. Stay here till I come back."

<span id="an_p_391">391</span>. He did not like that at all, but for
fear that he might go wrong as he did before, he stayed

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

there all alone for three days, and he never said a word against it.

<span id="an_p_392">392</span>. Then she came forth with a band of
maidens and of youths, and she said: "I have come to seek you to go to
the golden realm with me."

<span id="an_p_393">393</span>. "The ship is ready, let us go." And so
they sailed over the ocean to the golden realm, where the old king was
pleased to see his daughter come back with a handsome lad, and there
they were married.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_75"></span>[90:1](cdm12.htm#fr_76) According to Macnair.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[92:1](cdm12.htm#fr_77) According to Macnair.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[92:2](cdm12.htm#fr_78) According to an island
authority who has less history.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[92:3](cdm12.htm#fr_79) *Maithean na rioghachd*.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[93:1](cdm12.htm#fr_80) *Deise chruadhach*.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[93:2](cdm12.htm#fr_81) Probably because
Macleod's fairy flag and ancient Norse standards are, and were, supposed
to be magical.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[95:1](cdm12.htm#fr_82) Which is a fair
description of a Scandinavian battle in which sea-rovers got the worst
of the fight. Be that as it may, the story remains in its own shape, and
it is rather like the Exploit of Bhima in the Mahabharata, who won a
battle single-handed.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[99:1](cdm12.htm#fr_83) *Gin*, lit., any
begotten being; creature.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[100:1](cdm12.htm#fr_84) *Anabharra riomhach*.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[101:1](cdm12.htm#fr_85) *Inneal seilg*.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[108:1](cdm12.htm#fr_86) *An aon deo-gréine bu
bhòidhche:* a common phrase in speaking of a beautiful woman.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[119:1](cdm12.htm#fr_87) The equivalent of the
mermaid's death. This lion was one of the tribe who guarded the hearts
of mythical beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Meeting of the Three Ways](cdm13)
