[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc01) 
[Next](vc03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### II. Beginnings

Eternal, we wander the aeons, moving to the rhythm of our own inner
tides.

Freed from the most fundamental of cycles, we are nevertheless beings
bound by cycles. Our heightened awareness of ourselves and the world
around us forces us to acknowledge natural rhythms that others simply
ignore.

As the day waxes and wanes, we can feel it, and we know that the true
realm of magick is the night, for that is when we wax in power. As the
moon grows gravid and slim, we feel it, and we know, too, that there are
more complex rhythms of power tied to her phases. As the wheel of the
year turns round, we feel the wild times, the apogees and nadirs of
power.

The dark time of the year is our time, as are the threshold times when
we celebrate Samhain and Beltane. These days are our Im Kheperu, the Day
of Transformation, and our Im Sekhemu, the Day of Double Power. As
beings poised on the threshold of many things, the energies of these
holidays affect us profoundly. At these times we enjoy our greatest
power, but in balance, we also pay a stronger price. Waves of energy
rise and fall within us, and when in their grip, our hunger burns.

Forever, we are active elements moving through passive worlds.

Our rules are our own. We accept no others. We define who we are and
what we shall become. There is nothing in our lives which we cannot
control if we but choose to.

Our memories are carried like gems within our souls. Over the lifetimes
they build and crystallize until we can take them out and gaze upon them
as we choose.

Life sustains us, but death defines us. We are the many-born. Our
conception was in death, and each death now brings us a new beginning,
forever without end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. Catalysts of Change](vc03)
