[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc02) 
[Next](vc04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### III. Catalysts of Change

Everything we touch, we change. We take in energy constantly, and
although this is how we feed, this energy is never destroyed. Through
us, it is transformed. It changes states. It resonates to a higher
level.

Yet every birth is accompanied by struggle and pain. Every rebirth is
just as painful. It may seem that we bring destruction, chaos, and
turmoil to all those around us. And in a sense we do. But the changes
are always for the better, even though the initial change may seem
terrible.

Change is terrible. It tears away what we've grown comfortable with. It
destroys what we find familiar, stable, and simple, leaving uncertainty
in its wake. But to face uncertainty and to thrive is to become
stronger. Everything must change or die. We are active participants in
this universal mystery.

Every person that we come into contact with, no matter how casually, is
altered. Wherever we go, change will follow. Our dynamic spirits stretch
out all around us, and the wake we leave in our passing is like ripples
on the ocean. Only the ripples we cause can become tidal waves.

As beings on a threshhold state, we are living embodiments of the
dynamic complimentarity that keeps the universe in constant motion. This
is our burden. Yet this also is our purpose. In the gray area between
two polar opposites lies revelation. We feed upon all around us. Yet we
can also harness that energy to heal. We tear away and bring
destruction, yet we also nurture new growth. This is our nature, the
mystery of who we are.

There is no rebirth without destruction. Light only blinds without
shadow to throw it into relief. Understanding comes from balancing all
these things within the Self. We are that Balance. We affect it, and it
affects us. We are facilitators of the universal flow. We must accept
this, and never fear to move with that flow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. Awakenings](vc04)
