[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc07) 
[Next](vc09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### VIII. The Beacon

Our kind has ways of recognizing its own. Often this recognition occurs
on an unspoken level and is very subtle, so you must learn to trust your
impulses and allow your greater Self to guide you.

Especially in the unawakened, this recognition manifests itself as a
Beacon which calls us to them so that they may realize their Potential.
The Beacon calls to us on a very basic level, and often speaks purely to
our unconscious minds. Thus we find ourselves inexplicably attracted to
a Potential, stricken with a sudden fascination for him and a need to
draw him closer to us. If we listen to our perceptions and trust our
instinctual reactions, we can refine this awareness of others until we
can consciously pick out the Beacon in those around us. Sometimes, even
after such a refinement has been achieved, the Beacon still slips past
our conscious actions and we find ourselves simply responding to its
unspoken pull. The pull of the Beacon drives us to feed from the
Potential, thus awakening him to the most basic aspect of his hidden
nature.

We must learn to recognize the Beacon in others, to judge its varying
degrees of strength so that we may go about the awakening in a
deliberate manner. We must learn to recognize when it is appropriate to
awaken a Potential and when that awakening will bring only grief to all
involved.

We must let our judgment rule us in this matter and we must sometimes
resist the merely instinctual pull of the Beacon for awakenings that are
not appropriate. Not all of those with Potential are fit for the
awakening, and if we act rashly we may unwittingly loose the beast of
our destruction through a careless move.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX. Characteristics](vc09)
