[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc12) 
[Next](vc14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XIII. Breath and Life

We can adequately feed from a distance, extending our subtle bodies and
our wills beyond the limits of our physical bodies in order to touch the
energies of others. Such techniques can be satisfying in their own
right, yet we are not solely beings of energy. We are a balance of
spirit and matter, as are all things, and so contact with more than just
energy-bodies is necessary for us to feel truly satisfied.

Physical contact coupled with that extension of our Selves that creates
energy contact is the main method used to feed.

The primary centers for achieving such contact are our hands and our
mouths. The hands may tingle when used for this purpose. Our touch at
this time is intense, often very cold but also shiveringly pleasant. As
we draw forth more energy, the cold gives way to warmth which in turn
gives way to heat. The heat is a byproduct of the energy exchange.

In extreme cases, we may leave traces of our feeding, even when feeding
solely with our hands. We can draw blood up through the very pores or
leave barely discernible bruises at our points of contact.

We draw energy in like breath: this is a controlled breathing technique
which encompasses much more than our lungs. Even when the primary focus
is our hands or if our target is far removed from us physically, this
breathing helps focus our intake of energy. It is one slow, sustained
inhalation, almost like smoking a cigarette or sucking air through a
very small straw. If done correctly, it will seem that your are
breathing in far beyond the capacity of your lungs. Like breath, energy
is drawn in, filling us with life and vitality. You will feel it, like a
rush, spread through you, tingling down to your fingers and toes. You
will achieve an altered state of consciousness while doing this, where
body and energy body are both clearly perceived. Time may seem drawn out
and distance will be altered. Your perceptions can expand to encompass a
whole room, seeing everything inside and out all at once.

Like breath, energy may also be expelled, exhaled into the person you
choose to give it to. This secondary function of drawing energy is used
in healing. It is the necessary counterbalance to our function of taking
energy. We are creatures of balance above all else, and even as we can
sap the energy of those around us, so too can we build it up in order to
help and heal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Assimilating Energy](vc14)
