[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc16) 
[Next](vc18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XVII. More on Feeding

Our energy actually pierces the subtle body of our partner and
penetrates it, drawing energy out as if through a straw. Afterward, a
wound is left in the aura of the partner, though this will close on its
own in a few days. It can sometimes be echoed in the flesh in the form
of a small rounded bruise. In the case of long-standing partners, the
wound can become a permanent weak spot in the aura through which we can
easily penetrate and gain access to their energy.

Generally speaking, feeding is not harmful to the partner. They have a
connection to the universal force; this will replenish them in time,
usually overnight. Most partners will just feel a little tired and
fuzzy-headed after being fed from. Many have described it like a mild
drug, something that is pleasantly mellowing. Some experience euphoria
during feeding and feel they are riding intense waves of pleasure.
Others can achieve an altered state of consciousness with intense
dream-like visions.

Feeding partners may be a little hypersensitive to bright light
afterwards and they may experience a sudden feeling of cold. They may be
a little more tired than usual the next morning, and they may have a
headache that is much like a hangover. However, under ordinary
circumstances, these are the most severe side affects feeding will
produce in a partner.

Some caution should be used when feeding from those who are not
accustomed to it, however. If fed from too quickly or too deeply, the
partner may experience difficulty in breathing. Irregularities in the
heartbeat may follow. The partner's body will tingle all over, though
this may quickly give way to feelings of numbness and cold. Some find
this pleasant. To others, it is alarming. It may become very difficult
for the person to move and the limbs will feel heavy and uncoordinated.
In very extreme cases, the partner will experience a general depression
of the entire sympathetic nervous system. This includes lowered body
temperature, lowered blood pressure, slowed heart-rate, and a general
lassitude which may manifest itself in extreme cases as an all-over
muscular weakness and trembling or partial paralysis.

When feed from extremely deeply, it is almost guaranteed that a partner
will partially or completely lose consciousness. Do not panic if this
occurs. Make certain that they are in no immediate danger, and if they
seem to be breathing all right, just let them sleep it off. With their
connection to the universal life force, there is very little permanent
damage you can do to someone by overfeeding, so long as you do not make
it a habit to do so.

Consistent overfeeding will evoke in the partner symptoms similar to
those which we experience during periods of starvation. The continual
shortage of energy will begin to tax the immune system. They will be
tired all the time, sickly and weak. They may sleep a great deal, or
they may find themselves unable to actually sleep despite their
overwhelming lethargy. Putting constant demands upon one partner will
eventually put them in a position where their system can no longer
compensate for the loss of energy fast enough to meet your needs. This
is why it is always wise to have at least one other reliable source
which you can feed from. The best strategy to keep you and all those
close to you healthy is to have two or three partners which you feed
from, rotating through them so that no single one of them must bear the
full weight of your needs.

A draw can be enacted in conjunction with tantric magick. Your primary
contact is made at the mouth or the throat, and a tendril is inserted
into the subtle body of your partner. Through intense visualization,
this tendril is guided down through your partner's subtle body to the
root chakra. Here the Kundalini energy that is so crucial to Tantra lies
coiled. You can grasp onto the Kundalini energy and manually pull it up
through each successive chakra. Draw in only a little during this
process until the drawing up of the energy is complete. Once you have
brought the Kundalini through all the chakras to your primary point of
contact, you will have generated an immense amount of energy from which
both yourself and your partner can benefit. You and your partner will
sense something like an explosion of light and energy within yourselves,
followed immediately by a bursting sensation as if you had just been
pushed through some barrier. This will consummate in a powerful sense of
climax on the subtle level.

Feeding in this manner is very productive, as it serves to energize both
yourself and your partner. Your partner will almost invariably
experience a prolonged and impressive orgasm, and one may feed upon the
torrent of energy that results from the climax to increase mutual
stimulation. It is almost impossible to exhaust a partner when feeding
from the root: whereas prolonged or deep feeding from any of the other
major energy centers can cause trembling, weakness, dizziness, and an
overall depression of the system, feeding from the root seems to only
increase that which you feed upon. The partner, after recovering from
the intensity of the drain is almost always energized and while they
still feel the effects of physical exhaustion, they are driven by a
fevered desire that can sustain them for hours. The process is very
difficult to master, however, and if the coil of Kundalini energy slips
from your grasp, you will simply end up initiating a deep feed from all
the chakras in succession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIX. Dreamwalking](vc18)
