[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc17) 
[Next](vc19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XIX. Dreamwalking

Remember, we can feed through a touch, but our spirits extend far beyond
the limits of our body. Long-distance draws that are just as intimate
and intense as feeding flesh to flesh can be achieved.

When you are starved for energy and no opportunity to adequately sate
your needs has arrived, you may find that you will send yourself out in
dreams. This is much like astral travel, although it is largely an
unconscious activity. You will dream of someone close to you. This can
be a family member, a good friend, a current or a former lover. This
person need not be located physically close to you, as the subtle
reality does not know distance as we know it in the physical world. Your
body may be confined to your bedroom, yet your dream-self may wander
hundreds and even thousands of miles away.

The dream will seem unusually vivid. It is very likely that the dream
will also be lucid, and you will realize at least in part that you are
dreaming, but that this other person is somehow actually present in the
dream. In the course of the dream, you will have an exchange with the
target person. The exchange can be overtly vampiric, or it may manifest
itself in an erotic context. The person who you have visited this way
will wake up tired and worn just as if you had fed directly from them
that night. Often, they will recall the dream as well, and if it is
possible to compare experiences, you will find that certain elements of
the dreamscape were shared by both people involved in the dream.

With practice, you will come to be able to distinguish between your
ordinary dreams and these dream-walking experiences. The process does
not always have to be unconscious. You may gain mastery over this
ability and dream-walk at will. However it remains a survival technique
inherent in the vampiric nature. Therefore, especially in periods of
dire need, you may find your soul wandering regardless of your personal
control.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. Choosing Donors](vc19)
