[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc34) 
[Next](vc36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXXVI. Energy Manipulation

It is part of our essential nature to manipulate energy, and we are not
limited to only taking energy away from others into ourselves. Because
we can sense energy, grasp it, influence it, and channel it, we may also
give energy to others. Most often, we do this to help and to heal,
though like all things, this skill can also be used to hurt and harm.

For most energy manipulations, our best focus is our hands. We can
easily gather energy into our hands and manipulate it. If the energy
comes from within ourselves, we need but to draw the energy into our
center, then channel the energy down to either or both hands.

If you are successful in focusing energy into your hands, they will
begin to grow warm and tingle. The capillaries will expand, causing a
splotchy pinkening of the skin as, on a subtler level, the energy
channels also expand to increase circulation on both levels.

A thrumming sensation may encompass your arms all the way up to the
elbows and in some cases may even be perceptible to those around you. If
someone touches your hands at this point, he will not only notice the
increased heat (a by-product of the coalescing energy) but he will also
feel an electrical vibration coursing through your flesh.

Once you have gathered such a charge to your hands, you may direct the
energy toward a specific goal. To do this, you must visualize what you
wish to do, accompanying the visualization with actual physical contact
and motions to help maintain focus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVII. The Energy Ball](vc36)
