[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc35) 
[Next](vc37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXXVII. The Energy Ball

Once you have learned how to focus and direct energy through your body,
the most basic form of external energy manipulation is the energy ball.
Cup your hands slightly until you feel a build-up of energy gather in
your palm. It will have a barely perceptible heft to it, and if you
press your fingers around it, you will feel a subtle tension before it
begins to give.

This energy is malleable, like a very viscous fluid, and may be handled
and shaped as you would clay.

Bring your hands together, palms still cupped and slightly parted, and
form the energy into a ball. Feel its weight and the tension it creates
between your fingers. Mold it and shape it with your hands. In this
state, it can be thrown at a target or passed from person to person. In
general, anyone struck with such a neutral ball of energy will feel
something, though they may be hard pressed to define what.

If you look at this collected energy as you would the aura, you will
find that it is perceptible as something misty or oily in the space
between your hands.

You may charge this energy with a specific emotion or sensation. Simply
concentrate on the energy in your hands and concentrate on that emotion
or sensation. Recall it so completely that you actually experience it
while focusing on the energy ball. Direct the sensation to the energy in
your hands. The energy will then become infused with the emotion or
sensation which you generated.

Now, when you throw this energy ball at someone, they will experience
the sensation or emotion as you did. They may ignore it or they may act
upon what they suddenly feel. Sometimes, if the sensation is strong
enough, they may jump and instinctively look over at you.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXVIII. Augmented Healing](vc37)
