[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc36) 
[Next](vc38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXXVIII. Augmented Healing

Energy gathered into your hands, if allowed to remain neutral and
uncharged by any extraneous emotions, can be used to heal yourself or
another.

Cup the energy in your hand and hold this around the affected area.
Channel the energy through your hands to the wound. As you send the
energy through your hands, extends your awareness to include all that
the energy comes into contact with. Focus on gradually smaller and
smaller levels until you sense the source of the problem.

Your perception of the problem and how you seek to deal with it will
depend upon your knowledge of anatomy and your technique of
visualization. In general, you can speed the healing of any wound by
vitalizing the area with energy and stimulating both circulation and
cell growth.

If there are broken bones, visualize the ends of the bone knitting back
together. If there are tears in muscles or tendons, will the fibers to
reknit themselves. Visualize the blood gathering to carry away the
fluids which cause swelling or any clotted matter left over from bruises
or other ruptures. Visualize cell growth and mitosis occurring on an
increased level.

Flood the area with as much energy as you can spare, then gradually
cease the flow. Keep your hands over the area, holding the heat you've
generated in place for a bit longer, then pull away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXIX. Advanced Healing Techniques](vc38)
