[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index) 
[Esoteric](../../eso/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](vc37) 
[Next](vc39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### XXXIX. Advanced Healing Techniques

Sometimes a wound or illness may not have a physical cause. In such a
case, lay your hands upon the area where the problem is focused and
extend your awareness to the internal level. Probe out with your subtle
sense and locate the intrusion which is the source of the problem. This
may be a dark spot or a dense "object." It may merely be a feeling, such
as a sensation of cold or pain. Find it, then, taking one hand, close
both your physical and subtle self around it. Draw it out and throw it
away. Do not take it into yourself as this can cause complications, not
the least of which is the possibility of having the infection attack
you.

Sometimes a wound or illness may exist on both the physical and subtle
levels. In such a case, place your hands over the affected area and
extend your awareness to the internal level. Draw out the subtle
intrusion first. Heal the problem on the physical level only after this
has been done. The physical and the subtle levels of existence are so
interlinked that if you heal the physical but leave the subtle aspect
untouched, the subtle intrusion will eventually cause the physical
problem to recur.

You may use these techniques on yourself or others as the need arises.
If your visualization is strong, you may not need to touch the affected
area when healing yourself. Simply center, build up some energy, then
focus inward and become aware of your internal processes. Focus your
perception on the affected area and proceed with the healing
visualizations discussed above. Cease when you feel you have done all
the good that you can.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XLI. Shielding Techniques](vc39)
