[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43007)  [Next](cc43009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="iii.vi.i"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>[1 Timothy
4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p2"></span>**1**. Now the Spirit speaketh expressly,
that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed
to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;

<span id="iii.vi.i-p3"></span>**1**. Spiritus autem clare dicit, quod in
posterioribus temporibus desciscent quidam a fide, attendentes
spiritibus impostoribus, et doctrinis daemoniorum.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p4"></span>**2**. Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having
their conscience seared with a hot iron;

<span id="iii.vi.i-p5"></span>**2**. In hypocrisi falsiloquorum,
cauterio notatam habentium conscientiam;

<span id="iii.vi.i-p6"></span>**3**. Forbidding to marry, *and
commanding* to abstain from meats, which God hath created to be received
with thanksgiving of them which believe and know the truth.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p7"></span>**3**. Prohibentium matrimonia contrahere,
jubentium abstinere a cibis, quos Deus creavit ad percipiendum cum
gratiarum actione fidelibus, et qui congnoverunt veritatem.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p8"></span>**4**. For every creature of God *is*
good, and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving:

<span id="iii.vi.i-p9"></span>**4**. Quod omnis creatura Dei bona, et
nihil rejiciendum quod cum gratiarum actione sumatur:

<span id="iii.vi.i-p10"></span>**5**. For it is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p11"></span>**5**. Sanctificatur enim per sermonem
Dei et precationem.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p12"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p13"></span>**1** *Now the Spirit plainly saith* He
had industriously admonished Timothy about many things; and now he shews
the necessity, because it is proper to provide against the danger which
the Holy Spirit forewarns to be fast approaching, namely, that false
teachers will come, who shall hold out trifles as the doctrine of faith,
and who, placing all holiness in outward exercises, shall throw into the
shade the spiritual worship of God, which alone is lawful. And, indeed,
the servants of God have always had to contend against such persons as
Paul here describes. Men being by nature inclined to hypocrisy, Satan
easily persuades them that God is worshipped aright by ceremonies and
outward discipline; and, indeed, without a teacher, almost all have this
conviction deeply rooted in their hearts. Next is added the craftiness
of Satan to confirm the error: the consequence is, that, in all ages,
there have been impostors, who recommended false worship, by which true
godliness was buried. Again, this plague produces another, namely, that,
in matters indifferent, men are laid under restraint; for the world
easily permits itself to be hindered from doing that which God had
declared to be lawful, in order that they may have it in their power to
transgress with impunity the laws of God.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p14"></span>Here Paul, therefore, in the person of
Timothy, forewarns not only the Ephesians, but all the churches
throughout the world, about hypocritical teachers, who, by setting up
false worship, and by ensnaring consciences with new laws, adulterate
the true worship of God, and corrupt the pure doctrine of faith. This is
the real object of the passage, which it is especially necessary to
remark.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p15"></span>Besides, in order that all may hear with
more earnest attention what he is going to say, he opens with a preface,
that this is an undoubted and very clear prophecy of the Holy Spirit.
There is, indeed, no reason to doubt that he drew all the rest from the
same Spirit; but, although we ought always to listen to him as
communicating the will of Christ, yet in a matter of vast importance he
wished especially to testify that he said nothing but by the Spirit of
prophecy. By a solemn announcement, therefore, he recommends to us this
prophecy; and, not satisfied with doing this, he adds that it is plain,
and free from all ambiguity.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p16"></span>*In the latter times* At that time
certainly it could not have been expected that, amidst so clear light of
the gospel, any would have revolted. But this is what Peter says, that,
as false teachers formerly gave annoyance to the people of Israel, so
they will never cease to disturb the Christian Church. (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p16.1"></span>[2Pe
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003)<span id="iii.vi.i-p16.1"></span>.)
The meaning is the same as if he had said, “The doctrine of the gospel
is now in a flourishing state, but Satan will not long refrain from
laboring to choke the pure seed by tares.”  <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69) (<span id="iii.vi.i-p17.2"></span>[Matt.
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#020),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#038)<span id="iii.vi.i-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p18"></span>This warning was advantageous in the age
of the Apostle Paul, that both pastors and others might give earnest
attention to pure doctrine, and not suffer themselves to be deceived. To
us in the present day it is not less useful, when we perceive that
nothing has happened which was not foretold by an express prophecy of
the Spirit. Besides, we may here remark; how great care God exercises
about his Church, when he gives so early warning of dangers. Satan has,
indeed, manifold arts for leading us into error, and attacks us by
astonishing stratagems; but, on the other hand, fortifies us
sufficiently, if we did not of our own accord choose to be deceived.
There is therefore no reason to complain that darkness is more powerful
than light, or that truth is vanquished by falsehood; but, on the
contrary, we suffer the punishment of our carelessness and indolence,
when we are led aside from the right way of salvation.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p19"></span>But they who flatter themselves in their
errors object, that it is hardly possible to distinguish whom or what
kind of persons Paul describes. As if it were for nothing that the
Spirit uttered this prophecy, and published it so long before; for, if
there were no certain mark, the whole of the present warning would be
superfluous, and consequently absurd. But far be it from us to think
that the Spirit of God gives us unnecessary alarm, or does not accompany
the threatening of danger by shewing how we should guard against it! And
that slander is sufficiently refuted by the words of Paul; for he points
out, as with the finger, that evil which he warns us to avoid. He does
not speak, in general terms, about false prophets, but plainly describes
the kind of false doctrine; namely, that which, by linking godliness
with outward elements, perverts and profanes, as I have already said,
the spiritual worship of God.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p20"></span>*Some will revolt from the faith* It is
uncertain whether he speaks of teachers or of hearers; but I am more
disposed to refer it to the latter; for he afterwards calls teachers
spirits that are impostors. And this is (ἐμφατικώτερον) more emphatic,
that not only will there be those who sow wicked doctrines, and corrupt
the purity of faith, but that they can never want disciples whom they
call draw into their sect; and when a lie thus gains prevalence, there
arises from it greater trouble.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p21"></span>Besides, it is no slight vice which he
describes, but a very heinous crime — apostasy *from the faith;*
although, at first sight, in the doctrine which he briefly notices there
does not appear to be so much evil. What is the case? Is faith
completely overturned on account of the prohibition of marriage, or of
certain kinds of food? But we must take into view a higher reason, that
men pervert and invent at their pleasure the worship of God, that they
assume dominion over the consciences, and that they dare to forbid that
use of good things which the Lord has permitted. As soon as the purity
of the worship of God is impaired, there no longer remains anything
perfect or sound, and faith itself is utterly ruined.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p22"></span>Accordingly, although Papists laugh at
us, when we censure their tyrannical laws about outward observances, yet
we know that we are pleading a cause of the greatest weight and
importance; because the doctrine of faith is destroyed, as soon as the
worship of God is infected by such corruptions. The controversy is not
about flesh or fish, or about a black or ashy color, or about Friday or
Wednesday, but about the mad superstitions of men, who wish to appease
God by such trifles, and, by contriving a carnal worship of him,
contrive for themselves an idol instead of God. Who will deny that this
is revolting from the faith?

<span id="iii.vi.i-p23"></span>*To deceiving spirits* He means prophets
or teachers, to whom he gives this designation, because they boast of
the Spirit, and, under this title, insinuate themselves into the favor
of the people. This, indeed, is true at all times, that men, whatever
they are, speak under the excitement of the spirit. But it is not the
same spirit that excites them all; for sometimes Satan is a lying spirit
in the mouth of the false prophets, in order to deceive unbelievers, who
deserve to be deceived. (<span id="iii.vi.i-p23.1"></span>[1Ki
22:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#021)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p23.1"></span>.) On the other hand, every one that renders
due honor to Christ speaks by the Spirit of God, as Paul testifies.
(<span id="iii.vi.i-p23.2"></span>[1Co
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#003)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p24"></span>Now that mode of expression, of which we
are now speaking, originated at first from this circumstance, that the
servants of God professed to have from the revelation of the Spirit,
everything that they uttered in public. This was actually true; and
hence they received the name of the Spirit, whose organs they were. But
the ministers of Satan, by a false emulation, like apes, began
afterwards to make the same boast, and likewise falsely assumed the
name. On the same grounds John says,

<span id="iii.vi.i-p25"></span>“Try the spirits, whether they are of
God.” (<span id="iii.vi.i-p25.1"></span>[1Jo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001)<span id="iii.vi.i-p25.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p26"></span>Moreover, Paul explains his meaning by
adding, *to doctrines of devils;* which is as if he had said, “Attending
to false prophets, and to their devilish doctrines.” Again observe, that
it is not an error of small importance, or one that ought to be
concealed, when consciences are bound by the contrivances of men, and at
the same time the worship of God is corrupted.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p27"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p28"></span>**2** *Speaking lies in hypocrisy* If
these words refer to “demons,” then this word will mean men deceiving
through the instigation of the devil. But we may also supply the words,
“of men speaking.” He now descends to a particular instance, when he
says that they “speak lies in hypocrisy,” and *have their conscience
seared with a hot iron* And*,* indeed, it ought to be known that these
two are so closely Joined together that the former springs from the
latter; for consciences, that are bad and seared with the hot iron of
their crimes, always flee to hypocrisy as a ready refuge; that is, they
contrive hypocritical presences, in order to dazzle the eyes of God; and
what else is done by those who endeavor to appease God by the mask of
outward observances?

<span id="iii.vi.i-p29"></span>The word *hypocrisy* must therefore be
explained agreeably to the passage in which it now occurs; for, first,
it must relate to doctrine, and, next, it denotes that kind of doctrine
which adulterates the spiritual worship of God by exchanging its genuine
purity for bodily exercises; and thus it includes all methods contrived
by men for appeasing God or obtaining his favor. The meaning may be thus
summed up; first, that all who assume a pretended sanctimoniousness are
led by the instigation of the devil; because God is never worshipped
aright by outward ceremonies; for true worshipers

<span id="iii.vi.i-p30"></span>“worship him in spirit and truth,” (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p30.1"></span>[Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024)<span id="iii.vi.i-p30.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p31"></span>and, secondly, that this is a useless
medicine, by which hypocrites mitigate their pains, or rather a plaster
by which bad consciences conceal their wounds, without any advantage,
and to their utter destruction.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p32"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p33"></span>**3** *Forbidding to marry*. Having
described the class, he next mentions two instances,  <span
id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70) namely, the prohibition of marriage and
of some kinds of food. They arise from that hypocrisy which, having
forsaken true holiness, seeks something else for the purpose of
concealment and disguise; for they who do not keep from ambition,
covetousness, hatred, cruelty, and such like, endeavor to obtain a
righteousness by abstaining from those things which God has left at
large. Why are consciences burdened by those laws, but because
perfection is sought in something different from the law of God? This is
not done but by hypocrites, who, in order that they may with impunity
transgress that righteousness of the heart which the law requires,
endeavor to conceal their inward wickedness by those outward observances
as veils with which they cover themselves.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p35"></span>This was a distinct threatening of
danger, so that it was not difficult for men to guard against it, at
least if they had lent their ears to the Holy Spirit, when he gave so
express a warning. Yet we see that the darkness of Satan generally
prevailed, so that the clear light of this striking and memorable
prediction was of no avail. Not long after the death of the apostle,
arose Encratites, (who took their name from continence,) Tatianists,
 <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71) Catharists, Montanus with his
sect, and at length Manichaeans, who had extreme aversion to marriage
and the eating of flesh, and condemned them as profane things. Although
they were disowned by the Church, on account of their haughtiness, in
wishing to subject others to their opinions, yet it is evident that
those who opposed them yielded to their error more than was proper. It
was not intended by those of whom I am now speaking to impose a law on
Christians; but yet they attached greater weight than they ought to have
done to superstitious observances, such as abstaining from marriage, and
not tasting flesh.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p37"></span>Such is the disposition of the world,
always dreaming that God ought to be worshipped in a carnal manner, as
if God were carnal. Matters becoming gradually worse, this tyranny was
established, that it should not be lawful for priests or monks to enter
into the married state, and that no person should dare to taste flesh on
certain days. Not unjustly, therefore, do we maintain that this
prediction was uttered against the Papists, since celibacy and
abstinence from certain kinds of food are enjoined by them more strictly
than any commandment of God. They think that they escape by an ingenious
artifice, when they torture Paul’s words to direct them against
Tatianists or Manichaeans, or such like; as if the Tatianists had not
the same means of escape open to them by throwing back the censure of
Paul on the Cataphrygians, and on Montanus the author of that sect; or
as if the Cataphrygians had it not in their power to bring forward the
Encratites, in their room, as the guilty parties. But Paul does not here
speak of persons, but of the thing itself; and, therefore although a
hundred different sects be brought forward, all of which are charged
with the same hypocrisy in forbidding some kinds of food, they shall all
incur the same condemnation.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p38"></span>Hence it follows, that to no purpose do
the Papists point to the ancient heretics, as if they alone were
censured; we must always see if they are not guilty in the same manner.
They object, that they do not resemble the Encratites and Manichaens,
because they do not absolutely forbid the use of marriage and of flesh,
but only on certain days constrain to abstinence from flesh, and make
the vow of celibacy compulsory on none but monks and priests and nuns.
But this excuse also is excessively frivolous; for, first, they
nevertheless make holiness to consist in these things; next, they set up
a false and spurious worship of God; and lastly, they bind consciences
by a necessity from which they ought to have been free.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p39"></span>In the fifth book of Eusebius, there is a
fragment taken out of the writings of Apollonius, in which, among other
things, he reproaches Montanus with being the first that dissolved
marriage, and laid down laws for fasting. He does not say, that Montanus
absolutely prohibited marriage or certain kinds of food. It is enough if
he lay a religious obligation on the consciences, and command men to
worship God by observing those things; for the prohibition of things
that are indifferent, whether it be general or special, is always a
diabolical tyranny. That this is true in regard to certain kinds of food
will appear more clearly from the next clause,

<span id="iii.vi.i-p40"></span>*Which God created*. It is proper to
observe the reason, that, in the use of various kinds of food, we ought
to be satisfied with the liberty which God has granted to us; because He
created them for this purpose. It yields inconceivable joy to all the
godly, when they know that all the kinds of food which they eat are put
into their hands by the Lord, so that the use of them is pure and
lawful. What insolence is it in men to take away what God bestows! Did
they create food? Can they make void the creation of God? Let it always
be remembered by us, that he who created the food, gave us also the free
use of it, which it is vain for men to attempt to hinder.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p41"></span>*To be received with Thanksgiving* God
created food *to be received;* that is, that we may enjoy it. This end
can ever be set aside by human authority. He adds, *with thanksgiving;*
because we can never render to God any recompense for his kindness but a
testimony of gratitude. And thus he holds up to greater abhorrence those
wicked lawgivers who, by new and hasty enactments, hinder the sacrifice
of praise which God especially requires us to offer to him. Now, there
can be no thanksgiving without sobriety and temperance; for the kindness
of God is not truly acknowledged by him who wickedly abuses it.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p42"></span>*By believers* What then? Does not God
make his sun to rise daily on the good and the bad? (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p42.1"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p42.1"></span>.) Does not the earth, by his command, yield
bread to the wicked? Are not the very worst of men fed by his blessing?
When David says,

<span id="iii.vi.i-p43"></span>“He causeth the herb to grow for the
service of men, that he may bring forth food out of the earth,” (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p43.1"></span>[Ps
104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p43.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p44"></span>the kindness which he describes is
universal. I reply, Paul speaks here of the lawful use, of which we are
assured before God. Wicked men are in no degree partakers of it, on
account of their impure conscience, which, as is said,

<span id="iii.vi.i-p45"></span>“defileth all things.” (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p45.1"></span>[Titus
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p45.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.vi.i-p46"></span>And indeed, properly speaking, God has
appointed to his children alone the whole world and all that is in the
world. For this reason, they are also called the heirs of the world; for
at the beginning Adam was appointed to be lord of all, on this
condition, that he should continue in obedience to God. Accordingly, his
rebellion against God deprived of the right, which had been bestowed on
him, not only himself but his posterity. And since all things are
subject to Christ, we are fully restored by His mediation, and that
through faith; and therefore all that unbelievers enjoy may be regarded
as the property of others, which they rob or steal.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p47"></span>*And by those that know the truth* In
this clause he defines who they are whom he calls “believers,” namely,
those that have a knowledge of sound doctrine; for there is no faith but
from the word of God; in order that we may not falsely think, as the
Papists imagine, that faith is a confused opinion.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p48"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p49"></span>**4** *For every creature of God is good*
The use of food must be judged, partly from its substance, and partly
from the person of him who eats it. The Apostle therefore avails himself
of both arguments. So far as relates to food, he asserts that it is
pure, because God has created it; and that the use of it is consecrated
to us by faith and prayer. The goodness of the creatures, which he
mentions, has relation to men, and that not with regard to the body or
to health, but to the consciences. I make this remark, that none may
enter into curious speculations unconnected with the scope of the
passage; for, in a single word, Paul means, that those things which come
from the hand of God, and are intended for our use, are not unclean or
polluted before God, but that we may freely eat them with regard to
conscience.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p50"></span>If it be objected, that many animals were
formerly pronounced to be unclean under the Law, and that fruit, which
was yielded by the tree of knowledge of good and evil, was destructive
to man; the answer is, that creatures are not called pure, merely
because they are the works of God, but because, through his kindness,
they have been given to us; for we must always look at the appointment
of God, both what he commands and what he forbids.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p51"></span><span id="iii.vi.i-p51.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p52"></span>**5** *For it is sanctified by the word
of God and prayer* This is the confirmation of the preceding clause, *if
it be received with Thanksgiving*. And it is an argument drawn from
contrast; for “holy” and “profane” are things contrary to each other.
Let us now see what is the sanctification of all good things, which
belong to the sustenance of the present life. Paul testifies that it
consists of “the word of God and prayer.” But it ought to be observed,
that this *word* must be embraced by faith, in order that it may be
advantageous; for, although God himself sanctifies all things by the
Spirit of his mouth, yet we do not obtain that benefit but by faith. To
this is added “prayer;” for, on the one hand, we ask from God our daily
bread, according to the commandment of Christ, (<span
id="iii.vi.i-p52.1"></span>[Mt
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vi.i-p52.1"></span>;) and, on the other hand we offer
thanksgiving to Him for His goodness.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p53"></span>Now Paul’s doctrine proceeds on this
principle, that there is no good thing, the possession of which is
lawful, unless conscience testify that it is lawfully our own. And which
of us would venture to claim for himself a single grain of wheat, if he
were not taught by the word of God that he is the heir of the world?
Common sense, indeed, pronounces, that the wealth of the world is
naturally intended for our use; but, since dominion over the world was
taken from us in Adam, everything that we touch of the gifts of God is
defiled by our pollution; and, on the other hand, it is unclean to us,
till God graciously come to our aid, and by ingrafting us into his Son,
constitutes us anew to be lords of the world, that we may lawfully use
as our own all the wealth with which he supplies us.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p54"></span>Justly, therefore, does Paul connect
lawful enjoyment with “the word”, by which alone we regain what was lost
in Adam; for we must acknowledge God as our Father, that we may be his
heirs, and Christ as our Head, that those things which are his may
become ours. Hence it ought to be inferred that the use of all the gifts
of God is unclean, unless it be accompanied by true knowledge and
calling on the name of God; and that it is a beastly way of eating, when
we sit down at table without any prayer; and, when we have eaten to the
full, depart in utter forgetfulness of God.

<span id="iii.vi.i-p55"></span>And if such sanctification is demanded in
regard to common food, which, together with the belly, is subject to
corruption, what must we think about spiritual sacraments? If “the
word,” and calling on God through faith, be not there, what remains that
is not profane? Here we must attend to the distinction between the
blessing of the sacramental table and the blessing of a common table;
for, as to the food which we eat for the nourishment of our body, we
bless it for this purpose, that we may receive it in a pure and lawful
manner; but we consecrate, in a more solemn manner, the bread and wine
in the Lord’s Supper, that they may be pledges to us of the body and
blood of Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 4:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p2"></span>**6**. If thou put the brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus
Christ, nourished up in the words of faith and of good doctrine,
whereunto thou hast attained.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p3"></span>**6**. Haec suggerens fratribus, bonus
eris Iesu Christi minister, innutritus sermonibus fidei, et bonae
doctrinae quam sequutus es.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p4"></span>**7**. But refuse profane and old wives’
fables, and exercise thyself *rather* unto godliness.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p5"></span>**7**. Profanas autem et aniles fabulas
devita, quin potius exerce te ipsum ad pietatem.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p6"></span>**8**. For bodily exercise profiteth
little: but godliness is profitable unto all things, having promise of
the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p7"></span>**8**. Nam corporalis exercitatio
paululum habet utilitatis; at pietas ad omnia utilis est, ut quae
promissiones habeat vitae praesentis et futurae.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p8"></span>**9**. This *is* a faithful saying, and
worthy of all acceptation.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p9"></span>**9**. Fidelis sermo, dignusque qui modis
onmibus approbetur.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p10"></span>**10**. For therefore we both labour and
suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour
of all men, specially of those that believe.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p11"></span>**10**. Nam in hoc et laboramus, et
probris afficimur, quod spem fixam habemus in Deo vivente, qui servator
est omnium hominum, maxime fidelium.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p12"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p13"></span>**6** *Exhibiting these things to the
brethren* By this expression he exhorts Timothy to mention those things
frequently; and he afterwards repeats this a second and a third time;
for they are things of such a nature as it is proper to call frequently
to remembrance. And we ought to make the contrast which is implied; for
the doctrine which he commends is here contrasted by him not with false
or wicked doctrines, but with useless trifles which do not edify. He
wishes that those trifles may be entirely buried in forgetfulness, when
he enjoins Timothy to be earnest in exhibiting other things.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p14"></span>*Thou shalt be a good minister* Men
frequently aim at something else than to approve themselves to Christ;
and consequently many are desirous of being applauded for genius,
eloquence, and profound knowledge. And that is the very reason why they
pay less attention to necessary things, which do not tend to procure the
admiration of the common people. But Paul enjoins Timothy to be
satisfied with this alone, to be a faithful minister of Christ. And
certainly we ought to look on this as a far more honorable title than to
be a thousand times called seraphic and subtle doctors. Let us,
therefore, remember, that as it is the highest honor of a godly pastor
to be reckoned a good servant of Christ, so he ought to aim at nothing
else during his whole ministry; for whoever has any other object in
view, will have it in his power to obtain applause from men, but will
not please God. Accordingly, that we may not be deprived of so great a
blessing, let us learn to seek nothing else, and to account nothing so
valuable, and to treat everything as worthless in comparison of this
single object.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p15"></span>*Nourished* The Greek word ἐντρεφόμενος
being a participle in the Middle Voice, might also have been translated
in an active signification, *nourishing;* but as there is no noun
governed by the verb, I think that this would be rather a forced
construction; and, therefore, I prefer to take it in a passive sense, as
confirming the preceding exhortation by the education of Timothy. As if
he had said, “As thou hast been, from thy infancy, properly instructed
in the faith, and, so to speak, hast sucked along with the milk sound
doctrine, and hast made continual progress in it hitherto, endeavor, by
faithful ministration, to prove that thou art such.” This meaning agrees
also with the composition of the word ἐντρεφόμενος

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p16"></span>*In the words of faith and of good
doctrine. Faith* is here taken for the sum of Christian doctrine; and
what he immediately adds, about *good doctrine,* is for the sake of
explanation;  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72) for he means, that
all other doctrines, how plausible so ever they may be, are not at all
profitable.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p18"></span>*Which thou hast followed* This clause
denotes perseverance; for many who, from their childhood, had purely
learned Christ, afterwards degenerate in process of time; and the
Apostle says, that Timothy was very unlike these persons.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p19"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p20"></span>**7** *Exercise thyself to godliness*
 <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) After having instructed him as to
doctrine, what it ought to be, he now also admonishes him what kind of
example he ought to give to others. He says, that he ought to be
employed in “godliness;” for, when he says, *Exercise thyself*, he means
that this is his proper occupation, his labor, his chief care. As if he
had said, “There is no reason why you should weary yourself to no
purpose about other matters; you will do that which is of the highest
importance, if you devote yourself, with all your zeal, and with all
your ability, to godliness alone.” By the word *godliness,* he means the
spiritual worship of God which consists in purity of conscience; which
is still more evident from what follows, when it is contrasted with
bodily exercise.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p22"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p23"></span>**8** *For bodily exercise is of little
profit*. By the exercise “of the body,” he does not mean that which lies
in hunting, or in the race-course, or in wrestling, or in digging, or in
the mechanical occupations; but he gives that name to all the outward
actions that are undertaken, for the sake of religion, such as
watchings, long fasts, lying on the earth, and such like. Yet he does
not here censure the superstitious observance of those things; otherwise
he would totally condemn them, as he does in the Epistle to the
Colossians, (<span id="iii.vi.ii-p23.1"></span>[Col
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p23.1"></span>,) but at present he only speaks slightingly
of them, and says that they are of little advantage. So, then though the
heart be altogether upright, and the object proper, yet, in outward
actions, Paul finds nothing that he can value highly.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p24"></span>This is a very necessary warning; for
the world will always lean to the side of wishing to worship God by
outward services; which is an exceedingly dangerous imagination. But —
to say nothing about the wicked opinion of merit — our nature always
disposes us strongly to attribute more than we ought to austerity of
life; as if it were no ordinary portion of Christian holiness. A clearer
view of this cannot be adduced, than the fact, that, shortly after the
publication of this command, the whole world was ravished with
immoderate admiration of the empty form of bodily exercises. Hence arose
the order of monks and nuns, and nearly all the most excellent
discipline of the ancient Church, or, at least, that part of it which
was most highly esteemed by the common people. If the ancient monks had
not dreamed that there was some indescribably divine or angelical
perfection in their austere manner of living, they would never have
pursued it with so much ardor. In like manner, if pastors had not
attached undue value to the ceremonies which were then observed for the
mortification of the flesh, they would never have been so rigid in
exacting them. And what does Paul say on the other hand? That, when any
one shall have labored much and long in those exercises, the profit will
be small and inconsiderable; for they are nothing but the rudiments of
childish discipline.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p25"></span>*But godliness is profitable for all
things* That is, he who has godliness wants nothing, though he has not
those little aids; for godliness alone is able to conduct a man to
complete perfection. It is the beginning, the middle, and the end, of
Christian life; and, therefore, where that is entire, nothing is
imperfect. Christ did not lead so austere a manner of life as John the
Baptist; was he, therefore, any whit inferior? Let the meaning be thus
summed up. “We ought to apply ourselves altogether to piety alone;
because when we have once attained it, God asks nothing more from us;
and we ought to give attention to bodily exercises in such a manner as
not to hinder or retard the practice of godliness.”

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p26"></span>*Which hath the promises* It is a very
great consolation, that God does not wish the godly to be in want of
anything; for, having made our perfection to consist in godliness, he
now makes it the perfection of all happiness. As it is the beginning of
happiness in this life, so he likewise extends to it the promise of
divine grace, which alone makes us happy, and without which we are very
miserable; for God testifies that, even in this life, he will be our
Father.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p27"></span>But let us remember to distinguish
between the good things of the present and of the future life; for God
bestows kindness on us in this world, in order that he may give us only
a taste of his goodness, and by such a taste may allure us to the desire
of heavenly benefits, that in them we may find satisfaction. The
consequence is, that the good things of the present life are not only
mingled with very many afflictions, but, we may almost say, overwhelmed
by them; for it is not expedient for us to have abundance in this world,
lest we should indulge in luxury. Again, lest any one should found on
this passage the merits of works, we ought to keep in mind what we have
already said, that godliness includes not only a good conscience toward
men, and the fear of God, but likewise faith and calling upon him.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p28"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p29"></span>**9** *This is a faithful saying* He now
sets down, at the conclusion of the argument, what he stated twice at
the beginning of it; and he appears to do so expressly, because he will
immediately subjoin the contrary objection. Yet it is not without good
reason that he employs so strong an assertion; for it is a paradox
strongly at variance with the feeling of the flesh, that God supplies
his people, in this world, with everything that is necessary for a happy
and joyful life; since they are often destitute of all good things, and,
on that account, appear to be forsaken by God. Accordingly, not
satisfied with the simple doctrine, he wards off all opposing
temptations by this shield, and in this manner instructs believers to
open the door to the grace of God, which our unbelief shuts out; for,
undoubtedly if we were willing to receive God’s benefits,  <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) he would use greater liberality toward
us.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p31"></span><span id="iii.vi.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p32"></span>**10** *For in this we both labor and
suffer reproaches* This is an anticipation by which he solves that
question, “Are not believers the most miserable of all men, because they
are oppressed by tribulations of every kind?” In order to show,
therefore, that their condition must not be judged from outward
appearance, he distinguishes them from others, first in the cause, and
next in the result. Hence it follows, that they lose nothing of the
promises which he has mentioned, when they are tried by adversity. The
sum is, that believers are not miserable in afflictions, because a good
conscience supports them, and a blessed and joyful end awaits them.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p33"></span>Now, since the happiness of the present
life consists chiefly of two parts, honor and conveniences, he contrasts
them within two evils, *toils* and *reproach,* meaning by the former
words, inconveniences and annoyances of every kind, such as poverty,
cold, nakedness, hunger, banishments, spoliations, imprisonments,
scourgings, and other persecutions.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p34"></span>*We have hope fixed on the living God*
This consolation refers to the cause; for so far are we from being
miserable, when we suffer on account of righteousness, that it is rather
a just ground of thanksgiving. Besides, our afflictions are accompanied
by hope in the living God, and, what is more, hope may be regarded as
the foundation; but it never maketh ashamed, (<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p34.1"></span>[Ro
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p34.1"></span>,) and therefore everything that happens to
the godly ought to be reckoned a gain.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p35"></span>*Who is the Savior*  <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) This is the second consolation, though it
depends on the former; for the deliverance of which he speaks may be
viewed as the fruit of hope. To make this more clear, it ought to be
understood that this is an argument drawn from the less to the greater;
for the word σωτὴρ  <span id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76) is here a
general term, and denotes one who defends and preserves. He means that
the kindness of God extends to all men. And if there is no man who does
not feel the goodness of God towards him, and who is not a partaker of
it, how much more shall it be experienced by the godly, who hope in him?
Will he not take peculiar care in them? Will he not more freely pour out
his bounty on them? In a word, will he not, in every respect, keep them
safe to the end?

<span id="iii.vi.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 4:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p2"></span>**11**. These things command and teach.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p3"></span>**11**. Praecipe haec et doce.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p4"></span>**12**. Let no man despise thy youth;
but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in
sermon, in conversations, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p5"></span>**12**. Nemo tuam juventutem despiciat;
sed esto exemplar fidelium, in sermone, in conversatione, in caritate,
in spiritu, in fide, in castitate.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p6"></span>**13**. Till I come, give attendance to
reading, to exhortation, to doctrine.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p7"></span>**13**. Donec venio, attende lectioni,
exhortationi, doctrinae.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p8"></span>**14**. Neglect not the gift that is in
thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands
of the presbytery.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p9"></span>**14**. Ne donum, quod in te est,
negligas, quod tibi datum est per prophetiam cum impositione manuum
presbyterii.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p10"></span>**15**. Meditate upon these things;
give thyself wholly to them; that thy profiting may appear to all.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p11"></span>**15**. Haec cura, in his esto; ut
profectus tuus in omnibus manifestus fiat.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p12"></span>**16**. Take heed unto thyself, and
unto the doctrine; continue in them: for in doing this thou shalt both
save thyself, and them that hear thee.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p13"></span>**16**. Attende tibi ipsi et doctrinae,
permane in his; hoc enim si feceris, et te ipsum servabis, et eos qui te
audiunt.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p14"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p15"></span>**11** *Instruct and teach these
things* He means that the doctrine is of such a kind, that men ought not
to be weary of it, though they heard it every day. There are, no doubt,
other things to be taught; but there is emphasis in the demonstrative
*these;* for it means that they are not things of small importance, of
which it is enough to take a passing and brief notice; but, on the
contrary, that they deserve to be repeated every day, because they
cannot be too much inculcated. A prudent pastor ought, therefore, to
consider what things are chiefly necessary, that he may dwell on them.
Nor is there reason to dread that it shall become wearisome; for
whosoever is of God will gladly hear frequently those things which need
to be so often uttered.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p16"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p17"></span>**12** *Let no man despise thy youth*
He says this, both in regard to others, and to Timothy himself. As to
others, he does not wish that the age of Timothy should prevent him from
obtaining that reverence which he deserves, provided that, in other
respects, he conduct himself as becomes a minister of Christ. And, at
the same time, he instructs Timothy to supply by gravity of demeanor
what is wanting in his age. As if he had said, “Take care that, by
gravity of demeanor, thou procure for thyself so great reverence, that
thy youthful age, which, in other respects lays one open to contempt,
may take nothing from thy authority.” Hence we learn that Timothy was
still young, though he held a place of distinguished excellence among
many pastors; and that it is a grievous mistake to estimate by the
number of years how much is due to a person.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p18"></span>*But be an example of the believers*
 <span id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77) He next informs him what are the
true ornaments; not external marks, such as the crosier, the ring, the
cloak, and such like trifles, or children’s rattles; but soundness of
doctrine and holiness of life. When he says, by *speech* and
*conversation,* the meaning is the same as if he had said, “by words and
actions,” and therefore by the whole life.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p20"></span>Those which follow are parts of a godly
conversation — *charity, spirit faith, chastity.* By the word *spirit,*
I understand ardor of zeal for God, if it be not thought better to
interpret it more generally, to which I have no objection. *Chastity* is
not merely contrasted with uncleanness, but denotes purity of the whole
life. Hence we learn, that they act a foolish and absurd part, who
complain that no honor is paid to them, while they have nothing about
them that is worthy of applause, but, on the contrary, expose themselves
to contempt, both by their ignorance, and by a detestable example of
life, or by levity or other abominations. The only way of procuring
reverence is, by excellent virtues, to guard ourselves against contempt.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p21"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p22"></span>**13** *Attend to reading* He knew
Timothy’s diligence, and yet he recommends to him diligent reading of
the Scriptures. How shall pastors teach others if they be not eager to
learn? And if so great a man is advised to study to make progress from
day to day, how much more do we need such an advice? Woe then to the
slothfulness of those who do not peruse the oracles of the Holy Spirit
by day and night,  <span id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78) in order to
learn from them how to discharge their office!

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p27"></span>*Till I come* This reference to the
time gives additional weight to the exhortation; for, while Paul hoped
that he would come soon, yet he was unwilling, meanwhile, that Timothy
should remain unemployed even for a short time; how much more ought we
to look forward diligently to our whole life!

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p28"></span>*To exhortation, to doctrine* Lest it
should be thought that careless reading was enough, he, at the same
time, shews that it must be explained with a view to usefulness when he
enjoins him to give earnest attention “to doctrine and exhortation;” as
if he enjoined him to learn in order to communicate to others. It is
proper, also, to attend to this order, that he places *reading* before
*doctrine* and *exhortation;* for*,* undoubtedly, the Scripture is the
fountain of all wisdom, from which pastors must draw all that they place
before their flock.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p29"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p30"></span>**14** *Neglect not the gift that is in
thee* The Apostle exhorts Timothy to employ, for the edification of the
Church, that grace with which he was endued. God does not wish that
talents — which he has bestowed on any one, that they may bring gain —
should either be lost, or be hidden in the earth without advantage.
(<span id="iii.vi.iii-p30.1"></span>[Matt.
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#018),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#025)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p30.1"></span>.) To *neglect* a gift is carelessly to
keep it unemployed through slothfulness, so that, having contracted rust
it is worn away without yielding any profit. Let each of us, therefore,
consider what gift he possesses, that he may diligently apply it to use.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p31"></span>He says that grace was *given* to him
*by prophecy. How* was this? It was because, as we have already said,
the Holy Spirit marked out Timothy by revelation, that he might be
admitted into the rank of pastors; for he had not only been chosen by
the judgment of men, in the ordinary way, but had previously been named
by the Spirit.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p32"></span>*With the laying on of the hands of the
presbytery* He says that it was conferred “with the laying on of hands;”
by which he means, that, along with the ministry, he was also adorned
with the necessary gifts. It was the custom and ordinary practice of the
Apostles to ordain ministers “by the laying on of hands.” As to this
ceremony, and its origin and meaning, I have formerly given a brief
explanation of them, and the rest may be learned from the Institutes
(Book 4: chap. 3.)

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p33"></span>They who think that *presbytery* is
here used as a collective noun, for “the college of presbyters or
elders,”  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79) are, I think, correct in
their opinion; although, after weighing the whole matter, I acknowledge
that a different meaning is not inapplicable, that is, that *presbytery*
or *eldership* — is the name of an office. He put the ceremony for the
very act of ordination; and therefore the meaning is, that Timothy —
having been called to the ministry by the voice of the prophets, and
having afterwards been solemnly ordained was, at the same time, endued
with the grace of the Holy Spirit for the discharge of his office. Hence
we infer that it was not a useless ceremony, because God by his Spirit,
accomplished that consecration which men expressed symbolically “by the
laying on of hands.”

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p35"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p36"></span>**15** *Take heed to these things*
 <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) The greater the difficulty in
faithfully discharging the ministry of the Church, so much the more
ought a pastor to apply himself earnestly, and with his whole might; and
that not only for a short time, but with unfailing perseverance.  <span
id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) Paul therefore reminds Timothy that this
work leaves no room for indolence, or for slackening his labors, but
demands the utmost industry and constant application.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p39"></span>*That thy profiting may be manifest* By
adding these words, he means, that he ought to labor to this purpose,
that by his agency the edification of the Church may be more and more
advanced, and that corresponding results may be visible; for it is not
the work of a single day, and therefore he should strive to make daily
progress. Some refer this to Timothy, that he may profit more and more;
but I choose rather to interpret it as referring to the effect of his
ministry.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p40"></span>The Greek words, ἐν πᾶσιν, may either
be translated, *to all men,* or, in *all things.* There will thus be a
twofold meaning; either, “that all may see the progress which springs
from his labors”, or, “that in all respects, or in every possible way,
(which is the same thing,) they may be visible.” I prefer the latter
view.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p41"></span><span id="iii.vi.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p42"></span>**16** *Give heed to thyself, and to
the doctrine* There are two things of which a good pastor should be
careful; to be diligent in teaching, and to keep himself pure.  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) It is not enough if he frame his life to
all that is good and commendable, and guard against giving a bad
example, if he do not likewise add to a holy life continual diligence in
teaching; and, on the other hand, doctrine will be of little avail, if
there be not a corresponding goodness and holiness of life. With good
reason, therefore, does Paul urge Timothy to “give heed,” both to
himself personally, and to doctrine, for the general advantage of the
Church. On the other hand, he commends his constancy, that he may never
grow weary; for there are many things that frequently happen, which may
lead us aside from the right course, if we do not set our foot firmly to
resist.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p44"></span>*If thou shalt do these things, thou
shalt both save thyself and them that hear thee* It is no ordinary spur
to excite the thoughtfulness of pastors, when they learn that their own
salvation, as well as that of the people, depends on the industry and
perseverance with which they devote themselves to their office. And as
doctrine, which solidly edifies, is commonly attended by little display,
Paul says that he ought to consider what is profitable. As if he had
said, “Let men who are desirous of glory be fed by their ambition, let
them applaud themselves for their ingenuity; to you, let it be enough to
devote yourself to your own salvation and that of the people.”

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p45"></span>Now, this exhortation applies to the
whole body of the Church, that they, may not take offense at the
simplicity which both quickens souls and preserves them in health. Nor
ought they to think it strange that Paul ascribes to Timothy the work of
saving the Church; for, certainly, all that is gained to God is saved,
and it is by the preaching of the gospel that we are gathered to Christ.
And as the unfaithfulness or carelessness of the pastor is ruinous to
the Church, so the cause of salvation is justly ascribed to his
faithfulness and diligence. True, it is God alone that saves; and not
even the smallest portion of his glory can lawfully be bestowed on men.
But God parts with no portion of his glory when he employs the agency of
men for bestowing salvation.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p46"></span>Our salvation is, therefore, the gift
of God alone, because from him alone it proceeds, and by his power alone
it is performed; and therefore, to him alone, as the author, it must be
ascribed. But the ministry of men is not on that account excluded, nor
does all this interfere with the salutary tendency of that government on
which, as Paul shews, the prosperity of the Church depends. (<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p46.1"></span>[Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p46.1"></span>.) Moreover, this is altogether the work of
God, because it is he who forms good pastors, and guides them by his
Spirit, and blesses their labor, that it may not be ineffectual.

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p47"></span>If thus a good pastor is the salvation
of his hearers, let bad and careless men know that their destruction
must be ascribed to those who have the charge of them; for, as the
salvation of the flock is the crown of the pastor, so from careless
pastors all that perishes will be required. Again, a pastor is said to
*save* himself, when, by faithfully discharging the office committed to
him, he serves his calling; not only because he avoids that terrible
vengeance which the Lord threatens by Ezekiel, — “His blood will I
require at thy hand,” (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p47.1"></span>[Eze
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#008)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p47.1"></span>,) but because it is customary to speak of
believers as performing their salvation when they walk and persevere
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) in the course of their salvation.
Of this mode of expression we have spoken in our exposition of the
Epistle to the Philippians, (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p48.2"></span>[Php
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#012)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p48.2"></span>.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc43008.htm#fr_69) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p17"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.i-p17.1"></span>A
force d’yvroye et mauvaises herbes.” — “By means of darnel and
pernicious herbs.”

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc43008.htm#fr_70) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p34"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.i-p34.1"></span>Apres
avoir mis le terme general, a scavoir Doctrines des diables, et puis une
espece, a seavoir hypoerisie; maintenant ail met deux poinets par.
tieuliers de ceste hypocrisies.” — “After having employed the general
term, namely, Doctrines of devils, and next mentioned one class, namely,
hypocrisy, he mentions two individual instances of that hypocrisy.”

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc43008.htm#fr_71) <span
id="iii.vi.i-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.i-p36"></span> “Tatian, by birth an Assyrian, and a
disciple of Justin Martyr, had a great number of followers, who were,
after him, called Tatianists, but were nevertheless more frequently
distinguished from other sects by names relative to the austerity of
their manners. For, as they rejected with a sort of horror all the
comforts and conveniences of life, and abstained from wine with such a
rigorous obstinacy as to use nothing but water even at the celebration
of the Lord’s Supper; as they macerated their bodies by continual
fastings, and lived a severe life of celibacy and abstinence; so they
were called Encratites, (temperate,) Hydroparastates, (drinkers of
water,) and Apotaetites, (renouncers.)” — *Moshezn’s* Eccl. History.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc43008.htm#fr_72) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p17"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p17.1"></span>C’est pour mieux exposer et declarer le mot
precedent.” — “It is for the purpose of explaining more clearly and
fully the preceding word.”

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc43008.htm#fr_73) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p21"></span> “He who wishes to be faithfully
employed in the service of God must not only avoid, as Paul says, the
lies and superstitions that tend to poison souls; but he must avoid
profane fables, that is, subtleties that cannot edify, and that contain
no instruction which is good for the salvation of souls. Here is a
passage that well deserves to be considered; for we see that it was a
part of the corruptions which came into the world, and which, even at
the present day, prevail in Popery. True, there will be doctrines in the
highest degree absurd, and errors most foolish and debasing. We know
that idolatry is as gross and flagrant among them as it ever was among
the heathens, that the whole worship of God is corrupted, and, in short,
that there is nothing which is not spurious. Such errors ought to be
held in abhorrence by us; but there is an evil which is still more
concealed, and which is unknown to the common people. For although the
doctrine of the Papists were not false as it really is, though it were
not perverse; yet it is “profane,” as Paul calls it here. And why? They
have questions which they debate, about things in which there is no
profit. Were a man to know all the questions that are debated in the
schools of theology of Popery, there would be nothing but wind. Yet they
give themselves the greatest trouble about these matters, and can never
succeed; for they put forward questions that cannot be answered but by
divination; and though a man should wish to search out the secrets of
God, about which nothing is said in the Holy Scripture, does he not
plunge into an abyss? Now the Papists have had that pride and audacity,
to wish to inquire into those matters which ought to be unknown to us.
And thus it was that God withdrew his truth, when the world so corrupted
it.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc43008.htm#fr_74) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p30"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.ii-p30.1"></span>Si
les benefices de Dieu trouvoyent entree a nous, et que nous fussion
disposez a les recevoir.” — “If God’s benefits found admission to us,
and if we were disposed to receive them.”

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc43008.htm#fr_75) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p36"></span> “The word *Savior is* not here taken in
what we call its proper and strict meaning, in regard to the eternal
salvation which God promises to his elect, but it is taken for one who
delivers and protects. Thus we see that even unbelievers are protected
by God, as it is said (<span id="iii.vi.ii-p36.1"></span>[Mt
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)<span
id="iii.vi.ii-p36.1"></span>) that “he maketh his sun to shine on the
good and the bad;” and we see that all are fed by his goodness, that all
are delivered from many dangers. In this sense he is called “the Savior
of all men,” not in regard to the spiritual salvation of their souls,
but because he supports all his creatures. In this way, therefore, our
Lord is the Savior of all men, that is, his goodness extends to the most
wicked, who are estranged from him, and who do not deserve to have any
intercourse with him, who ought to have been struck off from the number
of the creatures of God and destroyed; and yet we see how God hitherto
extends his grace to them; for the life which he gives to them is a
testimony of his goodness. Since, therefore God shows such favor towards
those who are strangers to him, how shall it be with us who are members
of his household? Not that we are better or more excellent than those
whom we see to be cast off by him, but the whole proceeds from his mercy
and free grace, that he is reconciled to us through our Lord Jesus
Christ, since he hath called us to the knowledge of the gospel, and then
confirms us, and seals his bounty toward us, so that we ought to be
convinced that he reckons us to be his children. Since, therefore, we
see that he nourishes those who are estranged from him, let us go and
hide ourselves under his wings; for, having taken us under his
protection, he has declared that he will show himself to be a Father
toward us.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc43008.htm#fr_76) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p37"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.ii-p37.1"></span>Le
mot Grec que nous traduisons *Sauveur.”* — *“*The Greek word which we
translate Savior.”

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc43008.htm#fr_77) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p19"></span> “Be very careful to lead a holy and
blameless life. Let it be your care to set a good example to those who
are to be taught by you, of sobriety, temperance, justice, and a due
government of the tongue. Let it not be said that you preach what you
will not practice; for you may be sure, that perverse sinners who will
not hear good advice will endeavor to countenance themselves in sin by a
bad example, Examples sometimes do good, where precepts are of very
little force. He is a wise and happy instructor, who can say with
sincerity, in some degree, after the Apostle, when he addresses himself
in a solemn way to his hearers: ‘those things which you have learned,
and received, and heard, and seen in me, do.’ Such serious religion is
what every one that dispenses the bread of life must practice.” —
*Abraham, Taylor*.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc43008.htm#fr_78) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p23"></span> Our author may have had in his eye the
advice of the poet: —

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p24"></span>“<span id="iii.vi.iii-p24.1"></span>Vos
exemplaria Graeca  
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.”

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p25"></span>“Peruse the Grecian models night and
day.”

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p26"></span>It has always been a prominent feature
in the character of a good man, that “his delight is in the law of the
Lord and in his law doth he meditate day and night.” — (<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>[Ps
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p26.1"></span>.) How much more may we reasonably expect
that the servant of Christ, who speaks to the people in the name of his
Master, and whose office it is to “shew them that which is written in
the Scripture of truth,” (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p26.2"></span>[Da
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p26.2"></span>,) shall devoutly and laboriously read the
oracles of God! — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc43008.htm#fr_79) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p34"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p34.1"></span>Pour l’assemblee des prestres, c’est a
dire, des pasteurs et anciens de l’Eglise.” — “For the assembly of
presbyters, that is, of the pastors and elders of the Church.”

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc43008.htm#fr_80) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p37"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p37.1"></span>Ταῦτα μελέτα, meaning, ‘Exercise thyself in
these things, make them thy perpetual care and study;’ both this and the
next phrase, (<span id="iii.vi.iii-p37.2"></span>ἐν τούτοις ἴσθι,)
being, in the best writers, used of diligent attention.” *Bloomfield.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc43008.htm#fr_81) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p37.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p38"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p38.1"></span>Mais perseverant jusqu’au bout.” — “But
persevering till the end.”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc43008.htm#fr_82) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p43"></span> “<span id="iii.vi.iii-p43.1"></span>Et
de se garder pur de tous vices.” — “And to keep himself pure from all
vices.”

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc43008.htm#fr_83) <span
id="iii.vi.iii-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iii-p48"></span> “<span
id="iii.vi.iii-p48.1"></span>Quand is cheminent et perseverent.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 5](cc43009)
