[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43028)  [Next](cc43030) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vii.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION OF CALVIN’S VERSION

<span id="vii.i-p2"></span>OF THE

<span id="vii.i-p3"></span>FIRST EPISTLE OF PAUL  
TO TIMOTHY

<span id="vii.i.i"></span>

<span id="vii.i.i-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.i-p2"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vii.i.i-p3"></span>**1** Paul, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
according to the appointment of God our Savior, and of the Lord Jesus
Christ our hope;

<span id="vii.i.i-p4"></span>**2** To Timothy my own son in the faith,
grace, mercy, peace, from God our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vii.i.i-p5"></span>**3** As I besought thee to remain at
Ephesus, when I set out for Macedonia, I wish that thou shouldst charge
some not to teach differently;  <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270)
and

<span id="vii.i.i-p7"></span>**4** Not to give heed to fables and to
genealogies that have no end, which produce questions rather than the
edification of God, which consisteth in faith.

<span id="vii.i.i-p8"></span>**5** Now, the end of time commandment is
love, out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and of faith
unfeigned;

<span id="vii.i.i-p9"></span>**6** From which some, having gone astray,
have turned aside to idle talking

<span id="vii.i.i-p10"></span>**7** Wishing to be teachers of the law,
not understanding what they say, nor concerning what things they affirm.

<span id="vii.i.i-p11"></span>**8** But we know that the law is good, if
one use it lawfully;

<span id="vii.i.i-p12"></span>**9** Knowing this, that the law is not
made for the righteous man, but for the unrighteous and disobedient, for
the ungodly and for sinners, for the unholy and profane, for murderers
of fathers and murderers of mothers, for manslayers,

<span id="vii.i.i-p13"></span>**10** For fornicators, for sodomites, for
robbers, for liars, for perjurers, and if there be anything else that is
contrary to sound doctrine;

<span id="vii.i.i-p14"></span>**11** According to time gospel of the
glory of the blessed God, which hath been intrusted to me.

<span id="vii.i.i-p15"></span>**12** And I give thanks to our Lord Jesus
Christ, who hath made me powerful, because he reckoned me faithful, by
putting me into the ministry;

<span id="vii.i.i-p16"></span>**13** Who was formerly a blasphemer and a
persecutor, and an oppressor, but I obtained mercy, because I did it
ignorantly in unbelief.

<span id="vii.i.i-p17"></span>**14** And the grace of our Lord aboundeth
beyond measure, with faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="vii.i.i-p18"></span>**15** It is a faithful saying, and worthy
of being fully accepted, that Christ Jesus came into the world, to save
sinners, of whom I am the first;

<span id="vii.i.i-p19"></span>**16** But for this cause I obtained
mercy, that in me the first, Jesus Christ might show all compassion, for
a pattern to those who should believe in him to eternal life.

<span id="vii.i.i-p20"></span>**17** Now to the King eternal, immortal,
invisible, the only wise God, (be) honor and glory for ever and ever.
Amen.

<span id="vii.i.i-p21"></span>**18** This commandment I recommend to
thee, son Timothy, according to the prophecies which went before
concerning thee, that by them thou mayest war a good warfare;

<span id="vii.i.i-p22"></span>**19** Holding faith and a good
conscience, from which some, having turned aside concerning faith, have
made shipwreck;

<span id="vii.i.i-p23"></span>**20** Of whom are Hymenaeus and
Alexander, whom I have delivered to Satan, that they may learn not to
blaspheme.

<span id="vii.i.ii"></span>

<span id="vii.i.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vii.i.ii-p3"></span>**1** I exhort therefore, that, above all,
supplications, entreaties, intercessions, and thanksgivings, be made for
all men;

<span id="vii.i.ii-p4"></span>**2** For kings, and for all who are
placed in authority, that we lead a peaceful and quiet life, with all
godliness and decency;

<span id="vii.i.ii-p5"></span>**3** For this is good and acceptable
before God our Savior;

<span id="vii.i.ii-p6"></span>**4** Who wishes that all men may be saved
and come to the knowledge of the truth.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p7"></span>**5** For there is one God, and one
Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus,

<span id="vii.i.ii-p8"></span>**6** Who gave himself the price of
redemption for all, (that there might be) a testimony in due time;

<span id="vii.i.ii-p9"></span>**7** For which I have been appointed a
herald and an apostle, (I speak the truth in Christ, I lie not,) a
teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p10"></span>**8** I wish therefore that men may pray
in every place, lifting up pure hands, without wrath and disputing.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p11"></span>**9** In like manner also that women
adorn themselves in decent apparel, with modesty and sobriety, not with
plaited hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly raiment,

<span id="vii.i.ii-p12"></span>**10** But (which becometh women
professing godliness) by good works.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p13"></span>**11** Let the woman learn in silence
with all subjection.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p14"></span>**12** But I suffer not the woman to
teach, nor to assume authority over the man, but to be silent.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p15"></span>**13** For Adam was first created, then
Eve.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p16"></span>**14** And Adam was not deceived; but the
woman, being deceived, was guilty of the transgression.

<span id="vii.i.ii-p17"></span>**15** Yet she shall be saved through
child — bearing, if they continue in faith, and love, and
sanctification, with sobriety.

<span id="vii.i.iii"></span>

<span id="vii.i.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.iii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 3

<span id="vii.i.iii-p3"></span>**1** It is a true saying, If a man
desireth the office of a bishop, he desireth an excellent work.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p4"></span>**2** A bishop, therefore, must be
blameless, the husband of one wife, sober, temperate, modest not
wickedly desirous of gain,

<span id="vii.i.iii-p5"></span>**3** But mild, not quarrelsome, not
covetous,

<span id="vii.i.iii-p6"></span>**4** Who ruleth well his own house, who
hath his children in subjection with all reverence.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p7"></span>**5** (And if a man know not how to rule
his own house, how shall he take charge of the church of God?)

<span id="vii.i.iii-p8"></span>**6** Not a novice, lest, being swelled
with pride, he fall into condemnation of the devil.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p9"></span>**7** He must also have a good report
from those who are without, lest he fall into reproach and the snare of
the devil.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p10"></span>**8** In like manner, the deacons must
be grave, not double tongued, not given to much wine, not wickedly
desirous of gain;

<span id="vii.i.iii-p11"></span>**9** Holding the mystery of faith in a
pure conscience.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p12"></span>**10** And let these be first tried,
next let them minister when they have been found blameless.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p13"></span>**11** In like manner, their wives must
be grave, not slanderers, sober, faithful in all things.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p14"></span>**12** Let the deacons be husbands of
one wife, who rule their children and their houses in a becoming manner,

<span id="vii.i.iii-p15"></span>**13** For they who have served well
procure for themselves a good (or, *honorable)* degree, and much liberty
in the faith which is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p16"></span>**14** These things I write to thee,
hoping to come to thee soon and,

<span id="vii.i.iii-p17"></span>**15** If I shall delay, that thou
mayest see how thou oughtst to conduct thyself in the house of God;
which is the Church of the living God, the pillar and foundation of
truth.

<span id="vii.i.iii-p18"></span>**16** And, without controversy, great
is the mystery of godliness; God was manifested in the flesh, seen by
angels, preached to the Gentiles, obtained belief in the world, was
received into glory.

<span id="vii.i.iv"></span>

<span id="vii.i.iv-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.iv-p2"></span>CHAPTER 4

<span id="vii.i.iv-p3"></span>**1** Now, the Spirit plainly saith, that,
in the latter times, some will revolt from the faith, giving heed to
deceiving spirits and to doctrines of devils;

<span id="vii.i.iv-p4"></span>**2** Speaking lies in hypocrisy, having
their conscience seared with a hot iron;

<span id="vii.i.iv-p5"></span>**3** Forbidding to enter into marriages,
commanding to abstain from some kinds of food, which God hath created to
be received with thanksgiving by believers, and by those that know the
truth;

<span id="vii.i.iv-p6"></span>**4** Because every creature of God is
good, and nothing is to be rejected which is received with thanksgiving;

<span id="vii.i.iv-p7"></span>**5** For it is sanctified by the word of
God and prayer.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p8"></span>**6** Exhibiting these things to the
brethren, thou shalt he a good minister of Jesus Christ, nourished by
the words of faith, which thou hast followed.  <span
id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271)

<span id="vii.i.iv-p10"></span>**7** But avoid profane and old women’s
fables, and, on the contrary, exercise thyself to godliness.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p11"></span>**8** For bodily exercise is of little
profit; but godliness is profitable for all things, having the promises
of the present life, and of that which is to come.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p12"></span>**9** It is a faithful saying, and worthy
of being cordially embraced.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p13"></span>**10** For in this we both labor and
suffer reproaches, because we have hope fixed on the living God, who is
the Savior of all men, especially of believers.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p14"></span>**11** Instruct and teach these things.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p15"></span>**12** Let no man despise thy youth; but
be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in love,
in spirit, in faith, in chastity.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p16"></span>**13** Till I come, apply thyself to
reading, to exhortation, to doctrine.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p17"></span>**14** Neglect not the gift which is in
thee, which was given to thee by prophecy with the laying on of the
hands of the presbytery.

<span id="vii.i.iv-p18"></span>**15** Take heed to these things; give
attention to them, that thy profiting may be manifest to all men, *(or’
in all things.)*

<span id="vii.i.iv-p19"></span>**16** Give heed to thyself, and to the
doctrine; continue in them; for, if thou shalt do this, thou shalt both
save thyself and them that hear thee.

<span id="vii.i.v"></span>

<span id="vii.i.v-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.v-p2"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="vii.i.v-p3"></span>**1** Do not harshly rebuke an elder, but
exhort him as a father, the younger as brethren;

<span id="vii.i.v-p4"></span>**2** The older women as mothers; the
younger as sisters, with all chastity.

<span id="vii.i.v-p5"></span>**3** Honor widows that are really widows.

<span id="vii.i.v-p6"></span>**4** Now, if any widow hath children or
grandchildren, let them learn first to exercise piety toward their own
house, and to requite their parents; for this is good and acceptable
before God.

<span id="vii.i.v-p7"></span>**5** Now, she who is really a widow and
desolate hopeth in God, and continueth in prayers and supplications
night and day.

<span id="vii.i.v-p8"></span>**6** But she who spendeth her time in
luxury is dead while she liveth.

<span id="vii.i.v-p9"></span>**7** And enjoin these things, that they
may be blameless.

<span id="vii.i.v-p10"></span>**8** And if any person do not provide for
his own, and especially for those of his own household, he hath denied
the faith, and is worse than an infidel.

<span id="vii.i.v-p11"></span>**9** Let a widow be chosen, not under
sixty years of age, who hath been the wife of one man

<span id="vii.i.v-p12"></span>**10** Having attestation for good works,
if she hath brought up children, if she hath been hospitable, if she
hath washed the feet of the saints, if she hath relieved the afflicted,
if she hath been diligent in every good work.

<span id="vii.i.v-p13"></span>**11** But refuse younger widows; for,
when they have begun to he wanton against Christ, they wish to be
married;

<span id="vii.i.v-p14"></span>**12** Having condemnation, because they
have renounced their first faith.

<span id="vii.i.v-p15"></span>**13** And at the same time, being idle,
they learn to go about from house to house; and not only are idle, but
also tattlers and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.

<span id="vii.i.v-p16"></span>**14** I wish the younger (widows),
therefore, to be married, to bear children, to take charge of the house,
to give no occasion to the adversary, that he may have ground for
slandering;

<span id="vii.i.v-p17"></span>**15** For some have already turned aside
after Satan.

<span id="vii.i.v-p18"></span>**16** And if any believing man or
believing woman hath widows, let him or her relieve them; and let not
the church be burdened, that it may relieve those who are really widows.

<span id="vii.i.v-p19"></span>**17** Let the elders  <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272) that rule well be reckoned worthy of
double honor, especially those who labor in word and doctrine.

<span id="vii.i.v-p21"></span>**18** For the scripture saith, Thou shalt
not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn, (<span
id="vii.i.v-p21.1"></span>[De
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)<span id="vii.i.v-p21.1"></span>,)
and, The laborer is worthy of his hire. (<span
id="vii.i.v-p21.2"></span>[Mt
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span
id="vii.i.v-p21.2"></span>.)

<span id="vii.i.v-p22"></span>**19** Against an elder receive not an
accusation, unless by two or three witnesses.

<span id="vii.i.v-p23"></span>**20** Those that sin rebuke in presence
of all,  <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273) that others also may
fear.

<span id="vii.i.v-p25"></span>**21** I adjure thee before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these things
without hastiness of judgment, doing nothing by turning to this side or
that.

<span id="vii.i.v-p26"></span>**22** Lay not bands suddenly on any man,
neither partake of other men’s sins; keep thyself pure.

<span id="vii.i.v-p27"></span>**23** No longer drink water, but use a
little wine on account of thy stomach, and of thy frequent ill health.

<span id="vii.i.v-p28"></span>**24** The sins of some men are visible
beforehand, hastening to judgment; and in some they follow after.

<span id="vii.i.v-p29"></span>**25** In like manner, also, the good
works are visible beforehand; and those that are otherwise cannot be
concealed.

<span id="vii.i.vi"></span>

<span id="vii.i.vi-p1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.vi-p2"></span>CHAPTER 6

<span id="vii.i.vi-p3"></span>**1** Let all who are slaves under the
yoke reckon their own masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God
and his doctrine may not be blasphemed.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p4"></span>**2** And they who have believing masters,
let them not despise them because they are brethren; but let them serve
so much the more, because they are believers and beloved, and partakers
of the benefit. These things teach and exhort.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p5"></span>**3** If any man teacheth otherwise (or,
*other thing),* and consenteth not to the healthful words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to that doctrine which is according to godliness,

<span id="vii.i.vi-p6"></span>**4** He is puffed up, knowing nothing,
but sickening after questions and debates of words, out of which spring
envy, strife, slanders, unfounded suspicions,

<span id="vii.i.vi-p7"></span>**5** Useless disputes of men corrupt in
understanding, and that are destitute of the truth, thinking that gain
is godliness. Withdraw thyself from such.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p8"></span>**6** But godliness with sufficiency
 <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274) is great gain.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p10"></span>**7** For we brought nothing into the
world; it is certain that neither can we carry anything out.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p11"></span>**8** And having food and raiment, we
shall be content with these.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p12"></span>**9** For they who wish to be rich fall
into temptation and a snare, and into numerous and hurtful follies,
which plunge men into ruin and destruction.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p13"></span>**10** For the root of all evils is
avarice, which some eagerly desiring, have gone astray from the faith,
and have entangled themselves with many sorrows.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p14"></span>**11** But thou, O man of God, flee these
things, and follow after righteousness, piety, faith, love, patience,
meekness.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p15"></span>**12** Fight the good fight of faith; lay
hold on eternal life, to which also thou art called, and hast confessed
a good confession before many witnesses.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p16"></span>**13** I charge (or, *command)* thee
before God, who quickeneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, who
testified a good confession before Pontius Pilate,

<span id="vii.i.vi-p17"></span>**14** That thou keep the commandment
without spot and unblameably, till the revelation of our Lord Jesus
Christ;

<span id="vii.i.vi-p18"></span>**15** Which shall be manifested in due
season by the blessed and only Prince, the King of kings, and Lord of
lords,

<span id="vii.i.vi-p19"></span>**16** Who along bath immortality, who
inhabiteth unapproachable light, whom no man hath seen or can see, to
whom be honor and everlasting power *(or, everlasting dominion).* Amen.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p20"></span>**17** *Command (or, charge)* those who
are rich, that they be not haughty, nor hope in the uncertainty of
riches, but in the living God, who supplieth all things abundantly for
enjoyment;

<span id="vii.i.vi-p21"></span>**18** To do good, to be rich in good
works, ready to distribute *(or, to bestow),* willingly imparting,

<span id="vii.i.vi-p22"></span>**19** Laying up for themselves a good
foundation for the future, that they may lay hold on eternal life.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p23"></span>**20** O Timothy, guard that which is
committed to thee, avoiding profane vanities of noises, idle talking,
and contradictions of science falsely so called,

<span id="vii.i.vi-p24"></span>**21** Which some professing, have erred
concerning the faith. Grace (be) with thee. Amen.

<span id="vii.i.vi-p25"></span>The first (Epistle) to Timothy was sent
from Laodicea, which is the chief city of Phrygia Pacatiana.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_270"></span>[271](cc43029.htm#fr_270) <span
id="vii.i.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.i-p6"></span> “<span id="vii.i.i-p6.1"></span>Autrement,
ou, diverse doctrine.” — “Differently, or, different doctrine.”

<span id="fn_271"></span>[272](cc43029.htm#fr_271) <span
id="vii.i.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.iv-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.i.iv-p9.1"></span>Que tu
as soigneusement suivie.” — “Which thou hast carefully followed.”

<span id="fn_272"></span>[273](cc43029.htm#fr_272) <span
id="vii.i.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.v-p20"></span> “<span id="vii.i.v-p20.1"></span>Les
prestres on aneiens.” — “The presbyters or elders.”

<span id="fn_273"></span>[274](cc43029.htm#fr_273) <span
id="vii.i.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.v-p24"></span> “<span id="vii.i.v-p24.1"></span>Repren
publiquement.” — “Rebuke publicly.”

<span id="fn_274"></span>[275](cc43029.htm#fr_274) <span
id="vii.i.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vii.i.vi-p9"></span> “<span id="vii.i.vi-p9.1"></span>Avec
suffisance, ou, contentement.” — “With sufficiency, or, with
contentment.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Timothy](cc43030)
