[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43023)  [Next](cc43025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.i"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p1"></span><span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>[Philemon
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001)<span id="vi.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p2"></span>**1**. Paul, a prisoner of Jesus Christ, and
Timothy *our* brother, unto Philemon our dearly beloved, and
fellowlabourer,

<span id="vi.i-p3"></span>**1**. Paulus vinctus Christi Iesu et
Timotheus frater Philemoni amico et cooperario nostro,

<span id="vi.i-p4"></span>**2**. And to *our* beloved Apphia, and
Archippus our fellowsoldier, and to the church in thy house:

<span id="vi.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et Apphiae dilectae, et Archippo
commilitoni nostro, et Ecclesiae, quae domi tuae est.

<span id="vi.i-p6"></span>**3**. Grace to you, and peace, from God our
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ.

<span id="vi.i-p7"></span>**3**. Gratia vobis et pax a Deo Patre nostro
et Domino Iesu Christo.

<span id="vi.i-p8"></span>**4**. I thank my God, making mention of thee
always in my prayers,

<span id="vi.i-p9"></span>**4**. Gratias ago Deo meo, semper memoriam
tui faciens in precibus meis,

<span id="vi.i-p10"></span>**5**. Hearing of thy love and faith, which
thou hast toward the Lord Jesus, and toward all saints;

<span id="vi.i-p11"></span>**5**. Audiens tuam dilectionem et fidem,
quam habes erga Dominum Iesum et erga omnes sanctos,

<span id="vi.i-p12"></span>**6**. That the communication of thy faith
may become effectual by the acknowledging of every good thing which is
in you in Christ Jesus.

<span id="vi.i-p13"></span>**6.** Ut communicatio fidei tuae efficax sit
cognitione omnis boni, quod in vobis est erga Christum Iesum.

<span id="vi.i-p14"></span>**7**. For we have great joy and consolation
in thy love, because the bowels of the saints are refreshed by thee,
brother.

<span id="vi.i-p15"></span>**7**. Gratiam enim habemus multam et
consolationem super dilectione tua, quia viscera sanctorum per to
refocillata sunt, frater.

<span id="vi.i-p16"></span><span id="vi.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p17"></span>The singular loftiness of the mind of Paul,
though it may be seen to greater advantage in his other writings which
treat of weightier matters, is also attested by this Epistle, in which,
while he handles a subject otherwise low and mean, he rises to God with
his wonted elevation. Sending back a runaway slave and thief, he
supplicates pardon for him. But in pleading this cause, he discourses
about Christian forbearance  <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268)
with such ability, that he appears to speak about the interests of the
whole Church rather than the private affairs of a single individual. In
behalf of a man of the lowest condition, he demeans himself so modestly
and humbly, that nowhere else is the meekness of his temper painted in a
more lively manner.

<span id="vi.i-p19"></span>**1.** *A prisoner of Jesus Christ*. In the
same sense in which he elsewhere calls himself an Apostle of Christ, or
a minister of Christ, he now calls himself “a prisoner of Christ;”
because the chains by which he was bound on account of the gospel, were
the ornaments or badges of that embassy which he exercised for Christ.
Accordingly, he mentions them for the sake of strengthening his
authority; not that he was afraid of being despised, (for Philemon
undoubtedly had so great reverence and esteem for him, that there was no
need of assuming any title,) but because he was about to plead the cause
of a runaway slave, the principal part of which was entreaty for
forgiveness.

<span id="vi.i-p20"></span>*To Philemon our friend and fellow-laborer*.
It is probable that this “Philemon” belonged to the order of pastors;
for the title with which he adorns him, when he calls him
*fellow-laborer*, is a title which he is not accustomed to bestow on a
private individual.

<span id="vi.i-p21"></span><span id="vi.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p22"></span>**2.** *And to Archippus our fellow-soldier*.
He next adds “Archippus,” who appears also to have been a minister of
the Church; at least, if he be the same person who is mentioned towards
the conclusion of the Epistle to the Colossians, (<span
id="vi.i-p22.1"></span>[Col 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#017)<span
id="vi.i-p22.1"></span>,) which is not at all improbable; for the
designation — “fellow-soldier” — which he bestows on this latter
individual, belongs peculiarly to ministers. Although the condition of a
soldier belongs to all Christians universally, yet because teachers may
be regarded as standardbearers in the warfare, they ought to be ready
more than all others to fight, and Satan usually gives them greater
annoyance. It is also possible, that Archippus attended and shared in
some contests which Paul maintained; and, indeed, this is the very word
that Paul makes use of, whenever he mentions persecutions.

<span id="vi.i-p23"></span>*And to the Church which is in thy house.* By
employing these terms, he bestows the highest praise on the family of
Philemon. And certainly it is no small praise of a householder, that he
regulates his family in such a manner as to be an image of the Church,
and to discharge also the duty of a pastor within the walls of his
dwelling. Nor must we forget to mention that this good man had a wife of
the same character; for she, too, not without reason, is commended by
Paul.

<span id="vi.i-p24"></span><span id="vi.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p25"></span>**4.** *I give thanks to my God*. It deserves
attention, that he at the same time prays for that very thing for which
he “gives thanks.” Even the most perfect, so long as they live in the
world, never have so good ground for congratulation as not to need
prayers, that God may grant to them, not only to persevere till the end,
but likewise to make progress from day to day.

<span id="vi.i-p26"></span><span id="vi.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p27"></span>**5.** *Hearing of thy love and faith.* This
praise, which he bestows on Philemon, includes briefly the whole
perfection of a Christian man. It consists of two parts, faith in
Christ, and love towards our neighbors; for to these all the actions and
all the duties of our life relate. Faith is said to be in Christ,
because to him it especially looks; in like manner as in no other way
than through him alone can God the Father be known, and in no other than
in Him can we find any of the blessings which faith seeks.

<span id="vi.i-p28"></span>*And towards all saints.* He does not thus
limit this *love* to the *saints,* as if there ought to be none towards
others; for, since the doctrine of “love” is, that “we should not
despise our flesh,” (<span id="vi.i-p28.1"></span>[Isa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)<span id="vi.i-p28.1"></span>) and
that we should honor the image of God which is engraven on our nature,
undoubtedly it includes all mankind. But since they that are of the
household of faith are united with us by a closer bond of relationship,
and since God peculiarly recommends them to us, for this reason they
justly hold the highest rank.

<span id="vi.i-p29"></span>The arrangement of the passage is somewhat
confused; but there is no obscurity in the meaning, except that it is
doubtful whether the adverb *always* (in the 4th verse) is connected
with the first clause, “I give thanks always to my God,” or with the
second clause, “making mention of thee always in my prayers.” The
meaning may be brought out in this manner, that, whenever the Apostle
offered prayer for Philemon, he interwove thanksgiving with it; that is,
because Philemon’s piety afforded ground of rejoicing; for we often pray
for those in whom nothing is to be found but what gives occasion for
grief and tears. Yet the second mode of pointing is generally preferred,
that Paul “gives thanks for Philemon, and always makes mention of him in
his prayers.” Let my readers be at full liberty to judge for themselves;
but, for my own part, I think that the former meaning is more
appropriate.

<span id="vi.i-p30"></span>In the rest of the passage there is an
inversion of the natural order; for, after having spoken of “love” and
“faith,” he adds, “towards Christ and towards saints,” while, on the
contrary, the contrast would demand that “Christ” should be put in the
second part of the clause as the object to which our faith looks.  <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269)

<span id="vi.i-p33"></span><span id="vi.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p34"></span>**6.** *That the communication of thy faith
may be effectual*. This clause is somewhat obscure; but I shall endeavor
to elucidate it in such a manner that my readers may somewhat understand
Paul’s meaning. First, it ought to be known that the Apostle is not
continuing to give the praise of Philemon, but that, on the contrary, he
expresses those blessings for which he prays to God. These words are
connected with what he had formerly said, that he “makes mention of him
in his prayers.” (<span id="vi.i-p34.1"></span>[Phm
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#004)<span id="vi.i-p34.1"></span>.)
What blessing then did he ask for Philemon? That his faith, exercising
itself by good works, might be proved to be true, and not unprofitable.
He calls it “the communication of faith,” because it does not remain
inactive and concealed within, but is manifested to men by actual
effects. Although faith has a hidden residence in the heart, yet it
communicates itself to men by good works. It is, therefore, as if he had
said, “That thy faith, by communicating itself, may demonstrate its
efficacy in every good thing.”

<span id="vi.i-p35"></span>*The knowledge of every good thing* denotes
experience. He wishes that, by its effects, faith may be proved to be
effectual. This takes place, when the men with whom we converse know our
godly and holy life; and therefore, he says, *of every good thing which
is in you*; for everything in us that is good makes known our faith.

<span id="vi.i-p36"></span>*Towards Christ Jesus.* The phrase εἰς
Χριστόν may be explained to mean “through Christ.” But, for my own part,
if I were at liberty, I would rather translate it as equivalent to ἐν
Χριστῶ, “in Christ;” for the gifts of God dwell in us in such a manner,
that nevertheless, we are partakers of them only so far as we are
members of Christ. Yet because the words *in you* go before, I am afraid
that the harshness of the expression would give offense. Accordingly, I
have not ventured to make any alteration in the words, but only wished
to mention it to my readers, that, after full consideration, they may
choose either of those meanings which they prefer.

<span id="vi.i-p37"></span><span id="vi.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p38"></span>**7.** *We have much grace and consolation.*
Although this reading is found in the majority of Greek copies, yet I
think that it ought to be translated *joy*; for, since there is little
difference between χάριν and χαράν, it would be easy to mistake a single
letter. Besides, Paul elsewhere employs the word χάριν to mean “joy;” at
least, if we believe Chrysostom on this matter. What has “grace” to do
with “consolation?”

<span id="vi.i-p39"></span>*For thy love.* It is plain enough what he
means, that he has great joy and consolation, because Philemon
administered relief to the necessities of the godly. This was singular
love, to feel so much joy on account of the benefit received by others.
Besides, the Apostle does not only speak of his personal joy, but says
that many rejoiced on account of the kindness and benevolence with which
Philemon had aided religious men.

<span id="vi.i-p40"></span>*Because the bowels of the saints have been
refreshed by thee, brother.* “To refresh the bowels” is an expression
used by Paul to mean, to give relief from distresses, or to aid the
wretched in such a manner that, having their minds composed, and being
free from all uneasiness and grief, they may find repose. “The bowels”
mean the affections, and ἀνάπαυσις denotes tranquillity; and therefore
they are greatly mistaken who torture this passage so as to make it
refer to the belly and the nourishment of the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_268"></span>[269](cc43024.htm#fr_268) <span
id="vi.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p18"></span> “<span id="vi.i-p18.1"></span>De la douceur,
moderation, et humanite.” — “Of gentleness, moderation, and kindness.”

<span id="fn_269"></span>[270](cc43024.htm#fr_269) <span
id="vi.i-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.i-p31"></span> It has sometimes occurred to me, that the
intricacy of this passage might be removed, first, by the transposition
suggested by Calvin, and, next, by transposing the 5th verse so as to
place it before the 4th. “Hearing of thy love towards all saints, and of
thy faith which thou hast towards Lord Jesus, I give thanks unto my God,
making mention of thee always in my prayers, That the communication of
thy faith may be effectual, through the knowledge of every good thing
which is in thee towards Christ Jesus.” - *Ed*.

<span id="vi.i-p32"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon 8-14](cc43025)
