[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43019)  [Next](cc43021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="v.iii.i"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Titus
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Paul, a servant of God, and an
apostle of Jesus Christ, according to the faith of God’s elect, and the
acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness;

<span id="v.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Paulus servus Dei apostolus autem
Iesu Christi secundum fidem electorum Dei et agnitionem veritatis quae
secundum pietatem est

<span id="v.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** In hope of eternal life, which God,
that cannot lie, promised before the world began;

<span id="v.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** in spem vitae aeternae quam promisit
qui non mentitur Deus ante tempora saecularia

<span id="v.iii.i-p6"></span>**3**. But hath in due time manifested his
word through preaching, which is committed unto me according to the
commandment of God our Saviour;

<span id="v.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** manifestavit autem temporibus suis
verbum suum in praedicatione quae credita est mihi secundum praeceptum
salvatoris nostri Dei

<span id="v.iii.i-p8"></span>**4**. To Titus, *mine* own son after the
common faith: Grace, mercy, *and* peace, from God the Father and the
Lord Jesus Christ our Saviour.

<span id="v.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Tito dilecto filio secundum communem
fidem gratia et pax a Deo Patre et Christo Iesu salvatore nostro

<span id="v.iii.i-p10"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p11"></span>**1.** *A servant of God* This extended
and laborious commendation of his apostleship shows that Paul had in
view the whole Church, and not Titus alone; for his apostleship was not
disputed by Titus, and Paul is in the habit of proclaiming the titles of
his calling, in order to maintain his authority. Accordingly, just as he
perceives those to whom he writes to be disposed, he deals largely or
sparingly in those ornaments. Here his design was, to bring into
subjection those who had haughtily rebelled; and for this reason he
extols his apostleship in lofty terms. He therefore writes this Epistle,
not that it may be read in solitude by Titus in his closet, but that it
may be openly published.

<span id="v.iii.i-p12"></span>*An Apostle of Jesus Christ* First, he
calls himself “a servant of God,” and next adds the particular kind of
his ministry, namely, that he is “an Apostle of Christ;” for there are
various ranks among the servants of God. Thus he descends from the
general description to the particular class. We ought also to keep in
remembrance what I have said elsewhere, that the word *servant* means
something else than ordinary subjection, (on account of which all
believers are called “servants of God,”) and denotes a minister who has
received a particular office. In this sense the prophets were formerly
distinguished by this title, and Christ himself is the chief of the
prophets:

<span id="v.iii.i-p13"></span>“Behold my servant, I have chosen him.”
(<span id="v.iii.i-p13.1"></span>[Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.i-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p14"></span>Thus David, with a view to his royal
dignity calls himself “a servant of God.” Perhaps, also, it is on
account of the Jews that he designates himself “a servant of God;” for
they were wont to lower his authority by alleging the law against him.
He therefore wishes to be accounted an Apostle of Christ in such a
manner that he may likewise glory in being a servant of the eternal God.
Thus he shows not only that those two titles are quite consistent with
each other, but that they are joined by a bond which cannot be
dissolved.

<span id="v.iii.i-p15"></span>*According to the faith of the elect of
God*  <span id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) If any one doubt about his
apostleship, he procures credit for it by a very strong reason,
connecting it with the salvation “of the elect of God.” As if he had
said, “There is a mutual agreement between my apostleship and the faith
of the elect of God; and, therefore, it will not be rejected by any man
who is not a reprobate and opposed to the true faith.”

<span id="v.iii.i-p17"></span>By “the elect” he means not only those who
were at that time alive, but all that had been from the beginning of the
world; for he declares that he teaches no doctrine which does not agree
with the faith of Abraham and of all the fathers. So, then, if any
person in the present day wishes to be accounted a successor of Paul, he
must prove that he is the minister of the same doctrine. But these words
contain also an implied contrast, that the gospel may suffer no damage
from the unbelief and obstinacy of many; for at that time, as well as in
the present day, weak minds were greatly disturbed by this scandal, that
the greater part of those who boasted of the title of the Church
rejected the pure doctrine of Christ. For this reason Paul shows that,
though all indiscriminately boast of the name of God, there are many of
that multitude who are reprobates; as he elsewhere (<span
id="v.iii.i-p17.1"></span>[Ro 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii.i-p17.1"></span>) affirms, that not all who are descended from
Abraham according to the flesh, are the lawful children of Abraham.

<span id="v.iii.i-p18"></span>*And the knowledge of that truth* I
consider the copulative and to be here equivalent to *that is*; so that
the passage might run thus: “according to the faith of the elect of God,
that is, the knowledge of that truth which is according to godliness.”
This clause explains what is the nature of that “faith” which he has
mentioned, though it is not a full definition of it, but a description
framed so as to apply to the present context. For the purpose of
maintaining that his apostleship is free from all imposture and error,
he solemnly declares that it contains nothing but known and ascertained
truth, by which men are instructed in the pure worship of God. But as
every word has its own weight, it is highly proper to enter into a
detailed explanation.

<span id="v.iii.i-p19"></span>First, when “faith” is called “knowledge,”
it is distinguished not only from opinion, but from that shapeless faith
which the Papists have contrived; for they have forged an implicit faith
destitute of all light of the understanding. But when Paul describes it
to be a quality which essentially belongs to faith — to know the truth,
he plainly shews that there is no faith without knowledge.

<span id="v.iii.i-p20"></span>The word *truth* expresses still more
clearly the certainty which is demanded by the nature of faith; for
faith is not satisfied with probable arguments, but holds what is true.
Besides, he does not speak of every kind of truth, but of the heavenly
doctrine, which is contrasted with the vanity of the human
understanding. As God has revealed himself to us by means of that truth,
so it is alone worthy of the honor of being called “the truth” — a name
which is bestowed on it in many parts of Scripture.

<span id="v.iii.i-p21"></span>“And the Spirit will lead you into all
truth.” (<span id="v.iii.i-p21.1"></span>[Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)<span
id="v.iii.i-p21.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p22"></span>“Thy word is the truth.” (<span
id="v.iii.i-p22.1"></span>[Joh
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#017)<span
id="v.iii.i-p22.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p23"></span>“Who hath bewitched you that ye should not
obey the truth?”  
(<span id="v.iii.i-p23.2"></span>[Ga
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.i-p23.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p24"></span>“Having heard the word of the truth, the
gospel of the Son of God.” (<span id="v.iii.i-p24.1"></span>[Col
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.i-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p25"></span>“He wisheth all to come to the knowledge
of the truth.”  
(<span id="v.iii.i-p25.2"></span>[1Ti
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.i-p25.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p26"></span>“The Church is the pillar and foundation
of the truth.”  
(<span id="v.iii.i-p26.2"></span>[1Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span id="v.iii.i-p26.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p27"></span>In a word, that truth is the right and
sincere knowledge of God, which frees us from all error and falsehood.
So much the more ought it to be valued by us, since nothing is more
wretched than to wander like cattle during our whole life.

<span id="v.iii.i-p28"></span>*Which is according to godliness*. This
clause especially limits “the truth” of which he had spoken, but at the
same time commends the doctrine of Paul from the fruit and end of it,
because it has no other object than that God should be worshipped in a
right manner, and that pure religion should flourish among men. In this
manner he defends his doctrine from every suspicion of vain curiosity,
as he did before Felix, (<span id="v.iii.i-p28.1"></span>[Ac
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#010)<span
id="v.iii.i-p28.1"></span>,) and afterwards before Agrippa, (<span
id="v.iii.i-p28.2"></span>[Ac
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.i-p28.2"></span>;)
for, since all questions which do not tend to edification ought justly
to be suspected and even hated by good men, the only lawful commendation
of doctrine is this, that it instructs us to fear God and to bow before
him with reverence. And hence we are also informed, that the greater
progress any one has made in godliness, he is so much the better
disciple of Christ; and that he ought to be reckoned a true theologian
who edifies consciences in the fear of God.

<span id="v.iii.i-p29"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p30"></span>**2.** *In the hope* (or, *on account of
the hope*) *of eternal life* This undoubtedly denotes the cause; for
that is the force of the Greek preposition ἐπί*;* and therefore it may
be translated, “On account of the hope,” or “On the hope.” True religion
and the practice of godliness — begin with meditation on the heavenly
life; and in like manner, when Paul (<span
id="v.iii.i-p30.1"></span>[Col
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.i-p30.1"></span>)
praises the faith and love of the Colossians, he makes the cause and
foundation of them to be “the hope laid up in heaven.” The Sadducees and
all who confine our hope to this world, whatever they may pretend, can
do nothing else than produce contempt of God, while they reduce men to
the condition of cattle. Accordingly, it ought always to be the aim of a
good teacher, to turn away the eyes of men from the world, that they may
look up to heaven. I readily acknowledge that we ought to value the
glory of God more highly than our salvation; but we are not now
discussing the question which of these two ought to be first in order.
All that I say is — that men never seek God in a right manner till they
have confidence to approach to him; and, therefore, that we never apply
our mind to godliness till we have been instructed about the hope of the
heavenly life.  <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209)

<span id="v.iii.i-p32"></span>*Which God promised before the times of
ages.* As Augustine translated the words, Πρὸ χρόνων αἰωνίων to mean —
not “the times of ages” but “eternal times,” he gives himself great
uneasiness about “the eternity of times,” till at length he explains
“eternal times” as denoting those which go beyond all antiquity. As to
the meaning, he and Jerome and other commentators agree, that God
determined, before the creation of the world, to give that salvation
which he hath now manifested by the gospel. Thus Paul would have used
the word *promise* incorrectly instead of *decree;* for before men
existed there was no one to whom he could promise.

<span id="v.iii.i-p33"></span>For this reason, while I do not reject
this exposition, yet when I take a close survey of the whole matter, I
am constrained to adopt a different interpretation — that eternal life
was promised to men many ages ago, and not only to those who lived at
that time, but also for our own age. It was not for the benefit of
Abraham alone, but with a view to all who should live after him, that
God said,

<span id="v.iii.i-p34"></span>“In thy seed shall all nations be
blessed.” (<span id="v.iii.i-p34.1"></span>[Ge
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)<span
id="v.iii.i-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p35"></span>Nor is this inconsistent with what he
says, in another sense, (<span id="v.iii.i-p35.1"></span>[2Ti
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.i-p35.1"></span>)
that salvation was given to men “before the times of ages.” The meaning
of the word is still the same in both passages; for, since the Greek
word αἰών, denotes an uninterrupted succession of time from the
beginning to the end of the world, Paul declares, in that passage, that
salvation was given or decreed for the elect of God before times began
to flow. But because in this passage he treats of the promise, he does
not include all ages, so as to lead us back beyond the creation of the
world, but shews that many ages  <span id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210)
have elapsed since salvation was promised.

<span id="v.iii.i-p37"></span>If any person prefer to view “the times of
ages” as a concise expression for the ages themselves, he is at liberty
to do so. But because salvation was given by the eternal election of God
before it was promised, the act of giving salvation is put in that
passage (<span id="v.iii.i-p37.1"></span>[2Ti
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009)<span id="v.iii.i-p37.1"></span>)
before all ages, and therefore we must supply the word *all.* But here
it means nothing more than that the promise is more ancient than a long
course of ages, because it began immediately after the creation of the
world. In the same sense he shews that the gospel, which was to have
been proclaimed when Christ rose from the dead, had been promised in the
Scriptures by the prophets; for there is a wide difference between the
promise which was formerly given to the fathers and the present
exhibition of grace.

<span id="v.iii.i-p38"></span>*Who cannot lie.* This expression ἀψευδής
is added for glorifying God, and still more for confirming our faith.
And, indeed, whenever the subject treated of is our salvation, we ought
to recollect that it is founded on the word of Him who can neither
deceive nor lie. Moreover, the only proof of the whole of religion is —
the unchangeable truth of God.  <span id="fr_211"></span>[212](#fn_211)

<span id="v.iii.i-p40"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p41"></span>**3.** *But hath manifested* There was
indeed some manifestation of this kind, when God in ancient times spake
by his prophets; but because Christ publicly, displayed by his coming
those thing which they had obscurely predicted, and the Gentiles were
afterwards admitted into the fellowship of the covenant, in this sense
Paul says that what had formerly been exhibited in part “hath now been
manifested.”

<span id="v.iii.i-p42"></span>*In his own times* This has the same
meaning as “the fullness of times.” (<span id="v.iii.i-p42.1"></span>[Ga
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004)<span id="v.iii.i-p42.1"></span>.)
He reminds us that the time when it pleased the Lord to do this — must
have been the most seasonable time for doing it; and he mentions this
for the purpose of meeting the rashness of men, who have always the
hardihood to inquire why it was not sooner, or why it is to-day rather
than to-morrow. In order therefore that our curiosity may not exceed
proper bounds, he shews that the “times” are placed in the hand, and at
the disposal, of God, in such a manner that we ought to think that he
does everything in the proper order and at the most seasonable time.

<span id="v.iii.i-p43"></span>*His word.* Or*, by his word;* for it is
not uncommon with Greek writers to supply the preposition *by*. Or, he
calls Christ the Word; if it be not thought preferable to supply
something for the sake of completing the sentence. Were it not that the
second exposition is a little forced, in other respects I should give it
the preference. Thus John says,

<span id="v.iii.i-p44"></span>“What we have heard, what we have seen
with our eyes, what our hands have handled of the Word of life; and the
life was manifested.” (<span id="v.iii.i-p44.1"></span>[1 John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.i-p44.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p45"></span>I therefore prefer what is a simple
meaning, that God hath manifested the word concerning the life by the
preaching of the gospel.

<span id="v.iii.i-p46"></span>*The preaching,* of which he speaks, is
the gospel proclaimed, as the chief thing which we hear in it is — that
Christ is given to us, and that in him there is life.

<span id="v.iii.i-p47"></span>*Which hath been committed to me.* Because
all are not indiscriminately fit for so important an office, and no man
ought to thrust himself into it, he asserts his calling, according to
his custom. Here we ought to learn — what we have often remarked on
other occasions — that the honor is not due to any man, till he has
proved that God has ordained him, for even the ministers of Satan
proudly boast that God has called them, but there is no truth in their
words. Now Paul states nothing but what is known and proved, when he
mentions his calling.

<span id="v.iii.i-p48"></span>Besides, from this passage we learn for
what purpose they were made apostles. It was for the sake of publishing
the gospel, as he says elsewhere,

<span id="v.iii.i-p49"></span>“Woe to me if I preach not the gospel, for
a dispensation is committed unto me.” (<span
id="v.iii.i-p49.1"></span>[1 Cor.
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#017)<span id="v.iii.i-p49.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.i-p50"></span>Accordingly, they who enact dumb show, in
the midst of idleness and luxury, are excessively impudent in boasting
that they are the successors of the apostles.

<span id="v.iii.i-p51"></span>*Of God our Savior* He applies the same
epithet to the Father and to Christ, so that each of them is our Savior,
but for a different reason; for the Father is called our Savior, because
he redeemed us by the death of his Son, that he might make us heirs of
eternal life; and the Son, because he shed his blood as the pledge and
the price of our salvation. Thus the Son hath brought salvation to us
from the Father, and the Father hath bestowed it through the Son.

<span id="v.iii.i-p52"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p53"></span>**4** *To Titus, my own son, according to
the common faith.* Hence it is evident in what sense a minister of the
word is said to beget spiritually those whom he brings to the obedience
of Christ, that is, so that he himself is also begotten. Paul declares
himself to be the father of Titus, with respect to his faith; but
immediately adds, that this faith is common to both, so that both of
them alike have the same Father in heaven. Accordingly, God does not
diminish his own prerogative, when he pronounces those to be spiritual
fathers along with himself, by whose ministry he regenerates whom he
chooses; for of themselves they do nothing, but only by the efficacy of
the Spirit. As to the remainder of the verse, the exposition of it will
be found in the Commentaries on the former Epistles, and especially on
the First Epistle to Timothy.  <span id="fr_212"></span>[213](#fn_212)

<span id="v.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Titus
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For this cause left I thee in
Crete, that thou shouldest set in order the things that are wanting, and
ordain elders in every city, as I had appointed thee:

<span id="v.iii.ii-p3"></span>**5.** Huius rei gratia reliqui to Cretae
ut ea quae desunt corrigas et constituas per civitates presbyteros sicut
ego tibi disposui

<span id="v.iii.ii-p4"></span>**6.** If any be blameless, the husband of
one wife, having faithful children not accused of riot or unruly.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p5"></span>**6.** Si quis sine crimine est unius
uxoris vir filios habens fideles non in accusatione luxuriae aut non
subditos

<span id="v.iii.ii-p6"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p7"></span>**5.** *For this reason I left thee in
Crete* This preface clearly proves, that Titus is not so much admonished
on his own account as recommended to others, that no one may hinder him.
Paul testifies that he has appointed him in his own room; and on that
account all should acknowledge and receive him with reverence as the
Apostle’s deputy. The apostles had no fixed place assigned to them, but
were charged to spread the gospel through the whole world; and for this
reason, when they left one city or district to go to another, they were
wont to place fit men as their substitutes, to complete the work which
they had begun. Thus Paul affirms that he founded the church of the
Corinthians, but that there were other workmen,  <span
id="fr_213"></span>[214](#fn_213) who must build on his foundation, that
is, carry forward the building.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p9"></span>This, indeed, belongs to all pastors; for
the churches will always stand in need of increase and progress, as long
as the world shall endure. But in addition to the ordinary office of
pastors, the care of organizing the church was committed to Titus. Till
the churches have been already organized, and reduced to some order,
pastors were not usually appointed over them. But Titus held some
additional charge, which consisted in giving a form to churches that had
not yet been properly arranged, and in appointing a fixed kind of
government accompanied by discipline. Having laid the foundation, Paul
departed; and then it became the duty of Titus to carry the work higher,
that the building might have fair proportions.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p10"></span>This is what he calls correcting those
things which are still wanting. The building of the Church is not a work
so easy that it can be brought all at once to perfection. How long Paul
was in Crete — is uncertain; but he had spent some time there, and had
faithfully devoted his labors to erect the kingdom of Christ. He did not
lack the most consummate skill that can be found in man; he was
unwearied in toil; and yet he acknowledged that he left the work rough
and incomplete. Hence we see the difficulty; and, indeed, we find, by
experience, in the present day, that it is not the labor of one or two
years to restore fallen. churches to a tolerable condition. Accordingly,
those who have made diligent progress for many years — must still be
attentive to correct many things.  <span
id="fr_214"></span>[215](#fn_214)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p12"></span>Here it is highly proper to observe the
modesty of Paul who willingly permits another person to complete the
work which he had begun. And, indeed, although Titus is greatly inferior
to him, he does not refuse to have him for ἐπανορθωτήν a “corrector,” to
give the finishing hand to his work. Such ought to be the dispositions
of godly teachers; not that every one should labor to make everything
bend to his own ambitious views, but that they should strive to assist
each other, and that, when any one has labored more successfully, he
should be congratulated and not envied by all the rest.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p13"></span>And yet we must not imagine that Paul
intended that Titus should correct those things which he had left
undone, either through ignorance, or forgetfulness, or carelessness, but
those things which he could not finish on account of the shortness of
the time. In short, he enjoined Titus to make that correction which he
would himself have made, if he had remained longer in Crete; not by
varying — not by changing anything, but by adding what was wanting;
because the difficulty of such a work does not allow every part of it to
be done in a single day.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p14"></span>*And appoint presbyters in each city*
 <span id="fr_215"></span>[216](#fn_215) In the spiritual building this
nearly comes next to doctrine, that pastors be ordained, to take charge
of governing the Church; and therefore Paul mentions it here in
preference to everything else. It is a point which ought to be carefully
observed, that churches cannot safely remain without the ministry of
pastors, and that consequently, wherever there is a considerable body of
people, a pastor should be appointed over it. And yet he does not say
that each town shall have a pastor, so that no place shall have more
than one; but he means that no towns shall be destitute of pastors

<span id="v.iii.ii-p16"></span>*Presbyters* or elders. It is well known,
that it was not on account of age, that they received this appellation;
for sometimes those who were still young — such as Timothy — were
admitted to this rank. But in all languages it has been customary to
apply this honorable designation to all rulers. Although we may
conclude, from <span id="v.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>[1Ti
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)<span id="v.iii.ii-p16.1"></span>,
that there were two classes of presbyters, the context will immediately
show, that here none other than teachers are meant, that is, those who
were ordained to teach; for immediately afterwards, he will call the
same persons “bishops.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p17"></span>But it may be thought that he gives too
much power to Titus, when he bids him appoint ministers for all the
churches. That would be almost royal power. Besides, this method takes
away from each church the right of choosing, and from the College of
Pastors the power of judging; and thus the sacred administration of the
Church would be almost wholly profaned. The answer is easy. He does not
give permission to Titus, that he alone may do everything in this
matter, and may place over the churches those whom he thinks fit to
appoint to be bishops; but only bids him preside, as moderator, at the
elections, which is quite necessary. This mode of expression is very
common. In the same manner, a consul, or regent, or dictator is said to
have created consuls, on account of having presided over the public
assembly in electing them. Thus also Luke relates that Paul and Barnabas
ordained elders in every church. (<span id="v.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>[Ac
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)<span
id="v.iii.ii-p17.1"></span>.) Not that they alone, in an authoritative
manner, appointed pastors which the churches had neither approved nor
known; but that they ordained fit men, who had been chosen or desired by
the people. From this passage we do indeed learn, that there was not at
that time such equality among the ministers of Christ but that some one
had authority and deliberative voice above others; but this has nothing
to do with the tyrannical and profane custom which prevails in Popery as
to Collations. The apostles had a widely different mode of procedure.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p18"></span><span id="v.iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p19"></span>**6.** *If any one is blameless* In order
that no one may be angry with Titus, as if he were too rigorous or
severe in rejecting any, Paul takes the whole blame to himself;  <span
id="fr_216"></span>[217](#fn_216) for he declares that he has expressly
commanded, that no one may be admitted, unless he be such a person as is
here described. Accordingly, as he testified, a little before, that he
had invested Titus with authority to preside in the appointment of
pastors, that others might allow to him that right; so he now relates
the injunction which he had given, lest the severity of Titus should be
exposed to the illwill of the ignorant, or the slanders of wicked men.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p21"></span>As this passage presents to us a lively
portrait of a lawful bishop, we ought to observe it carefully; but, on
the other hand, as almost everything that is here contained has been
explained by me in the Commentary on the First Epistle to Timothy, it
will be enough at present to touch on it slightly. When he says, that a
bishop must be ἀνέγκληος*, blameless,* he does not mean one who is
exempt from every vice, (for no such person could at any time be found,)
but one who is marked by no disgrace that would lessen his authority. He
means, therefore, that he shall be a man of unblemished reputation.
 <span id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p23"></span>*The husband of one wife* The reason why
this rule is laid down — has been explained by us in the Commentary on
the First Epistle to Timothy.  <span id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218)
Polygamy was so common among the Jews, that the wicked custom had nearly
passed into a law. If any man had married two wives before he made a
profession of Christianity, it would have been cruel to compel him to
divorce one of them; and therefore the apostles endured what was in
itself faulty, because they could not correct it. Besides, they who had
involved themselves by marrying more than one wife at a time, even
though they had been prepared to testify their repentance by retaining
but one wife, had, nevertheless, given a sign of their incontinence,
which might have been a brand on their good name. The meaning is the
same as if Paul had enjoined them to elect those who had lived chastely
in marriage — had been satisfied with having a single wife, and had
forbidden those who had manifested the power of lust by marrying many
wives. At the same time, he who, having become an unmarried man by the
death of his wife, marries another, ought, nevertheless, to be accounted
“the husband of one wife;” for the apostle does not say, that they shall
choose him who has been, but him who is, “the husband of one wife.”

<span id="v.iii.ii-p25"></span>*Having believing children* Seeing that
it is required that a pastor shall have prudence and gravity, it is
proper that those qualities should be exhibited in his family; for how
shall that man who cannot rule his own house — be able to govern the
church! Besides, not only must the bishop himself be free from reproach,
but his whole family ought to be a sort of mirror of chaste and
honorable discipline; and, therefore, in the First Epistle to Timothy,
he not less strictly enjoins their wives what they ought to be.  <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219)

<span id="v.iii.ii-p27"></span>First, he demands that the children shall
be “believers;” whence it is obvious that they have been educated in the
sound doctrine of godliness, and in the fear of the Lord. Secondly, that
they shall not be devoted to luxury, that they may be known to have been
educated to temperance and frugality. Thirdly, that they shall *not* be
*disobedient;* for he who cannot obtain from his children any reverence
or subjection — will hardly be able to restrain the people by the bridle
of discipline.

<span id="v.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Titus
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p2"></span>**7.** For a bishop must be blameless, as
the steward of God; not selfwilled, not soon angry, not given to wine,
no striker, not given to filthy lucre;

<span id="v.iii.iii-p3"></span>**7.** oportet enim episcopum sine
crimine esse sicut Dei dispensatorem non superbum non iracundum non
vinolentum non percussorem non turpilucri cupidum

<span id="v.iii.iii-p4"></span>**8.** But a lover of hospitality, a
lover of good men, sober, just, holy, temperate;

<span id="v.iii.iii-p5"></span>**8.** sed hospitalem benignum sobrium
iustum sanctum continentem

<span id="v.iii.iii-p6"></span>**9.** Holding fast the faithful word as
he hath been taught, that he may be able by sound doctrine both to
exhort and to convince the gainsayers.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p7"></span>**9.** amplectentem eum qui secundum
doctrinam est fidelem sermonem ut potens sit et exhortari in doctrina
sana et eos qui contradicunt arguere

<span id="v.iii.iii-p8"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p9"></span>**7.** *For a bishop ought to be
blameless, as a governor of the house of God* He again repeats, that
they who aspire to the office of a bishop ought to retain an unspotted
reputation; and he confirms it by this argument, that, because the
Church is the house of God, every person who is appointed to govern it —
is constituted, as it were, governor of the house of God. Now, he would
be ill spoken of among men, who should take a scandalous and infamous
person, and make him his steward; and therefore it would be far more
base and intolerable to appoint such persons to be rulers of the
household of God. The Latin word <span
id="v.iii.iii-p9.1"></span>*dispensator* (steward or manager) — employed
in the old translation, and retained by Erasmus — does not at all
express Paul’s meaning; for, in order that greater care may be exercised
in the election, he adorns the office of a bishop within this honorable
eulogy, that it is a government of the house of God, as he says to
Timothy,

<span id="v.iii.iii-p10"></span>“That thou mayest know how thou oughtest
to conduct thyself in the house of the living God, the pillar and
foundation of truth.”  
(<span id="v.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>[1Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.iii-p11"></span>This passage plainly shows that there is
no distinction between a presbyter and a bishop; for he now calls
indiscriminately, by the latter name, those whom he formerly he employs
both names in the same sense, without any distinction; as Jerome has
remarked, both in his Commentary on this passage, and in his Epistle to
Evagrius. And hence we may perceive how much greater deference has been
paid to the opinions of men than ought to have been paid to them; for
the language of the Holy Spirit, has been set aside, and the custom
introduced by the arbitrary will of man has prevailed. For my own part,
I do not find fault with the custom which has existed from the very
beginning of the Church, that each assembly of bishops shall have one
moderator;  <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220) but that the name of
office which God has given to all, shall be conveyed to one alone, and
that all the rest shall be deprived of it, is both unreasonable and
absurd. Besides, to pervert the language of the Holy Spirit — in such a
manner that the same words shall have a different meaning from what he
intended — is excessive and profane hardihood.  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221)

<span id="v.iii.iii-p14"></span>*Not self-willed* With good reason does
he condemn this vice in a bishop, whose duty it is not only to receive
kindly those who come to him of their own accord, but also to allure
those who withdraw themselves, that he may conduct all in like manner to
Christ. Now, αὐθάδεια (as Plato says in one of his Epistles to Dion) τὢς
ἐρημίας ἐστὶ ξύνοικος that is, “self-will is closely allied to
solitude;” for society and friendship cannot be cherished, when every
man pleases himself to such an extent as to refuse to yield and
accommodate himself to others. And, indeed, every (αὐθάδης)
“self-willed” person, as soon as an occasion presents itself, will
instantly become a fanatic.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p15"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p16"></span>**8.** *But hospitable, devoted to
kindness* Hence it is evident how destructive is that plague which tears
the Church by quarrels. With this vice he contrasts, first, docility,
and next, gentleness and modesty towards all; for a bishop will never
teach well, who is not also ready to learn. Augustine praises highly a
saying of Cyprian: “Let him be as patient to learn as skillful to
teach.” Besides, bishops often need advice and warnings. If they refuse
to be admonished, if they reject good advices, they will immediately
fall headlong to the grievous injury of the Church. The remedy against
these evils, therefore, is, that they be not wise to themselves.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p17"></span>I have chosen to translate φιλάγαθον
*devoted to kindness,* rather than with Erasmus, “a lover of good
things;” for this virtue, accompanied by hospitality, appears to be
contrasted by Paul with covetousness and niggardliness. He calls that
man *just,* who lives among men without doing harm to any one.
*Holiness* has reference to God; for even Plato draws this distinction
between the two words.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p18"></span><span id="v.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p19"></span>**9.** *Holding fast the faithful word*
This is the chief gift in a bishop, who is elected principally for the
sake of teaching; for the Church cannot be governed in any other way
than by the word. “The faithful word” is the appellation which he gives
to that doctrine which is pure, and which has proceeded from the mouth
of God. He wishes that a bishop should hold it fast, so as not only to
be well instructed in it, but to be constant in maintaining it. There
are some fickle persons who easily suffer themselves to be carried away
to various kinds of doctrine; while others are cast down by fear, or
moved by any occurrence to forsake the defense of the truth. Paul
therefore enjoins that those persons shall be chosen who, having
cordially embraced the truth of God, and holding it firmly, never allow
it to be wrested from them, or can be torn from it. And, indeed, nothing
is more dangerous than that fickleness of which I have spoken, when a
pastor does not stedfastly adhere to that doctrine of which he ought to
be the unshaken defender. In short, in a pastor there is demanded not
only learning, but such zeal for pure doctrine as never to depart from
it.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p20"></span>But what is meant by *according to
instruction* or *doctrine?*  <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) The
meaning is, that it is useful for the edification of the Church; for
Paul is not wont to give the name of “doctrine” to anything that is
learned and known without promoting any advancement of godliness; but,
on the contrary, he condemns as vain and unprofitable all the
speculations which yield no advantage, however ingenious they may be in
other respects. Thus, “He that teacheth, let him do it in doctrine;”
that is, let him labor to do good to the hearers. (<span
id="v.iii.iii-p21.2"></span>[Ro
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#007)<span
id="v.iii.iii-p21.2"></span>.) In short, the first thing required in a
pastor is, that he be well instructed in the knowledge of sound
doctrine; the second is, that, with unwavering firmness of courage, he
hold by the confession of it to the last; and the third is, that he make
his manner of teaching tend to edification, and do not, through motives
of ambition, fly about through the subtleties of frivolous curiosity,
but seek only the solid advantage of the Church.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p22"></span>*That he may be able* The pastor ought
to have two voices: one, for gathering the sheep; and another, for
warding off and driving away wolves and thieves. The Scripture supplies
him with the means of doing both; for he who is deeply skilled in it
will be able both to govern those who are teachable, and to refute the
enemies of the truth. This twofold use of Scripture Paul describes when
he says, *That he may be able to exhort and to convince adversaries* And
hence let us learn, first, what is the true knowledge of a bishop, and,
next, to what purpose it ought to be applied. That bishop is truly wise,
who holds the right faith; and he makes a proper use of his knowledge,
when he applies it to the edification of the people.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p23"></span>This is remarkable applause bestowed on
the word of God, when it is pronounced to be sufficient, not only for
governing the teachable, but for subduing the obstinacy of enemies. And,
indeed, the power of truth revealed by the Lord is such that it easily
vanquishes all falsehoods. Let the Popish bishops now go and boast of
being the successors of the apostles, seeing that the greater part of
them are so ignorant of all doctrine, as to reckon ignorance to be no
small part of their dignity.

<span id="v.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Titus
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010)<span
id="v.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p2"></span>**10.** For there are many unruly and vain
talkers and deceivers, specially they of the circumcision:

<span id="v.iii.iv-p3"></span>**10.** sunt enim multi et inoboedientes
vaniloqui et seductores maxime qui de circumcisione sunt

<span id="v.iii.iv-p4"></span>**11.** Whose mouths must be stopped, who
subvert whole houses, teaching things which they ought not, for filthy
lucre’s sake.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p5"></span>**11.** quos oportet redargui qui
universas domos subvertunt docentes quae non oportet turpis lucri gratia

<span id="v.iii.iv-p6"></span>**12.** One of themselves, *even* a
prophet of their own, said, The Cretians *are* alway liars, evil beasts,
slow bellies.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p7"></span>**12.** dixit quidam ex illis proprius
ipsorum propheta Cretenses semper mendaces malae bestiae ventres pigri

<span id="v.iii.iv-p8"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p9"></span>**10** *For there are* *many unruly.*
 <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) After having laid down a
general rule, which ought to be everywhere observed, in order that Titus
may be more attentive to adhere to it, he holds out to him the urgent
necessity which ought to excite him more than all things else. He warns
him that he has to deal with many obstinate and incorrigible persons,
that many are puffed up with vanity and idle talk, that many are
deceivers; and that therefore they ought to choose, on the other hand,
such leaders as are qualified and well prepared to oppose them. For, if
the children of this world, when dangers arise, increase their
solicitude and watchfulness, it would be disgraceful for us, when Satan
is using his utmost efforts to remain careless and inactive, as if we
were in a state of peace.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p11"></span>*Unruly* Instead of (<span
id="v.iii.iv-p11.1"></span>inobedientes) *disobedient,* which *is* the
rendering in the old translation for ἀνυπότακτοι Erasmus translates it
(<span id="v.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>intractabiles) *incorrigible.* He
means those who cannot endure to be brought to obey, and who throw off
the yoke of subjection. He gives the appellation of *vain talkers*,
 <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) not only to the authors of
false doctrines, but to those who, addicted to ambitious display, occupy
themselves with nothing but useless subtleties. Ματαιολογία  <span
id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) (vain talking) is contrasted with
useful and solid doctrine, and therefore includes all trivial and
frivolous speculations, which contain nothing but empty bombast, because
they contribute nothing to piety and the fear of God. And such is all
the scholastic theology that is found, in the present day, in Popery.
Yet he calls the same persons *deceivers of minds*. It may be thought
preferable to view this as relating to a different class of persons;
but, for my own part, I think that it means the same class; for the
teachers of such trifles entice and fascinate the minds of men, so as no
longer to receive sound doctrine.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p14"></span>*Chiefly they who are of the
circumcision.* He says that they are chiefly of the Jews; for it is
highly requisite that such plagues shall be known by all. We ought not
to listen to those who plead that we should spare the reputation of this
or that individual, when the matter in question is the great danger of
the whole Church. And so much the greater danger was to be apprehended
from that nation, because it claimed superiority above others on account
of the sacredness of its lineage. This is therefore the reason why Paul
reproves the Jews more sharply, in order to take from them the power of
doing injury.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p15"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p16"></span>**11** *Whose mouth must be stopped* A
good pastor ought therefore to be on the watch, so as not to give silent
permission to wicked and dangerous doctrines to make gradual progress,
or to allow wicked men an opportunity of spreading them. But it may be
asked, “How is it possible for a bishop to constrain obstinate and
self-willed men to be silent? For such persons, even though they are
vanquished in argument, still do not hold their peace; and it frequently
happens that, the more manifestly they are refuted and vanquished, they
become the more insolent; for not only is their malice strengthened and
inflamed, but they give themselves up to indolence.” I reply, when they
have been smitten down by the sword of God’s word, and overwhelmed by
the force of the truth, the Church may command them to be silent; and if
they persevere, they may at least be banished from the society of
believers, so that they shall have no opportunity of doing harm.  <span
id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) Yet by “shutting the mouth” Paul
simply means — “to refute their vain talking,” even though they should
not cease to make a noise; for he who is convicted by the word of God,
however he may chatter, has nothing to say.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p18"></span>*Who overturn whole houses.* If the faith
of one individual were in danger of being overturned, (for we are
speaking of the perdition of a single soul redeemed by the blood of
Christ) the pastor should immediately gird himself for the combat; how
much less tolerable is it to see whole houses overturned?

<span id="v.iii.iv-p19"></span>*Teaching things which they ought not.*
The manner in which they were overturned is described in these words.
Hence we may infer how dangerous it is to make even the smallest
departure from sound doctrine; for he does not say that the doctrines,
by which they overturned the faith of many, were openly wicked; but we
may understand by this designation every kind of corruptions, when there
is a turning aside from the desire of edification. Thus it is in
reality, that, amidst so great weakness of the flesh, we are exceedingly
prone to fall; and hence it arises, that Satan easily and speedily
destroys, by his ministers, what godly teachers had reared with great
and long-continued toil.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p20"></span>He next points out the source of the
evil, a desire of *dishonest gain;* by which he reminds us how
destructive a plague avarice is in teachers; for, as soon as they give
themselves up to the pursuit of gain, they must labor to obtain the
favor and countenance of men. This is quickly followed by the corruption
of pure doctrine.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p21"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p22"></span>**12** *One of themselves, a prophet of
their own* I have no doubt that he who is here spoken of is Epimenides,
who was a native of Crete; for, when the Apostle says that this author
was “one of themselves,” and was “a prophet of their own,” he
undoubtedly means that he belonged to the nation of the Cretans. Why he
calls him a Prophet--is doubtful. Some think that the reason is, that
the book from which Paul borrowed this passage bears the title Περὶ
Χρησμῶν “concerning oracles.” Others are of opinion that Paul speaks
ironically, by saying that they have such a Prophet — a Prophet worthy
of a nation which refuses to listen to the servants of God. But as poets
are sometimes called by the Greeks (προφὢται) “prophets,” and as the
Latin authors call them <span id="v.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>*Vates*, I
consider it to denote simply a teacher. The reason why they were so
called appears to have been, that they were always reckoned to be (γένος
θεῖον καὶ ἐνθουσιαστικόν) *“*a divine race and moved by divine
inspiration.” Thus also Adimantus, in the Second Book of Plato’s
treatise Περὶ Πολιτείας after having called the poets υἵους Θεῶν “sons
of the gods,” adds, that they also became their prophets. For this
reason I think that Paul accommodates his style to the ordinary
practice. Nor is it of any importance to inquire on what occasion
Epimenides calls his countrymen liars, namely, because they boast of
having the sepulcher of Jupiter; but seeing that the poet takes it from
an ancient and well-known report, the Apostle quotes it as a proverbial
saying.  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227)

<span id="v.iii.iv-p28"></span>From this passage we may infer that those
persons are superstitious, who do not venture to borrow anything from
heathen authors. All truth is from God; and consequently, if wicked men
have said anything that is true and just, we ought not to reject it; for
it has come from God. Besides, all things are of God; and, therefore,
why should it not be lawful to dedicate to his glory everything that can
properly be employed for such a purpose? But on this subject the reader
may consult Basil’s discourse  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228)
πρὸς τοὺς νέους, ὅπως ἂν ἐξ ἑλλ κ.τ.λ

<span id="v.iii.v"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Titus
1:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#013)<span id="v.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p2"></span>**13.** This witness is true. Wherefore
rebuke them sharply, that they may be sound in the faith;

<span id="v.iii.v-p3"></span>**13.** testimonium hoc verum est quam ob
causam increpa illos dure ut sani sint in fide

<span id="v.iii.v-p4"></span>**14.** Not giving heed to Jewish fables,
and commandments of men, that turn from the truth.

<span id="v.iii.v-p5"></span>**14.** non intendentes iudaicis fabulis et
mandatis hominum aversantium se a veritate

<span id="v.iii.v-p6"></span>**15.** Unto the pure all things *are*
pure: but unto them that are defiled and unbelieving *is* nothing pure;
but even their mind and conscience is defiled.

<span id="v.iii.v-p7"></span>**15.** omnia munda mundis coinquinatis
autem et infidelibus nihil mundum sed inquinatae sunt eorum et mens et
conscientia

<span id="v.iii.v-p8"></span>**16.** They profess that they know God;
but in works they deny *him*, being abominable, and disobedient, and
unto every good work reprobate.

<span id="v.iii.v-p9"></span>**16.** confitentur se nosse Deum factis
autem negant cum sunt abominati et incredibiles et ad omne opus bonum
reprobi

<span id="v.iii.v-p10"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p11"></span>**13.** *This testimony is true.*  <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) How worthiness soever the witness may
have been,  <span id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) yet the truth which
has been spoken by him is acknowledged by Paul. The inhabitants of
Crete, of whom he speaks with such sharpness were undoubtedly very
wicked. The Apostle, who is wont to reprove mildly those who deserved to
be treated with extreme severity, would never have spoken so harshly of
the Cretans, if he had not been moved by very strong reasons. What term
more reproachful than these opprobrious epithets can be imagined; that
they were “lazy, devoted to the belly, destitute of truth, evil beasts?”
Nor are these vices charged against one or a few persons, but he
condemns the whole nation.

<span id="v.iii.v-p16"></span>It was truly a wonderful purpose of God,
that he called a nation so depraved, and so infamous on account of its
vices, to be among the first who should partake of the gospel; but his
goodness is not less worthy of admiration, in having bestowed heavenly
grace on those who did not even deserve to live in this world.  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) In that country so corrupt, as if in
the midst of hell, the Church of Christ held a position, and did not
cease to be extended, though it was infected by the corruption of the
evils which prevailed there; for here Paul not only reproves those who
were strangers to the faith, but expressly reproves those who had made a
profession of Christianity. Perceiving that these vices so hateful have
already taken root, and are spreading far and wide, he does not spare
the reputation of the whole nation, that he may attempt the care of
those whom there was some hope of healing.

<span id="v.iii.v-p18"></span>*Wherefore rebuke them sharply* Of that
circumspection and prudence with which a bishop ought to be endowed, it
is not the least part, that he regulate his manner of teaching by the
dispositions and conduct of men. We must not deal with obstinate and
unruly persons in the same manner as with those who are meek and
teachable; for, in instructing the latter, we ought to use such mildness
as is suitable to their teachable disposition, while the stubbornness of
the former must be severely corrected, and (as the saying is) for a bad
knot there must be a bad wedge.  <span id="fr_232"></span>[233](#fn_232)
The reason why Titus ought to be more sharp and severe in rebuking them
has been already stated, namely, that they are “evil beasts.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p20"></span>*That they may be sound in the faith*
Whether the “soundness” or “healthfulness” is here contrasted with the
diseases which he has mentioned, or whether he simply commands them to
remain in the sound faith, is uncertain. I prefer the latter view. As
they already are exceedingly vicious, and may easily be corrupted more
and more, he wishes them to be more closely and strictly kept within the
pure faith.  <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233)

<span id="v.iii.v-p22"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p23"></span>**14** *And may not listen to Jewish
fables* He now shews in what “sound faith” consists — when it is not
corrupted by any “fables.” But in guarding against the danger he
prescribes this remedy — not to give ear to them; for God wishes us to
be so attentive to his word, that there shall be no entrance for
trifles. And, indeed, when the truth of God has once gained admission
all that can be brought against it will be so tasteless, that it will
not attract our minds. If, therefore, we wish to preserve the faith
uncontaminated, let us learn carefully to restrain our senses, so that
they may not give themselves up to strange contrivances; for, as soon as
any person shall begin to listen to fables, he will lose the purity of
faith.

<span id="v.iii.v-p24"></span>All trivial inventions he calls “fables,”
or, as we would say, “trifles;” for what he immediately adds, about “the
commandments of men,” has the same meaning. And he calls those men
*enemies of the truth* who*,* not satisfied with the pure doctrine of
Christ, mix up with them their own fooleries; for all that men of
themselves contrive ought to be accounted “fabulous.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p25"></span>He attributes this vice chiefly to the
Jews, because, under the presence of the divine law, they introduced
superstitious ceremonies. The Gentiles, being aware that they had been
wretchedly deceived during their whole life, more easily renounced their
former course of life; while the Jews, having been educated in the true
religion, obstinately defended the ceremonies to which they had been
accustomed, and could not be convinced that the Law had been abrogated.
In this manner they disturbed all churches, because, as soon as the
gospel began to make its appearance anywhere, they did not cease to
corrupt its purity by mixing it with their leaven. Accordingly, Paul not
only forbids them, in general terms, to degenerate from sound doctrine,
but points out, as with the finger, the present evil which needed to be
remedied, that they may be on their guard against it.

<span id="v.iii.v-p26"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p27"></span>**15** *To the pure all things indeed are
pure* He glances at one class of fabulous opinions; for the choice of
the kinds of food, (such as was temporarily enjoined by Moses,) together
with purifications and washings, were insisted on as being still
necessary, and they even made holiness to consist almost wholly in these
minute observances. How dangerous to the Church this was, we have
already explained. First, a snare of bondage was laid on the
consciences; and next, ignorant persons, bound by this superstition, had
a veil drawn over their eyes, which hindered them from advancing in the
pure knowledge of Christ. If any of the Gentiles refused to submit to
this yoke, because he had not been accustomed to it, the Jews vehemently
contended for it, as if it had been the chief article of religions. Not
without good reason, therefore, does Paul firmly oppose such corrupters
of the gospel. In this passage, indeed, he not only refutes their error,
but wittily laughs at their folly, in laboring anxiously, any advantage,
about abstaining from certain kinds of food and things of that nature

<span id="v.iii.v-p28"></span>In the first clause of this verse he
upholds Christian liberty, by asserting, that to believers nothing is
unclean; but at the same time he indirectly censures the false apostles
who set no value on inward purity, which alone is esteemed by God. He
therefore rebukes their ignorance, in not understanding that Christians
are pure without the ceremonies enjoined by the Law; and next he
chastises their hypocrisy, in disregarding uprightness of heart, and
occupying themselves with useless exercises. But as the subject now in
hand is not the health of the body, but peace of conscience, he means
nothing else than that the distinction of the kinds of food, which was
in force under the Law, has now been abolished. For the same reason it
is evident, that they do wrong, who impose religious scruples on
consciences in this matter; for this is not a doctrine intended for a
single age, but an eternal oracle of the Holy Spirit, which cannot
lawfully be set aside by any new law.

<span id="v.iii.v-p29"></span>Accordingly, this must be true till the
end of the world, that there is no kind of food which is unlawful in the
sight of God; and, therefore, this passage is fitly and appropriately
quoted in opposition to the tyrannical law of the Pope, which forbids
the eating of flesh on certain days. And yet I am not unacquainted with
the sophistical arguments which they employ. They affirm, that they do
not forbid the eating of flesh, because they allege that it is unclean,
(for they acknowledge that all kinds of food are in themselves clean and
pure,) but that abstinence from flesh is enjoined on another ground,
that it has a tendency to tame the lust of the flesh; as if the Lord had
forbidden to eat swine’s flesh, because he judged swine to be unclean.
Even under the Law the fathers reckoned that everything which God
created is in itself pure and clean; but they held that they were
unclean for this reason, that the use of them was unlawful, because God
had forbidden it. All things are, therefore, pronounced by the Apostle
to be pure, with no other meaning than that the use of all things is
free, as regards the conscience. Thus, if any law binds the consciences
to any necessity of abstaining from certain kinds of food, it wickedly
takes away from believers that liberty which God had given them.

<span id="v.iii.v-p30"></span>*But to the polluted and unbelieving
nothing is pure.* This is the second clause, in which he ridicules the
vain and useless precautions of such instructors. He says that they gain
nothing by guarding against uncleanness in certain kinds of food,
because they cannot touch anything that is clean to them. Why so?
Because they are “polluted,” and, therefore, by their only touching
those things which were otherwise pure, they become “polluted.”

<span id="v.iii.v-p31"></span>To the “polluted” he adds the
“unbelieving,”  <span id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234) not as being a
different class of persons; but the addition is made for the sake of
explanation. Because there is no purity in the sight of God but that of
faith, it follows that all unbelievers are unclean. By no laws or rules,
therefore, will they obtain that cleanness which they desire to have;
because, being themselves “polluted,” they will find nothing in the
world that is clean to them.  <span id="fr_235"></span>[236](#fn_235)

<span id="v.iii.v-p34"></span>*But their mind and conscience are
polluted.* He shows the fountain from which flows all the filth which is
spread over the whole life of man; for, unless the heart be well
purified, although men consider works to have great splendor, and a
sweet smell, yet with God they will excite disgust by their abominable
smell and by their filthiness.

<span id="v.iii.v-p35"></span>“The Lord looketh on the heart,” (<span
id="v.iii.v-p35.1"></span>[1Sa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.v-p35.1"></span>,)

<span id="v.iii.v-p36"></span>and

<span id="v.iii.v-p37"></span>“his eyes are on the truth.” (<span
id="v.iii.v-p37.1"></span>[Jer
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003)<span id="v.iii.v-p37.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.v-p38"></span>Whence it arises, that those things which
are lofty before men are abomination before God.

<span id="v.iii.v-p39"></span>The *mind* denotes the understanding, and
the *conscience* relates rather to the affections of the heart. But here
two things ought to be observed; first, that man is esteemed by God, not
on account of outward works, but on account of the sincere desire of the
heart; and, secondly, that the filth of infidelity is so great, that it
pollutes not only the man, but everything that he touches. On this
subject let the reader consult <span id="v.iii.v-p39.1"></span>[Hag
2:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#011)<span
id="v.iii.v-p39.1"></span>. In like manner Paul teaches that

<span id="v.iii.v-p40"></span>“all things are sanctified by the word,”
(<span id="v.iii.v-p40.1"></span>[1Ti
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005)<span id="v.iii.v-p40.1"></span>,)

<span id="v.iii.v-p41"></span>because men use nothing in a pure manner
till they receive it by faith from the hand of God.

<span id="v.iii.v-p42"></span><span id="v.iii.v-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p43"></span>**16** *They profess that they know God*
He treats those persons as they deserve; for hypocrites, who give their
whole attention to minute observances, despise fearlessly what
constitutes the chief part of the Christian life. The consequence is,
that they display their vanity, while contempt of God is manifested in
open crimes. And this is what Paul means; that they who wish to be seen
abstaining from one kind of food — indulge in wantonness and rebellion,
as if they had shaken of the yoke; that their conduct is disgraceful and
full of wickedness, and that not a spark of virtue is visible in their
whole life.

<span id="v.iii.v-p44"></span>*For they are abominable, disobedient, and
to every good work reprobate.* When he calls them, βδελυκτούς  <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236) *abominable,* he seems to allude to
their pretended holiness, to which they gave their earnest attention.
But Paul declares that they gain no advantage, for they do not cease to
be profane and detestable. With good reason does he accuse them of
*disobedience;* for nothing can be more haughty than hypocrites, who
exert themselves so laboriously about ceremonies, in order that they may
have it in their power to despise with impunity the chief requirements
of the law. We may appropriately interpret the word ἀδόκιμοι *reprobate*
in an active signification; as if he had said, that they who wish to be
thought so sagacious instructors in trifles — are destitute of judgment
and understanding as to good works.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[209](cc43020.htm#fr_208) <span
id="v.iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p16"></span> “If faith be the fruit of election, the
prescience of faith does not influence the electing act of God. It is
called ‘the faith of God’s elect,’ Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ,
according to the faith of God’s elect, (<span
id="v.iii.i-p16.1"></span>[Titus
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.i-p16.1"></span>,)
that is, settled in this office to bring the elect of God to faith. If
men be chosen by God upon the foresight of faith, or not chosen till
they have faith, they are not so much God’s elect as God is their elect:
they choose God by faith, before God chooseth them by love. It had not
been the faith of God’s elect, that is, of those already chosen, but the
faith of those that were to be chosen by God afterwards. Election is the
cause of faith, and not faith the cause of election. Fire is the cause
of heat, and not heat of fire; the sun is the cause of day, and not the
day the cause of the rising of the sun. Men are not chosen because they
believe, but they believe because they are chosen. The Apostle did ill
else to appropriate that to the elect, which they had no more interest
in by virtue of their election than the veriest reprobate in the world.
If the foresight of what works might be done by his creatures was the
motive of his choosing them why did he not choose the devils to
redemption, who could have done him better service, by the strength of
their nature, than the whole mass of Adam’s posterity? Well, then, there
is no possible way to lay the original foundation of this act of
election and preterition in anything but the absolute sovereignty of
God.” — *Charnock*.

<span id="fn_209"></span>[210](cc43020.htm#fr_209) <span
id="v.iii.i-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p31"></span> “Thus he shews that it will never be
possible for men to dedicate themselves entirely to the service of God,
if they do not think more about God than about all things else. In
short, there is no living root, no faith no religion, till we have been
led to heaven, that is, till we know that God has not created us to keep
us here in an earthly life with brute beasts, but that he has adopted us
to be his heritage, and reckons us to be his children. If, therefore, we
do not look up to heaven, it is impossible that we shall have true
devotion to surrender ourselves to God, or that there shall be any faith
or Christianity in us. And that is the reason why — among all who, in
the present day, are accounted Christians, and give themselves out to be
such — there are very few who have this true mark, which Paul has here
given to all the children of God. It is because all are occupied with
the present life, and are so firmly bound to it, that they cannot rise
higher. Now perceiving this vice to be so common, so much the more ought
we to guard against it, and break the force of that which we cannot
altogether destroy, till we come into close fellowship with God, which
will only be, when the hope of eternal life shall be actually and
sincerely formed in our hearts.”—*Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_210"></span>[211](cc43020.htm#fr_210) <span
id="v.iii.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p36"></span> “<span id="v.iii.i-p36.1"></span>Beaucoup
de centeines d’ans.” — “Many centuries of years.”

<span id="fn_211"></span>[212](cc43020.htm#fr_211) <span
id="v.iii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p39"></span> “What a strange sort of men are these,
that will endure to be so exposed, so scorned, so trampled upon, as they
that bear the Christian name commonly are? What is the reason of it?
What account will a reasonable man give, why he will so expose himself?
I will tell you the reason. ‘Therefore we labor and suffer reproach,
because we hope in God, in the living God, and we are pretty well
persuaded we shall not finally be losers. We shall not have an ill
bargain of it at last.’ As the same Apostle, when he writes himself ‘an
Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ’ seems to allow that he was to doom
himself to all the sufferings and calamities that the enemies of the
Christian cause could load him with and lay upon him, for his assuming
to himself such names of ‘an Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ.’ But
why should Paul, — that wise and prudent man, that learned man, that man
of so considerable reputation among his own countrymen — why should he
come to be written among the Apostles and servants of Jesus Christ? Why,
saith he, it is in hope of eternal life, which God, that cannot lie,
hath promised. (<span id="v.iii.i-p39.1"></span>[Titus
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#002)<span id="v.iii.i-p39.1"></span>.) I
avow myself an Apostle and servant of Jesus Christ upon this inducement,
and for this reason; and so I mean to continue unto the end. It is the
hope of eternal life which God, that cannot lie, hath promised to me. He
whose nature doth not allow him to deceive to whom it is impossible to
lie, I firmly and securely hope in him; and, therefore, I will readily
dispose myself to encounter all the difficulties and hardships which the
service of Jesus Christ can lay me open to.” — *Howe.*

<span id="fn_212"></span>[213](cc43020.htm#fr_212) <span
id="v.iii.i-p53.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p54"></span> See p. 21.

<span id="fn_213"></span>[214](cc43020.htm#fr_213) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p8"></span> “<span id="v.iii.ii-p8.1"></span>Mais que
les autres estoyent macons ou charpentiers.” — “But that the others were
masons and carpenters.”

<span id="fn_214"></span>[215](cc43020.htm#fr_214) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p11"></span> “Those who are guided by ambition would
wish to be thought clever people on the first day; they would wish to
enjoy such reputation as to have it thought that they discharged their
duty so faithfully that nothing more could be desired. On the contrary,
when we have labored during our whole life to edify the Church of God,
still we shall not succeed to the full extent. Let us therefore know
that we must not presume so far on our industry or our virtues, that he
who is endued with more abundant graces can suddenly have edified the
Church of God to perfection; but we must assist each other. He who is
farthest advanced must know that he cannot do everything, and must bend
his shoulders and ask assistance from those whom God has appointed, and
must be well pleased that others make progress, provided that all aim at
serving God and advancing the kingdom of our Lord Jesus Christ. If we
look well to ourselves, there will always be reason to grieve, because
we are very far from having performed our duty. And those who make
themselves believe this or that, and say, ‘Here is a church so well
reformed that nothing more is needed’ — are mistaken; for if they knew
what reformation is, they would beware of thinking that there was no
room for finding fault. Whatever pains we take in arranging matters, and
bringing them into order, there are indeed many things which, when once
begun, will follow in a regular train; but as to reaching perfection, we
are very far from it.”—*Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_215"></span>[216](cc43020.htm#fr_215) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p15"></span> “Κατὰ πόλιν, Not ‘in every city,’ but
‘in each city or town,’ (literally, ‘city by city,’) of all those which
had Christian congregations. Of such there might be several in this
‘hundred-citied isle;’ though the name πόλις was often given to towns;
and there is reason to think that not a few of the Cretan cities were no
better.” — *Bloomfield*

<span id="fn_216"></span>[217](cc43020.htm#fr_216) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="v.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>Prend
sur soy toute l’envie, voulant qu’on luy impute tout ce que The fera en
cest endroit.” — “Takes all the blame on himself, wishing that to him
may be imputed all that Titus shall do in this matter.”

<span id="fn_217"></span>[218](cc43020.htm#fr_217) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p22"></span> “It is true, that the servants of God
will never be without blame; as he even says, that they cannot avoid
walking amidst disgrace and reproach. It is true, that Paul lived so
virtuously that no fault could be found with him, and that too, before
he came to the faith of Jesus Christ; so that he lived without reproach,
and was a mirror and a jewel of holiness. Indeed he know not what he
did, for hitherto he had not been directed by the Spirit of God; but he
led a life so good that it was not liable to any reproach. And yet he
tells us that he was pointed at with the finger, was mocked at, was
reproached, was even accursed among believers, whose ingratitude was
such that in his absence he was reviled and loaded with many slanders.
So it is with the servants of God. But when Paul demands that they shall
be without crime, he means that we should inquire and ascertain if the
life of a man be pure and without blame, and if he continues to conduct
himself in that manner. Although we cannot shut the mouths of all
slanderers, that they shall not revile us, yet we must be without crime;
for it is said, that we shall be reviled as evil-doers, but we shall be
pure and innocent. And in what way? Before God we shall have this
testimony, that he approves of us, and that all the talk against us is a
lie.”—*Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_218"></span>[219](cc43020.htm#fr_218) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p24"></span> See p. 76.

<span id="fn_219"></span>[220](cc43020.htm#fr_219) <span
id="v.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p26"></span> See p. 87.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[221](cc43020.htm#fr_220) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p12"></span> “<span id="v.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>Un
gouverneur ou superintendaet.” — “A governor or superintendent.”

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc43020.htm#fr_221) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p13"></span> “Those whom he formerly called
presbyters he now calls bishops, (which means overseers or
superintendents,) and he gives this name to all whose duty it is to
preach the word of God. And so it was a corruption and abuse in Popery —
that is, in the ancient Church — that one individual was called bishop;
for that was to change the language of the Holy Spirit, and we ought to
speak in accordance with the Scripture. Now we see that Satan labors
incessantly to draw us aside from the simplicity of the word of God.” —
*Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc43020.htm#fr_222) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p21"></span> “<span
id="v.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>Selon instruction ou doctrine.”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc43020.htm#fr_223) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p10"></span> “<span id="v.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>Car il
y en a plusieurs qui ne se peuvent ranger.” — “For there are many of
them who cannot submit.”

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc43020.htm#fr_224) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p12"></span> “<span
id="v.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>Parlans vanitez.” — “Speaking vanities.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc43020.htm#fr_225) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p13"></span> “<span id="v.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>Vanite
de paroles.” — “Vanity of words.”

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc43020.htm#fr_226) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p17"></span> “If we mark such persons, and point them
out with the finger, everybody will avoid them, and thus they will be
prevented from doing harm This its what Paul had in his eye. Following
his example, when we see people who can do nothing but contrive measures
for disturbing and ruining the Church, and who are altogether addicted
to evil, it is true that, if we can bring them back in a gentle manner
to the right path, we should endeavor to do so. But if they persist, and
if we perceive that they are obstinate in their malice, we must not be
wiser than the Holy Spirit. They must be known, they must be exposed,
and their baseness must be held up to public view, that they may be
abhorred, and that others may withdraw from them, as we have formerly
seen in other passages. As for those who murmur when we make use of such
liberty, they shew plainly that they aim at nothing but confusion in the
Church. They do indeed make a show of having some regard to humanity.
‘And must we degrade people, and hold them up to scorn, as if we wished
to put them to shame?’ We answer, Must we leave the poor Church of God
in the power of wolves and robbers? Must all the flock be scattered, the
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ trampled under foot, and souls which he
has redeemed at so costly a price go to perdition, and all order be set
aside; and must we nevertheless be silent and shut our eyes?”—*Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc43020.htm#fr_227) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p23"></span> The Greek hexameter verse which Paul
quotes has been rendered into Latin hexameter by Calvin himself, and
into a French couplet by his translator; and it may be worth while to
set down the quotation in the three languages:

<span id="v.iii.iv-p24"></span>Greek. — Κρὢτες ἀεὶ ψεῦσται, κακὰ θηρία,
γαστέρες ἀργαί

<span id="v.iii.iv-p25"></span>Latin. — <span
id="v.iii.iv-p25.1"></span>Mendax, venter iners, semper male bestia Cres
est.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p26"></span>French. — “<span
id="v.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>I’ousjours menteuse, et tousiours male-beste,

<span id="v.iii.iv-p27"></span> <span id="v.iii.iv-p27.1"></span>Venice
sacs coeur, et fay-neant est Crete.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc43020.htm#fr_228) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p29"></span> “<span id="v.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>Qu’il
lise l’oraison que Basile en a faite, remonstrant aux jeunes gens
comment ils se doyvent aider des livres des autheurs profanes.” — “Let
him read Basil’s discourse on this subject, instructing young persons
how they ought to avail themselves of the assistance to be derived from
heathen authors.”

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc43020.htm#fr_229) <span
id="v.iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p12"></span> “The general character of the Cretans,
noticed in Paul’s Epistle to Titus, is confirmed by the testimony of
antiquity. The Apostle, writing to Titus, who had been left in Crete to
regulate the affairs of the Christian Church in that island, complains
of many disorderly men there, — ‘many unruly and vain talkers and
deceivers, who subvert whole houses, (or families,) teaching things
which they ought not, for filthy lucre’s sake, (<span
id="v.iii.v-p12.1"></span>[Titus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#011)<span id="v.iii.v-p12.1"></span>);
and he quotes the following verse from ‘one of themselves, a prophet of
their own,’ namely, Epimenides, who was a Cretan poet, and whose
writings were by the ancients termed χρησμοὶ or ‘oracles,’

<span id="v.iii.v-p13"></span>Κρὢτεσ ἀεὶ ψεῦσται, κακὰ θηρία, γαστέρες
ἀργαί.

<span id="v.iii.v-p14"></span>The general import of which passage is,
that ‘the Cretans were a false people, and united in their character the
ferocity of the wild beast with the luxury of the domesticated one.’ The
circumstance of Paul’s styling Epimenides ‘a prophet’ is sufficiently
explained by the fact of the words Poet and Prophet being often used
promiscuously by the Greeks and Romans, — probably because their poets
pretended to be inspired, and were by some believed to be so. The
Apostle adds, that the testimony of Epimenides is but too true, ‘this
witness is true.’ How true the first part of it is, with respect to
their deceit and lying, the following facts will attest. From the time
of Homer, the island of Crete was regarded as the scene of fiction. Many
authors affirm that, as a people, its inhabitants were infamous for
their violation of truth; and at length their falsehood became so
notorious, that Κρητίζειν to Cretise, or imitate the Cretans, was a
proverbial expression among the ancients for *lying.”* — *Horne’s
Introduction.*

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc43020.htm#fr_230) <span
id="v.iii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p15"></span> “<span id="v.iii.v-p15.1"></span>Combien
que l’autheur soit profane et de nulle authorite.” — “Although the
author is a heathen and of no authority.”

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc43020.htm#fr_231) <span
id="v.iii.v-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p17"></span> “<span id="v.iii.v-p17.1"></span>De vivre
en ce monde.”

<span id="fn_232"></span>[233](cc43020.htm#fr_232) <span
id="v.iii.v-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p19"></span> “<span id="v.iii.v-p19.1"></span>A un
mauvais noeud il faut un mauvais coin.”

<span id="fn_233"></span>[234](cc43020.htm#fr_233) <span
id="v.iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p21"></span> “We have to observe that here, in a
single word, Paul declares to us by what means men may defend
themselves. It is, by keeping the purity of faith. If, then, we do not
turn aside from the simple doctrine of the gospel, but wish to be
governed according to the will of God; if we are not carried away by our
volatile passions, and do not walk according to our groveling appetites;
in short, if we are good scholars of our God, and reckon it enough to
have received the doctrine which he teaches us; if that be the case, we
shall be fortified against all evil. It is true, the devil will seek to
poison the whole world with his venom, and will spread his filth
everywhere, so that the world will be full of so many corruptions that
every place shall be infected by them. But however that may be, we must
not turn aside from time simplicity of our faith, and must always seek
to be instructed simply by our God. When we follow this course, though
the devil may contrive all that he can, still we shall be fortified
against all evil.”—*Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_234"></span>[235](cc43020.htm#fr_234) <span
id="v.iii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p32"></span> “The Apostle joins ‘defiled’ and
‘unbelieving,’ to intimate that, without a true belief, nothing is
clean. The understanding and the conscience are polluted. Both the man
and his doings are impure.” — *Hervey.*

<span id="fn_235"></span>[236](cc43020.htm#fr_235) <span
id="v.iii.v-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p33"></span> “It is a dreadful condemnation pronounced
on men, when it is said that nothing is clean to them — that all is
polluted and defiled, till God has renewed them. So far are we from
being able to bring anything that is acceptable to him, that we can
neither eat nor drink, nor put on our clothes, nor walk a single step,
without corruption, and, what is more, by dwelling in the world we
infect all the creatures. And this is the reason why they must call for
vengeance at the last day against all unbelievers and reprobates. We
have, therefore, good reason to be dissatisfied with ourselves and to be
ashamed, when we see that they become hateful on our account and that we
are so polluted as to have infected every thing that God had
appropriated to our use, and even that there is nothing in us but all
corruption — nothing but a God cursed and disowned. When we are thus
humbled, let us know, on the other hand, the inestimable blessing which
God bestows on us, when he brings us back to himself, and, after having
cleansed us, causes us to use all his blessings and bounties: with
purity of heart and when we are assured that it is lawful for us to eat
and drink, provided that we do so with all sobriety, and in a reasonable
manner.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_236"></span>[237](cc43020.htm#fr_236) <span
id="v.iii.v-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p45"></span> “**1.** They are said to be βδελυκτοί*,
abominable*, or shamefully addicted to all manner of evil. The word in
the original, denotes the heinousness of those practices in which they
allow themselves; and is derived from a word that signifies to send
forth an offensive smell. For all sentiments of right and good are not
so totally lost and obliterated among mankind, but that there are some
things which even pagans would detest. **2.** They are said to be also
ἀπειθείς, *disobedient*, which expression imports perseverance and
obstinacy in an evil course. They will by no means — by no importunity —
by no arguments whatever, be dissuaded from practices so unjustifiable
and detestable in their own nature. They are resolved to run on,
whatever it costs them — to continue in sin, and in the profession of
religion at the same time, which is the greatest absurdity imaginable.
**3.** They are said, lastly, to be πρὸς πᾶν ἔργον ἀγαθὸν ἀδόκιμοι,
*reprobate to every good work*; which signifies a disinclination to
everything that is good, to everything that is worthy of praise. ‘The
word may be taken, as it is observed, either actively or passively, and
so may signify not only to be disappointed by others, but to disapprove
themselves; in which latter sense we must, at present, principally
understand the phrase. They disapprove all that which claims their
approbation and esteem; and are disaffected to all that good which the
religion they profess would oblige them to the practice of. The
expression, therefore, does not so much signify their omission of what
is good, as their disinclination to it; but it further denotes that, if
they do anything at all in religion, it is what they neither delight in,
nor can endure. ‘Every good work’ is an expression of such latitude,
that it may comprehend all the works of piety, mercy, and common
justice. And so it is fit we should understand it in this place.
Whatever they do of this kind, their hearts are averse to it, and they
bear a disaffected mind to it all. And such as here described, persons
may be found to be, notwithstanding their profession.” — *Howe.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc43021)
