[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43024)  [Next](cc43026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span>Philemon Verses 8-14

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>**8**. Wherefore, though I might be much bold
in Christ to enjoin thee that which is convenient,

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>**8**. Quapropter multam in Christo fiduciam
habens imperandi tibi quod decet.

<span id="vi.ii-p4"></span>**9**. Yet, for love’s sake, I rather beseech
*thee*, being such an one as Paul the aged, and now also a prisoner of
Jesus Christ.

<span id="vi.ii-p5"></span>**9**. Propter caritatem magis rogo, quum
talis sim, nempe Paulus senex; nunc vero etiam vinctus Iesu Christi.

<span id="vi.ii-p6"></span>**10**. I beseech thee for my son Onesimus,
whom I have begotten in my bonds:

<span id="vi.ii-p7"></span>**10**. Rogo autem to pro filio meo, quem
genui in vinculis meis, Onesimo,

<span id="vi.ii-p8"></span>**11**. Which in time past was to thee
unprofitable, but now profitable to thee and to me:

<span id="vi.ii-p9"></span>**11**. Qui aliquando tibi inutilis fuit,
nunc autem et mihi et tibi utilis.

<span id="vi.ii-p10"></span>**12**. Whom I have sent again: thou
therefore receive him, that is, mine own bowels:

<span id="vi.ii-p11"></span>**12**. Quem remisi; tu vero illum, hoc est,
mea viscera, suscipe.

<span id="vi.ii-p12"></span>**13**. Whom I would have retained with me,
that in thy stead he might have ministered unto me in the bonds of the
gospel:

<span id="vi.ii-p13"></span>**13**. Quem ego volebam apud me ipsum
retinere, ut pro to mihi ministraret in vinculis evangelii.

<span id="vi.ii-p14"></span>**14**. But without thy mind would I do
nothing; that thy benefit should not be as it were of necessity, but
willingly.

<span id="vi.ii-p15"></span>**14**. Sed absque tua sententia nihil volui
facere, ut non quasi secundum necessitatem esset bonum tuum, sed
voluntarium.

<span id="vi.ii-p16"></span><span id="vi.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p17"></span>**8.** *Wherefore, while I have great
confidence in Christ to command thee*. That is, “though I have authority
so that I might justly command thee, yet thy love makes me prefer to
entreat thee.”

<span id="vi.ii-p18"></span><span id="vi.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p19"></span>**9.** *Being such a one*. He claims the
right to command on two grounds, that he is *an elder*, and that he is
*a prisoner for Christ* He says that, on account of Philemon’s love, he
chooses rather to entreat, because we interpose authority in commanding
those things which we wish to extort by necessity even from the
unwilling, but there is no need of commanding those who willingly obey.
And because they who are ready of their own accord to do their duty
listen more willingly to a calm statement of what is necessary to be
done than to the exercise of authority, with good reason does Paul, when
he has to deal with an obedient man, use entreaty. By his example he
shows that pastors should endeavor to draw disciples gently rather than
to drag them by force; and indeed, when, by condescending to entreaty,
he foregoes his right, this has far greater power to obtain his wish
than if he issued a command. Besides, he claims nothing for himself, but
in Christ, that is, on account of the office which he has received from
him; for he does not mean that they whom Christ has appointed to be
apostles are destitute of authority.

<span id="vi.ii-p20"></span>*What is proper.* By adding this, he means
that teachers have not power to enact whatever they please, but that
their authority is confined within these limits, that they must not
command anything but “what is proper,” and, in other respects,
consistent with every man’s duty. Hence (as I said a little before)
pastors are reminded that the hearts of their people must be soothed
with all possible gentleness, wherever this method is likely to be more
advantageous, but yet so as to know that they who are treated so gently
have nothing less exacted from them than what they ought to do.

<span id="vi.ii-p21"></span>The designation “elder,” here, denotes not
age, but office. He calls himself an apostle for this reason, that the
person with whom he has to deal, and with whom he talks familiarly, is a
fellow-laborer in the ministry of the word.

<span id="vi.ii-p22"></span><span id="vi.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p23"></span>**10.** *I beseech thee for my son*. Since
less weight is commonly attached to those prayers which are not founded
in some cause of just commendation, Paul shows that Onesimus is so
closely related to him as to afford a good reason for supplicating in
his behalf. Here it is of importance to consider how deep is his
condescension, when he gives the name of “son” to a slave, and a
runaway, and a thief.

<span id="vi.ii-p24"></span>When he says that Onesimus has been
*begotten by him* this must be understood to mean, that it was done by
his ministry, and not by his power. To renew a soul of man and form it
anew to the image of God — is not a human work, and it is of this
spiritual regeneration that he now speaks. Yet because the soul is
regenerated by faith, and “faith is by hearing,” (<span
id="vi.ii-p24.1"></span>[Ro 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017)<span
id="vi.ii-p24.1"></span>,) on that, account he who administers the
doctrine holds the place of a parent. Moreover, because the word of God
preached by man is the seed of eternal life, we need not wonder that he
from whose mouth we receive that seed is called a father. Yet, at the
same time, we must believe that, while the ministry of a man is
efficacious in regenerating the soul, yet, strictly speaking, God
himself regenerates by the power of his Spirit. These modes of
expression, therefore, do not imply any opposition between God and man,
but only show what God does by means of men. When he says that he had
*begotten him in his bonds,* this circumstance adds weight to the
commendation.

<span id="vi.ii-p25"></span><span id="vi.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p26"></span>**12.** *Receive him, that is, my bowels*.
Nothing could have been more powerful for assuaging the wrath of
Philemon; for if he had refused to forgive his slave, he would thus have
used cruelty against “the bowels” of Paul. This is remarkable kindness
displayed by Paul, that he did not hesitate to receive, as it were into
his bowels, a contemptible slave, and thief, and runaway, so as to
defend him from the indignation of his master. And, indeed, if the
conversion of a man to God were estimated by us, at its proper value, we
too would embrace, in the same manner, those who should give evidence
that they had truly and sincerely repented.

<span id="vi.ii-p27"></span><span id="vi.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p28"></span>**13.** *Whom I was desirous to keep beside
me*. This is another argument for the purpose of appeasing Philemon,
that Paul sends him back a slave, of whose services, in other respects,
he stood greatly in need. It would have been extreme cruelty, to disdain
so strong affection manifested by Paul. He likewise states indirectly,
that it will be a gratification to himself to have Onesimus sent back to
him rather than that he should be harshly treated at home.

<span id="vi.ii-p29"></span>*That he might minister to me instead of
thee in the bonds of the gospel.* He now mentions other circumstances:
first, Onesimus will supply the place of his master, by performing this
service; secondly, Paul himself, through modesty, was unwilling to
deprive Philemon of his right; and, thirdly, Philemon will receive more
applause, if, after having had his slave restored to him, he shall
willingly and generously send him back. From this last consideration we
infer, that we ought to aid the martyrs of Christ by every kind office
in our power, while they are laboring for the testimony of the gospel;
for if exile, imprisonment stripes, blows, and violent seizing of our
property, are believed by us to belong to the gospel, as Paul here calls
them, whoever refuses to share and partake of them separates himself
even from Christ. Undoubtedly the defense of the gospel belongs alike to
all. Accordingly, he who endures persecution, for the sake of the
gospel, ought not to be regarded as a private individual, but as one who
publicly represents the whole Church. Hence it follows, that all
believers ought to be united in taking care of it, so that they may not,
as is frequently done, leave the gospel to be defended in the person of
one man.

<span id="vi.ii-p30"></span><span id="vi.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p31"></span>**14.** *That thy benefit might not be by
constraint*. This is drawn from the general rule, that no sacrifices are
acceptable to God but those which are freely offered. Paul speaks of
almsgiving in the same manner. (<span id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>[2Co
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#007)<span id="vi.ii-p31.1"></span>.) Τό
ἀγαθον is here put for “acts of kindness,” and willingness is contrasted
with constraint, when there is no other opportunity of putting to the
test a generous and cheerful act of the will; for that duty which is
generously performed, and not through influence exercised by others, is
alone entitled to full praise. It is also worthy of observation, that
Paul, while he acknowledges that Onesimus was to blame in past time,
affirms that he is changed; and lest Philemon should have any doubt that
his slave returns to him with a new disposition and different conduct,
Paul says that he has made full trial of his repentance by personal
knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon 15-19](cc43026)
