[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43008)  [Next](cc43010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 5

<span id="iii.vii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#001)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Rebuke not an elder, but intreat
*him* as a father; *and* the younger men as brethren;

<span id="iii.vii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Seniorem ne aspere objurges sed
hortare ut patrem, juniores ut fratres;

<span id="iii.vii.i-p4"></span>**2**. The elder women as mothers; the
younger as sisters, with all purity.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Mulieres natu grandiores, ut
matres; juniores, ut sorores, cum omni castitate.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p6"></span>**3**. Honour widows that are widows
indeed.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Viduas honora, quae vere sunt
viduae.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p8"></span>**4**. But if any widow have children or
nephews, let them learn first to shew piety at home, and to requite
their parents: for that is good and acceptable before God.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Porro si qua vidua liberos aut
nepotes habet, discunt primum erga propriam domum pietatem colere, et
mutuum rependere progenitoribus; hoc enim bonum et acceptum est coram
Deo.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p10"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p11"></span>**1** *Do not harshly rebuke an elder*
He now recommends to Timothy gentleness and moderation in correcting
faults. Correction is a medicine, which has always some bitterness, and
consequently is disagreeable. Besides, Timothy being a young man, his
severity would have been less tolerable, if it had not been somewhat
moderated.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p12"></span>*But exhort him as a father* The Apostle
enjoins him to reprove elder persons as parents; and he even employs the
milder term, *exhort* It is impossible not to be moved with reverence,
when we place before our eyes our father or our mother; in consequence
of which, instead of harsher vehemence, we are immediately influenced by
modesty. Yet it ought to be observed, that he does not wish old men to
be spared or indulged in such a manner as to sin with impunity and
without correction; he only wishes that some respect should be paid to
their age, that they may more patiently bear to be admonished.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p13"></span>*The younger as brethren* Even towards
younger persons he wishes moderation to be used, though not in an equal
degree; for the vinegar must always be mingled with oil, but with this
difference, that reverence should always be shewn to older persons, and
equals should be treated with brotherly gentleness. Hence pastors are
taught, that they must not only take into account their office, but must
also see particularly what is due to the age of individuals; for the
same things are not applicable to all. Let it therefore be remembered,
that, if dramatic performers attend to decorum on the stage, it ought
not to be neglected by pastors, who occupy so lofty a station.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p14"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p15"></span>**2** *The younger as sisters, with all
chastity* The phrase, with all chastity, relates to younger women; for
at that age they ought always to dread every kind of suspicion. Yet Paul
does not forbid Timothy to have any criminal or immodest conduct towards
young women, (for there was no need of such a prohibition,) but only
enjoins him to beware of giving to wicked men any handle for laughter.
For this purpose, he demands a chaste gravity, which shall shine
throughout all their intercourse and conversation; so that he may more
freely converse with young persons, without any unfavorable reports.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p16"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p17"></span>**3** *Honor widows that are really
widows. By* the word *honor* he does not mean any expression of respect,
but that special care of them which bishops  <span
id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84) took in the ancient Church; for widows
were taken under the protection of the Church, that they might be
supported out of the common funds. The meaning of this mode of
expression is as if he had said, “For selecting widows that are to be
taken under your care and that of the deacons, you ought to consider who
they are *that are really widows*  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85)
What was their condition we shall afterwards explain more fully. But we
must here attend to the reason why Paul does not admit any but those who
are absolutely widows, and, at the same time, widows without children;
for, in that condition, they dedicated themselves to the Church, that
they might withdraw from all the private concerns of a family, and might
lay aside every hindrance. Justly, therefore, does Paul forbid to
receive the mothers of families, who are already bound by a charge of a
different kind. When he calls them “really widows”, he alludes to the
Greek word χήρα, which is derived ἀπὸ τοῦ χηροῦσθαι, from a verb which
signifies to be “deprived” or “destitute.”

<span id="iii.vii.i-p20"></span><span id="iii.vii.i-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p21"></span>**4** *If any widow* There are various
ways of explaining this passage; and the ambiguity arises from this
circumstance, that the latter clause may refer either to widows or to
their children. Nor is this consistent with the verb (*let them learn)*
being plural, while Paul spoke of a *widow* in the singular number; for
a change of number is very customary in a general discourse, that is,
when the writer speaks of a whole class, and not of an individual. They
who think that it relates to widows, are of the opinion that the meaning
is, “let them learn, by the pious government of their family, to repay
to their successors the education that they received from their
ancestors.” This is the explanation given by Chrysostom and some others.
But others think that it is more natural to interpret it as relating to
children and grandchildren. Accordingly, in their opinion, the Apostle
teaches that the mother or grandmother is the person towards whom they
should exercise their piety; for nothing is more natural than
(ἀντιπελαργία) the return of filial for parental affection; and it is
very unreasonable that it should be excluded from the Church. Before the
Church is burdened with them, let them do their duty.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p22"></span>Hereto I have related the opinion of
others. But I wish my readers to consider if it would not agree better
with the context in this manner: “Let them learn to conduct themselves
in a godly manner at home.” As if he had said, that it would be valuable
as a preparatory instruction, that they should train themselves to the
worship of God, by performing godly offices at home towards their
relatives; for nature commands us to love our parents next to God; that
this secondary piety leads to the highest piety. And as Paul saw that
the very rights of nature were violated under the pretense of religion,
 <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) in order to correct this fault, he
commanded that widows should be trained by domestic apprenticeship to
the worship of God.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p24"></span>*To shew piety towards their own house*
Almost all the commentators take the verb εὐσεβεῖν in an active sense,
because it is followed by an accusative; but that is not a conclusive
argument, for it is customary with the Greek authors to have a
preposition understood. And this exposition agrees well with the
context, that, by cultivating human piety, they should train themselves
in the worship of God; lest a foolish and silly devotion should divest
them of human feelings. Again, let widows learn to repay what they owe
to their ancestors by educating their own offspring.

<span id="iii.vii.i-p25"></span>*For this is good and acceptable before
God* Not to shew gratitude to our ancestors is universally acknowledged
to be monstrous; for that is a lesson taught us by natural reason. And
not only is this conviction natural to all, that affection towards our
parents is the second degree of piety; but the very storks teach us
gratitude by their example; and that is the etymology of the word
ἀνιπελαργία  <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) But Paul, not
satisfied with this, declares that God hath sanctioned it; as if he had
said, “There is no reason why any one should think that it has its
origin in the opinion of men; but God hath so ordained.”

<span id="iii.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 5:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p2"></span>**5**. Now she that is a widow indeed,
and desolate, trusteth in God, and continueth in supplications and
prayers night and day.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p3"></span>**5**. Porro quae vere vidua est ac
desolata, sperat in Deo, et perseverat in orationibus et obsecrationibus
noctu et die.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p4"></span>**6**. But she that liveth in pleasure
is dead while she liveth.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p5"></span>**6**. Quae autem in deliciis versatur,
vivens mortua est.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p6"></span>**7**. And these things give in charge,
that they may be blameless.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p7"></span>**7**. Et haec praecipe, ut
irreprehensibiles sint.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p8"></span>**8**. But if any provide not for his
own, and specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith,
and is worse than an infidel.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p9"></span>**8**. Quod si quis suis et maxime
familiaribus non providet, fidem abnegavit, et est infideli deterior.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p10"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p11"></span>**5** *She who is really a widow* He
expresses his meaning more clearly than before; for he shews that they
are really widows who are solitary and have no children. He says that
such persons *hope in God* Not that this is done by all, or by them
alone; for we may see many widows that are childless, and that have no
relatives whatever, who nevertheless are haughty and insolent, and
altogether ungodly both in heart and in life. On the other hand, then,
are those who have many children, and who are not prevented from having
their hope placed in God; such as Job and Jacob and David. But for this,
(πολυτεκνία) a multitude of children would be a curse, whereas Scripture
always reckons it among the remarkable blessings of God. But Paul says
here that widows “hope in God,” in the same manner as he elsewhere
writes, that the unmarried study only to please God, because their
affections are not divided like those of married persons. (<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>[1Co
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p11.1"></span>.) The meaning therefore is, that they have
nothing to disturb their thoughts, from looking to God alone; because
they find nothing in the world on which they can rely. By this argument
he commends them; for, when human aid and every refuge fails them, it is
the duty of the Church to stretch forth her hand to render assistance;
and thus the condition of the widow, who is childless and desolate,
implores the aid of the pastor.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p12"></span>*Continueth in prayers*. This is the
second ground of commendation, that they continually devote themselves
to prayer. Hence it follows, that they ought to be relieved and
supported at the expense of the Church. At the same time, by these two
marks he distinguishes between the worthy and the unworthy; for these
words are of the same import as if he enjoined that they only shall be
received who look for no aid from men, but rely on God alone, and,
laying aside other cares and employments, are earnestly devoted to
prayer; and that others are ill qualified and of no advantage to the
Church. Again, this constancy in prayer demands freedom from other
cares; for they who are occupied with the government of a family have
less freedom and leisure. We are all, indeed, commanded to pray
continually; but it ought to be considered what is demanded by every
person’s condition, when, in order to pray, retirement and exemption
from all other cares are demanded.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p13"></span>What Paul praises in widows, Luke
(<span id="iii.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>[Lu
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#036)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p13.1"></span>) asserts as to Anna, the daughter of
Phanuel; but the same thing would not apply to all, on account of the
diversity in their manner of life. There will be foolish women — apes,
and not imitators, of Anna — who will run from altar to altar, and will
do nothing but sigh and mutter till noon. On this presence, they will
rid themselves of all domestic affairs; and, having returned home, if
they do not find everything arranged to their wish, they will disturb
the whole family by outrageous cries, and will sometimes proceed to
blows. Let us therefore remember that there are good reasons why it is
the peculiar privilege of those who are widows and childless, to have
leisure for praying by night and by day; because they are free from
lawful hindrances, which would not permit those who govern a family to
do the same.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p14"></span>And yet this passage lends no
countenance to monks or nuns, who sell their mutterings or their loud
noises for the sake of leading an easy and idle life. Such were
anciently the Euchites or Psallians; for monks and Popish priests differ
in no respect, except that the former, by continually praying, thought
that none but themselves were pious and holy, while the latter, with
inferior industry, imagined that they sanctify both themselves and
others. Paul had no thought of anything of this sort, but only intended
to shew how much more freely they may have leisure for prayer who have
nothing else to disturb them.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p15"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p16"></span>**6***. She who is in luxury*. After
having described the marks by which real widows may be known, he now
contrasts them with others that ought not to be received. The Greek
participle which he employs, σπαταλῶσα, means one who allows herself
every indulgence, and leads an easy and luxurious life. Accordingly,
Paul (in my opinion) censures those who abuse their widowhood for this
purpose, that, being loosed from the marriage yoke, and freed from every
annoyance, they may lead a life of pleasant idleness; for we see many
who seek their own freedom and convenience, and give themselves up to
excessive mirth.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p17"></span>*Is dead while she liveth* When Paul
says that such persons “are dead while they live,” this is supposed by
some to mean that they are unbelievers; an opinion with which I do not
at all agree. I think it more natural to say that a woman “is dead,”
when she is useless, and does no good; for to what purpose do we live,
if it be not that our actions may yield some advantage? And what if we
should say that the emphasis lies in the word liveth? For they who covet
an indolent life, that they may live more at their ease, have constantly
in their mouth the proverbial saying: —

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p18"></span>*“For life is not to live, but to be
well.”*  <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p20"></span>The meaning would therefore be: “If
they reckon themselves happy, when they have everything to their heart’s
wish, and if they think that nothing but repose and luxury can be called
life, for my part, I declare that they are dead.” But as this meaning
might seem liable to the charge of excessive ingenuity, I wished merely
to give a passing glimpse of it, without making any positive assertion.
This at least is certain, that Paul here condemns indolence, when he
calls those women dead who are of no use.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p21"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p22"></span>**7** *And command these things* He
means, that not only does he prescribe to Timothy the course which he
ought to follow, but the women also must be carefully taught not to be
stained with such vices. It is the duty of the pastor not only to oppose
the wicked practices or ambition of those who act an unreasonable part,
but to guard against every danger, as far as lies in his power, by
instruction and constant warnings.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p23"></span>*That they may be blameless.* It was
the natural result of prudence and steadfastness not to admit widows,
unless they were worthy; but yet it was proper to assign a reason why
they were not admitted; and it was even necessary to forewarn the Church
that unworthy persons should not be brought forward, or should not offer
themselves. Again, Paul commends this part of instruction on the ground
of utility; as if he had said, that it must by no means be despised,
because it is common, since it aims at the chief part of a good and
perfect life. Now there is nothing that ought to be more diligently
learned in God’s school than the study of a holy and upright life. In a
word, moral instruction is compared with ingenious speculations, which
are of no visible advantage, agreeably to that saying,

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p24"></span>“All Scripture is profitable, that the
man of God may become perfect,” etc. (<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>[2Ti
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#016)<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p24.1"></span>.)

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p25"></span><span id="iii.vii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p26"></span>**8** *And if any person do not provide
for his own* Erasmus has translated it, “If any woman do not provide for
her own,” making it apply exclusively to females. But I prefer to view
it as a general statement; for it is customary with Paul, even when he
is treating of some particular subject, to deduce arguments from general
principles, and, on the other hand, to draw from particular statements a
universal doctrine. And certainly it will have greater weight, if it
apply both to men and to women.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p27"></span>*He hath denied the faith*  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89) He says that they who do not care about
any of their relatives, and especially about their own house, have
“denied the faith.” And justly; for there is no piety towards God, when
a person can thus lay aside the feelings of humanity. Would faith, which
makes us the sons of God, render us worse than brute beasts? Such
inhumanity, therefore, is open contempt of God, and denying of the
faith.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p29"></span>Not content with this, Paul heightens
the criminality of their conduct, by saying, that he who forgets his own
*is worse than an infidel* This is true for two reasons. First, the
further advanced any one is in the knowledge of God, the less is he
excused; and therefore, they who shut their eyes against the clear light
of God are worse than infidels. Secondly, this is a kind of duty which
nature itself teaches; for they are (στοργαὶ φυσικαί) natural
affections. And if, by the mere guidance of nature, infidels are so
prone to love their own, what must we think of those who are not moved
by any such feeling? Do they not go even beyond the ungodly in
brutality? If it be objected, that, among unbelievers, there are also
many parents that are cruel and savage; the explanation is easy, that
Paul is not speaking of any parents but those who, by the guidance and
instruction of nature, take care of their own offspring; for, if any one
have degenerated from that which is so perfectly natural, he ought to be
regarded as a monster.

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p30"></span>It is asked, Why does the Apostle
prefer the members of the household to the children? I answer, when he
speaks of *his own and especially those of his household,* by both
expressions he denotes the children and grandchildren. For, although
children may have been transferred, or may have passed into a different
family by marriage, or in any way may have left the house of the
parents; yet the right of nature is not altogether extinguished, so as
to destroy the obligation of the older to govern the younger as
committed to them by God, or at least to take care of them as far as
they can. Towards domestics, the obligation is more strict; for they
ought to take care of them for two reasons, both because they are their
own blood, and because they are a part of the family which they govern.

<span id="iii.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 5:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009)<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p2"></span>**9**. Let not a widow be taken into
the number under threescore years old, having been the wife of one man,

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p3"></span>**9**. Vidua deligatur non minor annis
sexaginta, quae fuerit inius viri uxor.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p4"></span>**10**. Well reported of for good
works; if she have brought up children, if she have lodged strangers, if
she have washed the saints’ feet, if she have relieved the afflicted, if
she have diligently followed every good work.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p5"></span>**10**. In operibus bonis habens
testimonium, si liberos educavit, si fuit hospitalis, si sanctorum pedes
lavit, si afflictis subministravit, si in omni bono opere fuit assidua.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p6"></span>**11**. But the younger widows refuse:
for when they have begun to wax wanton against Christ, they will marry;

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p7"></span>**11**. Porro juniores viduas rejice;
quum enim lascivire coeperint adversus Christum, nubere volunt;

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p8"></span>**12**. Having damnation, because they
have cast off their first faith.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p9"></span>**12**. Habentes condemnationem, quod
primam fidem rejecerint.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p10"></span>**13**. And withal they learn *to be*
idle, wandering about from house to house; and not only idle, but
tattlers also and busybodies, speaking things which they ought not.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p11"></span>**13**. Simul autem et otiosae discunt
circuire domos; nec solum otiosae, verum etiam garrulae et curiosae,
loquentes quae non oportet.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p12"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p13"></span>**9** *Let a widow be chosen.* He
again points out what kind of widows should be taken under the care of
the Church;  <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90) and more clearly than
he had formerly done.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p15"></span>*Not under sixty years of age* First,
he describes the age, *sixty years;* for, being supported at the public
expense, it was proper that they should have already reached old age.
Besides, there was another and stronger reason; for they consecrated
themselves to the ministry of the Church, which would have been
altogether intolerable, if there were still a likelihood of their being
married. They were received on the condition that the Church should
relieve their poverty, and that, on their part, they should be employed
in ministering to the poor, as far as the state of their health allowed.
Thus there was a mutual obligation between them and the Church. It was
unreasonable that those who were under that age, and who were still in
the vigor of life, should be a burden to others. Besides, there was
reason to fear that they would change their mind and think of being
married again. These are two reasons why he does not wish any to be
admitted “under sixty years of age.”

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p16"></span>*Who hath been the wife of one man* As
to the desire of marrying, that danger had been sufficiently guarded
against, when a woman was more than sixty years old; especially if,
during her whole life, she had not been married to more than one
husband. It may be regarded as a sort of pledge of continence and
chastity, when a woman has arrived at that age, satisfied with having
had but one husband. Not that he disapproves of a second marriage, or
affixes a mark of ignominy to those who have been twice married; (for,
on the contrary, he advises younger widows to marry;) but because he
wished carefully to guard against laying any females under a necessity
of remaining unmarried, who felt it to be necessary to have husbands. On
this subject we shall afterwards speak more fully.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p17"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p18"></span>**10** *For good works* Those
qualifications which are next enumerated relate partly to honor, and
partly to labor. There can be no doubt that the assemblies of widows
were honorable, and highly respectable; and, therefore, Paul does not
wish that any should be admitted into them, but those who had excellent
attestations of the whole of their past life. Besides, they were not
appointed in order to lazy and indolent inactivity, but to minister to
the poor and the sick, until, being completely worn out, they should be
allowed honorably to retire. Accordingly, that they may be better
prepared for the discharge of their office, he wishes them to have had
long practice and experience in all the duties which belong to it; such
as — labor and diligence in bringing up children, hospitality,
ministering to the poor, and other charitable works.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p19"></span>If it be now asked, Shall all that are
barren be rejected, because they have never borne any children? We must
reply, that Paul does not here condemn barrenness, but the daintiness of
mothers, who, by refusing to endure the weariness of bringing up their
children, sufficiently shew that they will be very unkind to strangers.
And at the same time he holds out this as an honorable reward to godly
matrons, who have not spared themselves, that they, in their turn, shall
be received into the bosom of the Church in their old age.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p20"></span>By a figure of speech, in which a part
is taken for the whole, he means by *the washing of the feet* all the
services which are commonly rendered to the saints; for at that time it
was customary to “wash the feet.”  <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)
An employment of this nature might have the appearance of being mean and
almost servile; and therefore he makes use of this mark for describing
females who were industrious, and far from being fastidious or dainty.
What next follows relates to liberality; and, lastly, he expresses the
same thing in general terms, when he says, *if she hath been diligent in
every good work;* for here he speaks of acts of kindness.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p22"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p23"></span>**11** *Refuse younger widows* He does
not enjoin that they be excommunicated from the Church, or have any mark
of disgrace put upon them; but he only asserts that they must not be
rewarded by obtaining that honor which he has already mentioned. And if
the Spirit of God, by the mouth of Paul, declares that no woman under
sixty years of age deserves to be admitted into that order, because at
that age the unmarried state was dangerous; what effrontery was it,
afterwards, to lay down a law of celibacy for young women in all the
warmth of youthful years? Paul, I say, does not allow of abstaining from
marriage till they are in extreme old age, and altogether beyond the
danger of incontinence. They afterwards came to forty years as the age
for putting the veil on virgins, and next to thirty; and at length they
began to put the veil — indiscriminately, and without exception — on
females of any age. They allege, that continence is much easier for
virgins, who have never had a husband, than it is for widows. But they
will never succeed in proving, that there is no reason to dread that
danger against which Paul guards and commands others to guard.
Accordingly, it is rash, and even cruel, to lay a snare for those who
still are young girls, and who would have been fitter for the married
state.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p24"></span>*For when they have begun to be wanton
against Christ* He says that they are “wanton against Christ,” who,
forgetting the condition to which they were called, indulge in
unbecoming mirth; for they ought to have kept themselves under the yoke
of modesty, as becomes grave and respectable females. Accordingly, a
more luxurious and abandoned course of life is a sort of wantonness
against Christ, to whom they had pledged their fidelity. As Paul had
seen many instances of this kind, he meets it by a general remedy, that
none should be admitted who were of an age that could ever induce them
to desire to be married.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p25"></span>How many monsters of crimes are
produced every day in Popery by that compulsory celibacy of nuns! What
barriers does it not deliberately break through! And therefore, although
this course had at first appeared to be commendable, yet, taught by
experiments so many and so terrible, they ought to have somewhat
complied with in the counsel of Paul. But they are so far from doing
this, that they provoke the wrath of God more and more, from day to day,
by their obstinacy. Nor do I speak of nuns only, but priests and monks
are also compelled by them to observe perpetual celibacy. Yet
disgraceful lusts rage amongst them, so that hardly one in ten lives
chastely; and in monasteries, the least of the evils is ordinary
fornication. If they would incline their heart to hear God speaking by
the mouth of Paul, they would instantly have recourse to this remedy
which he prescribes; but so great is their pride, that they furiously
persecute all who remind them of it.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p26"></span>Some read the words thus: — “When they
become wanton, they will marry in opposition to Christ.” Although this
makes little difference as to Paul’s meaning, the former view is
preferable.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p27"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p28"></span>**12** *Having condemnation, because
they have renounced their first faith. “*To have condemnation,” is
interpreted by some as signifying “to deserve reproof.” But I take it to
be a statement of greater severity, that Paul terrifies them by the
damnation of eternal death; as if he reproved them by saying that that
excellent order, which ought rather to have united them to Christ, was
the very ground of their condemnation. And the reason is added, that
they entirely “revolt from the faith” of baptism and from Christianity.
I am aware that there are some who interpret it differently; that is,
that they break the pledge which they gave to the Church by marrying,
having formerly promised that they would live unmarried till death. This
is exceedingly absurd. Besides, why should he call it *their first
faith?*

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p29"></span>Accordingly, Paul rises to greater
vehemence against them, and magnifies the enormity of the offense, by
saying that not only would they bring disgrace on Christ and his Church
by departing from the condition to which they had agreed, but they
likewise broke their “first faith” by wicked revolt. Thus it usually
happens, that he who has once transgressed the bounds of modesty gives
himself up to all impudence. It grieved him that the levity of those
women was a reproach to the godly, and that their lustfulness was
reproved, or, at least, was liable to reproof. This led them to proceed
to greater and greater degrees of licentiousness, till they renounced
Christianity. That amplification is exceedingly appropriate; for is
there anything more absurd than that they should, through a wish to
promote the advantage of persons, open the door to the denial of Christ?

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p30"></span>The attempt of the Papists to support,
by means of this passage, a vow of perpetual celibacy, is absurd.
Granting that it was customary to exact from the widows an engagement in
express terms, still they would gain nothing by this admission. First,
we must consider the end. The reason why widows formerly promised to
remain unmarried, was not that they might lead a holier life than in a
state of marriage, but because they could not, at the same time, be
devoted to husbands and to the Church; but in Popery, they make a vow of
continence, as if it were a virtue acceptable to God on its own account.
Secondly, in that age they renounced the liberty of marrying at the time
when they ceased to be marriageable; for they must have been, at least,
sixty years old, and, by being satisfied with being once married, must
have already given a proof of their chastity. But now, vows are made
among the Papists to renounce marriage, either before the time, or in
the midst of time ardor of youthful years.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p31"></span>Now we disapprove of the tyrannical
law about celibacy, chiefly for two reasons. First, they pretend that it
is meritorious worship before God; and secondly, by rashness in vowing,
they plunge souls into destruction. Neither of these was to be found in
the ancient institution. They did not make a direct vow of continence,
as if the married life were less acceptable to God, but only, so far as
it was rendered necessary by the office to which they were elected, they
promised to keep from the tie of marriage for their whole life; nor did
they deprive themselves of the liberty of marrying, till the time when,
though they had been ever so free, it was foolish and unreasonable for
them to marry. In short, those widows differed as much from the nuns, as
Anna the prophetess from Claude the Vestal.  <span
id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p33"></span><span id="iii.vii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p34"></span>**13** *And not only so, but they grow
idle* Nothing is more becoming in women than keeping the house; and
hence, among the ancients, a tortoise  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) was the image of a good and respectable
mother of a family. But there are many who are diseased with the
opposite vice. Nothing delights them more than the liberty of running
from one place to another, and especially when, being freed from the
burden of a family, they have nothing to do at home.

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p36"></span>*Tattlers and busybodies* Besides,
those widows, under the pretense of the respect due to the public
character which they sustained, had more easy access to many persons.
This opportunity, obtained through the kindness of the Church, they
abused for purposes of “idleness;” and next, as usually happens, from
slothfulness sprung curiosity, which is also the mother of
talkativeness. Most true is the saying of Horace: “Shun an inquisitive
person, for he is always a tattler.”  <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94) “No trust should be placed,” as Plutarch
says, “in inquisitive persons, for, as soon as they have heard anything,
they are never at rest till they have blabbed it out.” This is
especially the case with women, who, by nature, are prone to
talkativeness, and cannot keep a secret. With good reason, therefore,
has Paul joined together these three things, sloth, inquisitiveness, and
tattling.

<span id="iii.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 5:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#014)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p2"></span>**14**. I will therefore that the
younger women marry, bear children, guide the house, give none occasion
to the adversary to speak reproachfully.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p3"></span>**14**. Volo igitur juniores nubere,
liberos gignere, domum administrare, nullam occasionem dare adversario,
ut habeat maledicendi causam.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p4"></span>**15**. For some are already turned
aside after Satan.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p5"></span>**15**. Nonnullae enim jam deflexerunt
post Satanam.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p6"></span>**16**. If any man or woman that
believeth have widows, let them relieve them, and let not the church be
charged; that it may relieve them that are widows indeed.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p7"></span>**16**. Quodsi quis fidelis, aut si qua
fidelis habet viduas, suppeditet illis, et non oneretur Ecclesia, ut
iis, quae vere viduae sunt, suppetat.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p8"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p9"></span>**14** *I wish the younger* (widows) *to
marry*. Censorious men laugh at this injunction of the Apostle. “As if,”
say they, “it had been necessary to stimulate their excessively strong
desire; for who does not know that almost all widows have naturally a
wish to be married?” Superstitious men, on the other hand, would reckon
that this doctrine concerning marriage is highly unsuitable to an
Apostle of Christ. But, after a careful examination of the whole matter,
men of sound judgment will acknowledge that Paul teaches nothing here
but what is necessary and highly useful. For, on the one hand, there are
many to whom widowhood gives the opportunity of greater licentiousness;
and, on the other hand, there are always arising spirits speaking lies
in hypocrisy, who make holiness to consist in celibacy, as if it were
angelical perfection, and either totally condemn marriage, or despise it
as if it savored of the pollution of the flesh. There are few either of
men or women that consider their calling. How rarely do you find a man
who willingly bears the burden of governing a wife! The reason is, that
it is attended by innumerable vexations. How reluctantly does a woman
submit to the yoke!

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p10"></span>Consequently, when Paul bids the
younger widows marry, he does not invite them to nuptial delights; and,
when he bids them bear children, he does not exhort them to indulge
lust; but, taking into account the weakness of the sex, and the
slipperiness of the age, he exhorts them to chaste marriage, and, at the
same time, to the endurance of those burdens which belong to holy
marriage. And he does this, especially, in order that he may not be
thought to have acted contemptuously in excluding them from the rank of
widows; for he means, that their life will be not less acceptable to God
than if they remained in widowhood. And, indeed, God pays no regard to
the superstitious opinions of men, but values this obedience more highly
than all things else, when we comply with our calling, instead of
permitting ourselves to be carried along by the wish of our own heart.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p11"></span>Having heard that consolation, they
have no reason to complain that injury is done to them, or to take it in
that they are excluded from one kind of honor; for they learn that, in
the married state, they are not less acceptable to God, because they
obey his calling. When he speaks of *bearing children,* he includes,
under a single word, all the annoyances that must be endured in bringing
up children; in the same manner as, under *the government of the house,*
he includes all that belongs to household management.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p12"></span>*To give no occasion to the adversary*
For, as the husband may be said to be the covering of the wife, so
widowhood is liable to many unfavorable suspicions. And what purpose
does it serve, to arm the enemies of the gospel with calumnies, without
any necessity? But it is very difficult for a widow, in the flower of
her age, to act with such caution that wicked men shall not find some
pretext for slandering her; and, therefore, if they sincerely desire
edification, let them, in order to shut the mouth of evil speakers,
choose a way of life that is less liable to suspicion. Here, I suppose,
the common *adversaries* of the gospel to be meant, rather than the
private adversaries of any woman; for Paul speaks indefinitely.  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p14"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p15"></span>**15** *For some have already turned
aside* It is certain, that there is no ordinance so holy that some evil
may not arise out of it through the wickedness of men. Yet those things
which are necessary ought to remain unmoved, whatever may happen to
them, although the sky should fall. But when we are at liberty to choose
either way, and when this or that has been found by experience to be
advantageous, it is a matter of prudence to lay aside what was formerly
approved, as in the present case. It was not at all necessary that
women, who were still young, should be admitted into the rank of widows;
experience shewed that it was dangerous and hurtful; and, therefore,
Paul justly advises to take care for the future that nothing of this
kind may happen.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p16"></span>If the revolt of some women was
regarded by him as a sufficiently strong argument for seeking a
universal remedy, how many arguments would the Papists have for
abolishing their filthy celibacy, if they had any regard to edification!
But they choose rather to strangle millions of souls by the cruel cords
of a wicked and diabolical law than to loose a single knot; and this
makes it evident how widely their cruelty differs from the holy zeal of
Paul.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p17"></span>*After Satan* The expression is worthy
of notice; because no one can turn aside from Christ, in the smallest
degree, without following Satan; for he has dominion over all who do not
belong to Christ. We learn from this how destructive is turning aside
from the right course, since, from being children of God, it makes us
slaves of Satan, and, by withdrawing us from the government of Christ,
places Satan over us as our guide.  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p19"></span><span id="iii.vii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p20"></span>**16** *If any believer*. It being
customary for every one willingly to throw his own burdens on the whole
Church, on this account he expressly enjoins that it be guarded against.
He speaks of believers who ought to support their widows; for, as to
those widows who renounced a wicked relationship, it was proper that
they should be received by the Church. And if they act a sinful part,
who, by sparing themselves, allow the Church to be burdened with
expense, let us learn from this in what aggravated sacrilege they are
involved, who, by fraud or robbery, profane what was once dedicated to
the Church.

<span id="iii.vii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 5:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p2"></span>**17**. Let the elders that rule well be
counted worthy of double honour, especially they who labour in the word
and doctrine.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p3"></span>**17**. Presbyteri, qui bene praesunt,
duplici honore digni habeantur; maxime qui laborant in verbo et
doctrina.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p4"></span>**18**. For the scripture saith, Thou
shalt not muzzle the ox that treadeth out the corn. And, The labourer
*is* worthy of his reward.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p5"></span>**18**. Dicit enim scriptura: Non
obligabis os bovi trituranti, (<span id="iii.vii.v-p5.1"></span>[De
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#004)<span id="iii.vii.v-p5.1"></span>)
et, Dignus est operarius mercede sua, (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p5.2"></span>[Mt
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p5.2"></span>).

<span id="iii.vii.v-p6"></span>**19**. Against an elder receive not an
accusation, but before two or three witnesses.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p7"></span>**19**. Adversus presbyterum accusationem
ne admittas, nisi sub duobus aut tribus testibus.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p8"></span>**20**. Them that sin rebuke before all,
that others also may fear.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p9"></span>**20**. Peccantes coram omnibus argue, ut
et caeteri timorem habeant.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p10"></span>**21**. I charge *thee* before God, and
the Lord Jesus Christ, and the elect angels, that thou observe these
things without preferring one before another, doing nothing by
partiality.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p11"></span>**21**. Contestor coram Deo, et Domino
Iesu Christo, et electis angelis, ut haec custodias absque
praecipitatione judicii, nihil faciens, alteram in partem declinando.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p12"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p13"></span>**17** *Elders*  <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97) For preserving the good order of the
Church, it is likewise highly necessary that elders should not be
neglected, but that due regard should be paid to them; for what could be
more unfeeling than to have no care about those who have the care of the
whole Church? Here πρεσβύτερος *(elder) is* not a name of age, but of
office.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p15"></span>*Accounted worthy of double honor*
Chrysostom interprets “double honor” as meaning “support and reverence.”
I do not oppose his opinion; let it be adopted by any one that chooses.
But for my own part, I think it is more probable that a comparison is
here drawn between widows and elders. Paul had formerly enjoined that
honor should be paid — to widows; but elders are more worthy of being
honored than widows, and, with respect to them, ought therefore to
receive double honor.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p16"></span>But in order to shew that he does not
recommend masks, he adds, *who rule well;* that is, who faithfully and
laboriously discharge their office. For, granting that a person should a
hundred times obtain a place, and though he should boast of his title;
yet, if he do not also perform his duty, he will have no right to demand
that he shall be supported at the expense of the Church. In short, he
means that honor is not due to the title, but to the work performed by
those who are appointed to the office.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p17"></span>Yet he prefers *those who labor in word
and doctrine,* that is, those who are diligent in teaching the word; for
those two terms, *word* and *doctrine,* signify the same thing, namely,
the preaching of the word. But lest any one should suppose him to mean
by the *word* an indolent, and, as it is called, a speculative study of
it, he adds *doctrine*  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)

<span id="iii.vii.v-p19"></span>We may learn from this, that there were
at that time two kinds of elders; for all were not ordained to teach.
The words plainly mean, that there were some who “ruled well” and
honorably, but who did not hold the office of teachers. And, indeed,
there were chosen from among the people men of worth and of good
character, who, united with the pastors in a common council and
authority administered the discipline of the Church, and were a kind of
censors for the correction of morals. Ambrose complains that this custom
had gone into disuse, through the carelessness, or rather through the
pride, of the doctors, who wish to possess undivided power.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p20"></span>To return to Paul, he enjoins that
support shall be provided chiefly for pastors, who are employed in
teaching. Such is the ingratitude of the world, that very little care is
taken about supporting the ministers of the word; and Satan, by this
trick, endeavors to deprive the Church of instruction, by terrifying
many, through the dread of poverty and hunger, from bearing that burden.
 <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99)

<span id="iii.vii.v-p22"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p23"></span>**18** *Thou shalt not muzzle the ox*
This is a political precept which recommends to us equity and humanity
 <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) in general; as we have said in
expounding the First Epistle to the Corinthians;  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) for, if he forbids us to be unkind to
brute animals, how much greater humanity does he demand towards men! The
meaning of this statement, therefore, is the same as if it had been said
in general terns, that they must not make a wrong use of the labor of
others. At the present day, the custom of treading out the corn is
unknown in many parts of France, where they thresh the corn with flails.
None but the inhabitants of Provence know what is meant by “treading it
out.” But this has nothing to do with the meaning; for the same thing
may be said about ploughing.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p26"></span>*The laborer is worthy of his hire* He
does not quote this as a passage of Scripture, but as a proverbial
saying, which common sense teaches to all. In like manner, when Christ
said the same thing to the Apostles, (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p26.1"></span>[Mt
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p26.1"></span>,) he brought forward nothing else than a
statement approved by universal consent. It follows that they are cruel,
and have forgotten the claims of equity, who permit cattle to suffer
hunger; and incomparably worse are they that act the same part towards
men, whose sweat they suck out for their own accommodation. And how
intolerable is the ingratitude of those who refuse support to their
pastors, to whom they cannot pay an adequate salary!

<span id="iii.vii.v-p27"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p28"></span>**19** *Against an elder receive not an
accusation* After having commanded that salaries should be paid to
pastors, he likewise instructs Timothy not to allow them to be assailed
by calumnies, or loaded with any accusation but what is supported by
sufficient proof. But it may be thought strange, that he represents, as
peculiar to elders, a law which is common to all. God lays down,
authoritatively, this law as applicable to all cases, that they shall be
decided “by the mouth of two or three witnesses.” (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p28.1"></span>[De
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p28.1"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.v-p28.2"></span>[Mt
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p28.2"></span>.) Why then does the Apostle protect elders
alone by this privilege, as if it were peculiar to them, that their
innocence shall be defended against false accusations?

<span id="iii.vii.v-p29"></span>I reply, this is a necessary remedy
against the malice of men; for none are more liable to slanders and
calumnies than godly teachers.  <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)
Not only does it arise from the difficulty of their office, that
sometimes they either sink under it, or stagger, or halt, or blunder, in
consequence of which wicked men seize many occasions for finding fault
with them; but there is this additional vexation, that, although they
perform their duty correctly, so as not to commit any error whatever,
they never escape a thousand censures. And this is the craftiness of
Satan, to draw away the hearts of men from ministers, that instruction
may gradually fall into contempt. Thus not only is wrong done to
innocent persons, in having their reputation unjustly wounded, (which is
exceedingly base in regard to those who hold so honorable a rank,) but
the authority of the sacred doctrine of God is diminished.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p31"></span>And this is what Satan, as I have said,
chiefly labors to accomplish; for not only is the saying of Plato true
in this instance, that “the multitude are malicious, and envy those who
are above them,” but the more earnestly any pastor strives to advance
the kingdom of Christ, so much the more is he loaded with envy, and so
much the fiercer are the assaults made on him. Not only so, but as soon
as any charge against the ministers of the word has gone abroad, it is
believed as fully as if they were already convicted. This is not merely
owing to the higher degree of moral excellence which is demanded from
them, but because almost all are tempted by Satan to excessive
credulity, so that, without making any inquiry, they eagerly condemn
their pastors, whose good name they ought rather to have defended.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p32"></span>On good grounds, therefore, Paul opposes
so heinous iniquity, and forbids that elders shall be subjected to the
slanders of wicked men till they have been convicted by sufficient
proof. We need not wonder, therefore, if they whose duty it is to
reprove the faults of all, to oppose the wicked desires of all, and to
restrain by their severity every person whom they see going astray, have
many enemies. What, then, will be the consequence; if we shall listen
indiscriminately to all the slanders that are spread abroad concerning
them?

<span id="iii.vii.v-p33"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p34"></span>**20** *Those that sin rebuke before
all*  <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) Whenever any measure is
taken for the protection of good men, it is immediately seized by bad
men to prevent them from being condemned. Accordingly, what Paul had
said about repelling unjust accusations he modifies by this statement,
so that none may, on this presence, escape the punishment due to sin.
And, indeed, we see how great and diversified are the privileges by
which Popery surrounds its clergy; so that, although their life be ever
so wicked,  <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) still they are
exempted from all reproof. Certainly, if regard be had to the cautions
which are collected by Gratian,  <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105)
(Caus. 2, Quest. 4 and Quest. 7,) there will be no danger of their being
ever compelled to give an account of their life. Where will they find
the seventy-two witnesses for condemning a bishop, which are demanded by
the disgusting bull issued by Pope Sylvester? Moreover, seeing that the
whole order of laymen is debarred from accusing, and as the inferior
orders, even of the clergy, are forbidden to give any annoyance to the
higher classes of them, what shall hinder them from fearlessly mocking
at all decisions?

<span id="iii.vii.v-p38"></span>It is therefore proper, carefully to
observe this moderation, that insolent tongues shall be restrained from
defaming elders by false accusations, and yet that every one of them who
conducts himself badly shall be severely corrected; for I understand
this injunction to relate to elders, that they who live a dissolute life
shall be openly reproved.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p39"></span>*That others also may fear* Wherefore?
That others, warned by such an example, may fear the more, when they
perceive that not even those who are placed above them in rank and honor
are spared; for as elders ought to lead the way to others by the example
of a holy life, so, if they commit crime, it is proper to exercise
severity of discipline toward them, that it may serve as an example to
others. And why should greater forbearance be used toward those whose
offenses are much more hurtful than those of others? Let it be
understood that Paul speaks of crimes or glaring transgressions, which
are attended by public scandal; for, if any of the elders shall have
committed a fault, not of a public nature, it is certain that he ought
to be privately admonished and not openly reproved.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p40"></span><span id="iii.vii.v-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p41"></span>**21** *I adjure thee before God* Paul
introduced this solemn appeal, not only on account of the very great
importance of the subject, but likewise on account of its extreme
difficulty. Nothing is more difficult than to discharge the office of a
public judge with so great impartiality as never to be moved by favor
for any one, or to give rise to suspicions, or to be influenced by
unfavorable reports, or to use excessive severity, and in every cause to
look at nothing but the cause itself; for only when we shut our eyes to
persons  <span id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106) do we pronounce an
equitable judgment.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p43"></span>Let us remember that, in the person of
Timothy, all pastors are admonished, and that Timothy is armed, as with
a shield, against wicked desires, which not infrequently occasion much
trouble even to some excellent persons. He therefore places God before
the eyes of Timothy, that he may know that he ought to execute his
office not less conscientiously than if he were in the presence of God
and of his angels.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p44"></span>*And the Lord Jesus Christ*. After
having named God, he next mentions Christ; for he it is to whom the
Father hath given all power to judge, (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p44.1"></span>[Joh
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p44.1"></span>,) and before whose tribunal we shall one
day appear.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p45"></span>*And the elect angels*. To “Christ” he
adds “angels,” not as judges, but as the future witnesses of our
carelessness, or rashness, or ambition, or unfaithfulness. They are
present as spectators, because they have been commanded to take care of
the Church. And, indeed, he must be worse than stupid, and must have a
heart of stone, whose indolence and carelessness are not shaken off by
this single consideration, that the government of the Church is under
the eye of God and the angels; and when that solemn appeal is added, our
fear and anxiety must be redoubled. He calls them “*elect* angels,”
 <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) not only to distinguish them
from the reprobate angels, but on account of their excellence, in order
that their testimony may awaken deeper reverence.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p47"></span>*Without hastiness of judgment*  <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) . The Greek word προκρίμα, to
translate it literally, answers to the Latin word <span
id="iii.vii.v-p48.2"></span>*proejudicium, “*a judgment beforehand.” But
it rather denotes excessive haste,  <span
id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) as when we pronounce a decision at
random, without having fully examined the matter; or it denotes
immoderate favor, when we render to persons more than is proper, or
prefer some persons as being more excellent than others; which, in the
decisions of a judge, is always unjust. Paul, therefore, condemns here
either levity or acceptance of persons.

<span id="iii.vii.v-p50"></span>To the same purpose is that which
immediately follows, that there must be no *turning to this side or
that;* for it is almost impossible to tell how difficult it is, for
those who hold the office of a judge, to keep themselves unmoved, amidst
assaults so numerous and so diversified. Instead of κατὰ πρόσκλισιν,
 <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) some copies have κατὰ
πρόσκλησιν But the former reading is preferable.

<span id="iii.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>[1
Timothy 5:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#022)<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p2"></span>**22**. Lay hands suddenly on no man,
neither be partaker of other men’s sins: keep thyself pure.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p3"></span>**22**. Manus cito ne cui imponas; neque
communices peccatis alienis; temetipsum purum custodi.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p4"></span>**23**. Drink no longer water, but use a
little wine for thy stomach’s sake and thine often infirmities.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p5"></span>**23**. Ne posthac bibas aquam; sed
paululo vino utere propter stomachum tuum, et crebras tuas infirmitates.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p6"></span>**24**. Some men’s sins are open
beforehand, going before to judgment; and some *men* they follow after.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p7"></span>**24**. Quorundam hominum peccata ante
manifestata sunt, festinantia ad judicium, in quibusdam vero etiam
subsequuntur.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p8"></span>**25**. Likewise also the good works *of
some* are manifest beforehand; and they that are otherwise cannot be
hid.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p9"></span>**25**. Similiter et bona opera ante
manifesta sunt; et quae secus habent latere nequeunt.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p10"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p11"></span>**22** *Lay not hands suddenly on any
man* There can be no doubt that he intended to guard Timothy against
ill-will, and to obviate many complaints, which are continually arising
against the godly servants of Christ, who refuse to comply with the
ambitious requests of any. For some accuse them of sternness; others of
envy; and some exclaim that they are cruel, because they do not at once
receive those who boast of having some recommendatory qualities. This is
what we abundantly experience in the present day. Paul therefore exhorts
Timothy not to lay aside judicious caution, and not to suffer himself to
be overpowered by improper feelings; not that Timothy needed such an
admonition, but to restrain, by his authority, those who otherwise might
have given annoyance to Timothy,

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p12"></span>First, the “*laying on of hands*” means
Ordination:  <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) that is, the sign
is put for the thing signified; for he forbids him to receive too easily
any one that has not been fully tried. There are some who, through a
desire of novelty, would wish to receive into the ministerial office,
some person hardly at all known, as soon as he has given one or two
exhibitions that are reckoned good. It is the duty of a wise and
thoughtful bishop, to resist this troublesome feeling, in the same
manner as Paul here bids Timothy do.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p14"></span>*Neither partake of other men’s sins*
He means that he who consents to an unlawful act of ordination is
involved in the same guilt as the chief actors in it. Yet some explain
it thus: “If he admit unworthy persons, whatever faults they may
afterwards commit, to him will be imputed the blame or a part of the
blame.” But I think that this is a more simple view of it: “Though
others rush forth to such rashness, do not make thyself a partaker with
them, lest thou share in their guilt.” Even where our judgment is
otherwise sound, it often happens that we are carried away by the folly
and levity of others.  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112)

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p16"></span>*Keep thyself pure* I consider this
also to have the same reference as the preceding clause. As if he had
said, “If others do anything that is wrong, beware lest any contagion
reach you, either by consent or by approbation. If you cannot hinder
them from polluting themselves, it is at least your duty to have your
counsels at all times separated from theirs, so that you may keep
yourself pure.” If any prefer to view it as a general statement, let him
enjoy his opinion; but, for my own part, I reckon it to be more suitable
to limit it to the present context.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p17"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p18"></span>**23** *No longer drink water* There
are some who conjecture that this sentence, which breaks off the train
of thought, was not written by Paul. But we see that Paul was not so
anxious about keeping up the close connection of a discourse, and that
it was very customary with him to intermingle a variety of statements
without any arrangement. Besides, it is possible that what had been
formerly written in the margin of the Epistle afterwards found its way
into this passage through the mistake of the transcribers. Yet there is
no necessity for giving ourselves much trouble on that point, if we
consider Paul’s custom, which I have mentioned, of sometimes mingling
various subjects.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p19"></span>What is said amounts to this, that
Timothy should accustom himself to drink a little wine, for the sake of
preserving his health; for he does not absolutely forbid him to “drink
water,” but to use it as his ordinary beverage; and that is the meaning
of the Greek word ὑδροποτεῖν

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p20"></span>But why does he not simply advise him
to *drink wine?* For when he adds, a *little,* he appears to guard
against intemperance, which there was no reason to dread in Timothy. I
reply, this was rather expressed, in order to meet the slanders of
wicked men, who would otherwise have been ready to mock at his advice,
on this or some such pretext: “What sort of philosophy is this, which
encourages to drink wine? Is that the road by which we rise to heaven?”
In order to meet jeers of this kind, he declares that he provides only
for a case of necessity; and at the same time he recommends moderation.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p21"></span>Now it is evident that Timothy was not
only frugal, but even austere, in his mode of living; so much so as even
not to take care of his health; and it is certain that this was done,
neither through ambition nor through superstition. Hence we infer, that
not only was he very far from indulging in luxury and superfluities, but
that, in order that he might be better prepared for doing the work of
the Lord, he retrenched a portion even of his ordinary food; for it was
not by natural disposition, but through a desire of temperance, that he
was abstemious.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p22"></span>How few are there at the present day,
who need to be forbidden the use of water; or rather how many are there
that need to be limited to drink wine soberly! It is also evident how
necessary it is for us, even when we are desirous to act right, to ask
from the Lord the spirit of prudence, that he may teach us moderation.
Timothy was, indeed, upright in his aims; but, because he is reproved by
the Spirit of God, we learn that excess of severity of living was faulty
in him. At the same time a general rule is laid down, that, while we
ought to be temperate in eating and drinking, every person should attend
to his own health, not for the sake of prolonging life, but that, as
long as he lives, he may serve God, and be of use to his neighbors.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p23"></span>And if excessive abstinence is blamed,
when it brings on or promotes diseases, how much more should
superstition be avoided? What judgment shall we form as to the obstinacy
of the Carthusians,  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) who would
sooner have died than taste the smallest morsel of flesh in extreme
necessity? And if those who live sparingly and soberly are commanded not
to injure their health by excessive parsimony, no slight punishment
awaits the intemperate, who, by cramming their belly, waste their
strength. Such persons need not only to be advised, but to be kept back
from their fodder like brute beasts.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p25"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p26"></span>**24** *The sins of some men are
visible beforehand* As there is nothing that distresses more the
faithful ministers of the Church, than to see no way of correcting
evils, and to be compelled to endure hypocrites, of whose wickedness
they are aware and to be unable to banish from the Church many who are
destructive plagues, or even to hinder them from spreading their venom
by secret arts;  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) Paul supports
Timothy by this consolation, that, when it shall please God, they, will
one day be brought to public view. Thus he strengthens him for the
exercise of patience; because he ought calmly to await the fit time
which God in his wisdom has appointed.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p28"></span>There is another kind of base conduct
that sorely distresses good and holy pastors. When they have most
conscientiously discharged their duty, they are provoked by many unfair
statements, are loaded with much ill-will, and perceive that those
actions which deserved praise are turned into blame. Paul meets this
case also, by informing Timothy, that there are some good works which
are reserved for being brought to light at a future period; and
consequently that, if their praise is, as it were, buried under ground
by the ingratitude of men, that also ought to be patiently endured, till
the time of revelation have arrived.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p29"></span>Yet not only does he provide a remedy
for these evils, but, because it often happens that we are mistaken in
choosing ministers, unworthy persons insinuating themselves cunningly,
and the good being unknown to us; and even though we do not go wrong in
judging, but still cannot bring others to approve of our judgment, the
most excellent being rejected, notwithstanding all our efforts to the
contrary, while bad men either insinuate or force themselves forward; it
is impossible that our condition and that of the Church should not
occasion great anguish. Accordingly, Paul strenuously endeavors to
remove, or at least to alleviate, this cause of uneasiness. The meaning
may be thus summed up. “We must bear what cannot be immediately
corrected; we must sigh and groan, while the time for the remedy is not
fully come; and we must not apply force to diseases, till they are
either ripened or laid open. On the other hand, when virtue does not
receive the honor which it deserves, we must wait for the full time of
revelation, and endure the stupidity of the world, and wait quietly in
darkness till the day dawn.”

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p30"></span>*Hastening to judgment* I now come to
the words, after having given a brief illustration of the subject. When
he says that *the sins of some men are visible beforehand,* he means
that they are discovered early, and come to the knowledge of men, as it
were, before the time. He expresses the same thing by another
comparison, that they run, as it were, and “hasten to their judgment;”
for we see that many run headlong, and, of their own accord, bring
damnation on themselves, though the whole world is desirous to save
them. Whenever this happens, let us remember that the reprobate are
prompted by an unseen movement of Providence, to throw out their foam.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p31"></span>*In some they follow after* The
rendering given by Erasmus, “Some they follow after,” I do not approve.
Although it seems to be more in accordance with the Greek construction,
yet the sense requires that the preposition ἐν be understood; for the
change of case does not destroy the contrast. As he had said that the
sins of some men hasten rapidly to their judgment; so now, on the other
hand, he adds, that the sins of some men (or, of others) come slowly to
be known. But instead of the genitive “of some,” he uses the dative “in
some” (or “in others.”) He means that, although the sins of some men may
be concealed longer than we would wish, and are slowly brought to light,
yet they shall not always be concealed; for they too shall have their
own time. And if the version of Erasmus be preferred, still the meaning
must be the same, that, although the vengeance of God does not hasten,
yet it follows slowly behind them.

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p32"></span><span id="iii.vii.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p33"></span>**25** *In like manner also the good
works* He means, that sometimes piety and other virtues obtain early and
speedily their applause among men; so that great men are held in
estimation; and that, if it happen otherwise, the Lord will not suffer
innocence and uprightness to be always oppressed; for it is often
obscured by calumnies, or by clouds, but at length shall be fulfilled
the prediction, (<span id="iii.vii.vi-p33.1"></span>[Da
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p33.1"></span>; <span id="iii.vii.vi-p33.2"></span>[Mt
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043)<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p33.2"></span>,) that God will cause them to shine forth
like the dawn of the day. But we have need of a calm spirit to endure;
and therefore we must always consider what is the limit of our
knowledge, that we may not go beyond it; for that would be to assume to
ourselves the prerogative of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc43009.htm#fr_84) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p18"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.i-p18.1"></span>Les
Pasteurs et Evesques.” — “Pastors and bishops.”

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc43009.htm#fr_85) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p19"></span> “From what the Fathers and Greek
commentators tell us, it appears that those persons were maintained from
the funds of the Church; and from what follows, it is clear that they
filled an office; the name <span id="iii.vii.i-p19.1"></span>χήραι being
as much one of office as <span id="iii.vii.i-p19.2"></span>διάχονες,
though the exact nature of its duties has not been determined. That the
persons who held it instructed the younger females in the principles of
the Christian faith, is pretty certain; but whether they were, as some
say, ‘the same as the deaconesses,’ is yet a disputed point. It would
seem that they were not necessarily the same; but that, having once been
such, during the life of their husbands, they were not removed from that
office. Otherwise, it would seem their duties were different from those
of the deaconesses; and if we were to call them by such a name as would
designate their chief duties, we might call them ‘Female Catechists.’
That these differed from the deaconesses is certain from the positive
testimony of Epiphanius. Yet they might occasionally *assist* them in
their duty of visiting the sick. Be that as it may, the existence of
such an order as the <span id="iii.vii.i-p19.3"></span>χήραι requires no
very strong testimony from ecclesiastical history; since, from the
extremely retired life of the women in Greece and other parts of the
East, and their almost total separation from the other sex, they would
much *need* the assistance of such a person, who might either convert
them to the Christian faith, or farther instruct them in its doctrines
and duties.” — *Bloomfield*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc43009.htm#fr_86) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p23"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.i-p23.1"></span>C’est a dire, qu’on oublivit l’amour que
nature enseigne.” — “That is, that they forgot the love which nature
teaches.”

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc43009.htm#fr_87) <span
id="iii.vii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.i-p26"></span> “This word is compounded of <span
id="iii.vii.i-p26.1"></span>ἀντὶ, (‘instead of,’ or, ‘in return for,’)
and <span id="iii.vii.i-p26.2"></span>πελαργὸς, ‘a stork.’ The stork is
a bird of passage, and is mentioned, along with the crane and the
swallow, as knowing the appointed time, (<span
id="iii.vii.i-p26.3"></span>[Jer
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007)<span
id="iii.vii.i-p26.3"></span>.) Its name, in the Hebrew, means Mercy, or
Piety; and its English name, taken (indirectly at least) from the Greek
<span id="iii.vii.i-p26.4"></span>στοργὴ, signifying natural affection.
This accords with our knowledge of its character, which is remarkable
for tenderness, especially in the young towards the old birds. It is not
uncommon to see several of the old birds, which are tired and feeble
with the long flight, supported at times on the backs of the young; and
the peasants (of Jutland) speak of it as well know that such are
carefully laid in their old nests, and cherished by the young ones whom
they reared the spring before. The stork has long been a peculiar emblem
of filial duty.” — *Eadie’s Cyclopoedia.*

<span id="iii.vii.i-p27"></span>*“The stork’s an emblem of true piety,  
Because when age has seized and made its dame  
Unfit for flight, the grateful young one takes  
His mother on his back, provides her food,  
Repaying thus her tender care of him  
Ere he was fit to* fly.” — Beaumont.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc43009.htm#fr_88) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p19"></span> <span id="iii.vii.ii-p19.1"></span>Non
est vivere, sed valere vita.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc43009.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iii.vii.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.ii-p28"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.ii-p28.1"></span>Ou, il a renonce’ a la foy.” — “Or, he hath
renounced the faith.”

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc43009.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p14"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p14.1"></span>Quelles vefues on doit recevoir a estre
entretenues aux depens de l’Eglise.” — “What widows ought to be
received, to be supported at the expense of the Church.”

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc43009.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p21"></span> “This observance was usually
administered by, or under the superintendence of, the mistress of the
house; and, being in the East particularly grateful, is meant to
designate, generally, kind attention to the guests.” — *Bloomfield.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc43009.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p32"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p32.1"></span>A Rome on appeloit Vestales les vierges
consacrees a une deesse nommee Vesta (comme qui diroit aujourd’huy les
nonnains de saincte Claire) et ceste Claude en estoit une qui a este
fort renomnmee.” — “At Rome they gave the name of Vestals to virgins
consecrated to a goddess called Vesta, (as if we should say, at the
present day, the nuns of St. Claire) and that Clauda was one of them
that was highly celebrated.”

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc43009.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p35"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p35.1"></span>Une tortue ou limace.” — “A tortoise or a
snail.”

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc43009.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iii.vii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iii-p37"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.iii-p37.1"></span>Percunctatorem fugito; lam garrulus idem
est.” — *Hor*.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc43009.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p13"></span> “Let us ponder well this doctrine of
Paul; for, although he treats here of widows in particular yet we are
all admonished, that, in order to perform our duty towards God, it is
not enough that our conscience be pure and clean, and that we walk
without any bad disposition; but we ought likewise to add such prudence
that enemies shall have their mouth shut when they wish to slander us,
that their impudence may be known, and that we may always be ready to
give an account of what we have done, and that they may have no presence
for blaspheming against the name of God and his word, because there will
be no appearance of evil in us. True, we cannot avoid being slandered;
but let us always attend to this, that no occasion may be given on our
part, or by our imprudence.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc43009.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p18"></span> “Since the gospel is preached to us,
it is Jesus Christ who holds out his scepter, and shews us that he
wishes to be our king, and to take us for his people. When we have thus
made profession of the gospel, if we do not persevere till the end, if
it happen that we debauch ourselves in any way, not only do we refuse to
be in obedience to the Son of God, but we give to Satan all mastery over
us, and he will seize it, and we must be in his service in spite of our
teeth. If this is dreadful and absolutely shocking, ought we not to be
better advised than we have been to conceal ourselves under the wings of
our God, and to suffer ourselves to be governed by him, till he renew us
by his Holy Spirit in such a manner that we shall not be so giddy and
foolish as we have been? For that purpose, let us consider that we must
have our Lord Jesus Christ for our guide; for if we wish to be truly the
people of God, the saying of the Prophet must be fulfilled in us, that
the people shall walk, and David their king shall go before them. Let us
always have his doctrine before our eyes, and let us follow him step by
step, hearing his voice as that of our good Shepherd, (<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p18.1"></span>[Joh
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#004)<span
id="iii.vii.iv-p18.1"></span>)*.”* — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc43009.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p14"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.v-p14.1"></span>Les
prestres ou anciens.” — “Presbyters or elders.”

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc43009.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p18"></span> “He shews that we might do many other
things, and might allege that we had no leisure; but yet we must
consider chiefly what it is to which God calls us. They who would wish
to be reckoned pastors ought to devote themselves especially to that
word. And how? In order to study it secretly in their closet? Not at
all; but for the general instruction of the Church. That is the reason
why Paul chose to add the term *doctrine.* It was quite enough to have
said, *word;* but he shews that we must not privately speculate what we
shall think fit, but that, when we have studied, it is that others may
profit along with us, and that the instruction may be common to the
whole Church. — This is the true mark for distinguishing properly
between the pastors whom God approves and wishes to be supported in his
Church, and those who claim that title and honor, and yet are excluded
and rejected by him and by the Holy Spirit.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc43009.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p21"></span> “In this passage Paul did not look to
himself, but spoke by the authority of God, in order that the Church
might not be destitute of persons who should teach faithfully. For the
devil, from the beginning, had the trick of attempting to hunger good
pastors, that they might cease to labor, and that there might be very
few who were employed in preaching the word of God. Let us not view the
recommendation here contained as coming from a mortal man, but let us
hear God speaking, and let us know that there is no accepting of
persons, but that, knowing what was profitable to the whole Church, and
perceiving that many were cold and indifferent on this subject, he has
laid down a rule, that they whose duty it is to preach the gospel shall
be supported; as we see that Paul speaks of it in other passages, and.
treats of it very fully in the First Epistle to the Corinthians, though
he likewise mentions it in the Epistle to the Galatians.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc43009.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p24"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.v-p24.1"></span>Equite et humanite.”

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc43009.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p25"></span> See Commentary on the Corinthians, vol.
1, p. 294.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc43009.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p30"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.v-p30.1"></span>Que
les docteurs ou pasteurs fideles.” — “Than faithful teachers or
pastors.”

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc43009.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p35"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.v-p35.1"></span>Repren publiquement.” “Rebuke publicly.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc43009.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p36"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.v-p36.1"></span>Combien que la vie de leurs moines et
prestres soit la plus meschante et desbordee qu’on scauroit dire.” —
“Although the life of their monks and priests be the most wicked and
dissolute that can be described.”

<span id="fn_105"></span>[106](cc43009.htm#fr_105) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p36.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p37"></span> “Gratian, a Benedictine of the 12th
century, was a native of Chiusi, and was the author of a famous work,
entitled “<span id="iii.vii.v-p37.1"></span>Decretal,” or “<span
id="iii.vii.v-p37.2"></span>Concordantia Discordantium Canonum,” in
which he endeavored to reconcile those canons that seem to contradict
each other. He was, however, guilty of some errors, which Anthony
Augustine endeavored to correct in his work entitled “<span
id="iii.vii.v-p37.3"></span>De emendatione Gratiani“ Gratian’s “<span
id="iii.vii.v-p37.4"></span>Decretal“ forms one of the principal parts
of the canon law.” — *Gorton’s Biog. Dict.*

<span id="fn_106"></span>[107](cc43009.htm#fr_106) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p42"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.v-p42.1"></span>Et
qu’on regarde seulement le faict.” — “And when we look at nothing but
the fact.”

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc43009.htm#fr_107) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p46"></span> “Let us remark that he wishes to
distinguish them from those who rebelled. For the devils were not
created wicked and malicious as they now are, enemies of all that is
good, and false and cursed in their nature. They were angels of God, but
they were not elected to persevere, and so they fell. Thus God reserved
what he chose among the angels. And so we have already a mirror of God’s
election of us to heaven, by free grace before we came into the world.
Now, if we see the grace of God displayed even to angels, what shall
become of us? For all mankind were lost and ruined in Adam, and we are
an accursed, and, as the Scripture tells us, are born “children of
wrath.” (<span id="iii.vii.v-p46.1"></span>[Eph
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#003)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p46.1"></span>.) What must we become if God do not choose
us by pure goodness, since from our mother’s womb (<span
id="iii.vii.v-p46.2"></span>[Ps
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)<span
id="iii.vii.v-p46.2"></span>) we are corrupted, and are alienated from
him? This gracious election must prevail, in order to separate us from
the reprobate, who remain in their perdition. We ought, therefore,
carefully to remark this passage, that Paul, when speaking of the
angels, shews that their high rank proceeds from their having been
chosen and elected by God. And so, by a still stronger reason, we are
separated from all other visible creatures, only because: God separates
us by his mercy.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc43009.htm#fr_108) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p48"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.v-p48.1"></span>Sans
jugement precupite, ou, sans preferer l’un a l’autre.” — “Without hasty
judgment, or, without preferring one before another.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc43009.htm#fr_109) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p49"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.v-p49.1"></span>Une
trop soudaine hastivete.” — “A too sudden haste.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc43009.htm#fr_110) <span
id="iii.vii.v-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.v-p51"></span> “<span id="iii.vii.v-p51.1"></span>Κατὰ
πρόσχλισιν, ‘through partiality’ or undue favor. So Clemens, in his
Epistle to the Corinthians, has χατὰ προσχλίσεις (through partialities.)
The word properly signifies a leaning towards, or upon.” — *Bloomfield.*

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc43009.htm#fr_111) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p13"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p13.1"></span>Laquelle on appelle Ordination ou
Consecration.” — “What is called Ordination or Consecration.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc43009.htm#fr_112) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p15"></span> “To whom does the Apostle speak? Is it
only to ministers who preach the doctrine of the gospel? Is it only to
magistrates, and to those who have the sword and the administration of
civil government? No, but to all Christians, great and small. It is then
said, that we must not partake of the sins of others. And in what
manner? By reproving them. (<span id="iii.vii.vi-p15.1"></span>[Eph
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p15.1"></span>.) And so he who intends to flatter his
neighbor, and who shuts his eyes when he sees that God is offended, and
especially he who consents to it will be still more blamable. Let us
seriously think, that we shall have a hard account to render to God, if
we have walked amidst the corruptions of the world, so as to make it
appear that we approved of them. And so much the more ought we to
meditate on this doctrine, when we see that there is such boldness in
sinning, that custom appears to have become the law. Let a man be
convinced that he is doing wrong, yet provided that he has many
companions, he thinks that he is excused. ‘Among wolves we must howl,’
it will be said. Now we see that the sins of others will not excuse us
before God, and though the whole world sin along with us, we shall not
fail to be involved in the same condemnation. Let us think of that.” —
*Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc43009.htm#fr_113) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p24"></span> “In the year 1084, was instituted the
famous order of the Carthusians, so called from Chartreux, a dismal and
wild spot of ground near Grenoble in Dauphine, surrounded with barren
mountains and craggy rocks. The founder of this monastic society, which
surpassed all the rest in the extravagant austerity of their manners and
discipline, was Bruno, a native of Cologne, and canon of the cathedral
of Rheims in France. This zealous ecclesiastic, who had neither power to
reform, nor patience to bear, the dissolute manners of his Archbishop
Manasse, retired from his church, with six of his companions and, having
obtained the permission of Hugh, bishop of Grenoble, fixed his residence
in the miserable desert already mentioned. He adopted at first the rule
of St. Benedict, to which he added a considerable number of severe and
rigorous precepts. His successors, however, went still farther, and
imposed upon the Carthusians new laws, much more intolerable than those
of their founder, — laws which inculcated the highest degrees of
austerity that the most gloomy imagination could invent.” *Mosheim’s
Eccl. Hist*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc43009.htm#fr_114) <span
id="iii.vii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.vi-p27"></span> “<span
id="iii.vii.vi-p27.1"></span>Par moyens secrets, et comme par dessous
terre.” — “By secret and underground arts.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 6](cc43010)
