[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43013)  [Next](cc43015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
2:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span>**1**. Thou therefore, my son, be strong
in the grace that is in Christ Jesus.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span>**1**. Tu ergo, fili mi, fortis esto in
gratia, quae est in Christo Iesu.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span>**2**. And the things that thou hast heard
of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who
shall be able to teach others also.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span>**2**. Et quae a me audisti per multos
testes, haec commenda fidelibus hominibus, qui idonei erunt ad alios
etiam docendos.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span>**3**. Thou therefore endure hardness, as
a good soldier of Jesus Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span>**3**. Tu igitur feras afflictions, ut
bonus miles Iesu Christi.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span>**4**. No man that warreth entangleth
himself with the affairs of *this* life; that he may please him who hath
chosen him to be a soldier.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span>**4**. Nemo, qui militat, implicator vitae
negotiis, ut imperatori placeat.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p10"></span>**5**. And if a man also strive for
masteries, *yet* is he not crowned, except he strive lawfully.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p11"></span>**5**. Quodsi quis etiam certaverit, non
coronatur, nisi legitime certaverit.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p12"></span>**6**. The husbandman that laboureth must
be first partaker of the fruits.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p13"></span>**6**. Laborare prius agricolam oportet,
quam fructus percipiat.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p14"></span>**7**. Consider what I say; and the Lord
give thee understanding in all things.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p15"></span>**7**. Intellege quae dico; det enim tibi
Dominus intellectum in omnibus.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p16"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p17"></span>**1** *Be strong in the grace* As he had
formerly commanded him to keep, by the Spirit, that which was committed
to him, so now he likewise enjoins him “to be strengthened in grace.” By
this expression he intends to shake off sloth and indifference; for the
flesh is so sluggish, that even those who are endued with eminent gifts
are found to slacken in the midst of their course, if they be not
frequently aroused.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p18"></span>Some will say: “Of what use is it to
exhort a man to ‘be strong in grace,’ unless free-will have something to
do in cooperation?” I reply, what God demands from us by his word he
likewise bestows by his Spirit, so that we are strengthened in the grace
which he has given to us. And yet the exhortations are not superfluous,
because the Spirit of God, teaching us inwardly, causes that they shall
not sound in our ears fruitlessly and to no purpose. Whoever, therefore,
shall acknowledge that the present exhortation could not have been
fruitful without the secret power of the Spirit, will never support
free-will by means of it.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p19"></span>*Which is in Christ Jesus*. This is added
for two reasons; to shew that the grace comes from Christ alone, and
from no other, and that no Christian will be destitute of it; for, since
there is one Christ common to all, it follows that all are partakers of
his grace, which is said to be in Christ, because all who belong to
Christ must have it.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p20"></span>*My son*. This kind appellation, which he
employs, tends much to gain the affections, that the doctrine may more
effectually obtain admission into the heart.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p21"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p22"></span>**2** *And which thou hast heard from
me*. He again shews how earnestly desirous he is to transmit sound
doctrine to posterity; and he exhorts Timothy, not only to preserve its
shape and features, (as he formerly did,) but likewise to hand it down
to godly teachers, that, being widely spread, it may take root in the
hearts of many; for he saw that it would quickly perish if it were not
soon scattered by the ministry of many persons. And, indeed, we see what
Satan did, not long after the death of the Apostles; for, just as if
preaching had been buried for some centuries, he brought in innumerable
reveries, which, by their monstrous absurdity, surpassed the
superstitions of all the heathens. We need not wonder, therefore, if
Paul, in order to guard against an evil of such a nature and of such
magnitude, earnestly desires that his doctrines shall be committed to
all godly ministers, who shall be qualified to teach it. As if he had
said, — “See that after my death there may remain a sure attestation of
my doctrine; and this will be, if thou not only teach faithfully what
thou hast learned from me, but take care that it be more widely
published by others; therefore, whomsoever thou shalt see fitted for
that work, commit to their trust this treasure.”

<span id="iv.iii.i-p23"></span>*Commit to believing men* He calls them
*believing men,* not on account of their faith, which is common to all
Christians, but on account of their pre-eminence, as possessing a large
measure of faith. We might even translate it “*faithful* men;”  <span
id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) for there are few who sincerely labor
to preserve and perpetuate the remembrance of the doctrine intrusted to
them. Some are impelled by ambition, and that of various kinds, some by
covetousness, some by malice, and others are kept back by the fear of
dangers; and therefore extraordinary faithfulness is here demanded.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p25"></span>*By many witnesses*  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) He does not mean that he produced
witnesses in a formal and direct manner  <span
id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) in the case of Timothy; but, because
some might raise a controversy whether that which Timothy taught had
proceeded from Paul, or had been forged by himself, he removes all doubt
by this argument, that he did not speak secretly in a corner, but that
there were many alive who could testify that Timothy spoke nothing which
they had not formerly heard from the mouth of Paul. The doctrine of
Timothy would therefore be beyond suspicion, seeing that they had many
fellow-disciples, who could bear testimony to it. Hence we learn how
greatly a servant of Christ should labor to maintain and defend the
purity of doctrine, and not only while he lives, but as long as his care
and labor can extend it.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p28"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p29"></span>**3** *Do thou therefore endure
afflictions* Not without strong necessity has he added this second
exhortation; for they who offer their obedience to Christ must be
prepared for “enduring afflictions;” and thus, without patient endurance
of evils, there will never be perseverance. And accordingly he adds, “as
becomes a *good soldier of Jesus Christ.”* By this term he means that
all who serve Christ are warriors, and that their condition as warriors
consists, not in inflicting evils, but rather in patience.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p30"></span>These are matters on which it is highly
necessary for us to meditate. We see how many there are every day, that
throw away their spears, who formerly made a great show of valor. Whence
does this arise? Because they cannot become inured to the cross. First,
they are so effeminate that they shrink from warfare. Next, they do not
know any other way of fighting than to contend haughtily and fiercely
with their adversaries; and they cannot bear to learn what it is to

<span id="iv.iii.i-p31"></span>“possess their souls in patience.” (<span
id="iv.iii.i-p31.1"></span>[Lu
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p31.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p32"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p33"></span>**4** *No man who warreth* He continues
to make use of the metaphor which he had borrowed from warfare. Yet,
strictly speaking, he formerly called Timothy “a soldier of Christ”
metaphorically; but now he compares profane warfare with spiritual and
Christian warfare in this sense. “The condition of military discipline
is such, that as soon as a soldier has enrolled himself under a general,
he leaves his house and all his affairs, and thinks of nothing but war;
and in like manner, in order that we may be wholly devoted to Christ, we
must be free from all the entanglements of this world.”

<span id="iv.iii.i-p34"></span>*With the affairs of life* By “the
affairs of life”,  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) he means the
care of governing his family, and ordinary occupations; as farmers leave
their agriculture, and merchants their ships and merchandise, till they
have completed the time that they agreed to serve in war. We must now
apply the comparison to the present subject, that every one who wishes
to fight under Christ must relinquish all the hindrances and employments
of the world, and devote himself unreservedly to the warfare. In short,
let us remember the old proverb, <span id="iv.iii.i-p35.2"></span>*Hoc
age*,  <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) which means, that in the
worship of God, we ought to give such earnestness of attention that
nothing else should occupy our thoughts and feelings. The old
translation has, “No man that fights for God,” etc. But this utterly
destroys Paul’s meaning.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p37"></span>Here Paul speaks to the pastors of the
Church in the person of Timothy. The statement is general, but is
specially adapted to the ministers of the word. First, let them see what
things are inconsistent within their office, that, freed from those
things, they may follow Christ. Next, let them see, each for himself,
what it is that draws them away from Christ; that this heavenly General
may not have less authority over us than that which a mortal man claims
for himself over heathen soldiers who have enrolled under him.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p38"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p39"></span>**5** *And if any one strive* He now
speaks of perseverance, that no man may think that he has done enough
when he has been engaged in one or two conflicts. He borrows a
comparison from wrestlers, not one of whom obtains the prize till he has
been victorious in the end. Thus he says:

<span id="iv.iii.i-p40"></span>“In a race all run, but one obtaineth the
prize;  
run so that ye may obtain.” (<span id="iv.iii.i-p40.2"></span>[1Co
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p40.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p41"></span>If any man, therefore, wearied with the
conflict, immediately withdraw from the arena to enjoy repose, he will
be condemned for indolence instead of being crowned. Thus, because
Christ wishes us to strive during our whole life, he who gives way in
the middle of the course deprives himself of honor, even though he may
have begun valiantly. To *strive lawfully* is to pursue the contest in
such a manner and to such an extent as the law requires, that none may
leave off before the time appointed.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p42"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p43"></span>**6** *The husbandman must labor before
he receive the fruits* I am well aware that others render this passage
differently; and I acknowledge that they translate, word for word, what
Paul has written in Greek; but he who shall carefully examine the
context will assent to my view.  <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160)
Besides, the use of (κοπιῶντα) *to labor* instead of (κοπιᾷν) *to
labor,* is a well-known Greek idiom; for Greek writers often make use of
the participle in place of the infinitive.  <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p46"></span>The meaning therefore, is, that
husbandmen do not gather the fruit, till they have first toiled hard in
the cultivation of the soil, by sowing and by other labors. And if
husbandmen do not spare their toils, that one day they may obtain fruit,
and if they patiently wait for the season of harvest; how much more
unreasonable will it be for us to refuse the labors which Christ enjoins
upon us, while he holds out so great a reward?

<span id="iv.iii.i-p47"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p48"></span>**7** *Understand what I say*  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) He added this, not on account of the
obscurity of the comparisons which he has set forth, but that Timothy
himself might ponder, how much more excellent is the warfare under the
direction of Christ, and how much more abundant the reward; for, when we
have studied it incessantly, we scarcely arrive at a full knowledge of
it.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p50"></span>*The Lord give thee understanding in all
things* The prayer, which now follows, is added by way of correction.
Because our minds do not easily rise to that “incorruptible crown”
(<span id="iv.iii.i-p50.1"></span>[1Co
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#025)<span id="iv.iii.i-p50.1"></span>)
of the life to come,  <span id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) Paul
betakes himself to God, to “give understanding” to Timothy. And hence we
infer, that not less are we taught in vain, if the Lord do not open our
understandings, than the commandments would be given in vain, if he did
not impart strength to perform them. For who could have taught better
than Paul? And yet, in order that he may teach with any advantage, he
prays that God may train his disciple.

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[2
Timothy 2:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>**8**. Remember that Jesus Christ the
seed of David was raised from the dead according to my gospel:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p3"></span>**8**. Memonto Iesum Christum excitatum a
mortuis, ex semine David, secundum evangelium meum,

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p4"></span>**9**. Wherein I suffer trouble, as an
evil doer, *even* unto bonds; but the word of God is not bound.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p5"></span>**9**. In quo laboro usque ad vincula,
tanquam maleficus; sed sermo Dei non est vinctus.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p6"></span>**10**. Therefore I endure all things for
the elect’s sakes, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in
Christ Jesus with eternal glory.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p7"></span>**10**. Quamobrem omnia tolero propter
electos, ut ipsi quoque salutem consequantur, quae est in Christo Iesu,
cum gloria aeterna.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p8"></span>**11** *It is* a faithful saying: For if
we be dead with *him*, we shall also live with *him*:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p9"></span>**11**. Fidelis sermo: si enim commortui
sumus, etiam simul cum ipso vivemus:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p10"></span>**12**. If we suffer, we shall also
reign with *him*: if we deny *him*, he also will deny us:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p11"></span>**12**. Si sufferimus, etiam simul
regnabimus; si negamus, ille quoque negabit nos:

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p12"></span>**13** If we believe not, *yet* he
abideth faithful: he cannot deny himself.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p13"></span>**13**. Si increduli sumus, ille fidelis
manet; negare se ipsum non potest.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p14"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p15"></span>**8** *Remember that Jesus Christ, being
raised from the dead.* He expressly mentions some part of his doctrine,
which he wished to go down to posterity, entire and uncorrupted. It is
probable that he glances chiefly at that part about which he was most
afraid; as will also appear clearly from what follows, when he comes to
speak about the error of “Hymenaeus and Philetus,” (<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>[2Ti
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p15.1"></span>;) for they denied the resurrection, of
which we have a sure pledge in this confession, when they falsely said
that it was already past.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p16"></span>How necessary this admonition of Paul
was, the ancient histories shew; for Satan put forth all his strength,
in order to destroy this article of our faith. There being two parts of
it, that Christ was born “of the seed of David,” and that he rose from
the dead; immediately after the time of the Apostles, arose Marcion, who
labored to destroy the truth of the human nature in Christ; and
afterwards he was followed by the Manichaeans; and even, in the present
day, this plague is still spreading.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p17"></span>So far as relates to the resurrection,
how many have been employed, and with what diversified schemes, in
laboring to overthrow the hope of it! This attestation, therefore, means
as much as if Paul had said, “Let no one corrupt or falsify my gospel by
slanders; I have thus taught, I have thus preached, that Christ, who was
born a man of the seed of David, rose from the dead.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p18"></span>*According to my gospel* He calls it
“his gospel,” not that he professes to be the author but the minister of
it. Now, in the resurrection of Christ we all have a sure pledge of our
own resurrection. Accordingly, he who acknowledges that Christ has risen
affirms that the same thing will take place with us also; for Christ did
not rise for himself, but for us. The head must not be separated from
his members. Besides, in the resurrection of Christ is contained the
fulfillment of our redemption and salvation; for it is added, *from the
dead*. Thus Christ, who was dead, arose. Why? and for what purpose? Here
we must come to ourselves, and here too is manifested the power and
fruit of both, namely, of his resurrection and of his death; for we must
always hold by this principle, that Scripture is not wont to speak of
these things coldly, and as matters of history, but makes indirect
reference to the fruit.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p19"></span>*Of the seed of David* This clause not
only asserts the reality of human nature in Christ, but also claims for
him the honor and name of the Messiah. Heretics deny that Christ was a
real man, others imagine that his human nature descended from heaven,
and others think that there was in him nothing more than the appearance
of a man.  <span id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) Paul exclaims, on the
contrary, that he was “of the seed of David;” by which he undoubtedly
declares that he was a real man, the son of a human being, that is, of
Mary. This testimony is so express, that the more heretics labor to get
rid of it, the more do they discover their own impudence. The Jews and
other enemies of Christ deny that he is the person who was formerly
promised; but Paul affirms that he is the son of David, and that he is
descended from that family from which the Messiah ought to descend.
 <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p22"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p23"></span>**9** *In which I am a sufferer* This is
an anticipation, for his imprisonment lessened the credit due to his
gospel in the eyes of ignorant people. He, therefore, acknowledges that,
as to outward appearance, he was imprisoned like a criminal; but adds,
that his imprisonment did not hinder the gospel from having free course;
and not only so, but that what he suffers is advantageous to the elect,
because it tends to confirm them. Such is the unshaken courage of the
martyrs of Christ, when the consciousness of being engaged in a good
cause lifts them up above the world; so that, from a lofty position,
they look down with contempt, not only on bodily pains and agonies, but
on every kind of disgrace.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p24"></span>Moreover, all godly persons ought to
strengthen themselves with this consideration, when they see the
ministers of the gospel attacked and outraged by adversaries, that they
may not, on that account, cherish less reverence for doctrine, but may
give glory to God, by whose power they see it burst through all the
hindrances of the world. And, indeed, if we were not excessively devoted
to the flesh, this consolation alone must have been sufficient for us in
the midst of persecutions, that, if we are oppressed by the cruelty of
the wicked, the gospel is nevertheless extended and more widely
diffused; for, whatever they may attempt, so far are they from obscuring
or extinguishing the light of the gospel, that it burns the more
brightly. Let us therefore bear cheerfully, or at least patiently, to
have both our body and our reputation shut up in prison, provided that
the truth of God breaks through those fetters, and is spread far and
wide.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p25"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p26"></span>**10** *Wherefore I endure all things
for the sake of the elect* From the elect he shews, that his
imprisonment is so far from being a ground of reproach, that it is
highly profitable to the elect. When he says that he endures *for the
sake of the elect,*  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) this
demonstrates how much more he cares for the edification of the Church
than for himself; for he is prepared, not only to die, but even to be
reckoned in the number of wicked men, that he may promote the salvation
of the Church.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p28"></span>In this passage Paul teaches the same
doctrine as in <span id="iv.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>[Col
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p28.1"></span>, where he says, that he

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p29"></span>“fills up what is wanting in the
sufferings of Christ, for his body, which is the Church.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p30"></span>Hence the impudence of the Papists is
abundantly refuted, who infer from these words that the death of Paul
was a satisfaction for our sins; as if he claimed anything else for his
death, than that it would confirm the faith of the godly, for he
immediately adds an exposition, by affirming that the salvation of
believers is found in Christ alone. But if any of my readers wishes to
see a more extended illustration of this subject, let him consult my
Commentary on the chapter which I have just now quoted — the first of
the Epistle to the Colossians.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p31"></span>*With eternal glory* This is the end of
the salvation which we obtain in Christ; for our salvation is to live to
God, which salvation begins with our regeneration, and is completed by
our perfect deliverance, when God takes us away from the miseries of
this mortal life, and gathers us into his kingdom. To this salvation is
added the participation of heavenly, that is, divine glory; and,
therefore, in order to magnify the grace of Christ, he gave to salvation
the name of “eternal glory.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p32"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p33"></span>**11** *A faithful saying* He makes a
preface to the sentiment which he is about to utter; because nothing is
more opposite to the feeling of the flesh, than that we must die in
order to live, and that death is the entrance into life; for we may
gather from other passages, that Paul was wont to make use of a preface
of this sort, in matters of great importance, or hard to be believed.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p34"></span>*If we die with him, we shall also live
with him* The general meaning is, that we shall not be partakers of the
life and glory of Christ, unless we have previously died and been
humbled with him; as he says, that all the elect were

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p35"></span>“predestinated that they might be
conformed to his image.” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p35.1"></span>[Ro
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p35.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p36"></span>This is said both for exhorting and
comforting believers. Who is not excited by this exhortation, that we
ought not to be distressed on account of our afflictions, which shall
have so happy a result? The same consideration abates and sweetens all
that is bitter in the cross; because neither pains, nor tortures, nor
reproaches, nor death ought to be received by us with horror, since in
these we share with Christ; more especially seeing that all these things
are the forerunners of a triumph.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p37"></span>By his example, therefore, Paul
encourages all believers to receive joyfully, for the name of Christ,
those afflictions in which they already have a taste of future glory. If
this shocks our belief, and if the cross itself so overpowers and
dazzles our eyes, that we do not perceive Christ in them, let us
remember to present this shield, “It is a faithful saying.” And, indeed,
where Christ is present, we must acknowledge that life and happiness are
there. We ought, therefore, to believe firmly, and to impress deeply on
our hearts, this fellowship, that we do not die apart, but along with
Christ, in order that we may afterwards have life in common with him;
that we suffer with him, in order that we may be partakers of his glory.
By *death* he means all that outward mortification of which he speaks in
<span id="iv.iii.ii-p37.1"></span>[2Co
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#010)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p37.1"></span>.  <span id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p39"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p40"></span>**12** *If we deny him, he will also
deny us* A threatening is likewise added, for the purpose of shaking off
sloth; for he threatens that they who, through the dread of persecution,
leave off the confession of his name, have no part or lot with Christ.
How unreasonable is it, that we should esteem more highly the transitory
life of this world than the holy and sacred name of the Son of God! And
why should he reckon among his people those who treacherously reject
him? Here the excuse of weakness is of no value;  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) for, if men did not willingly deceive
themselves with vain flatteries, they would constantly resist, being
endued with the spirit of strength and courage. Their base denial of
Christ proceeds not only from weakness, but from unbelief; because it is
in consequence of being blinded by the allurement of the world, that
they do not at all perceive the life which is in the kingdom of God. But
this doctrine has more need of being meditated on than of being
explained; for the words of Christ are perfectly clear,

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p42"></span>“Whoever shall deny me, him will I also
deny” (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p42.1"></span>[Mt
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#033)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p42.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p43"></span>It remains that every one consider with
himself, that this is no childish terror, but the judge seriously
pronounces what will be found, at the appointed time, to be true.

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p44"></span><span id="iv.iii.ii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p45"></span>**13** *If we are unbelieving, he
remaineth faithful* The meaning is, that our base desertion takes
nothing from the Son of God or from his glory; because, having
everything in himself, he stands in no need of our confession. As if he
had said, “Let them desert Christ who will, yet they take nothing from
him; for when they perish, he remaineth unchanged.”

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p46"></span>*He cannot deny himself* This is a still
stronger expression. “Christ is not like us, to swerve from his truth.”
Hence it is evident, that all who deny Christ are disowned by him. And
thus he drives away from wicked apostates the flatteries with which they
soothe themselves; because, being in the habit of changing their hue,
according to circumstances, they would willingly imagine that Christ, in
like manner, assumes various forms, and is liable to change; which Paul
affirms to be impossible. Yet, at the same time, we must firmly believe
what I stated briefly on a former passage, that our faith is founded on
the eternal and unchangeable truth of Christ, in order that it may not
waver through the unsteadfastness or apostasy of men.

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[2
Timothy 2:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014)<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>**14**. Of these things put *them* in
remembrance, charging *them* before the Lord that they strive not about
words to no profit, *but* to the subverting of the hearers.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p3"></span>**14**. Haec admone, contestans coram
Domino, ne verbis disceptent, ad nullam utilitatem, ad subversionem
audientium

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p4"></span>**15**. Study to shew thyself approved
unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the
word of truth.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p5"></span>**15**. Stude to ipsum probatum exhibere
Deo, operarioum non erubescentem, recte secanem sermonem vertitatis.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p6"></span>**16**. But shun profane *and* vain
babblings: for they will increase unto more ungodliness.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p7"></span>**16**. Caeterum profanas clamorum
inanitates omitte; ad majorem enim proficiunt impietatem.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p8"></span>**17**. And their word will eat as doth
a canker: of whom is Hymenæus and Philetus;

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p9"></span>**17**. Et sermo eorum, ut gangraena,
pastionem habebit, quorum de numero est Hymeneus et Philetus

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p10"></span>**18**. Who concerning the truth have
erred, saying that the resurrection is past already; and overthrow the
faith of some.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p11"></span>**18**. Qui circa veritatem aberrarunt,
dicentes resurrectionem jam esse factam, et subvertunt quorundam fidem.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p13"></span>**14** *Remind them of these things.*
The expression (ταῦτα) *these things*, is highly emphatic. It means that
the summary of the gospel which he gave, and the exhortations which he
added to it, are of so great importance, that a good minister ought
never to be weary of exhibiting them; for they are things that deserve
to be continually handled, and that cannot be too frequently repeated.
“They are things” (he says) “which I wish you not only to teach once,
but to take great pains to impress on the hearts of men by frequent
repetition.” A good teacher ought to look at nothing else than
edification, and to give his whole attention to that alone.  <span
id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169) On the contrary, he enjoins him not
only to abstain from useless questions, but likewise to forbid others to
follow them.  <span id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p16"></span>*Solemnly charging them before the
Lord, not to dispute about words.* Λογομαχεῖν means to engage earnestly
in contentious disputes, which are commonly produced by a foolish desire
of being ingenious. *Solemn charging* *before the Lord* is intended to
strike terror;  <span id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) and from this
severity we learn how dangerous to the Church is that knowledge which
leads to debates, that is, which disregards piety, and tends to
ostentation; of this nature is the whole of that speculative theology,
as it is called, that is found among the Papists.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p18"></span>*For no use,* On two grounds,
λογομαχία, or “disputing about words,” is condemned by him. It is of no
advantage, and it is exceedingly hurtful, by disturbing weak minds.
Although in the version I have followed Erasmus, because it did not
disagree with Paul’s meaning, yet I wish to inform my readers that
Paul’s words may be explained in this manner, “That which is useful for
nothing.” The Greek words are, εἰς οὐδὲν χρήσιμον, and I read *χρήσιμον*
in the accusative case, and not in the nominative. The style will thus
flow more agreeably; as if he had said, “Of what use is it, when no good
comes from it, but much evil? for the faith of many is subverted.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p19"></span>Let us remark, first, that, when a
manner of teaching does no good, for that single reason it is justly
disapproved; for God does not wish to indulge our curiosity, but to
instruct us in a useful manner. Away with all speculations, therefore,
which produce no edification!

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p20"></span>But the second is much worse, when
questions are raised, which are not only unprofitable, but tend *to the
subversion of the hearers* I wish that this were attended to by those
who are always armed for fighting with the tongue, and who, in every
question are looking for grounds of quarreling, and who go so far as to
lay snares around every word or syllable. But they are carried in a
wrong direction by ambition, and sometimes by an almost fatal disease;
which I have experienced in some. What the Apostle says about
*subverting* is shown, every day, by actual observation, to be perfectly
true; for it is natural, amidst disputes, to lose sight of the truth;
and Satan avails himself of quarrels as a presence for disturbing weak
persons, and overthrowing their faith.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p21"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p22"></span>**15** *Study to shew thyself to be
approved by God* Since all disputes about doctrine arise from this
source, that men are desirous to make a boast of ingenuity before the
world, Paul here applies the best and most excellent remedy, when he
commands Timothy to keep his eyes fixed on God; as if he had said; “Some
aim at the applause of a crowded assembly, but do thou study to approve
thyself and thy ministry to God.” And indeed there is nothing that tends
more to check a foolish eagerness for display, than to reflect that we
have to deal with God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p23"></span>*A workman that doth not blush* Erasmus
translates ἀνεπαίσχυντον *“*that ought not to blush.” I do not find
fault with that rendering, but prefer to explain it actively, “that doth
not blush;”, both because that is the more ordinary meaning of the word
as used by Greek writers, and because I consider it to agree better with
the present passage. There is an implied contrast. Those who disturb the
Church by contentions break out into that fierceness, because they are
ashamed of being overcome, and because they reckon it disgraceful that
there should be anything that they do not know. Paul, on the contrary,
bids them appeal to the judgment of God.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p24"></span>And first, he bids them be not lazy
disputants, but *workmen.* By this term he indirectly reproves the
foolishness of those who so greatly torment themselves by doing nothing.
Let us therefore be “workmen” in building the Church, and let us be
employed in the work of God in such a manner that some fruit shall be
seen then we shall have no cause to “blush;” for, although in debating
we be not equal to talkative boasters, yet it will be enough that we
excel them in the desire of edification, in industry, in courage, and in
the efficacy of doctrine. In short, he bids Timothy labor diligently,
that he may not be ashamed before God; whereas ambitious men dread only
this kind of shame, to lose nothing of their reputation for acuteness or
profound knowledge.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p25"></span>*Dividing aright the word of truth*.
This is a beautiful metaphor, and one that skillfully expresses the
chief design of teaching. “Since we ought to be satisfied with the word
of God alone, what purpose is served by having sermons every day, or
even the office of pastors? Has not every person an opportunity of
reading the Bible?”  <span id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) But Paul
assigns to teachers the duty of dividing or cutting,  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) as if a father, in giving food to his
children, were dividing the bread, by cutting it into small pieces.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p28"></span>He advises Timothy to “cut aright,”
lest, when he is employed in cutting the surface, as unskillful people
are wont to do, he leave the pith and marrow untouched. Yet by this term
I understand, generally, an allotment of the word which is judicious,
and which is well suited to the profit of the hearers. Some mutilate it,
others tear it, others torture it, others break it in pieces, others,
keeping by the outside, (as we have said,) never come to the soul of
doctrine.  <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) To all these faults
he contrasts time “dividing aright,” that is, the manner of explaining
which is adapted to edification; for that is the rule by which we must
try all interpretation of Scripture.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p30"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p31"></span>**16** *But avoid profane and unmeaning
noises* My opinion as to the import of these words has been stated in my
commentary on the last chapter of the First Epistle to Timothy; and my
readers will find it there.  <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175)

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p33"></span>*For they will grow to greater
ungodliness.* That he may more effectually deter Timothy from that
profane and noisy talkativeness, he states that it is a sort of
labyrinth, or rather a deep whirlpool, from which they cannot go out,
but into which men plunge themselves more and more.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p34"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p35"></span>**17** *And their word will eat as a
gangrene* I have been told by Benedict Textor, a physician, that this
passage is badly translated by Erasmus, who, out of two diseases quite
different from each other, has made but one disease; for, instead of
“gangrene,” he has used the word “cancer.” Now Galen, in many passages
throughout his writings, and especially where he lays down definitions
in his small work “On unnatural swellings,” distinguishes the one from
the other. Paul Aegineta, too, on the authority of Galen, thus in his
sixth book defines a “cancer;” that it is “an unequal swelling, with
inflated extremities, loathsome to the sight, of a leaden color, and
unaccompanied by pain.” Next, he enumerates two kinds, as other
physicians do; for he says that some “cancers” are concealed and have no
ulcer; while others, in which there is a preponderance of the black bile
from which they originate, are ulcerous.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p36"></span>Of the “gangrene,” on the other hand,
Galen, both in the small work already quoted, and in his second book to
Glauco, Aetius in his fourteenth book, and the same Ægineta in his
fourth book, speak to the following effect; that it proceeds from great
phlegmons or inflammations, if they fall violently on any member, so
that the part which is destitute of heat and vital energy tends to
destruction. If that part be quite dead, the Greek writers call the
disease σφάκελος the Latins <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>*sideratio,* and the common people call it
St. Anthony’s fire.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37"></span>I find, indeed, that Cornelius Celsius
draws the distinction in this manner, that “cancer “is the genus, and
“gangrene” the species; but his mistake is plainly refuted from numerous
passages in the works of physicians of high authority. It is possible,
also, that he was led astray by the similarity between the Latin words
“<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>cancer“ and “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p37.2"></span>gangræna.” But in the Greek words there can
be no mistake of that kind; for κάρκινος is the name which corresponds
to the Latin word “<span id="iv.iii.iii-p37.3"></span>cancer,” and
denotes both the animal which we call a crab, and the disease; while
grammarians think that γάγγραινα is derived ἀπο τοῦ γραίνειν which means
“to eat.” We must therefore abide by the word “gangrene,” which Paul
uses, and which best agrees with what he says as to “eating” or
“consuming.”

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p38"></span>We have now explained the etymology;
but all physicians pronounce the nature of the disease to be such, that,
if it be not very speedily counteracted, it spreads to the adjoining
parts, and penetrates even to the bones, and does not cease to consume,
till it has killed the man. Since, therefore, “gangrene” is immediately
followed by (νέκρωσις) mortification, which rapidly infects the rest of
the members till it end in the universal destruction of the body; to
this mortal contagion Paul elegantly compares false doctrines; for, if
you once give entrance to them, they spread till they have completed the
destruction of the Church. The contagion being so destructive, we must
meet it early, and not wait till it has gathered strength by progress;
for there will then be no time for rendering assistance. The dreadful
extinction of the gospel among the Papists arose from this cause, that,
through the ignorance or slothfulness of the pastors, corruptions
prevailed long and without control, in consequence of which the purity
of doctrine was gradually destroyed.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p39"></span>*Of the number of whom are Hymenaeus
and Philetus* He points out with the finger the plagues themselves, that
all may be on their guard against them; for, if those persons who aim at
the ruin of the whole Church are permitted by us to remain concealed,
then to some extent we give them power to do injury. It is true that we
ought to conceal the faults of brethren, but only those faults the
contagion of which is not widely spread. But where there is danger to
many, our dissimulation is cruel, if we do not expose in proper time the
hidden evil. And why? Is it proper, for the sake of sparing one
individual, that a hundred or a thousand persons shall perish through my
silence? Besides, Paul did not intend to convey this information to
Timothy alone, but he intended to proclaim to all ages and to all
nations the wickedness of the two men, in order to shut the door against
their base and ruinous doctrine.

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p40"></span><span id="iv.iii.iii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p41"></span>**18** *Who, concerning the truth have
erred, saying that the resurrection is already past* After having said
that they had departed from “the truth,” he specifies their error, which
consisted in this, that they gave out that “the resurrection was already
past.” In doing this, they undoubtedly contrived a sort of allegorical
resurrection, which has also been attempted in this age by some filthy
dogs. By this trick Satan overthrows that fundamental article of our
faith concerning the resurrection of the flesh. Being an old and
worthless dream, and being so severely condemned by Paul, it ought to
give us the less uneasiness. But when we learn that, from the very
beginning of the gospel, *the faith of some was subverted,* such an
example ought to excite us to diligence, that we may seize an early
opportunity of driving away from ourselves and others so dangerous a
plague; for, in consequence of the strong inclination of men to vanity,
there is no absurdity so monstrous that there shall not be some men who
shall lend their ear to it.

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[2
Timothy 2:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>**19**. Nevertheless the foundation of
God standeth sure, having this seal, The Lord knoweth them that are his.
And, Let every one that nameth the name of Christ depart from iniquity.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>**19**. Firmum tamen fundamentum Dei
stat, habens sigillum hoc, Novit Dominus, qui sint sui; et, Discedat ab
injustitia, quicunque invocat nomen Christi.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span>**20**. But in a great house there are
not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth;
and some to honour, and some to dishonour.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span>**20**. In magna quidem domo non solum
sunt vasa aurea et argentea, sed etiam lignea et fictilia, et alia
quidem in honorem, alia in contumeliam.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>**21**. If a man therefore purge himself
from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for
the master’s use, *and* prepared unto every good work.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>**21**. Si quis ergo expurgaverit se
ipsum ab his, erit vas in honorem sanctificatum, et utile Domino ad omne
opus bonum comparatum.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9"></span>**19** *Nevertheless the foundation of
God standeth firm*. We know too well, by experience, how much scandal is
produced by the apostasy of those who at one time professed the same
faith with ourselves. This is especially the case with those who were
extensively known, and who had a more brilliant reputation than others;
for, if any of the common people apostatize, we are not so deeply
affected by it. But they who in the ordinary opinion of men held a
distinguished rank, having been formerly regarded as pillars, cannot
fall in this manner, without involving others in the same ruin with
themselves; at least, if their faith has no other support. This is the
subject which Paul has now in hand; for he declares that there is no
reason why believers should lose heart, although they see those persons
fall, whom they were wont to reckon the strongest.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p10"></span>He makes use of this consolation, that
the levity or treachery of men cannot hinder God from preserving his
Church to the last. And first he reminds us of the election of God,
which he metaphorically calls *a foundation,* expressing by this word
the firm and enduring constancy of it. Yet all this tends to prove the
certainty of our salvation, if we are of the elect of God. As if he had
said, “The elect do not depend on changing events, but rest on a solid
and immovable foundation; because their salvation is in the hand of
God.” For as

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11"></span>“every plant which the heavenly Father
hath not planted  
must be rooted up,” (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>[Mt
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p11.2"></span>,)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12"></span>so a root, which has been fixed by his
hand, is not liable to be injured by any winds or storms.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p13"></span>First of all, therefore, let us hold
this principle, that, amidst so great weakness of our flesh, the elect
are nevertheless beyond the reach of danger, because they do not stand
by their own strength, but are founded on God. And if foundations laid
by the hand of men have so much firmness, how much more solid will be
that which has been laid by God himself? I am aware that some refer this
to doctrine, “Let no man judge of the truth of it from the
unsteadfastness of men;” but it may easily be inferred from the context,
that Paul speaks of the Church of God, or of the elect.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p14"></span>*Having this seal* The word <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>*signaculum* (which denotes either “a seal”
or “the print of a seal”) having led into a mistake some people who
thought that it was intended to denote a mark or impress, I have
translated it <span id="iv.iii.iv-p14.2"></span>*sigillum* (a seal,)
which is less ambiguous. And, indeed, Paul means, that under the secret
guardianship of God, as a signet, is contained the salvation of the
elect, as Scripture testifies that they are

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p15"></span>“written in the book of life.” (<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>[Ps
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p15.1"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.iv-p15.2"></span>[Php
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p15.2"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p16"></span>*The Lord knoweth who are his* This
clause, together with the word *seal,* reminds us, that we must not
judge, by our own opinion, whether the number of the elect is great or
small; for what God hath sealed he wishes to be, in some respect, shut
up from us. Besides, if it is the prerogative of God to *know who are
his*, we need not wonder if a great number of them are often unknown to
us, or even if we fall into mistakes in making the selection.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p17"></span>Yet we ought always to observe why and
for what purpose he makes mention of a *seal;* that is, when we see such
occurrences, let us instantly call to remembrance what we are taught by
the Apostle John, that

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p18"></span>“they who went out from us were not of
us.” (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>[1Jo
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#019)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p18.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p19"></span>Hence arises a twofold advantage. First,
our faith will not be shaken, as if it depended on men; nor shall we be
even dismayed, as often happens, when unexpected events take place.
Secondly, being convinced that the Church shall nevertheless be safe, we
shall more patiently endure that the reprobate go away into their own
lot, to which they were appointed; because there will remain the full
number, with which God is satisfied. Therefore, whenever any sudden
change happens among men, contrary to our opinion and expectation, let
us immediately call to remembrance, “The Lord knoweth who are his.”

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p20"></span>*Let every one that calleth on the name
of Christ depart from iniquity* As he formerly met the scandal by
saying, “Let not the revolt of any man produce excessive alarm in
believers;” so now, by holding out this example of hypocrites, he shews
that we must not sport with God by a feigned profession of Christianity.
As if he had said, “Since God thus punishes hypocrites by exposing their
wickedness, let us learn to fear him with a sincere conscience, lest
anything of that kind should happen to us. Whoever, therefore, calleth
upon God, that is, professeth to be, and wisheth to be reckoned, one of
the people of God, let him keep at a distance from all iniquity.”  <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) For to “call on the name of Christ”
means here to glory in Christ’s honorable title, and to boast of
belonging to his flock; in the same manner as to have

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22"></span>“the name of a man called on a woman”
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>[Isa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#001)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p22.1"></span>)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p23"></span>the woman is accounted to be his lawful
wife; and to have “the name of Jacob called on” all his posterity (<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>[Ge
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p23.1"></span>) means that the name of the family shall be
kept up in uninterrupted succession, because the race is descended from
Jacob.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p24"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p25"></span>**20** *In a great house* He now goes
farther, and demonstrates by a comparison, that when we see some who,
for a time, made a show of distinguished piety and zeal, fall back
shamefully, so far from being troubled on account of it, we ought rather
to acknowledge that this arrangement is seemly and adapted to the
providence of God. Who will find fault with a large house, in which
there is abundance of every kind of furniture, and which accordingly
contains not only those articles which are fitted for purposes of
display, but likewise those which are of a meaner sort? This diversity
is even ornamental, if, while the sideboard and the table glitter with
gold and silver, the kitchen is furnished with vessels of wood and of
earthenware. Why then should we wonder if God, the head of the family,
so rich and so abundantly supplied with everything, has in this world,
as in a large house, various kinds of men, as so many parts of
furniture?

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p26"></span>Commentators are not agreed, however,
whether the “great house” means the Church alone, or the whole world.
And, indeed, the context rather leads us to understand it as denoting
the Church; for Paul is not now reasoning about strangers, but about
God’s own family. Yet what he says is true generally, and in another
passage the same Apostle extends it to the whole world; that is, at
<span id="iv.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>[Ro
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#021)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>, where he includes all the reprobate under
the same word that is here used. We need not greatly dispute, therefore,
if any person shall apply it simply to the world. Yet there can be no
doubt that Paul’s object is to shew that we ought not to think it
strange, that bad men are mixed with the good, which happens chiefly in
the Church.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p27"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p28"></span>**21** *If any man shall cleanse himself
from these* If the reprobate are “vessels for dishonor,” they have that
dishonor confined to themselves, but they do not disfigure the house, or
bring any disgrace on the head of the family, who, while he has a
variety of articles of furniture, appropriates each vessel to its proper
use. But let us learn, by their example, to apply them to better and
worthier uses; for in the reprobate, as in mirrors, we perceive how
detestable is the condition of man, if he do not sincerely promote the
glory of God. Such examples, therefore, afford to us good ground for
exhortation to devote ourselves to a holy and blameless life.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p29"></span>There are many who misapply this
passage, for the sake of proving that what Paul elsewhere (<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>[Ro
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#016)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>) declares to belong “to God that sheweth
mercy,” is actually within the power of “him that willeth and him that
runneth.” This is exceedingly frivolous; for Paul does not here argue
about the election of men, in order to shew what is the cause of it, as
he does in the ninth chapter of the Epistle to the Romans (<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p29.2"></span>[Ro 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#000)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p29.2"></span>); but only means that we are unlike wicked
men, whom we perceive to have been born to their perdition. It is
consequently foolish to draw an inference from these words, about the
question whether it is in a man’s power to place himself in the number
of the children of God, and to be the author of his own adoption. That
is not the present question. Let this short warning suffice against
those who bid a man cause himself to be predestinated; as if Paul
enjoined men to do what they must have done before they were born, and
even before the foundations of the world were laid.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p30"></span>Others, who infer from these words that
free-will is sufficient for preparing a man, that he may be fit and
qualified for obeying God, do not at first sight appear to be so absurd
as the former, yet there is no solidity in what they advance. The
Apostle enjoins that men who desire to consecrate themselves to the Lord
cleanse themselves from the pollution of wicked men; and throughout the
Scriptures God gives the same injunction; for we find nothing here but
what we have seen in many passages of Paul’s writings, and especially in
the Second Epistle to the Corinthians,

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p31"></span>“Be ye clean, that bear the vessels of
the Lord.”  <span id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p33"></span>Beyond all controversy, we are called to
holiness. But the question about the calling and duty of Christians is
totally different from the question about their power or ability. We do
not deny that it is demanded from believers that they purify themselves;
but elsewhere the Lord declares that this is their duty, while he
promises by Ezekiel that he will send

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p34"></span>“clean waters, that we may be cleansed.”
(<span id="iv.iii.iv-p34.1"></span>[Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p34.1"></span>.)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p35"></span>Wherefore we ought to supplicate the
Lord to cleanse us, instead of vainly trying our strength in this matter
without his assistance.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p36"></span>*A vessel sanctified for honor* means,
set apart for honorable and magnificent purposes. In like manner, what
is *useful* to the head of the family is put for that which is applied
to agreeable purposes. He afterwards explains the metaphor, when he
adds, that we must *be prepared for every good work.* Away with the wild
language of fanatics, “I will contribute to the glory of God, as Pharaoh
did; for is it not all one, provided that God be glorified?” For here
God explicitly states in what manner he wishes us to serve him, that is,
by a religious and holy life.

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[2 Timothy
2:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#022)<span
id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>**22**. Flee also youthful lusts: but
follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the
Lord out of a pure heart.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>**22**. Juvenilis cupiditates fuge;
sequere autem justitiam, fidem, dilecgionem, pacem cum omnibus
invocantibus Dominum ex puro corde.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span>**23**. But foolish and unlearned
questions avoid, knowing that they do gender strifes.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span>**23**. Stultas vero et ineruditas
quaestiones vita, sciens quod generant pungas.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span>**24**. And the servant of the Lord must
not strive; but be gentle unto all *men*, apt to teach, patient,

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span>**24**. Atqui servum Domini non oportet
pugnare; sed placidum esse erga omnes, propensum ad docendum, tolerantem
malorum,

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span>**25**. In meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them repentance to the
acknowledging of the truth;

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span>**25**. Cum mansuetudine erudientem (*vel,
castigantem*) eos qui obsistunt, si quando det illis Deus paenitentiam
in agnititonem veritatis,

<span id="iv.iii.v-p10"></span>**26**. And *that* they may recover
themselves out of the snare of the devil, who are taken captive by him
at his will.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p11"></span>**26**. Et excitationen (*vel, reditum ad
sanam menten*) a laque diaboli, a quo capti tenentur ad ipsius
voluntatem.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p12"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p13"></span>**22** *Flee youthful desires.* This is
an inference from what goes before; for, after mentioning useless
questions, and having been led by this circumstance to censure Hymenaeus
and Philetus, whose ambition and vain curiosity had led them away from
the right faith, he again exhorts Timothy to keep at a distance from so
dangerous a plague, and for this purpose he advises him to avoid
“youthful desires.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p14"></span>By this term he does not mean either a
propensity to uncleanness, or any of those licentious courses or sinful
lusts in which young men frequently indulge, but any impetuous passions
to which the excessive warmth of that age is prone. If some debate has
arisen, young men more quickly grow warm, are more easily irritated,
more frequently blunder through want of experience, and rush forward
with greater confidence and rashness, than men of riper age. With good
reason, therefore, does Paul advise Timothy, being a young man, to be
strictly on his guard against the vices of youth, which otherwise might
easily drive him to useless disputes.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p15"></span>*But follow righteousness* He recommends
the opposite feelings, that they may restrain his mind from breaking out
into any youthful excesses; as if he had said, “These are the things to
which thou oughtest to give thy whole attention, and thy whole
exertions.” And first he mentions *righteousness,* that is, the right
way of living; and afterwards he adds *faith* and *love,* in which it
principally consists. *Peace* is closely connected with the present
subject; for they who delight in the questions which he forbids must be
contentious and fond of debating.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p16"></span>*With all that call on the Lord* Here, by
a figure of speech, in which a part is taken for the whole, “calling on
God” is taken generally for worship, if it be not thought preferable to
refer it to profession. But this is the chief part of the worship of
God, and for that reason “calling on God” often signifies the whole of
religion or the worship of God. But when he bids him seek “peace with
all that call upon the Lord,” it is doubtful whether, on the one hand,
he holds out all believers as an example, as if he had said, that he
ought to pursue this in common with all the true worshippers of God, or,
on the other hand, he enjoins Timothy to cultivate peace with them. The
latter meaning appears to be more suitable.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p17"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p18"></span>**23** *But avoid foolish and
uninstructive questions* He calls them *foolish,* because they are
*uninstructive;* that is, they contribute nothing to godliness, whatever
show of acuteness they may hold out. When we are wise in a useful
manner, then alone are we truly wise. This ought to be carefully
observed; for we see what foolish admiration the world entertains for
silly trifles, and how eagerly it runs after them. That an ambition to
please may not urge us to seek the favor of men by such display, let us
always remember this remarkable testimony of Paul, that questions, which
are held in high estimation, are nevertheless foolish, because they are
unprofitable.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p19"></span>*Knowing that they beget quarrels* Next,
he expresses the evil which they commonly produce. And here he says
nothing else than what we experience every day, that they give occasion
for jangling and debates. And yet the greater part of men, after having
received so many instructions, do not at all profit by them.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p20"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p21"></span>**24** *But the servant of the Lord must
not fight* Paul’s argument is to this effect: “The servant of God must
stand aloof from contentions; but foolish questions are contentions;
therefore whoever desires to be a ‘servant of God,’ and to be accounted
such, ought to shun them.” And if superfluous questions ought to be
avoided on this single ground, that it is unseemly for a servant of God
to fight, how impudently do they act, who have the open effrontery of
claiming applause for raising incessant controversies? Let the theology
of the Papists now come forth; what else will be found in it than the
art of disputing and fighting? The more progress any man has made in it,
the more unfit will he be for serving, Christ.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p22"></span>*But gentle towards all,*  <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) *qualified for teaching* When he bids
the servant of Christ be “gentle,” he demands a virtue which is opposite
to the disease of contentions. *To* the same purpose is what immediately
follows, that he be διδακτικός, “qualified for teaching.” There will be
no room for instruction, if he have not moderation and some equability
of temper. What limit will be observed by a teacher, when he is warmed
for fighting? The better a man is qualified for teaching, the more
earnestly does he keep aloof from quarrels and disputes.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p24"></span>*Patient to the bad*  <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) The importunity of some men may
sometimes produce either irritation or weariness; and for that reason he
adds, “bearing with them,” at the same time pointing out the reason why
it is necessary; namely, because a godly teacher ought even to try
whether it be possible for him to bring back to the right path obstinate
and rebellious persons, which cannot be done without the exercise of
gentleness.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p26"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p27"></span>**25** *If sometime God grant to them
repentance* This expression, “If sometime,” or “If perhaps,” points out
the difficulty of the case, as being nearly desperate or beyond hope.
Paul therefore means that even towards the most unworthy we must
exercise *meekness;* and although at first there be no appearance of
having gained advantage, still we must make the attempt. For the same
reason he mentions that “God will grant it.” Since the conversion of a
man is in the hand of God, who knows whether they who today appear to be
unteachable shall be suddenly changed by the power of God, into other
men? Thus, whoever shall consider that repentance is the gift and work
of God, will cherish more earnest hope, and, encouraged by this
confidence, will bestow more toil and exertion for the instruction of
rebels. We should view it thus, that our duty is, to be employed in
sowing and watering, and, while we do this, we must look for the
increase from God. (<span id="iv.iii.v-p27.1"></span>[1Co
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006)<span id="iv.iii.v-p27.1"></span>.)
Our labors and exertions are thus of no advantage in themselves; and
yet, through the grace of God, they are not fruitless.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p28"></span>*To the knowledge of the truth* We may
learn from this what is the actual repentance of those who for a time
were disobedient to God; for Paul declares that it begins with “the
knowledge of the truth.” By this he means that the understanding of man
is blinded, so long as it stands out fiercely against God and his
doctrine.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p29"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p30"></span>**26** *And deliverance from the snare of
the devil* Illumination is followed by deliverance from the bondage of
the devil; for unbelievers are so intoxicated by Satan, that, being
asleep, they do not perceive their distresses. On the other hand, when
the Lord shines upon us by the light of his truth, he wakens us out of
that deadly sleep, breaks asunder the snares by which we were bound,
and, having removed all obstacles, trains us to obedience to him.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p31"></span>*By whom they are held captive* A truly
shocking condition, when the devil has so great power over us, that he
drags us, as captive slaves, here and there at his pleasure. Yet such is
the condition of all those whom the pride of their heart draws away from
subjection to God. And this tyrannical dominion of Satan we see plainly,
every day, in the reprobate; for they would not rush with such fury and
with brutal violence into every kind of base and disgraceful crimes, if
they were not drawn by the unseen power of Satan. That is what we saw at
<span id="iv.iii.v-p31.1"></span>[Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii.v-p31.1"></span>,
 <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) that, Satan exerts his energy
in unbelievers.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p33"></span>Such examples admonish us to keep
ourselves carefully under the yoke of Christ, and to yield ourselves to
be governed by his Holy Spirit. And yet a captivity of this nature does
not excuse wicked men, so that they do not sin, because it is by the
instigation of Satan that they sin; for, although their being carried
along so resistlessly to that which is evil proceeds from the dominion
of Satan, yet they do nothing by constraint, but are inclined with their
whole heart to that to which Satan drives them. The result is, that
their captivity is voluntary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc43014.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p24"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p24.1"></span>Loyaux
et digne auxquels on se fie.” — “Faithful and trustworthy.”

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc43014.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p26"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p26.1"></span>Entre
plusieurs tenmoins, ou, en presence de plusieurs temoins.” — “Among many
witnesses, or, in presence of many witnesses.”

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc43014.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p27"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p27.1"></span>Il ne
vent pas dire qu’il ait appele des tesmoins, comme c’est la coustume es
contrats et autres actes solennels.” — “He does not mean that he called
witnesses, as is customary in contracts and other solemn acts.”

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc43014.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p35"></span> “By <span id="iv.iii.i-p35.1"></span>τοῦ
βίου πραγματείαις is meant the business of life in general, the plural
being used with allusion to the various kinds thereof, as agriculture,
trade, manufactures, etc. Now, by the Roman law, soldiers were excluded
from *all* such. See Grotius.” — *Bloomfield*

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc43014.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p36"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p36.1"></span>Brief,
qu’il nous souvienne du proverbe ancien duquel les Latins ont use en
faisant leurs sacrifices, <span id="iv.iii.i-p36.2"></span>Hoc *age*,
<span id="iv.iii.i-p36.3"></span>c’est a dire, Fay ceci, ou, Pense a
ceci, ascavoir que tu as entre mains, lequel signifie, que quand il est
question du service de Dieu, il s’y faut tellement employer, que nous ne
soyons ententifs ni affectionnez ailleurs.” — “In short, let us remember
the old proverb which the Latins used in offering their sacrifices,
<span id="iv.iii.i-p36.4"></span>*Hoc age,* that is to say, ‘Do this,’
or, ‘Think of this,’ ‘Do (or think of) what thou hast in hand,’ which
means, that when the worship of God is the matter in question, we must
be employed in it in such a manner that we shall not give our attention
or our heart to anything else.”

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc43014.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p44"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p44.1"></span>Je
scay bien que les autres ont tradoit ce passage autrement: Il faut que
le laboureur travaillaut (ou, qui travaille) prene premier des fruits.”
— “I am well aware that others translate this passage differently: The
husbandman laboring (or, who laboreth) must first partake of the
fruits.”

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc43014.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p45"></span> “The agonistic metaphor now passes into
an agricultural one, (such as we find at <span
id="iv.iii.i-p45.1"></span>[1Co
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.i-p45.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.i-p45.2"></span>[Jas
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.i-p45.2"></span>.)
The sense, however, will depend upon what <span
id="iv.iii.i-p45.3"></span>πρῶτον is to be referred to. It is most
naturally connected with <span id="iv.iii.i-p45.4"></span>μεταλαμβάνειν,
and such is the construction adopted by the generality of Expositors,
ancient and modern. The sense, however, thus arising, either involves
what is inconsistent with facts, or (even when helped out by the harsh
ellipsis of <span id="iv.iii.i-p45.5"></span>ἵνα κοπιᾷ, ‘in order that
he may be enabled to labor,’) contains a truth here inapposite; and the
*spiritual* application thence deduced is forced and frigid. It is not,
however, necessary, with some, to resort to conjecture. We have only to
suppose, what is common in his writings, a somewhat harsh transposition,
and (with many of the best Expositors) to join <span
id="iv.iii.i-p45.6"></span>πρῶτον with <span
id="iv.iii.i-p45.7"></span>κοπιῶντα, as is required by the course of the
argument; the true construction being this: — <span
id="iv.iii.i-p45.8"></span>δεῖ τὸν γεωργὸν πρῶτον κοπιῶντα τῶν καρπῶν
μεταλαμβάνειν, where <span id="iv.iii.i-p45.9"></span>κοπιὦντα is the
participle imperfect, and the literal sense is, — It is necessary that
the husbandmen should first labor, and then enjoy the fruits (of his
labor.)” — *Bloomfield.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc43014.htm#fr_162) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p49"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p49.1"></span>Enten
ce que je di, of, Considere.” — “Understand what I say, or, Consider
what I say.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc43014.htm#fr_163) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p51"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.i-p51.1"></span>De la
vie eternelle.” — “Of eternal life.”

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc43014.htm#fr_164) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p20"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p20.1"></span>Que
seulement il y avoit en luy une apparence d’homme, et non pas une vraye
nature humaine.” — “That there was in him only an appearance of man, and
not a real human nature.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc43014.htm#fr_165) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p21"></span> “If we wish to be victorious over all
the temptations of Satan, we must have great steadfastness, and must
know that it is not at random that we believe in Jesus Christ, that this
is not a doubtful matter, but that he came to us from God to be our
Redeemer. And for this reason Paul here points out that he is of the
lineage of David, and of his seed, for we know the promises that are
contained in the Holy Scriptures, namely, that the whole world should be
blessed in the seed of Abraham. Now, God confirmed this to David, by
shewing that from him the Redeemer should proceed, that is, from the
tribe of Judah, and from the house of David. Thus, the reason why Paul
claims for him this title is, that, having the promises which God had
formerly made to the fathers, concerning that Redeemer who hath been
given to us, we may not doubt that we ought to receive him with full
conviction, and have no reason to doubt whether he is, or is not, the
Messiah. Why? He is descended from the house of David; and, although at
that time, it had no royal dignity, yet that defect could not lessen the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, but, on the contrary, was fitted to
confirm more fully our belief that it was he who should be sent. And
why? The Prophet Isaiah did not say that he would be born in a palace,
or that he would be brought up in great splendor; but he said, that he
would grow as a small twig (<span id="iv.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>[Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.ii-p21.1"></span>) from the root of Jesse; as if he had said,
that, although Jesus Christ was of royal lineage, nevertheless his
parents were poor, and were held of no account in worldly matters,
having no rank or grandeur.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc43014.htm#fr_166) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p27"></span> “It might be replied, that it is
superfluous that Paul should ‘endure for the elect.’ ‘Cannot God save
those whom he elected and adopted before the creation of the world,
without the assistance of men? Has the immutable decree of God any need
of human help, or of creatures? Why then does Paul say that he endures
on account of the elect?’ Now, it us true that God will conduct his
people to the inheritance which is prepared for them but yet he is
pleased to make use of the labor of men. Not that he is under a
necessity of borrowing anything from us, but he confers on us this honor
by his undeserved goodness, and wishes that we should be instruments of
his power. Thus Paul does not boast that the salvation of the children
of God depends on his steadfastness or on the afflictions which he had
to endure; but he only means that God wishes to conduct his people by
means of the word, and that he employs men whom he has chosen for that
purpose, as for his own work, and makes them instruments of the power of
his Holy Spirit.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc43014.htm#fr_167) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p38"></span> The reader will do well to consider the
author’s Commentary on that remarkable passage. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc43014.htm#fr_168) <span
id="iv.iii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p41"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.ii-p41.1"></span>On
ne gaigne rien yci de se defendre et excuser, en alleguant son
infirmite.” — “Here nothing is gained by defending and excusing
ourselves on the ground of our weakness.”

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc43014.htm#fr_169) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p14"></span> “When any person comes to the sermon,
let it not be to hear something that tickles the ears, or that gives
pleasure; but let it be to make progress in the fear of God, and in
humility, and to excite to prayer, and to confirm him in patience. If we
have heard an exhortation today, and if tomorrow it is repeated to us,
let us not think that this is superfluous, let us not be annoyed at it;
for every person who carefully examines this subject will find it to be
highly necessary for him to be reminded of the lesson which he had
learned, that he may practice it well. If, therefore, God refreshes our
memory with it, he has conferred on us a great favor. That is what we
have to remark on this passage, when Paul says, ‘Remind them of these
things.’ For undoubtedly he intended to prevent what we frequently meet
with, when it is said, ‘We have heard this before. Is not that a very
common remark? Where is the little child that does not know it?” Such
things are said by those who would wish to be fed with useless
questions. But here the Holy Spirit desires that what is useful should
be brought forward every day, because we have not sufficiently
understood it, and because it must be put in practice.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc43014.htm#fr_170) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p15"></span> *“*<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>Mais de defendre aussi aux autres qu’ils ne
s’y amusent point.” — “But likewise to forbid others to entertain
themselves with them.”

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc43014.htm#fr_171) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p17"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>Est pour donner crainte a ceux qui
voudroyent faire autrement.” — “Is intended to strike terror into those
who would wish to act differently.”

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc43014.htm#fr_172) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p26"></span> “We shall find fanatics who think that
it is a loss of time to come to the church to be taught. ‘What? Is not
all the doctrine of God contained in the Bible? What more can be said on
the subject?’ It is making them little children (they will say) to come
here to be taught; but grown people may dispense with it. What? Must
there be all this preaching? There are but two points in Scripture, that
we ought to love God and to love our neighbor. We have not heard these
things merely from those who come to relate them; but the most
distinguished scholars of those who vomited out these blasphemies have
themselves declared them to us. I could name the day when it was said,
and the houses, and the hour, and the people who were present, and how
wicked men poured out their venom and their passion against God, to
overthrow and destroy all religion, if it were possible; that is but too
well known. On the contrary, Paul shews us here, that if we have only
the Holy Scripture, it is not enough that each of us read it in private,
but the doctrine drawn from it must be preached to us in order that we
may be well informed” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc43014.htm#fr_173) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>De
couper et tailler.” — “Of cutting and carving.”

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc43014.htm#fr_174) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29"></span> “<span id="iv.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>A
l’ame de la doctrine.”

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc43014.htm#fr_175) <span
id="iv.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p32"></span> See p. 173.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc43014.htm#fr_176) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p21"></span> “Let us not therefore be distressed by
all the scandals that may arise. And yet let us study to walk in fear,
not abusing the goodness of our God but knowing that, since he hath
separated us from the rest of the world we must live as being in his
house and as being his, in the same manner as he hath given to us the
onward mark of baptism, that we may also have the signature of his holy
Spirit, for he is “the earnest,” as Paul calls him, of our election, he
is the pledge which we possess that we are called to the heavenly
inheritance. Let us therefore pray to God that he may sign and seal in
our hearts his gracious election, by his holy Spirit, and, at the same
time, that he may keep us sealed and as shut up under the shadow of his
wings; and if poor reprobates go astray and are lost, and if the devil
drives them along, and if they do not rise again when they fall, but are
cast down and ruined, let us, on our part, pray to God to keep us under
his protection, that we may know what it is to obey his will, and to be
supported by him. Though the world strive to shake us, let us lean on
this foundation, that the Lord knoweth who are his; and let us never be
drawn aside from this, but let us persevere and profit more and more,
till God withdraw us from the present state into his kingdom, which is
not liable to change.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_177"></span>[178](cc43014.htm#fr_177) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p32"></span> This quotation is taken from <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p32.1"></span>[Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p32.1"></span>, but the passage to which our author,
quoting from memory, makes reference, is <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p32.2"></span>[2Co
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p32.2"></span>, where the words of Isaiah have undergone
considerable variation See Calvin's Com. On Corinthians, vol. 2, p. 261.
— *Ed*.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[179](cc43014.htm#fr_178) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p23"></span> “When he says, that we must be “gentle
towards all, “he means that we ought to be easy and affable in receiving
all who come to be taught in the gospel, for if we do not give them
access it is like shutting the door against them, so that they shall
never have it in their power to approach to God. We must, therefore,
have that mildness and humanity dwelling in us, so as to be ready to
receive all who wish to be instructed. And therefore, he adds, that we
must be \`qualified for teaching,’ as if he had said, that those things
are connected with each other, gentleness and skill in teaching. The
reason is, if a man be fierce and inaccessible, it will never be
possible for us to receive instruction from him. He who wishes to be a
good teacher must conduct himself with civility, and must have some way
of drawing those who come to him, so as to gain their affections; and
that cannot be, unless he have that ‘gentleness’ of which Paul speaks.
Thus we see how he intended to confirm what he had briefly stated, that
a man who is quarrelsome, and addicted to disputes and contentions, is
in no degree a servant of God. And why? As servants of God, must we not
labor to gain poor ignorant persons? And that cannot be, unless we are
mild, unless we hear patiently what they say, unless we bear with their
weakness, until by little and little they are edified. If we have not
that, it is like casting them off.” — *Fr. Ser.*

<span id="fn_179"></span>[180](cc43014.htm#fr_179) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p25"></span> “<span
id="iv.iii.v-p25.1"></span>Portant patiemment les mauvais.” — “Patiently
bearing with the bad”

<span id="fn_180"></span>[181](cc43014.htm#fr_180) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p32"></span> See Calvin's Com. On Galatians and
Ephesians, p. 220.— *Ed*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc43015)
