[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43002)  [Next](cc43004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span>TO THE MOST NOBLE AND TRULY CHRISTIAN PRINCE,

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>EDWARD, DUKE OF SOMERSET,

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span>EARL OF HERTFORD, etc. PROTECTOR OF ENGLAND  
AND IRELAND, AND ROYAL TUTOR,

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span>JOHN CALVIN

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span>OFFERS HIS SALUTATIONS.

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span>The brilliant reputation, most noble Prince,
not only of your other virtues, altogether heroic, but especially of
your distinguished piety, produces so warm a love of you in the hearts
of all good men, even of those to whom you are unknown by face, that you
must unavoidably be regarded with extraordinary affection and reverence
by all right-minded persons in the kingdom of England, on whom hath been
bestowed the privilege, not only of beholding with their eyes those
benefits which are admired by others who only hear of them, but likewise
of reaping all the advantage which a most excellent governor can confer
on the whole body of the people, and on every one of its members. Nor is
there any reason why the praises bestowed on you should be suspected of
falsehood, as if they proceeded from flatterers; for a clear proof of
them is to be found in your actions.

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span>When a pupil belongs to private life, and his
wealth is moderate, the work of a tutor is attended by difficulty; but
you hold the office of tutor, not of the King only, but of a very large
kingdom, and you discharge that office with such wisdom and skill, that
all are astonished at your success. That your virtue might not shine
merely amidst the laws, and in a peaceful state of the commonwealth, God
has exhibited it to view in war also, which has hitherto been conducted
by you with not less prosperity and valor.

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>Yet the great and numerous difficulties which
every person readily perceived that you had experienced did not hinder
you from making the restoration of religion your principal object. That
consideration is certainly not less advantageous to the public benefit
of the kingdom than it is worthy of a Prince; for then do kingdoms enjoy
solid prosperity and faithful guardianship, when he, on whom they were
founded, and by whom they are preserved — the Son of God himself — rules
over them. Thus you could not have established more firmly the kingdom
of England than by banishing idols and setting up there the pure worship
of God; for the true doctrine of godliness, which had too long been
crushed and buried by the sacrilegious tyranny of the Roman Antichrist,
cannot but be restored; and what is that, but to place Christ on his
throne? And this act, which in itself is excellent, is so much the more
praiseworthy on account of the small number of rulers in the present day
who own the subjection of their high rank to the spiritual scepter of
Christ.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span>It was therefore a high advantage to this
illustrious King, that such a person, related to him by blood, was the
guide of his youth; for, although the noble character of his mind is
universally applauded, yet, in training him to habits of manly firmness,
and in regulating the English Church, so long as his tender age does not
permit him to discharge these duties, such an instructor was much
needed. And I doubt not that even now he acknowledges that you were
given to him by the peculiar kindness of God, in order that he might
soon afterwards receive his affairs from your hands in excellent
condition.

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>For my own part, neither the distance of
place nor my humble rank could prevent me from congratulating you on
your distinguished success in promoting the glory of Christ. And since
it has pleased God to make me one of those by whose labors and exertions
he has, in the present day, given to the world the doctrine of the
gospel in greater purity than before, why should I not, however widely I
am separated from you, express as strongly as I can my reverence for
you, who have been appointed, through the extraordinary kindness of God,
to be the defender and protector of that very doctrine? And since I had
no other proof of it to give, I thought that, at least as an earnest of
my regard, it was my duty to offer to you my Commentaries on two of
Paul’s Epistles. Nor have I selected at random the gift that I should
offer, but, in the exercise of my judgment, have selected that which
appeared to me to be the most suitable. Here Paul admonishes his beloved
Timothy by what kind of doctrine he must edify the Church of God, what
vices and enemies he must resist, and how many annoyances he must
endure. He exhorts him to give way to no difficulties, to vanquish all
dangers by courage, to restrain by authority the licentiousness of
wicked men, and not to bestow gifts through eagerness to obtain their
favor. In short, in these two Epistles we have the true government of
the Church set before us in a lively picture.

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span>Now, since in order to restore the English
Church, which, along with almost every other part of Christendom, had
been miserably corrupted by the shocking wickedness of Popery, you
employ your strenuous efforts under the direction of your King, and for
that purpose have many Timothys under your charge, neither they nor you
can direct your holy transactions in a more profitable manner than by
taking the rule here laid down by Paul for your pattern. For there is
nothing in them that is not highly applicable to our times, and hardly
anything that is necessary in the building of the Church that may not
likewise be drawn from them. I trust that my labor will, at least,
afford some assistance; but I choose that this should be known by
experience rather than that I should boast of it in words. If you, most
noble Prince, shall approve of it, I shall have abundant reason for
congratulating myself; and your remarkable kindness does not permit me
to doubt that you will take in good part that service which I now
perform.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span>May the Lord, in whose hand are the ends of
the earth, long uphold the safety and prosperity of the kingdom of
England, adorn its illustrious King with the royal spirit, bestow on him
a large measure of all blessings, and grant to you grace to persevere
happily in your noble course, that through you his renown may be more
and more widely extended.

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>Geneva, *25th July* 1556.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](cc43004)
