[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43025)  [Next](cc43027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span>Philemon Verses 15-19

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>**15**. For perhaps he therefore departed
for a season, that thou shouldest receive him for ever;

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>**15**. Forte’ enim ideo separatus fuit ad
tempus, ut perpetuo eum retineres;

<span id="vi.iii-p4"></span>**16**. Not now as a servant, but above a
servant, a brother beloved, specially to me, but how much more unto
thee, both in the flesh, and in the Lord?

<span id="vi.iii-p5"></span>**16**. Non jam ut servum, sed super servum
fratrem dilectum maxime mihi, quanto magis tibi et in carne et in
Domino?

<span id="vi.iii-p6"></span>**17**. If thou count me therefore a
partner, receive him as myself.

<span id="vi.iii-p7"></span>**17**. Si igitur me habes consortem,
suscipe eum tanquam me.

<span id="vi.iii-p8"></span>**18**. If he hath wronged thee, or oweth
*thee* ought, put that on mine account;

<span id="vi.iii-p9"></span>**18**. Si vero qua in re to laesit, vel
aliquid debet, id mihi imputa

<span id="vi.iii-p10"></span>**19**. I Paul have written *it* with mine
own hand, I will repay *it*: albeit I do not say to thee how thou owest
unto me even thine own self besides.

<span id="vi.iii-p11"></span>**19**. Ego Paulus scripsi mea manu, ego
solvam, ut ne dicam tibi, quod et to ipsum mihi debes.

<span id="vi.iii-p12"></span><span id="vi.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p13"></span>**15** *For perhaps he was separated*. If
we are angry on account of offenses committed by men, our minds ought to
be soothed, when we perceive that those things which were done through
malice have been turned to a different end by the purpose of God. A
joyful result may be regarded as a remedy for evils, which is held out
to us by the hand of God for blotting out offenses. Thus Joseph — when
he takes into consideration, that the wonderful providence of God
brought it about, that, though he was sold as a slave, yet he was
elevated to that high rank, from which he could provide food for his
brethren and his father — forgets the treachery and cruelty of his
brethren, and says, that he was sent before on their account. (<span
id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>[Ge 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#005)<span
id="vi.iii-p13.1"></span>.)

<span id="vi.iii-p14"></span>Paul therefore reminds Philemon that he
ought not to be so greatly offended at the flight of his slave, for it
was the cause of a benefit not to be regretted. So long as Onesimus was
at heart a runaway, Philemon, though he had him in his house, did not
actually enjoy him as his property; for he was wicked and unfaithful,
and could not be of real advantage. He says, therefore, that he was a
wanderer for a little time, that, by changing his place, he might be
converted and become a new man. And he prudently softens everything, by
calling the flight a departure, and adding, that it was only *for a
time.*

<span id="vi.iii-p15"></span>*That thou mightest receive him for ever*.
Lastly, he contrasts the perpetuity of the advantage with the short
duration of the loss.

<span id="vi.iii-p16"></span><span id="vi.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p17"></span>*But above a servant, a beloved brother*.
He next brings forward another advantage of the flight, that Onesimus
has not only been corrected by means of it, so as to become a useful
slave, but that he has become the “brother” of his master.

<span id="vi.iii-p18"></span>*Especially to me.* Lest the heart of
Onesimus, wounded by the offense which was still fresh, should be
reluctant to admit the brotherly appellation, Paul claims Onesimus first
of all, as his own “brother.” Hence he infers that Philemon is much more
closely related to him, because both of them had the same relationship
in the Lord according to the Spirit, but, according to the flesh,
Onesimus is a member of his family. Here we behold the uncommon modesty
of Paul, who bestows on a worthless slave the title of a brother, and
even calls him a dearly beloved brother to himself. And, indeed, it
would be excessive pride, if we should be ashamed of acknowledging as
our brother those whom God accounts to be his sons.

<span id="vi.iii-p19"></span>*How much more to thee*. By these words he
does not mean that Philemon is higher in rank according to the Spirit;
but the meaning is, “Seeing that he is especially a brother to me, he
must be much more so to thee; for there is a twofold relationship
between you.”

<span id="vi.iii-p20"></span>We must hold it to be an undoubted truth,
that Paul does not rashly or lightly (as many people do) answer for a
man of whom he knows little, or extol his faith before he has
ascertained it by strong proofs, and therefore in the person of Onesimus
there is exhibited a memorable example of repentance. We know how wicked
the dispositions of slaves were, so that scarcely one in a hundred ever
came to be of real use. As to Onesimus, we may conjecture from his
flight, that he had been hardened in depravity by long habit and
practice. It is therefore uncommon and wonderful virtue to lay aside the
vices by which his nature was polluted, so that the Apostle can truly
declare that he has now become another man.

<span id="vi.iii-p21"></span>From the same source proceeds a profitable
doctrine, that the elect of God are sometimes brought to salvation by a
method that could not have been believed, contrary to general
expectation, by circuitous windings, and even by labyrinths. Onesimus
lived in a religious and holy family, and, being banished from it by his
own evil actions, he deliberately, as it were, withdraws far from God
and from eternal life. Yet God, by hidden providence, wonderfully
directs his pernicious flight, so that he meets with Paul.

<span id="vi.iii-p22"></span><span id="vi.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p23"></span>**17** *If, therefore, thou holdest me to
be thy associate*. Here he lowers himself still further, by giving up
his right and his honor to a runaway, and putting him in his own room,
as he will shortly afterwards offer himself to be his cautioner. He
reckoned it to be of vast importance that Onesimus should have a mild
and gentle master, that immoderate severity might not drive him to
despair. That is the object which Paul toils so earnestly to accomplish.
And his example warns us how affectionately we ought to aid a sinner who
has given us proof of his repentance. And if it is our duty to intercede
for others, in order to obtain forgiveness for those who repent, much
more should we ourselves treat them with kindness and gentleness.

<span id="vi.iii-p24"></span><span id="vi.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p25"></span>**18** *If in any thing he hath done thee
injury*. Hence we may infer that Onesimus had likewise stolen something
from his master, as was customary with fugitives; and yet he softens the
criminality of the act, by adding, *or if he oweth thee anything* Not
only was there a bond between them recognised by civil law, but the
slave had become indebted to his master by the wrong which he had
inflicted on him. So much the greater, therefore, was the kindness of
Paul, who was even ready to give satisfaction for a crime.

<span id="vi.iii-p26"></span><span id="vi.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p27"></span>**19** *Not to tell thee that thou owest to
me thyself*. By this expression he intended to describe how confidently
he believes that he will obtain it; as if he had said, “There is nothing
that thou couldest refuse to give me, even though I should demand
thyself.” To the same purpose is what follows about lodging and other
matters, as we shall immediately see.

<span id="vi.iii-p28"></span>There remains one question. How does Paul —
who, if he had not been aided by the churches, had not the means of
living sparingly and frugally — promise to pay money? Amidst such
poverty and want this does certainly appear to be a ridiculous promise;
but it is easy to see that, by this form of expression, Paul beseeches
Philemon not to ask anything back from his slave. Though he does not
speak ironically, yet, by an indirect figure, he requests him to blot
out and cancel this account. The meaning, therefore, is — “I wish that
thou shouldest not contend with thy slave, unless thou choosest to have
me for thy debtor in his stead.” For he immediately adds that Philemon
is altogether his own; and he who claims the whole man as his property,
need not give himself uneasiness about paying money.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon 20-25](cc43027)
