[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc43017)  [Next](cc43019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 43: Timothy, Titus, and Philemon*, tr. by
John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>TO TWO EMINENT SERVANTS OF CHRIST,

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>WILLIAM FARELL AND PETER VIRET,

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>HIS DEARLY BELOVED BRETHREN AND COLLEAGUES,

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>JOHN CALVIN

<span id="v.i-p5"></span>OFFERS HIS SALUTATIONS.

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>My Commentary — which now goes forth bearing
the inscription of your name — is, indeed, a small gift; yet I fully
believe that it will be acceptable to you, for this reason, that the
subject of the Epistle induced me to make this Dedication. The task of
putting the finishing hand to that building which Paul had begun in
Crete, but left incomplete was undertaken by Titus. I occupy nearly the
same position with regard to you.

<span id="v.i-p7"></span>When you had made some progress in rearing this
church with vast exertions, and at great risk, after some time had
elapsed I came, first as your assistant, and afterwards was left as your
successor, that I might endeavor to carry forward, to the best of my
ability, that work which you had so well and so successfully begun. This
work, I and my colleagues are endeavoring to perform, if not with so
great progress as might have been desired yet heartily and faithfully,
according to our small ability.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>To return to you, in consequence of holding the
same relation to you which Paul assigned to Titus, I have been led to
consider this similarity as a good reason for selecting you above all
others, for dedicating to you this labor of mine. Meanwhile, to the
present age, and perhaps to posterity, it will, at least, be some
evidence of that holy union and friendship which exists between us. I
think that there has never been, in ordinary life, a circle of friends
so sincerely bound to each other as we have been in our ministry. With
both of you I discharged here the office of pastor; and so far was there
from being any appearance of envy, that you and I seemed to be one. We
were afterwards separated by places; for you, Farell, were invited by
the church of Neufchastel, which you had rescued from the tyranny of
Popery, and brought into obedience to Christ; and you, Viret, are held
in the same relation by the church of Lausanne.

<span id="v.i-p9"></span>While each of us occupies his own position, our
union brings together the children of God into the fold of Christ, and
even unites them in his body; while it scatters not only those outward
enemies who openly carry on war with us, but those nearer and domestic
enemies, by whom we are inwardly assailed. For I reckon this also to be
one of the benefits resulting from being closely related, that filthy
dogs, whose bites cannot succeed so far as to tear and rend the Church
of Christ, do nothing more than bark against it with all their might.
And, indeed, we cannot too thoroughly despise their insolence, since we
can, with truth, glory before God, and have proved to men by the
clearest evidence, that we cultivate no other society or friendship than
that which has been consecrated to the name of Christ, which has
hitherto been advantageous to his Church, and which has no other aim
than that all may be at one with us in Him.

<span id="v.i-p10"></span>Farewell, my most excellent and most upright
brethren. May the Lord Jesus continue to bless your pious labors!

<span id="v.i-p11"></span>Geneva, 29th November 1549.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Argument](cc43019)
