[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Astrology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hba06)  [Next](hba08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766187152/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Hindu Book of Astrology*, by Bhakti Seva, \[1902\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

### Aries

### ♈

*All persons born from March* 21 *to April* 19*, inclusive, were born
under the sign of Aries*.

This is the head of the Fire Triplicity, and is a most favorable sign to
be born under. Your success in everything depends upon tremendous push,
energy and systematic effort. You must be stubbornly persistent in
carrying your projects to a successful end. Men and women of the Aries
sign, when they do not fear opposition and are sincerely honest and
earnest, become great leaders. The planetary and solar forces which
surround you can be of greater help when you are kind, gentle, noble,
generous, agreeable and affable. At such times you are very fascinating,
charming and exceedingly magnetic and hypnotic. Any man or woman who has
magnetism is a grand success in everything. Education, culture and lots
of reading will make you a brilliant and charming conversationalist.
Knowledge and wisdom are of great importance to you, and you can acquire
the same without

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

much difficulty; if you will set your mind with grim determination that
you must have knowledge, powers and forces which are yours by birth will
help you. We Yogis positively know that the Devas (angels) will help all
Aries people who have faith in themselves, and are hopeful, cheerful and
courageous. There are no powers in the Universe that can help in the
slightest degree anyone who whines, murmurs, complains and broods over
troubles or obstacles. There is a way out of every trouble, and the
calm, quiet, patient being soon discovers that way and is helped by
unseen powers. When the higher or spiritual side of the Aries nature is
cultivated, it makes a wonderfully strong character, with extraordinary
psychic powers for banishing all ill, sorrows and troubles. You can
acquire clairvoyant powers when you can learn to diligently apply
yourself to trying to improve your mind and body by thought and study.
It is very important that you think highly and live simply. Only do one
thing at a time and learn to concentrate and apply your mind to that one
thing alone and not scatter and throw away your force on a number of
undertakings. Steady application is absolutely necessary in amassing
wealth and having perfect health and happiness. It will be of advantage
to you to study

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

occult science and metaphysics. Many such works are published, and if
you have a strong desire to know about these subjects you will find a
way of laying your hands on the right works at the right time. Always
remember you can make a grand success in anything you undertake if you
so believe at the commencement of the undertaking and persistently hold
to that thought until the end. Aries people of a true religious nature,
who persistently and silently pray to God for help, light and direction,
invariably have their prayers answered.

And now a few words of caution about envy and jealousy. Often Aries
people have envious and jealous thoughts, which retard their progress
and dwarf their nature. To counteract this bad and injurious state of
mind learn to give forth thoughts of love and kindness to all your
fellow beings, and especially learn to love your enemies and those who
are more successful than you are. In love affairs you will be a dire
failure if you are the least bit jealous. No one can really love or
admire anyone tainted the least bit with jealousy. Love is always driven
away by jealousy. Moreover, there can be no happiness where there is
jealousy. In business matters, envy of others’ success is disastrous to
one's own success. It should delight you

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

beyond all measure to see everyone succeed, and you should never gloat
over the failure of anyone who is competing with you. A great man or
woman is always above all envy or all jealousy. Selfishness, anger,
intense greed and impatience can also block your way to success. You
must always strive to be large and broadminded, liberal, tolerant and
not bigoted. These are the men and women of the world who succeed—the
broadminded people. Now I tell you emphatically that any Aries person
who will be guided by my advice, as given here, can without a question
of doubt become perfectly healthy, vigorous and powerful, lovable and
charming, and wealthy and happy. Associate all you can with good, wise,
educated and successful people, and in conversation do little talking
yourself, but a great deal of observation and thinking. This is a rule
observed by all who desire to become wise and great. Life and its proper
conduct is the greatest problem man has to solve, and we must silently
and alone give much thought to it. When you have a very important matter
to decide, take plenty of time in arriving at a decision; you should
always be in a quiet and calm state of mind in settling important
matters. Anger, haste and excitement have caused much failure, much
sadness and much sorrow in this world.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

A happy marriage is a good thing for Aries people of both sexes, and in
the selection of a life partner don't be in too great a hurry. If you
are married, then continually study and plan to make your home a bright
and happy one. If there is not harmony, peace and happiness in your
home, the chances are that it is your fault, as Aries people often cause
unhappiness by their anger, selfishness and jealousy.

This sign is governed by Mars and Neptune; the gems are
amethyst-Brazilian and diamond. The astral colors are white and rose
pink.

The diseases that you are most likely to suffer from are headache,
affections of the eyes, stomach troubles and paralysis.

Your best companions are those born in Sagittarius and your own sign.

There are really two distinct types of Aries people; one type is tall,
spare, with oval face, swarthy complexion and large shoulders; the other
type is short of stature.

May the peace and blessing of the Blessed One, and all the Devas
(angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister
or brother of Aries.—*Bhakti Seva*.

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

#### CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of
another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence
you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days,
any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding
sign.

##### THE CUSP OF PISCES—ARIES.

*March* 21 *to* 27.

This cusp is a union of the feet—intellect—head, which insures
remarkable brain power and capacity to carry business projects of all
kinds to successful conclusions. They have remarkable enthusiasm and
kindliness, which makes them charming friends and companions. Their
loyalty is as steadfast as the day is long. They depend upon their
intuition, which is remarkable, and their intuition never fails them.
The women are unusually fond of men's society and enjoy having a large
number of strings to their bow, and do not care to forfeit this pleasure
for marriage. The men are more given to marriage than the women, but
they have a way of calculating conditions and look before

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

they leap. The genius of this cusp is absolute cleanliness, inside and
out. They have warm hearts and cool passions, and are called the
consolers of the world.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Taurus](hba08)
