[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Astrology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hba09)  [Next](hba11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766187152/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Hindu Book of Astrology*, by Bhakti Seva, \[1902\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

### Cancer

### ♋

*All persons born from June* 21 *to July* 21*, inclusive, were born
under the sign of Cancer*.

Cancer is the head sign of the Water Triplicity. Hindu Astrology teaches
persons born in this sign much that will enable them to go through life
successfully. In the first place, you are naturally restless and
nervous, and have a hard time making your friends understand your true
nature. It is important that you know all your faults and realize that
you must overcome them before you can reach the high degree of success
which you can attain, and which belongs to your sign. Really you can
become very successful and reach greatness by paying strict attention to
what I here tell you. Your propensity is to travel, and it would be an
excellent thing if you could engage in some occupation that would
require you to be on the go most of the time. But don't travel about
chasing rainbows or will-o’-the-wisps. Have a steadfast and earnest
purpose in everything you do, and try

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

to acquire much knowledge of the world by reading good books of travel,
history and biographical sketches. Learn at once that it is a very bad
thing for you to talk about yourself—about the great things you have
done or intend doing. Be silent and act, ever remembering that
performance and true work speak louder than boastful talk. Don't get
discouraged or make yourself miserable because you cannot do all of the
great things you see others doing. If you will keep calm and patient you
can attract unseen planetary and solar forces which in time will enable
you to surpass in accomplishment many of your acquaintances who seem to
be ahead of you. Your best plan is to be secretive and work quietly
without letting anyone know your plans. "Acts speak louder than words;
silence is golden." You must be at the head and not at the tail end of
things, and you can accomplish this by quiet thought, careful study and
much reading of the lives of successful men and women. Learn all you can
and understand that knowledge and wisdom is power. Stick persistently to
one kind of occupation and don't fritter and waste your energy and
powers by changing from one thing to another. While you are naturally
adapted to do many things well, take the advice of one who knows what he
is writing about and stick faithfully and

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

persistently to one thing at a time. If you will follow the teachings of
Hindu Astrologers, you will never regret it. Under no circumstances tell
a lie; be truthful and honest, and you will receive great reward. There
is a Great and Loving Ruler of this universe to whom you ought to pray
for Light, Love and Direction. Such prayers are always answered. He, the
Blessed One, can lead you to all peace and all happiness. The Devas
(angels) are ever ready to help you. Have the strongest faith in
yourself, for you can succeed and progress and go onward, forward and
upward, if you once realize what a great being you are. Cancer people
have always furnished the world with great and grand people. Make up
your mind that you will be one more of this class. It is in You to be
good and great, and you certainly can become so by following Bhakti
Seva's advice, as given here.

We Yogis always urge men and women to marry and have children and make
happy homes. In all ages through the writings of sages, seers and
prophets, God has given the command to His children to marry and
perpetuate the races. Any man or woman who does not heed this Divine
command is doing wrong. There is nothing that can bring so much success
and true happiness into the world

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

as a happy marriage. If you are married, then God bless you, and may you
create such a happy home that it will be an example to others to do
likewise. In love affairs the Cancer people are very successful when
they are sincere and persistent. Laziness, selfishness, vanity, jealousy
and dishonesty, are sometimes natural to the Cancer person, and must be
overcome before any success or happiness can be had. You ought to dress
well, but must not run in debt for fine clothes; every dollar you spend
for anything ought to be a dollar that you have earned. Don't let people
make you vain, silly and foolish by flattering you; flattery can work
you great harm if you listen to it. Don't be fickle or inconstant,
because a fickle person is soon known, and no one will place any
confidence in such a person. Some women of the Cancer sign are very
fickle. Cancer is governed by the Moon, and as this satellite of our
planet is changing every month, it accounts for the restless and
impatient nature of people born in your sign. You can easily remedy all
of your bad tendencies and become very strong and great by holding in
your mind all the time an earnest desire to be a better man or a better
woman. The planetary forces and the solar fluids will then help you to
destroy the influence of the Moon. Besides, Cancer people can get much

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

strength and help from unseen powers if they will only feel and
understand that behind all Creation is one Blessed Principle—the Ancient
One—the King of all kings—the very God of the universe. Until you can
realize this grand truth you will have to struggle and suffer more or
less. God can only help those who sincerely desire His help. The study
of philosophy, metaphysics and occult science will open your eyes to
wonderful truths, and give you powers and forces that will make you
successful, magnetic, charming and fascinating.

This sign is governed by the Moon, and the gems are emerald and black
onyx. The astral colors are green and russet brown. The diseases which
you are most likely to suffer from are indigestion, and gastric
troubles. Your best companions are those born in Pisces and Scorpio.

People born in this sign are usually of medium stature, rather large in
the upper portion of the body, with round face, soft skin, pale
complexion and small features.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas
(angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister
or brother of Cancer.—*Bhakti Seva*.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

#### CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of
another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence
you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days,
any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding
sign.

##### THE CUSP OF GEMINI—CANCER.

*June* 21 *to* 27.

The utmost care in childhood is needed to persons born in this cusp.
These persons are opinionated and self-willed, but make the best
neighbors and friends when they are understood. The women born in this
sign are often coquettes. Their marital engagement is treated as a
passing sensation, and marriage is liable to be held quite as loosely.
They are excessively fond of children, and in case of separation they
fight to death for their custody. The men are extremely fond of
pleasure, and liable to sacrifice business and home for this pursuit.
The bon vivants of the world were born in this cusp. They are
excessively fond of show, but possess a magnetic quality that draws
everything to them. If they fail in business some one always

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

comes to the rescue and helps them start again, and it is very apt to be
a woman. They are remarkably brilliant, and always show to advantage on
account of their wonderful magnetism. They are fluent talkers, great
readers, but are apt to be superficial. The genius of this sign is
kindliness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leo](hba11)
