[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Astrology](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](hba10)  [Next](hba12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766187152/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Hindu Book of Astrology*, by Bhakti Seva, \[1902\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

### Leo

### ♌

*All persons born from July* 22 *to August* 21*, inclusive, were born
under the sign of Leo*.

Leo, the Lion, is the middle of the Fire Triplicity. You are naturally
of a jovial, sympathetic, free and friendly disposition. To the extent
that you are kind-hearted, generous and sympathetic to that extent you
are magnetic and hypnotic. Magnetic and hypnotic powers will give you
force to accomplish much good, and will draw to you wealth, health and
happiness. You must bend every energy to be magnetic and charming,
because these qualities are yours by birth. By paying the strictest
attention to what I advise in this delineation you can swing through
this world as a lovable and powerful being, and can avoid all trouble
and friction. Put forth of your love freely to all mankind and have only
high aims, ever striving to be pure and high thinking. There is nothing
that can harm you or retard your progress and growth if you will only
hold steadfast

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

to high principles. Learn that silence is great power; that
cheerfulness, contentment and patience will bring you much prosperity,
much health and much happiness. Never shirk a duty, and work with a high
motive, and you will become invincible and can overcome with your mind
and will every obstacle in your pathway. Education, culture and
refinement can do great things for you. Always remember you were born
under very fortunate planetary conditions; that many of the greatest
people in the world are Leo people. You have the strength and courage of
a lion, and if you are not successful or happy, it is due entirely to
your neglect of cultivating and bringing out your wonderful powers.
These powers and forces which make for success are always latent in
every Leo person, and can only be developed by intelligent exercise of
mind and the will. And that reminds me your will power is naturally very
strong; but you can add greatly to its strength by continually and
persistently holding in your mind high and strong thoughts. Any line of
thinking which causes you to be morbid or blue is weakening to your will
power, and all worry and apprehension about your success will drive good
things away from you. In business, love and money matters you must feel
that you will be successful; that there is no possible

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

chance for you to fail, and when you can get into that state of mind
your success is as certain and sure as two and two are four. Those of
the Leo sign who reach the highest attainments are always of a
philosophical turn of mind; they fully realize that it is of the utmost
importance for them to take the ups and downs of life without a single
murmur or complaint. Learn to take the bitter with the sweet, rain with
the sunshine, sorrow with joy, and never whine or grumble at seeming
fate or ill-luck. In other words, be grateful and thankful for the many
good things in the world. By doing this you strengthen your will power
and will easily batter down all obstacles in your way to success and
happiness. In love affairs, by being mild, gentle and kind to the being
loved, you will in return not only win all of that person's love, but
will also command their highest respect and admiration. All Leo people
should seek an early marriage. If you are married, your chief aim or
object should be to make your home bright and happy by flooding it with
all the kindness and love you can command.

In every move you make be absolutely fearless and courageous, always
keeping in mind that the highest rewards are only earned by indomitable
will, great courage and an entire absence of doubt

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

and fear. The cultivated and educated Leo persons possess clairvoyant
and intuitive powers which enable them to foretell and prophesy things
that will happen in the future. Many great prophets, seers, sages and
wise men and women come out of the sign of Leo. Listening to music,
reading good books and magazines and observing and studying successful
men and women is of untold advantage to you. You can learn anything that
you will apply your mind to, and ought to be handy in mechanical
matters. Your possibilities are so great when you correct and remedy
your faults that I have taken special pains in this delineation to
caution you against faults which will retard your progress and make you
unhappy. In no way ever give way to an inclination to be tricky. Always
stick to strict truth and don't borrow money, books or anything. Be
independent and self-reliant, and you will become a giant of strength
and power. If you yield to laziness, indolence, impatience, anger, worry
and anxiety you will bring on yourself misery and suffering. Always
control your passion for the opposite sex; by not doing this many a Leo
person has brought on great misery and trouble. Always have high ideals
and try to

live a pure and high life; let your higher nature have full sway.
Whenever you are troubled or

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

anxious, I would advise you to go off in a quiet spot and all alone try
to calm yourself by thinking of the bright side of life. If you can
believe in prayer to the Good God, offer up to Him a silent prayer for
calm, peace, help and love, and your prayer will be answered. The power
of an earnest, sincere prayer for relief is wonderful. By prayer, the
Yogis often perform wonderful things, which, to the ignorant and
unbelieving, seem like great miracles. As a matter of fact, we say that
every force and power in the universe is natural, and can be controlled
and directed in natural ways for good. We know there is nothing
supernatural in the universe. The great Sun of this solar system governs
your sign, and you can attract all of the wonderful solar fluids and
currents to your aid by living the higher life. I have suggested here
just what you are to do to have perfect health, amass wealth and
happiness, and if you heed my teachings you cannot fail.

This sign is governed by the Sun. The gems are ruby and diamond. The
astral colors are red and green. The diseases which you are most likely
to suffer from are weak lungs, heart troubles, fevers, back and kidney
troubles and despondency. Your best companions are those born in
Sagittarius, Libra and Aries.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

People born in this sign are usually wiry, but not over tall, well
proportioned, round head, light or ruddy complexion and have a strong,
deep voice and large eyes.

May the peace and blessings of the Blessed One, and all the Devas
(angels) and all the Yogis of the Universe be ever with you, dear sister
or brother of Leo.—*Bhakti Seva*.

#### CUSPS.

If your first breath was drawn when one sign was taking the place of
another, you will partake of the characteristics of both signs. Hence
you belong to the Cusp. The residence in a sign consists of six days,
any time less endows one with some of the qualities of the preceding
sign.

##### THE CUSP OF CANCER—LEO.

*July* 22 *to* 28.

In these six days are found the elements of fire and water. The most
daring and confident, the most unscrupulous politicians were born during
this period. The natural Leo laziness is much modified by the Cancer
restlessness, which keeps

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

them looking for strange sensations and new enjoyments. They are
secretive or frank, whichever best suits their purpose. The men require
the utmost probity of their wives, but do not care to be called to book
in return. The women of this sign are intense, and if treated harshly or
indifferently will conceive a disgust for their marital companion. As
mothers, they are self-denying and affectionate, and as housekeepers
they are orderly; in fact, they are liable to be too orderly for their
own comfort and those around them. The people born in this cusp are
gifted with phenomenal memory. There are no heights that these people
cannot attain if they so determine. They can always be depended upon to
stand by a friend through every description of trouble. When well reared
and educated these natives have beautiful characters, freely giving to
the suffering both from their pocket and their heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Virgo](hba12)
