<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc114)  [Next](swc116.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Pellar and Tom Treva's Cows</span>

Few who came to the comfortable old inn of the "Lamb and Flag" thought
of leaving before night. Witch stories and drolls became the order of
the time. Most of these were of the ordinary class, in which man or
beast is said to wither, pine, or die, because some malicious neighbour
begrudges the possession of the blighted thing. There were, however, a
few other stories told which may be worth repeating, as they show how
prone our simple country-folks are to think some supernatural agency
must be the cause of everything unusual or mysterious, and how, the more
particularly in whatever may be regarded as a calamity, the devil and
his hags are sure to have the blame attributed to them. The following
story (which we select from a number of others told on a like occasion)
will serve as an example of this, and that the pellar sometimes
endeavoured to serve his clients by more trustworthy means than by his
charms, powders, bones, and stones. Perhaps, after all, these fanciful
remedies were as good as anything else which is usually prescribed for
imaginary ailments. It is well known that the old Pellar of the
south-country was as skilful a cow-leech as any then going, and when
persons came to him in the belief that because their cattle, by some
unaccountable means, didn't thrive, they must be bewitched, he often
accompanied them home, and detected the true cause of the disaster.

A young couple (the man a tinner, the woman also worked to bal), after
many years of hard work and care in scraping everything together, took a
small farm, which they were barely able to stock, and their chief
dependance for raising the rent was the profit of three milk cows. About
Christmas, the cows were taken to house and kept there on turnips and
straw. A few weeks after the cows were taken in, it was found that they
left their food, and an unusual stench in the cattle-house was thought
to proceed from the diseased kine. One of them soon died, and the
others, though all that could be thought of, as likely to entice them to
eat, was

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

placed before them, yet refused corn, hay, and everything else untasted
in their cribs. Next, the wife took to her bed;—she did not know what
was the matter with her, but felt as if she had neither the power nor
the heart to rise. The neighbours advised the farmer, called Tom Treva,
to go, without delay, to the conjuror. Someone, they said, had begrudged
the land or the cattle, and had bewitched his wife. The man couldn't be
persuaded to do anything of the sort;—he had never injured man, woman,
or child that he knew of; all the neighbours were on good terms with
them; what should he be ill-wished for? And as for begrudging, he didn't
fear nor believe in it. Everybody knew it was better to be envied than
pitied. But the wife (Molly) would have it that she was illwished, and
begrudged to her husband, by the mother of a young woman Tom was once
courting of and left for her.

As the young farmer had no peace, with his wife and the other folks,
about the witchcraft, he consented to go and see if the conjuror could
do them any good. Early in the morning, last thing before starting, he
slipped the ropes from the necks of the beasts, and left open the
cattle-house door. If they got out and caught cold he thought they would
but die a little sooner. They didn't appear able to rise from the straw,
and his wife was in bed, seemingly worse than ever when he left home.

The young farmer arrived at the Pellar's abode about noon. The wise man,
as usual, asked if he knew of anyone who had a grudge against him. Tom,
replied, as he had answered his wife and others before, that he was on
good terms with everyone, as far as he knew, and couldn't condemn
anybody in his mind for illwishing him or his: his wife he believed to
be merely fretting over their loss. The conjuror, wishing to do his best
for the young farmer, said he would go home with him and try if he could
find out what caused the bad speed.

Now, about the hour that the farmer arrived at the conjuror's, some men,
passing through the town-place on their way home from bal, were
surprised to see that the two cows, left untied in the house in the
morning, were then out in the fold eating from the litter thrown out of
the stable—the roots, leaves, and rotten refuse of turnips, anything and
everything they could find, like half-starved things.

The tinners went into the house, called up to the woman, who was fast
asleep, "Molly, we have good news for ’e; the cows, that were all but
dead when your good man started for the conjuror, are now out in the
fold eating everything they can find." The goody, on hearing that,
thought no more about her illness, but jumped out of bed and came down
half-dressed to see the cows. "Now," said they all, "who wouldn't put
faith in what the pellar can do? An hour ago, perhaps, not more, your
Tom got there and put him to work to undo the spells, and now see, here
are you and the cows as well as ever you were in the world. Why the
spell is broke as soon as the word is spoken by the pellar's mouth."

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The cows were
turned into a field, and a few turnips given them, which they ate and
looked for more.

Towards night, Tom Treva came home with the pellar, found the cows
eating heartily from the straw that his wife had given them, and she and
several of the neighbours gathered together to behold the wonder. The
wise man was regarded by all the assembled multitude with awful respect.
Everyone present believed that his conjurations had effected the
wonderful change in Tom's wife and cows.

The conjuror took good care not to undeceive them, and declined to say
or do anything before those who hadn't paid for his services; but, as
soon as the way was clear and the curious neighbours all gone, he took a
lanthorn and went into the cattle-house, to look round the place, and
more particularly to examine the food which the cows rejected. Though
the cows were in the fold and the house clean, yet there was all about
the place a sickening stench which seemed to proceed from the old hollow
wall, close over the cribs where food was placed for the cows. On nearer
inspection he observed a green slimy substance oozing from between the
stones and tricking down on the food in the cribs. The pellar, taking a
bar of iron, ripped out some of the stones, and there in the hollow of
the old wall (from which all the clay filling had long departed) he saw
a mass of corruption which accounted for the supposed bewitching. A
score or more of dead rats were there, all in a heap, in such a state of
rapid putrefaction as is only caused by poison. Some few weeks before
the cattle became ill, as the premises were swarming with rats, the
young farmer procured some "mundicky stuff" from a burning house. This
poison he mixed in dough, made with flour and cream, which was placed
for the rats in their holes opening into a barn adjoining the cow-house;
and, as is frequently the case, they gathered together in a great number
to breathe their last in the same place. The mass of corruption cleared
away, the wall rebuilt, with plenty of lime and mortar, and every
precaution taken to prevent any farther mischief from the poisonous
compound, the cows and wife were soon as well as ever. Yet many
attributed the harm to witchcraft rather than to the poisoned rats, and
gave the pellar all the credit of working the cure by his conjurations.

We know of many cases, within the last few years, of persons going off
to the conjuror, under the impression that members of their family or
their cattle were illwished, when the cattle were only suffering from
ordinary complaints often caused by insufficient or unwholesome food and
want of cleanliness.

An acquaintance who long had a run of bad luck, told us, the other day,
that, partly out of curiosity to see the pellar's performance and in
part to satisfy the whims of some relatives, he visited the wise man
J.T., at his abode in or near Helston. He found a great number seated in
the outer room waiting their turn to be admitted to the inner apartment

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

that they might consult the oracle. Tired with waiting, and finding no
one inclined for a chat, he said to the company in general, "Why, when
will the old conjuror send us all going. He ought to have somebody to
help him, seeming to me." "Dear me friend," one of the company replied,
"You seem to take it very light, but you ought to think that we are met
here on a very solemn occasion." "Yes, indeed," said other "it would be
well if we passed the time in prayer to beg that wisdom from on high
might be imparted to the good man."

Our acquaintance, being one of those who make no mystery of anything,
because he rates little what others think or say of his proceedings,
related to the neighbours what he saw and heard at the conjuror's. Then
he found out that there was scarcely a person in the parish but had been
to the pellar more than once. They didn't mind making it known to anyone
who had been there too, because they couldn't laugh at each other.

Many of the witch stories we hear of are what we call "funny but wisht."
They are sad indeed, being a melancholy proof of the superstitious
ignorance still common in many districts, and among many of the most
religious of the country folks.

<span id="img_12400"></span> ![](img/12400.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ghost of Stythians](swc116.md)

</div>
