<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc108)  [Next](swc110.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Uter Bosence and the Piskey</span>

*A [Midsummer](errata.htm#6.md) Night's Legend*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"<span class="smallcaps">Joculo</span>:—O you are a
dangerous farie! I care not whose hand I were in, so I were out of
yours.  
"<span class="smallcaps">Fairy</span>:—Will’t please you dance, sir?  
"<span class="smallcaps">Joculo</span>:—Indeed, sir, I cannot handle my
legs.  
"<span class="smallcaps">Fairy</span>:—O you must needs dance and
sing,  
             Which, if you refuse to do,  
             We will pinch you black and black,  
             And about we go."—Lylie, *Mayde's Metamorphosis*.</span>

</div>

Little more than two centuries ago, great part of Sancreed parish
belonged to the ancient family of Bosence, when an old gentleman called
Uter Bosence lived on the estate of the same name, in that parish.

The old man was a widower, with an only son, also called Uter, who was
the pride and joy of his father's heart. Young Uter Bosence was known,
far and near, as the champion of the wrestling-ring, the most expert
hurler, and noted horseman in the West. His favourite pastime was to
tame the wild colts that in these times (when but a small proportion of
the land was enclosed and cultivated) had the run of hills and moors,
until they were many years old. Young Uter is said to have had some
secret method of taming them, so that in a few days he could make the
wildest colt perfectly docile without the use of whip or spur; at the
same time they would become so fond of him as to follow him the same as
his dogs.

The young Uter had long been engaged to his cousin Pee Tregeer, of St.
Just, who passed a great part of her time in Bosence, to superintend the
housekeeping at harvest and feasten-tides. She was now, on this
Midsummer's eve, staying there to make the few arrangements required for
her wedding, which was intended to take place in a few weeks. Her
brother William Tregeer, and Uter, had been as much attached to each
other from childhood as brothers ought to be. They were so near a match
in wrestling, boxing, and all other manly exercises, that they often
bruised each other black and blue by practising—not for the mastery, but
that each might train the other to be the best man in his parish. On the
afternoon of this Midsummer's eve there was a wrestling-match at St.
Just. All the standards having been made long before, the prizes were to
be won that afternoon. The two young men were at the wrestling, each one
being the champion standard for his own parish. The best prize, a pair
of silver spurs, was won by Uter after a stout contest with his comrade,
Will Tregeer. Lanyon, of Tregonebris, gained the second prize—a
gold-lace hat; and another Sancreed man won the pair of embroidered
gloves, the usual third prize. The St. Just men were much chagrined to
have all their prizes carried off to Sancreed. It was the usual

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

custom then, whenever large parties of young men went from one parish to
take part in the games held in another, to take their silver ball with
them, that they might practice hurling on the road. The Sancreed boys
had their ball with them then, as they wanted to keep their hand in
against the next day, when a match was to be played between Sancreed and
Buryan. Tregeer and the St. Just men proposed that the victorious
wrestlers should try the game of hurling with them, that evening, from
St. Just to Sancreed church-town. The St. Just men were then noted for
being the most expert hurlers in the west country, and had carried off
the balls from all the parishes round, and from Sancreed, more than
once. The wrestling being over many hours before dark, the challenge was
accepted, so that instead of passing the evening together, as usual, in
the parish in which the games were held, the ball was thrown up at St.
Just Cross. With a swift run, and smart contest over hills and moors,
the St. Just men kept the ball amongst them best part of the way, until
they arrived at Trannack downs, when the Sancreed party, getting hold of
the ball, sent it to Uter Bosence, who, with the rest of his party,
being well acquainted with the ground, took right across the country,
over the rocks and cairns on the downs, through the bogs, and old
stream-works on the moors, straight for church-town, and bore their ball
in triumph into the trough in the church porch long before the St. Just
men got out of the bogs in the moors. Sancreed men were proud enough of
their double victory, and treated the men of St. Just, and all-comers,
to the best in the "Bird-in-hand," if that was the sign of the ancient
hostel in those days. It was not felt to be any disgrace to the losers
to be beaten on the run, with which they were quite unacquainted, once
in a while; so the carouse was kept up with high glee and good
fellowship until near midnight, when all left the public-house for their
homes, that they might have a little rest before going to Buryan, where
the principal games of the west were to be held on Midsummer day. Uter,
and the young men belonging to Botrea, Durval, Trannack, and other
places near, with the St. Just men, reached the end of Botrea land all
together. Uter, wishing to speak with Will Tregeer, the two young men
went on together as far as the stile on the church-road leading from
Botrea townplace into the field. Here they sat awhile, and the rest of
their Sancreed comrades went on before to the different villages in the
side of the hill.

The weather was so calm, and the air so clear, that the young men could
distinctly hear the wild music to which the dance was kept up around the
bonfires on the Beacon and Caer Brane hills. After the two friends had
said their say, and agreed where to meet the next day, they lingered
together some time looking at the young men and maidens, with hands
firmly locked, dancing in a ring around the blazing fires, or pulling
each other for good luck over the embers, that they might extinguish the
fires by treading them out, without breaking their chain, or rather
ring. Then they vainly tried to count the fires to be seen blazing on
all the hills far

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

away. The young men, waiting at the end of Botrea land, called to Will
Tregeer to come along or they would go home without him. Uter said he
could get on very well alone: he wasn't at all tipsy, only a little
lightheaded, as he had only drunk a few mugs of beer to cool himself
after the run. Over a while he had taken two or three horns of brandy
for fear of a chill. He wouldn't have Will Tregeer go any farther with
him, as he had only a few fields to cross to bring him home. Soon after
they wished good night, Uter remembered that the old gentleman, his
father (who liked to keep up the ancient customs), had agreed to go with
Pee Tregeer, and the rest of the young folks, to the bonfire on Trannack
hill, which Uter could still see blazing away in all its glory, with the
young people dancing around it. He had also promised to come to Trannack
hill for them on his way home from St. Just, not expecting then that a
hurling-match would bring him back before night. His father and Pee
Tregeer might still be waiting for him on the hill. That he might be
there as soon as possible, he took his course across Botrea and Bosence
fields, straight for the hill. He knew every inch of the ground, and
could find his way, as he thought, by night as well as by day.

When he got into the field on Bosence, called Park-an-chapel, a cloud of
fog rising from the moors (so thick that one could scarcely see a yard
before him), entirely surrounded Uter or buried him, we may say; yet,
although he couldn't see the bonfires then, he could hear the singing
plainer than ever. He steered his course for the eastern side of the
field, as near as he could guess toward the place of an opening in the
hedge through which he intended to pass into the next field. He soon
came to the fence, but found no opening; searched forth and back;
wandered round and round, without avail; then he tried to get over what
appeared to be a low place in the hedge; but the more he climbed the
higher the hedge seemed to rise above him. He tried ever so many places,
but could never reach the top of the fence, and, every time he gave
over, his ears rung with such tormenting, mocking laughter as nothing
but a piskey ever made. He was very anxious to reach the hill, and above
all to get out of this field, as it had a bad name, and was shunned by
most people after nightfall. The ugliest of sprights and spriggans, with
other strange apparitions, such as unearthly lights, were often seen
hovering around the ruins of the old chapel, or oratory, which stood in
this field, and departing thence in all directions. These ruins were so
overgrown with brambles and thorns that there was but little of the
building to be seen. Uter had often laughed at the stories of those who
had been piskey-led; in fact on the subject of spriggans, piskeys, small
people, and all the rest of the fairy tribe, he was no better than an
unbelieving heathen, and would often blaspheme and abuse the merry and
innocent small-people, who are now seldom seen on account of the
increased pride and wickedness of the world. Uter had turned round and
round so often that he neither knew what course he was steering nor in
what part of the field he stood,

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

until he found himself among the thickets surrounding the ruins; even
here he heard the same teasing, tormenting, laughter proceeding from
inside the chapel. Then he took it into his head that some one in flesh
and blood was following him about in the mist. He soon got out of
temper, and threatened to let whoever, or whatever, was dogging his
footsteps, feel the weight of his boot as soon as he could lay hands on
him, and send him to the place of which one need not mention the
direction as well-dressed respectable people such as we are have no
business there. Knowing now where he was, and that it would be an easy
matter for him to get on the church-road and be home in a few minutes,
he sat himself down to rest and draw breath, on a long stone, lying
close by the doorway of the ruined chapel.

Uter felt so very stiff and weary that he would as soon pass the night
where he sat as go a step farther. He thought to have a comfortable
smoke at least (tobacco was just come into fashion then, and the use of
the fragrant weed regarded as a mark of distinction by the young beaux).
He took his tinder-box from his pocket, struck a light for his pipe,
which was no sooner in full blast then he heard all sorts of strange
noises in the old building. Looking towards the entrance, he saw it
filled with the most frightful sprights and spriggans one ever
beheld—all sorts of unnaturally-shaped bodies were topped with heads
like those of adders. The ugly things kept hissing, grinning, throwing
out their forked tongues, and spitting fire at him all the time; others
were making a horrible dance, and cutting all sorts of fantastic capers
on the roofless walls of the chapel, and hanging down from the gable
close over his head. hissing like serpents all the time. Uter rose to
get away from the ugly sight as quickly as he could, and was no sooner
on his forkle-end then he saw, standing close before him, a being
(whether beast, sprite, or demon he knew not) much like a black
buck-goat, with horns and beard more than a yard in length; but a goat
of such a size, with such flaming balls of eyes and such a length of
tail behind, was never seen on hills or moors before. The ugly thing,
standing on its hind legs, danced round, trying all the time to get a
firm grip of Uter with the hairy paws, in the place of hoofs, on its
fore legs. Uter did not like dancing with such a partner, yet he could
hardly hinder his feet from keeping time to the music ringing from the
surrounding hills. He was rather scared, but not afraid, for he feared
nothing in this world, give him fair play and no favour. He tried to
keep off the thing (which must have been the piskey) by striking its
long hairy paws with his black thornstick. He had no sooner hit the
thing than the cudgel was snatched from his hand, his heels tripped up,
and he was laid flat on his back; then he was sent rolling down the hill
faster and faster, till he went like a stone bowled over cliff, tossed
over the hedge at the bottom of the field like a bundle of rags, then
pushed through the brambles and furze on the moor, or pitched over the
bogs and stream-works on the piskey's horns; then whirled away like dust
before the wind. When

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

he fell down he was pitched up again, and not allowed a moment's rest
from rolling or running until he passed the high-road in Botrea bottom,
and was driven by piskey or demon smash against a high rock at the foot
of the Beacon hill, where he was found quite insensible the next day.

Uter's father and affianced bride remained late on Trannack hill, as the
old gentleman liked to join in the ancient pastimes that united all
classes of the people, as well as in those manly exercises for which the
men of the west have in former times been famed. Besides, he might have
believed (as many did not long ago) that dancing round the fire in an
unbroken chain-ring with, hands firmly locked, the prescribed number of
times, leaping through the flame and treading out the fire, insured good
luck for the year, and was the surest preservative against the spells of
witchcraft, blighting of an evil eye, and many other calamities to which
we are subject from the powers of darkness.

They were not surprised because Uter did not return, as he often stayed
with Will Tregeer over night, when anything in the way of games was
going on in St. Just. In the morning, when Tregeer came to Bosence, not
finding Uter there, he said nothing to alarm the old man, but went to
the neighbouring villages to enquire after his comrade, when all the
good folks, young and old, dispersed to make search over hill and dale,
moor and downs.

Uter was soon found lying, apparently dead, at the foot of the rock—the
flesh almost cut from his ribs with the rowels of the prize spurs, which
he wore as a trophy, suspended by their straps to the leathern girdle
that, according to the fashion of the time, he wore round the waist; the
spikes of the rowels, full an inch long, had pierced his flesh to the
bone in his rolling over nearly half a mile. The silver buttons, large
as crown-pieces, beautifully engraved and embossed, were all torn from
his coat. They say that these buttons were sought for, and continued to
be found on Uter's and the piskey's route, many years after. No wonder
that the old folks, even the giants, were fond of the game of bob, when
the buttons were so well worth the labour of throwing the quoits after
them. Uter was soon taken home. When he came to himself he told how he
was served out by the piskey. Some say, he was never so strong a man
after the piskey encounter as before. However, he soon got well enough
to be wedded, and seldom went to the games to prove his strength after
he took home his wife, but paid more attention to his farm and family;
so perhaps the rolling did him good, on the whole.

Such is the story just as it was told me a few years ago by William
Bosence, of Sancreed. The name of Uter is still kept up in the Bosence
family. I did not venture to suggest (what was in my mind all the time)
that, perhaps, the frightful vision was merely the production of a
drunken dream, well knowing that to show the least scepticism respecting
the cherished belief of the old folks was a sure way to be regarded by
them as

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

something worse then a heretic. Besides, there is little reason in
pretending to be so over wise as to scorn their harmless fancies, when,
little more than a century ago, no one doubted that these phantoms often
appeared, and tales of possession and witchcraft were circulated as
articles of faith. Then the most learned and most religious men were not
exempt from this weakness.

There are still some remains of the old chapel of Bosence to be seen,
which are well worthy of a visit. The site of the ruins is about
half-a-mile north-west of Sancreed church. Those who wish to see some of
the most interesting views of the Mount's-bay and neighbourhood should
not fail to climb the Beacon hill and Caer Brane, as few landscapes are
so beautiful as the view (obtained from about half-way up the Beacon
hill) of the bay and the diversified scenery of its shores. From the
summit, the contrast is remarkable of the wild and romantic hills and
cairns on the north and west, with the prospect of soft rural beauty in
the opposite direction. Should one feel inclined to extend the ramble a
mile farther towards the west, to drink from the crystal fount of St.
Uny's holy well, and explore the fogou (cavern) and circular hut near
it, the pilgrimage would ensure a good night's rest and pleasant dreams.

<span id="img_06200"></span> ![](img/06200.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Old Wandering Droll-Teller of the Lizard, and his Story of
the Mermaid and the Man of Cury](swc110.md)

</div>
