<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc130)  [Next](swc132) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Nancy Trenoweth, the Fair Daughter of the Miller of Alsia</span>

*Sequel*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"'Fire on, fire on,' says Captain Ward,  
   'I value you not a pin;  
 If you are brass on the outside,  
   I am good steel within.

'Go home, go home,' says Captain Ward,  
   'And tell your king from me,  
 If he reigns king upon dry land,  
   I will reign king at sea.'"—Old Song.

</div>

High winds from the south-east having increased to a tempest, none of
that portion of the crew, who left the ship, with the intention of
returning on board as soon as they had gained some tidings of their
friends, attempted to put to sea again. But few hands were left on
board, and the ship was driven ashore on the rocks near Lamorna Cove.
where she became a wreck before the morning.

On the night after the funeral of Lanyon, some of his crew related to
their old acquaintances in the public-house (whither they all assembled
to renew their friendship with their old comrades, to cheer their heavy
hearts with good strong drink, and to drown their sorrows and forget

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

their cares over the pure home-brewed) that on the night of the 30th of
October, Lanyon was for hours like one raving mad. They could scarcely
keep him in the ship until he fell on the deck in a trance, and remained
speechless and still as death for hours. When he carne to himself he
told them he had been taken to the village of Kimyel, and that if he
ever married the woman who cast the spell he would make her suffer the
longest day she had to live, for drawing his soul out of his body. The
young men had often, before this night, related to their old comrades
the story of their adventures in the pirate-ship, which adventures were
thought to be nothing remarkable for those times. The contrary winds
that came on soon after they left Boulogne (with a cargo of the choicest
wines and cordials, strongest brandy, silks, laces, and other
merchandise) became a fearful storm, which lasted several days, and
drove them towards the south-east and far out of their course.

For several days they saw neither sun, moon, nor stars, and knew not
which way to steer, for compass they had none. The fifth day, when the
weather cleared, they were out of sight of land, and knew not what
course to take to arrive at the nearest port. As much of their rigging
was lost, and their eatables spoiled, they must either make land or
perish, unless picked up by some ship; and they had been days on the
look-out for some friendly sail, without seeing any other signs of human
life than what their own frail bark contained. As well as they were
able, they kept their course towards the east, hoping soon to reach the
coast of France or Spain. When all but Lanyon had fallen to the bottom
of the boat quite exhausted, he saw, and signalled to, a rakish-looking
craft that was passing at no great distance. The boat's crew roused
themselves and all joined to hail the passing ship.

They were at last noticed by the ship's crew, who, seeing their signal
of distress, hove about and slackened sail. When taken on board the
young men were too much exhausted to know or care what ship they were
in, or with whom. They heard a strange lingo, saw strange
swarthy-looking visages with long black beards, smelt the flavour of
strange cookery, and soon made a hearty meal on what they were too
hungry to examine, and fell asleep, quite worn out with their long
watch, fast, and fatigue. They awoke from a protracted sleep much
restored, and found that their knives and everything else they wore as
armour or for self-defence, as well as the little money they had about
them, was taken from them. When they arose, to examine the dark part of
the hold in which they were placed, and found the doors and hatches
secured by massive bars and bolts, with chains and manacles fastened to
beams and stanchions they then understood that they had fallen into the
hands of Algerine pirates or Barbary corsairs. As the day wore on, a
negro came below and made signs for them to go on deck, where they found
a good repast of stewed mutton prepared for them. All but two of the
ship's swarthy crew kept aloof, and seemed afraid of being polluted if
they came near

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

them. Even the rank negro who served the pirates’ cabin—either from the
monkey-like instinct of imitation, or the slavish perception which ever
prompts the despicable race of black or white to lick the feet of the
strongest and crush the weakest—pretended to find the strangers unclean
and offensive, but a withering glance from Lanyon made the man skulk
away, abashed. The young men also remarked that before meals and at
stated times, there was a great show of washing without much regard to
cleanliness, and that their captors often placed themselves in formal
attitudes, made various prostrations towards the east,—in fact,
according to their Mussulman notions, they were as religious a set as
gentlemen of their profession could well be, under the circumstances,
and were even regarded by their fellow-countrymen as holy warriors for
making havoc on the unbelieving Christian dogs.

Their interpreters of the dubious oracles and wild fables of the prophet
(like the priests of all other barbarous creeds) taught the ignorant and
superstitious people that what the infidels regard as crimes are mere
venial faults, compared with unbelief in what these interested
interpreters of their prophet dictate as the will of Allah. This
unbelief, they say, is the most heinous and unpardonable of all sins,
because a sin against God; whereas all other sins, or what the infidels
call crimes, are merely sins against mankind. As a consequence of this
atrocious dogma, so dangerous in the mouths of interested fiery
fanatics, these religious warriors spread rapine and murder into many
peaceful Christian lands, believing all the while that they were
offering an acceptable sacrifice to the god whom they created after
their own image. It is well known that these bloody Algerine pirates
were regarded by their countrymen as holy warriors in the service of
Allah to subdue the unbelieving "dogs of Christians." Yet little better
could be expected of the people who regard the insane as the particular
favourites of heaven, and as the oft-chosen instruments of the celestial
powers for communicating their pleasure to the more sober sons of earth.
The Mahomedan fanatics are not singular in believing the insane to be
the most favoured of heaven. Notwithstanding the formal profession, by
these sanguinary roving Moors, of unquestioning submission to the
ordinances of their prophet, yet in their heart of hearts they were
bound by no other laws than such as their pleasures or necessities
dictated, and were striking examples of the general rule, that there is
always a close connection between devoteeism and devilry—superstition
and the most atrocious wickedness, like modern developments of cant,
sanctimonious pride, and diabolically-treacherous actions.

There were two seamen on board who had been captured by the pirates many
years before from a French ship, and had been retained instead of sold
as slaves, because one of them was a clever cook, and had such a
knowledge of surgery as was not to be despised, while the other was an
able pilot. These wandering sailors, who had mixed for many

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

years with people from all the trading parts of the world, seemed to
belong to no country in particular, and their language was composed of a
mixture of words from all the babels of the North and West, with many
Levantine terms, which make up that confusion of tongues known in the
Levant as the Lingua Franca, and which was a universal language among
sailors of these times. These two Francs had much sympathy and liking
for the young Cornish smugglers, which they contrived to express by
signs and their universal lingo (when not watched by the jealous Moors),
and informed the young men, with whom they had more affinity of race,
that when they were taken on board, the day before the pirate ship was
cruising near Corunna, waiting for more favourable weather to land in
any cove or creek at no great distance, with the intention of carrying
off some Astrurian maidens for the harems of wealthy Moors, and youths
to work in their gardens, and that their object for then setting sail
for Levant was to take the young men to some market on the coast and
sell them for slaves.

The young men of Buryan determined to fight hard for their lives, before
they would be this disposed of. As is well known, the Mahomedans are
forbidden by the prophet to taste either wine or strong drink; yet these
rovers took good care to save, and stow away, all the delicious wines,
cordials, and spirits that they found in the smugglers’ boat, and it was
soon plain, by the altered demeanour of the usually gloomy and silent
Moors, that they had made a law for themselves for the time, thinking,
no doubt, that if Mahomed had only tasted the rich wines of France he
would never have made the unreasonable ordinance to forbid the faithful
from drinking nectar worthy of Allah. The first day the pirates indulged
themselves so far, that in their early excitement they amused themselves
by showing their contempt and practising on the fears of the captives
and, displayed their exultation over the young men, whom they called
Christian dogs, by torturing them in various ways, and finished their
cowardly cruelty by spitting in the faces of the fettered, defenceless
band. They became stupidly drunk and powerless before night, when the
two Franks and Lanyon took advantage of the pirates’ oblivion to all
sublunary doings to procure themselves arms, and to provide the means of
releasing the others of the smuggling band from the manacles to which
they were obliged to submit, when they showed by signs that they wished
to have some provisions, and to be allowed to proceed westward in their
own boat. Afterwards, by the advice of their Frankish accomplices, they
appeared to be as submissive as possible, to throw the Moors off their
guard.

When the rovers roused themselves a little, the next day, their captain
came into the part of the ship in which the smugglers were confined. He
found them all apparently asleep and the negro keeping vigilant guard
over them: then, seeing the cook busy in the galley, the pilot at the
wheel, and the weather being so calm that the ship made no headway, he
took

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

some more of the nectar that the doctor-cook had taken good care to drug
with some powerful opiate. All the other Moors, following the example of
their captain, were, long before night, in such a state as to be unable
to offer much resistance. After the negro (who could go to any part of
the ship without suspicion) had procured them the keys of the armoury,
that they might get such weapons as they required, the youngsters of
Buryan got rid of their bracelets and placed them quietly on the arms of
the drunken pirates. Then, as soon as a boat was ready, and a light
breeze sprang up, they, with the help of the Franks and the negro soon
put the Moors overboard.

In the rough handling required to haul the grimfaced pirates from their
sleeping-places and to land them into the boat, many of them became
sensible of their altered fortunes, and made such desperate resistance
as occasioned much bloodshed. Yet, although some were bleeding freely,
all seemed to be breathing when they were sent adrift at no great
distance from the Spanish land with two or three days’ provisions and a
keg of water. The honest doctor-cook sent them down a bucket of such
things as would be suitable for their stomachs when they got over their
drink;—the good man would not even let a drunken Turk be without proper
food if he could help it, as most seamen know there is nothing so bad as
hunger to make savages of saints.

The pilot tried to make them understand the course to steer for the
nearest land. The negro, who was a good Mussulman in his way, saluted
his former masters with the ordinary salaam of "Allah is great, and
Mahomed is his prophet; what is to be must be; the will of the Lord be
done;" and, turning to his new masters, he called the Moors a set of
nasty black niggers.

Lanyon was chosen captain; the treasures, money, and merchandize found
in the ship were divided as equally as might be between the Buryan men,
the Franks, and the negro (who was about the best sailor on board, and a
favourite with the crew for his facility of adapting himself to any
changes).

The wind being favourable for continuing their course towards the coast
of Barbary, the new possessors of the pirate-craft resolved to try a
scheme they planned by way of retaliation on those who are fond of
buying Christian captives.

The ship had no sooner arrived within sight of a town on the Levantine
shores, than Jewish or other dealers in human merchandize came off in
their galleys, in hopes to procure some young Christian slaves for the
Moorish bashaws of the city.

The negro and the two Franks were well known. The rest of the ship's
company, by darkening their skin with gunpowder and donning the Moorish
garb, were not remarked as strangers by the Jewish and Ishmaelitish
dealers, who came with money or merchandize to pay for the

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

captives that the nigger assured the Jews they would see below, where
the captain was waiting to receive his friends. The merchants were no
sooner below the hatchway than they found themselves gagged, and placed
in the chains in which they expected to find some lovely Spanish damsels
or stalwart youths. This game was played until they had as much
provision and Moorish human chattels on board as they could well stow
away and attend to. Then they set sail for the Spanish and Portuguese
settlements in the new world. In repassing the Bay of Biscay, the bottle
containing the paper, with the names of those on board, was committed to
the deep, with but little hopes that its contents would ever reach
Buryan. In some isle of the Spanish main they disposed of their Moors,
who took to their changed condition with all the apathy for which these
fatalists are remarkable. The rovers then made some profitable
buccaneering expeditions to the Dutch, and other, isles and settlements,
when they returned with the intention of selling their ship and
merchandize in some English port and settling quietly at home.

Although the ship became a wreck, as related before, most of those on
board, by swimming, reached the shore, and with the help of the others
of the ship's company saved good quantity of the rich spoils of the
wrecked pirate ship in Lamorna Cove, and gave much more than Lanyon's
share to the old folks for his son. They say that the horse was found
dead the morning after the spectre-bridegroom rode it to fetch his
bride, either in the town-place of Bosean or in Baranhuel cliff.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sarah Polgrain](swc132)

</div>
