<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc127)  [Next](swc129.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Mousehole</span>

*Part II*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Hail Mousehole! birthplace of old Doll Pentreath,  
 The last who jabbered Cornish—so says Daines."—  
                                                 Peter Pindar's Ode,
22.</span>

</div>

<span class="small">In a note to the above lines, Peter says:—"A very
old woman of Mousehole, supposed (falsely, however) to have been the
last who spoke the Cornish language. The honourable antiquarian, Daines
Barrington, Esq., journeyed, some years since, from London to the Land's
End, to converse with this wrinkled yet delicious morceau. He entered
Mousehole in a kind of triumph; and, peeping into her hut, exclaimed,
with all the fire of an enraptured lover, in the language of the famous
Greek philosopher, 'Eureka!' The couple kissed: Doll soon after gabbled;
Daines listened with admiration; committed her speeches to paper, not
venturing to trust his memory with so much treasure. The transaction was
announced to the Society; the journals were enriched with their
dialogues; the old lady's picture was ordered to be taken by the most
eminent artist, and the honourable member to be publicly thanked for the
discovery!" Thus sayeth Peter Pindar.</span>

If the hut is still in existence in which the honourable Daines and
Dolly kissed and jabbered, as recorded by Peter Pindar, it may become
one of the most noted objects in the ancient town, as Dolly's posthumous
fame seems to be augmenting. Mr. Halliwell has lately collected and
published all he could glean from books about her. As Dolly lived until
within the last ninety years—the date of her death being 1777—many
interesting traditions of the dame might still be collected from the old
folks of Paul, who must often have heard of her from their grandparents,
which is the usual source from which children derive all they remember
of old-world stories.

Dolly was married to a person called Jeffrey, but as she belonged to one
of the most ancient and respectable families in the parish of Paul, she
always retained her maiden name. This practice is still very general
when the wife's family are or were persons of note.

Dolly lived in Duck-street, and there the dame was visited by many other
great scholars as well as the honourable Daines Barrington, who laboured
hard to convince themselves, and the learned world, that the old lady's
lingo had a close affinity to Hebrew, Greek, Latin, Coptic, and other
languages of the ancient world. Yet, notwithstanding Dolly's intimate
connection with the savants of her time, she did not even learn her A B
C in Greek from them: a question if she knew her letters in English.

One morning, as Dolly was proceeding down the street on her return
journey home, after having disposed of her fish in town, when near
Penzance Grammar School, she was overtaken by four boys, who, happening
to have for their morning's lesson the beginning part of the

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Greek alphabet to
learn by heart, were alternately repeating aloud, "Alpha, beta, gamma,
delta." Dolly no sooner heard their words than she dropped her cowal,
took to her heels, and the boys close behind her, to see what in the
world the old woman could be running after. Dolly ran into school as
well as all the boys. When Dolly recovered her wind, she told the
schoolmaster that four of his blackguards of boys had chased her down
the street, the one calling out, "at her;" another, "beat her;" the
third, "damn her;" and the other said, "pelt her!" If she hadn't beaten
them in running she believed they would have killed her. The boys, when
taken to task, declared that they said nothing to the old woman; they
were only repeating aloud the letters they had to learn. The master,
seeing Dolly's mistake, explained to her that what she mistook for
threatening language was only the A B C in Greek. If that was a sample
of the outlandish tongue, Dolly thought it the wickedest she ever heard.

Dolly, from her skill in fortune-telling, charming for the cure of
various diseases, giving directions to the young folks as to the best
way of trying for sweethearts, and other practices of divination, came
to be regarded as one of those who have acquired so much forbidden
knowledge that they have the power to blast and ban, to lay a spell on
man or beast, so that the old dame was little loved, but—what is the
next best thing—much feared as one of those overwise ones about whom we
now often hear the whisper, accompanied by the ominous shake of the head
(which expresses whatever you please, like the bells chiming to your
thoughts), "That she knows the hour and the minute: on that account it
is much better not to offend the one who holds the dreaded secret. This
mysterious intimation alludes to the general belief that there is an
hour in every day, and a minute, only known to the demon-taught, in that
particular hour (which varies from day to day), in which as we say
"curses will not fall to the ground." This notion seems to be some
vestige of the dogmas belonging to judical astrology, perhaps the shadow
of some idea about the culmination of the malignant planet. However that
may be, the belief exists to the present hour; also that our pellars,
conjurors, white witches, or by whatever names these wise people are
distinguished, have a profound acquaintance with this mysterious
science. It seems that Dolly was also regarded as one having this
knowledge, and more fearful kinds of wisdom, by the stories still told
of her. When much excited, she seemed to forget the little English she
knew; and her voluble Cornish speech, then imperfectly understood by the
younger and educated folks, impressed the people with far greater
terrors than if she cursed or scolded in a language of which they knew
the import.

One day Mr. Price, of Choone, was riding down Newlyn hill on a shying,
restive horse, when Dolly the Spring (as she was more generally called
than by her right name) was slowly hobbling down the narrow lane (then a
mere bridle-path) before him. Dolly's broad beaver hat,

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

scarlet cloak, and cowal, as she resolutely kept the middle of the lane,
left less space than Mr. Price or his horse thought sufficient for them
to pass beside her. The gentleman wishing to get ahead of Dolly, called
out to her, "Clear the way!" Dolly would neither move on any faster, nor
start a peg, as she said, for all the cursed Jamaica drummer's brats in
the country, and told the gentleman that, like all other upstart
beggars, he would ride to the devil, with much more of the same kind in
her choicest English (which she could speak pretty well when cool). This
civil talk, for Dolly, was not much to Mr. Price's taste, and as he did
not wish to be treated to any more of the popular history about the rise
of his family, by the vigorous use of whip and spurs he forced his horse
to pass Dolly, but, in going by, the horse or rider came in contact with
her cowal, full of fish, which was overturned and all the contents cast
out in the muddy ditch. Dolly then forgot her English, and began to
abuse in her native Cornish, which came more glibly to her tongue; at
the same time casting mud, fish, and stones at Mr. Price as hard and
fast as she could pelt them, the refrain of each sentence of abuse being
an oath ending with, "Cronnack an hagar dhu." As Dolly was reputed to be
a kind of half witch, as mentioned before, Mr. Price became terribly
frightened at hearing what he dreaded might be some horrible incantation
for laying a spell on him and his. He endeavoured to appease her by
paying for the fish, when she became a little more placable. He wished
above all to know what she had been saying, to curse or blast him
perhaps? Dolly called him a fool for thinking anything of the kind, and
assured him that she was no more a witch than himself. Still, Mr. Price
was not satisfied, and before he arrived at the bottom of the hill
returned again to Dolly. He must know the meaning of what she repeated
like a spell, after every oath, which he did not mind, as he could swear
as hard and fast as she could in honest and plain English. At last he
offered Dolly half-a-crown to be told the meaning of "Cronnack an hagar
dhu." "Give me the money first, then," says Dolly, "and I must call ye a
fool for your pains; as all I said was to call ye the ugly black toad
that thee art." Mr. Price, on hearing this, threatened to horsewhip her.
Dolly then dared him to lift but a finger against her, and if he did she
would put such a spell on him as should make his arm rot from his
shoulder, and began again to jabber Cornish, which so frightened Mr.
Price, or his horse, that they went off with all haste and left Dolly to
gather up her fish in peace.

The above anecdotes were told me by an old lady of Sennen, who knew
Dolly well. She often said there was no one in the west country who knew
so much of what had taken place in the neighbourhood for hundreds of
years past as this notable old dame of Mousehole, and that all the
Pentreaths were remarkable for possessing more than the ordinary
quantity of mental endowments.

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

Dolly's ghost must be very much gratified by the sight of the handsome
monument recently erected to her memory by Prince Lucien Buonaparte. In
speaking of this memorial J. O. Halliwell says:—"It is right to add that
my supposition of the new monument to Dolly's memory having been placed
near the traditional site of her grave is erroneous. The general belief
in Paul is that she was buried in the older cemetery of that
church-town. The date of her death, as inscribed on that memorial, is
also incorrect; so that, on the whole, the epitaph appropriately
commences, "Here lieth," &c.

It may not be generally known that the ludicrous epitaph said to be
inscribed on her tomb is a fabrication, which has imposed on many from
its having been so frequently printed. Hundreds have hunted in vain
throughout the churchyard in hope of finding her tomb with the Cornish
of this absurd elegy inscribed on it. There is little doubt that the
hoax was perpetrated by the Mr. Tonkin, of Newlyn, who composed many of
the curious Cornish dialogues, &c., and by him gravely recited as the
veritable epitaph which was inscribed on her tomb soon after her
decease. If it never has been it ought to be now (as it is so well
known), to gratify those who make pilgrimages to her grave. Better late
than never. As Dolly has only been dead ninety years (the date of her
decease being 1777), we may hope that the house in which she lived may
yet be found, as, if known, it would be a great attraction for
antiquaries.

The [writer](errata.htm#29.md) of an article on Cornish antiquities, in the
"Quarterly" for August, 1867, says:—"Those who can appreciate the charms
of genuine antiquity will not, therefore, find fault with the enthusiasm
of Daines Barrington or Sir Joseph Banks in listening to the strange
utterances of Dolly Pentreath; for her language, if genuine, carried
them back to, and brought them as it were into immediate contact with,
people who, long before the Christian era, acted an important part on
the stage of history, supplying the world with two of the most precious
metals, more precious then than gold or silver, with copper and tin, the
very materials, it may be, of the finest works of art in Greece, aye of
the armour wrought for the heroes of the Trojan war, as described so
minutely by the poets of the Iliad. There is a continuity in language
which nothing equals, and there is an historical genuineness in ancient
words, if but rightly interpreted, which cannot be rivalled by
manuscripts, or coins, or monumental inscriptions."

Mr. J. O. Halliwell also remarked, when his visited the west, six years
ago (1861), that, "The provincial language of the Cornish of the present
day is hardly a dialect, but rather, for the country, a singularly pure
English, spoken in a kind of recitative twang that it would not be easy
to describe. None of the recently-published specimens of the so-called
Cornish dialect convey this peculiarity intelligibly, nor do they
present it in a form that would be easily recognized. A few sentences

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

may suffice. "Aunt Betty, coming from a Christmas party, had a ben too
forthey in teeming out her licker, and p’raps were a little boozy, and
she were found upon the sea-shore, laid down as of she were to bed, and
water were comed opp to her face and flopping agen et, and she were a
saying quite genteellylike, 'Nat a drop more, nat a drop more, thankee.'
The people of the Land's End district do not talk in this tyle. Theirs
is a really good English, intermingled only with a few provincial
words." The few sentences given by Mr. Halliwell are taken from "Uncle
Jan Trenoodle."

At the time Dolly the Spring flourished in Mousehole, and Mr. Price in
Choone, the Praeds of Trevethow lived in such style and state as well
become the head of the squirearchy and the hospitable customs of old
Cornwall, which found their last resting-place in the ancient seat of
this family, where many of the delights of "merrie old England" lingered
long after they had said adieu to other places in the west.

Now, in these pinching times, it is rather tantalizing to hear the old
folks of Lelant talk of the fat oxen, sheep, and deer, game and poultry
without number, that were then weekly butchered in Trevethow for the use
of the squire's establishment. Much out of this abundance was
distributed with liberal heart and hand to all the poor of the
neighbourhood. At the same time the choice spirits of town and country
always found a hearty welcome at the squire's hospitable board.

Among scores of others, Dr. Walcot (Peter Pindar) was a frequent and
favourite guest. Mr. Price (the same who had the encounter with Dolly)
also frequently enjoyed the good cheer at Trevethow, and served as a
butt for the satirical poet’s shafts. The heavy Mr. Price appears to
have been very much of a gourmand, as one day at table, when the host
and Peter were interested in duscussing some literary production, Peter,
in one of his happiest moods, replying to Mr. Praed's remarks by some
impromptu squib, but the heavy gentleman of Paul being formed on
nature's very homely plan, had his heart and soul engrossed by the
flavour or more substantial fare than that of Peter Pindar's spicy
repartees; above all he admired the degree of perfection to which the
host's turkeys were fattened and cooked, wished to know from the host
what method was pursued in the fattening process of the poultry, the
ingredients of the blancmange, and of the other delicacies he found the
most pleasing to his palate. Neither Mr. Praed nor the poet took much
pleasure in a dissertation on pudding and turkey-fattening. To put a
check on the annoying interruptions of Mr. Price about such vulgar
subjects Mr. Praed replied to the effect that he never paid much
attention to the matter; yet that he had often noticed broken charcoal
and chopped cabbage-stumps placed with the water in the feeding-troughs
of the turkeys, and thought it highly probable that the success in
fattening depended on their having an abundant supply of carbon and
greens, with little else

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

but what they found for themselves, and that was a secret he should not
tell everybody. Mr. Price made a note, and congratulating himself on his
shrewdness in having extracted the wonderful secret returned home early,
that his turkeys might be put without delay to fatten on cabbage-stumps
and charcoal. The carbonised regimen not succeeding to Mr. Price's
expectation nor his turkeys either, he suspected the truth of his having
been hoaxed, when he found the turkeys starved to death. This was
followed by a quarrel between the squires, which did not last long, as
Mr. Price feared losing the delicacies always to be found on the table
of the squire of Trevethow. The whole affair was satirized by Peter
Pindar in a few verses (well known to the old gentlemen of the
neighbourhood) which were published in some of the early editions of the
poet’s works.

We have but little more time to spare in the ancient town, although
there are many more noteworthy objects in the place, particularly
suitable for the sketch-book, as the old mill, some cottages farther up
the glen, and on the cliff, &c.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

We take the pleasant pathway across the fields from Mousehole to
Lamorna: if the tide be out, we pass down over the cliff at the foot of
Regennis hill, to see the cavern known as the Mouse-hole. This cavern is
about fifty feet high at the entrance, and is said to extend to a great
distance under the cliff; but, from being so low and narrow, it is not
easily explored. The almost perfect arch of the cavern is adorned with a
luxuriant growth of *Asplinum marinum* and other delicate and graceful
ferns. On the cliff, near the sawn, are masses of creeping wild flowers:
among others, trailing close to the water's edge, is a variety of the
great bind-weed, remarkable for having beautiful pink-striped flowers.
Ascending Regennis hill, we pass over a stile on the left, and are on
the path which winds along near the shore, and which affords a splendid
sea-view with a foreground (in many places) of towering cairns and
picturesque crags. On the way we come to the farm-house of Lower Kimyal,
and its surrounding cottages. This place is remarkable as the scene of
an incident in one of the most romantic of the many wild legends of the
west. We will give the story, as it is generally narrated by the old
folks of Buryan, to which parish it belongs, rather than to that of
Paul. This legend will give us many glimpses of the inner life and
feelings of the ancient people, and enable us to understand how the
wildly-poetical stories of the Cornish drolls may still tincture the
Celtic race, just as tales of terror, related by an
[ignorant](errata.htm#30.md) and superstitious nurse, make an impression in
the infant mind never to be entirely [obliterated](errata.htm#31.md); and
the ghost, demon, or bucca-dhu, with which the child is frightened,
remains as a dim and unpleasant

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

spectre to shake the nerves of the man in his prime; and, as second
childhood advances, these fantastic pictures are renewed in all their
pristine vividness. We are still too much under the influence of the
fearful fancies and images of horror, which those who pretend to teach
us are found of displaying, in order to gratify the lovers of the
marvellous, and the fantastical imaginations of the weak.

When children, we have often, of a winter's night, been more terrified
than amused, as we listened, pitying all the while, to the old folk's
tale.

<span id="img_18400"></span> ![](img/18400.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](swc129.md)

</div>
