<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc133)  [Next](swc135) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 1*, by William
Bottrell, \[1870\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The Dwelling of Chenance</span>

*Part II*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Our nurse, our dear old faithful Joan,  
   What pleasant tales she told,—  
 Adventures that herself had known,  
   Or legends quaint and old;

 Unceasing marvel each excites;  
   Untired, her stores we claim,  
 Close seated round o’ winter nights,  
   Beside the faggot's flame."—Anon.

</div>

I was soon across the fields through Kimyal, Ragennis, Halwyn, Paul
church-town, and out to Choon. I skipped along, went down over Paul hill
as lively as a kid, feeling that the drop of French brandy had done me
all the good. How true the old saying is, that "a spur in the head is
worth two in the heels." I dearly like the truth.

It must have been about four o'clock when I arrived in Penzance. After I
had done my marketing, I took a turn down to the new public-house in
Market-jew-street, to have a drink of beer with the piece of Christmas
cake I brought in my pocket to eat on the road. The house was so full
there was no getting within, and I sat down, with many others, on the
long bench placed under the trees opposite the door. The tapster brought
us out our drink. There were a number of travellers’ and carriers’
horses fastened to the mangers placed under the trees below. I courseyed
with a few old acquaintances, and we wished each other a merry Christmas
in some very fair ale, and a little brandy after, that it might not be
cold in the stomach.

Old friends are loath to part, and I should have stopped much longer if
it had not been getting dusk very early. Besides, I thought what a way
master would be in if he hadn't the spices brought home in time for
making the Christmas ale. I had forgotten some few arrants too, and when
up among the standings, again looking up such things as I wanted, who
should I see but Tom Chenance!—who but he, whipping about as brisk as a
bee from standing to stall, picking and pocketing all that pleased his
fancy, and nobody seemed to notice him. He took hanks of yarn,
stockings, and cloth from one, shoes and leather, pewter spoons and
knives, from another, stuffing all into his wallet together. I could
hardly believe my own eyes. I looked and looked again to be sure, before
I went up to him, and said, "Tom, artn’t thee ashamed to be here in the
dark carrying on such a game?" "Ah, ha!" says he, "is that thee, old
Joan? which eye can ye see me upon?" After winking, it seemed to me that
my left eye was bleared, for I could only see him on the right—the on
that had been touched with the ointment. I answered, "’Tis plain enough
that I can see thee on my right eye." Then, looking as if he

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

would look me through, he brought his hand up close to my face; he
pointed his finger to my right eye, and mumbled out a spell, but I could
only catch the words

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Thou cursed old spy—  
 Thou shalt no more see me,  
 Nor peep nor pry  
 On that charmed eye."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then he blew in my
face, and, when his blasting breath struck my eye, all the sight was
gone; and from that day to this I haven't seen a blink on my blighted
eye. I was almost made with the pain, as I tumbled up and down, calling
on the market-women to catch the thief; but they couldn't see the
villain. I didn't think of it at the time, but the same devil's salve
that caused me to see him made the thief to be unseen. Some (who were no
better than the thief himself) said I was a drunken old baggage, and
told me to go home the same way as I came. I was so bewildered and
"tossicated" about that I couldn't tell whether I was going towards the
Quay or St. Clare, Alwarton or Market-jew, nor where I was at all, until
I again found myself down by the door of the public-house. Then I just
took one horn of beer to deaden the pain in my eye, but wouldn't take
any more for fear of making my head light.

By good luck I took my bearings right, blind as I was, and steered my
course down Voundervoor and over the horse-tracks among the sandybanks,
on the Green,—and what a dreary lonely road that is too—not a house as
large as a pig's crow beside the road all the way from Voundervoor to
Tolcarn, nor a single light to be seen shining from a casement anywhere,
except in the windows of a few fishermen's houses in the place they have
now named Newlyn. Not being able to see more than half the road I often
fell into the ditch on the blind side, and, for fear of missing the
track and getting too near the sea, I fell over the low hedge into
Park-an-skebbar (the field below the barn belonging to Tolcarn). It was
no more than six o'clock then, so the maidens told me who were in the
field milking, and the way they were so late was because they finished
decking the house with holly and bays, and other Christmas greens,
before they came out. One of the boys who brought out the hay for the
cows put me down as far as Tom Treglown's smith's-shop (you know where
it is), a little below the stepping-stones that cross Tolcarn river. Tom
took me in and gave me a good glass of new-fashioned, nice cordial
called shrub. I would have taken another with all my heart if he had
asked me,—it did my stomach so much good; but it is such precious stuff,
or he liked it too well himself to ask me take a second glass. However,
he was civil enow to lend me a hand to get across the stream. And well
for me that he was there to help me; one can never see well where to
place one's feet on the stepping-stones when the water is eddying about
them in the moonlight, even when one has the best of sight.

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

My dear Duffy, you may be sure that I was very glad to find myself in
Paul, and so near home once more. Thinks I to myself I shall be home yet
all in good time for the squire to have the spice and things for the
Christmas ale: another hour's walk, or less, will bring me home. I hoped
that my troubles were over now; but, good Booth, they were hardly begun
yet, my dear cheeld, for I didn't reach home for that night. And now I
must stop a spell, and have a horn to wet my whistle, before I tell ye
of the narrow escape I had of being carried away bodily by the Old One,
more than once, before I reached Trove bottom. And I feel dry whenever I
think of it.

I left the smith's house, hoping to reach home in time to get the supper
for master and the company that were sure to be at Trive on Christmas
Eve, but when I had dragged myself up Paul Hill it was hard work for me
to stand up, and I determined, as I passed Choon, that if there was any
light to be seen in Rose-an-beagle I would go into Aunt Joney Polgrain's
and stop for the night; but when I reached the end of the lane there
wasn't a glimmer of light to be seen in the house. Thinks I to myself,
dame Polgrain is gone to roost, and, as she isn't the best tempered body
in the world, there will be but a cold welcome for me if I disturb her.
Then, to rest myself awhile and think whatever I should do to get home,
I fell to sit, as I though, on a green bank beside the road, but instead
of finding myself on a bank plump down I went in a pit of muddy water,
with my heels tossed up higher than my head. By much kicking and
scrambling like a toad on his back getting out of a hole, or a
dumbledory (beetle) kicking himself clear of the dung, I got up to my
knees at last, and begged and prayed that I might find an old quiet
horse in the lane to have a lift: else I felt (as the weakness of my
legs, the sickness of my stomach, and the pain in my eyes, altogether,
made my head so light that it was no easy matter for me to stand steady)
I should never be able to get home for that night, with my
streaming-wet, quilted coats hanging about my legs. I should have been
ashamed to go into any decent house then like that of Joney Polgrain, if
there had been any light to be seen.

After wringing my petticoats, and going on a few steps, there in the
ditch (as it seemed in answer to my prayers) stood an old horse, that I
took to be uncle Will Polgrain's grey mare (I had seen the beast some
place before) spanned with a halter, and eating from the hedge. ’Twas
only the work of a moment for me to untie the halter from the legs of
the horse, and place it over his head and ears, then to mount his back
from the hedge. I had to place myself astride. Nobody could sit
sideling, bare-ridged, on the lean, razor-backed thing;—as well try to
balance oneself without holding fast on the top of a gate or on a
pike-staff. That I mightn't be cut in two with the sharp backbone of the
beast I got back on the cheens as far as one could without falling over
behind. The beast, at first, would hardly move one foot before the
other, with all

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

the whacking I gave it with my ivory-headed cane over every part within
my reach. I might cry gee-up and gee-ho; devil a bit the faster would
the old thing go, until we got near Trevella, when it pricked up its
ears at the cry of some hounds giving tongue (as they often do when out
hunting by the moonlight). The beast took off to trot going down
Trevella lane, faster and faster still, with such rough motion and high
action, bump, bump, I couldn't keep my seat without a tight grasp on his
tail with my right hand, the halter I held in my left hand, and the
basket was swinging on that arm: by the time I had the power to sling my
cane by the leather loop over my wrist, that I might have the firmer
holdfast of the tail of the hoss, or of the devil, or whatever it was,
it went like the wind. The more I cried wo-hey! wo-ho! the faster still
the thing would go, and seemed to me, by the time we reached Trevella
lane's end, to be grown as high as the tower. Then it would leap across
all the turnings, and over the corners of the hedges coming into the
lane. The wind rose at the same time to a hurricane; mingled with the
roaring of the storm was the howling of the dogs, and the blast of the
huntsman's horn. The thing I was mounted on often rose on end, or
plunged in such a way that my heels were sent aloft and my head thrown
over the tail, or the pitching of the thing would bring my head down on
his shoulder; but, worst of all, my cane hanging down over the rump of
the thing, swinging by the thong to my wrist, was sent by the flying
legs of the devil's charger all the time wallopping about my head and
ears like a threshal (flail). Do but think, my dear Duffy, what a
picture I must have looked, as we galloped along through Trevella
lanes—my best steeple-crowned hat hanging over my back by the strings
round my neck, the basket swinging on me left arm, which was dragged out
of joint with holding on the halter of the hard-headed brute.

I kept a good holdfast on the tail of the beast for a long while, but at
last, with snorting and blowing, it made a rush over the hedge through
bramble and bush into the croft, then back in the lane again, and down
the road faster and faster—stones and fire flying, the wind howling, and
getting under my coats, I was so tossed about that I lost my mainstay;
that being gone, the wind would every now and then take me up so high
that I could barely touch the back of my steed with the high heels of my
shoes. On the Clodgey Moor the devil, or dragon, or whatever I was
mounted on, took off the road towards the fowling-pool, and people say,
you know, that the devil's huntsman and his hounds have often been seen
(after hunting Trevella and Mimmis carns) to come down over the moor and
vanish in the Clodgey pool. The halter in my left hand was the only stay
that now kept me on the thing, often more standing than sitting, when it
gallopped round and round the pool. With my stick I hindered it from
plunging into the water, and kept on its back until the blast of a
whirlwind getting under my coats made me lose the halter and took me up
like a feather, towers high. I was kept long hovering in

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

the air and mounting higher and higher until I lost sight of this wicked
world. My scarlet cloak spread out on one side, the open skirt of my
gown on the other like the outstretched wings of an eagle; true, I never
did see one, yet any person (who had chanced to have seen me then) must
have taken me for a very uncommon bird, or when coming down one might
have taken me for a monster of a kite, and have shot me whilst in the
sky beating on against the wind, if the Powers that raised me above this
sinful world had not preserved me in a wonderful way from man and
devils. Whilst I was flying in the air, with outstretched wings, the
black huntsman came down the road over the moor and his hounds came
around the pool to drink. The devil's charger (that I was taken from by
a miracle that I might escape the old one) ran on to the road, the
huntsman blew his horn, sprung on the steed, and when I was dropping
slowly down I saw them all—man, horse, and hounds—going like lightning
down the moors in flashing balls of fire. By a great mercy I came gently
down and alighted on a brake of rushes when I again touched the ground.
There was plain proof in the sickening smell of sulphur all around that
the being who rode the beast away was one of brimstone, and not of clay.
Through all my riding and flying I kept my basket and stick. The bunch
of rushes I was landed on was surrounded with bogs like an island in the
sea. In getting off, and wading through the mud on to dry land, my shoes
were dragged from my feet; then, barefooted, I hobbled down the moor,
keeping on the grass all the way.

It took me a long time to hobble along barefooted from the fowling-pool
to the large rock on one side of the brake of thorns, near the
horse-track, at the bottom of the moor. I rested a few minutes on the
lew side of the rick and was preparing to start once more for home, when
I again heard the sounds of the tramp of a horse, the winding of the
bugle-horn, and yelping of the hounds. I shook with dread and fear, fell
on my knees in prayer that the Lord might again deliver me from the
black huntsman, who was now so near that I heard the snorting of his
steed. A moment after the sound of the horse's hoofs came within a few
yards of the brake and rock; then ceased. I prayed with all my power
that the Old One might be deceived of his prey that night. Not hearing
any sounds for some time I ventured a look towards the road, and there,
at no great distance off, I spied the black huntsman, seated on the same
horse with a pillion behind him. We have all heard of the wiles of the
devil, and the various schemes he takes to tempt poor creatures to their
destruction. I prayed that I might not be beguiled by false appearances,
nor by any of the allurements of the evil one (who was now come to try
the power of his illusions on my poor wearied carcase). As I prayed with
all me strength that the devil might not discover my place of refuge, he
blew a blast on his bugle-horn, called his hell-hounds together, and
gallopped up the hill. Not a moment longer would I stay on this haunted
moor. Not even Sennen Green and Kelynack Downs have a worse name

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

than the Clodgey and the carns around it. I got at last to the gate
opening into the North Downs;—the gate is near the river, and just
inside the gate is the bowjey, where plenty of straw is kept under hand
for the young cattle on the downs and moors. I felt as if my bleeding
feet would carry me no farther, to save my life. It was as much as ever
I could do to crawl into the bowjey, and fall down, more dead than
alive, among the straw. I was then within a quarter-of-a-mile of home,
yet had it been to save my soul I could not have gone a step farther.

Although my pains and sufferings were dreadful, I soon fell into a
troubled sleep, with fatigue and weakness, and was again waked up by the
tramp of a horse and the barking of dogs, that were soon in the house,
all around and treading over me. Grasping my stick, to beat them off, I
heard the tramping of boots near the door. "Avaunt thee, sathanas, in
the name of the Lord," cried I; and, when I ventured to take my hand
from my eyes, there was the squire with a lantern in his hand and the
man Jan close behind.

"What have we here? May the devil run away with me," says the squire,
"if our old Joan isn't here among the straw dead drunk! when men and
boys, with horse and hounds, have been trying to hunt her up in the town
and all the country round, during the whole of this blessed night."

"Oh! master," I said, for the sake of all I have done for you, from your
cradle to the time you were booted and breeched, do leave me to die in
peace and bury me decent, I beseech ye. By all that I have done and
suffered for ye, from the time ye mounted a horse until this the last
hour of my life, by the remembrance of all my knitting and spinning, for
the sake of all the pies and puddings I have made, and by all that I
have done and suffered for ye from the time ye first mounted a horse
until this last blessed hour of my life, oh! my dear master, swear to
me, by your horses and hounds and all you love best, that you will leave
nobody abuse me after I am gone above to my old mistress; but whatever
shall I tell her about this wicked world and the bad doings of the
people of Buryan?"

"Tell her! tell who? Hold thy tongue, old fool!" says the squire, after
I had made this tender appeal to his best feelings, that might have
touched the heart of a dumbledory. Then turning to my unnatural son, he
said, "Jan, my dear man, run down to the mill as fast as thee cust lay
feet to ground, for the miller's wheelbarrow, that we pay get out old
mammy home before she is frozen to death: tell the miller to bring a
flask of brandy, and dame Tremellyn to come up quick with some blankets,
flour-sacks, or anything that comes to hand to keep the cold from her
this frosty morning."

The miller was the first to run up from the mill. "Here, aunt Joan,"
said he (when the squire raised my head), "take a hair of the dog that
bit ye; it will do ye all the good."

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

"Oh!" says I, "I have never been the worse of liquor in my life; and as
this is the last drop I shall ever taste in this world, I will just take
a thimbleful to help me round land comfortable."

By the time I had swallowed the drop of brandy dame Tremellyn was come
with blankets and flour-sacks, and Jan with the barrow and ropes. They
lifted me into the barrow to sit on some straw, and covered me over all
but my head (I wouldn't have the flour-sacks thrown over my best
steeple-crown). The squire and Jan fastened the ropes to the ears of the
barrow, to help to get it over the banks and up the hill. Dame Tremellyn
held me steady, and the miller took the handles. When I found myself
once more in the broad green lane among the trees, and trundled along
over the smooth bowling-green, I felt that the drop of brandy had saved
my life, and when I was seated in the old hall before the blazing fire,
eating a bowl of warm caudle that Betty Trevelyan made me take, I should
have felt very well but for the remembrance of what I had gone through.
Then I told them how I had been served by Tom Chenance, missed my way in
consequence; but, most fearful even to think or speak of, how I had
escaped twice just by the skin of my teeth, as is were, in a most
wonderful way, from being carried off by the, Old One, and the last time
he came to tempt me to go away—weary worn, and footsore as I was—with a
horse and pillion. But, thank the powers, I had the grace to resist all
the wiles of the evil one.

Then, to help me overcome my fright (I suppose), they made up a story
among them that the steed of Satan that beguiled me was no other than
the miller's breachy horse (that no spanning will keep from going over
the hedges), which had got into the lane from Trevella croft, where
Tremellyn had put it an hour or two before, and spanned with the halter;
and [the](errata.htm#46) black huntsman and his hounds were no other
than my own son Jan and our dogs; that, thinking we hadn't rabbits and
hares enough for the Christmas feast, man Jan had taken the hounds and
gone off to hunt the crofts about Trevella and Mimmis carns, by the
moonlight; that coming down over the moor near the fowling-pool, he had
found the miller's horse on the road with the halter under its feet;
that then Jan mounted the horse, rode home, and finding that I wasn't
come home from town, put the saddle and pillion on the miller's horse at
once and rode off to town, hoping to meet me on the road. He called at
all the houses on the way, to inquire after me, as he said in his
impudence that I was like a miller's horse for stopping at every door.
Joan Polgrain, in Rose-an-beagle, told him that she had neither seen nor
heard of me. At Tom's Smith's shop, by Tolcarn river, Treglown told him
that I had passed over the hill many hours before. He was then come
back, when the squire, boys, and all who had been searching round for
me, were going into the bowjey. Jan said the story the squire made up
was all true, but if the squire tells as big a lie as ever was spoken
his man Jan will swear to it, and the miller, the sinful unbelieving
wretch, said I was just as

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

much, and no more, in the sky, than his old woman was the other night,
when she dreamed that she went up to visit the man in the moon, to know
the reason why he had not hung out a better light the other night, for
her and the rest of the witches to see how to steer their black
ram-cats, and the brooms on which they rode, across the water, to milk
the Welshmen's cows. When she awoke there was no putting it out of her
head but that she had been aloft all night. She would have me believe
that on first staring one night, with the rest from Castle-peak, she
(being foremost always) went off with such force that the end of her
broom-stick came slap against the sky; the blow made the blue ceiling
over this world to ring like a crystal goblet, or a silver bell; and
that it continued to ring louder and louder, until it sounded harder
than the biggest bell in Buryan tower, when some of the smallest stars
fell out with the shock and she came down after them expecting to find
them, but they all fell down in the sea somewhere between Penvonlas and
Scilly rocks, when their lights were put out and she lost them, except
from her hot brains. "I tell thee what, Aunt Joan," said the villain of
a miller, "It would have been no wonder if my young horse had gone into
fits with the fright he must have had to see thee fixed astride on his
rump, with thy long bony shanks and high-heeled shoes cocked out on each
side, your claws stuck fast of his tail, the skirt of your open
swing-tail gown and your scarlet cloak flapping about his head and ears,
surely he must have thought that something worse than Satan was mounted
on his hindquarters when your heavy spiked cane was wallopping about and
sticking into the poor brute's legs. Lucky for ye old deat," said he,
"that you were either blown, thrown, or fell on the brake of rushes;
then you went off in a drunken doze and dreamt of flying like a kite or
an angel. What a beauty you must have been! You were waked up by the
noise of our own Jan, winding his horn to call in the hounds, saw him
mount my nag and gallop down the hill, then you took him, your own son,
for the devil. As for the balls of fire they were all in your own hot
head, old dear."

"Oh! you liar," I answered, "as if I have not lived long enough in the
world, and heard enough about such things, not to know the Old One when
I saw him; and to speak of him in the way you do is very wicked, thou
disbelieving sinner."

He told me besides that it was only my vanity and conceit that puffed me
up, and sent me flying in the sky. "Old Joan," says he, "doesn’t thee
think thyself of so much consequence, that, for thy sake, the old
gentleman would ever leave his own warm country this cold morning and
come tramping from far away, with a horse and pillion, to fetch such a
troublesome curious old woman as you are. They would rather never have
ye among them;—your everlasting meddling would set them all by the ears.
And Tom Chenance did no more than right to put out the light of your
game eye. You shall have another and a better one made of chaney, or
beautiful clome, that you mayn't see honest people

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

stealing things in the market when they are not near the place. If you
came down to the mill with that eye anointed with the devil's-salve you
would swear that I, the honest miller, tolled the grist five or six
times when I had not put my dish into the sacks more than half so often.
I tell thee, Joan, all peeping spies only see evil, because they look
and wish for that alone; and if they can't see wickedness enough to
please them in a natural way they will rub on some of the devil's
eye-ointment to make them see as much as they wish for."

I left him go on, but I shall find a chance some day to serve him out,
or it's much to me.

I closed my eyes, as I was leaning back in the chimney-corner and seemed
to take no heed; but it was a fox's sleep with my eyes closed and ears
open. Then I overheard him say to the squire, "If our old Joan, when she
was down in the cove, had been treated by Betty to some of the vile,
home-distilled, instead of with the pure spirits of France, she would
have seen the dwelling of Chenance full of blue devils in place of the
pretty innocent small people. Best part of the devils, ghosts, and all
sorts of apparitions that our old women (whether in petticoats or
breeches) see, are merely the vapours of the spirits they take in their
drink."

The miller has the impudence to say quite as bad, or worse, to one's
face, I know, as he says behind one's back. The squire, poor graceless
man, says he is an honest-spoken fellow, and my Jan is as bad. I hope I
may some day be enabled to forget: then I will forgive them.

Over a while the men left the hall, and the women got me up to bed.
After all my troubles it was no wonder that I soon fell asleep and
didn't wake till late in the afternoon: then, taking the twilight for
the break of day, I composed myself to sleep again, and did not wake up
for good, till I heard many voices below singing some of the sweet old
curls (carols). I could stay in bed no longer. The squire had been up to
church, and, according to his custom, had asked down the singers to give
them a treat on Christmas Day in the Evening. Our own—the tenants’—feast
was the next day. They began with the carol for Christmas Day in the
Morning

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The first Nowell the angel did say  
 Was to three poor shepherds in fields as they lay;  
 In fields where they lay keeping their sheep  
 On a cold winter's night that was so deep,  
                    Nowell, Nowell, Nowell, Nowell,  
                    Born is the King of Israel."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then the carol of
the three ships—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"As I sat down on a sunny bank  
 On Christmas-day, on Christmas-day,  
 I saw three ships come sailing in  
 On Christmas-day in the morning."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I don't remember
all this carol, but I shall never forget the sweet music of the last
verse—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O! he did whistle and she did sing,  
 And all the bells on earth did ring,  
 For joy that our Saviour he was born  
 On Christmas-day in the morning."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Next they sang the
Cherry-tree Carol—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Joseph was an old man,  
   And an old man was he,  
 When he married Mary  
   In the land of Galilee."</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Then "The Seven
Sweet Joys of Mary"—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"The first good joy our Mary had," &c.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The last I heard
them singing when I fell asleep was the sweet old carol of the "Holy
Well," which I like best of all—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"As it fell out one May morning,  
   And upon one bright holiday,  
 Sweet Jesus asked of his mother  
   If he might go out to play." <span
id="fr_8"></span>[\*](#fn_8)</span>

</div>

I went to bed early, for Christmas time, and was fast asleep long before
they had ceased singing the sweet old carols. All the women-folks wanted
to be early in bed that night, because they had to rise betimes in the
morning of the morrow on Christmas Day; as on that day, long before I
was born, the Lovells of Trove have held their Christmas feast for the
tenantry, when many from a long way upwards, as well as friends and
relations from all the country over, come and remain in Trove over Old
Christmas Day. That all might be ready in time for the expected company,
the women-folks had to rise soon after midnight to make the pies,
prepare the meat, game, and poultry, for roasting, boiling, and baking,
and to get the great oven (opening into the side of the kitchen chimney)
thoroughly heated. By the break of day all the bottoms rung, and the
hills resounded far away, with the winding of man Jan's bugle-horn to
rouse the folks of Boleit, Trevider, Kerris, Castallack, and all the
villages round, to join in the hunting and hare-tracing over the
newly-fallen

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

snow. As soon as all the men had left the hall (where they found their
breakfast ready before daylight) there was such a fire made in the great
chimney of the hall as is only seen there twice a year—at Christmas and
the Feast.

The fireplace was filled up all its depth, and from bottom to top, with
logs of oak, ash, and elm (with bog-turf laid between and piled behind
the wood, to keep up a steady fire). By the time the fire was all aglow,
and sending out such heat and sweet smoke from wood and turf that one
might feel and smell it all over the town-place, the largest joints were
spitted, and the two great spits placed on the hand-irons before the
hall fire: an hour or two after, the geese and other small things were
placed on the end of the same spits, until our great spits were full
from end to end, all the width of the chimney; and many such small
things as woodcocks, snipes, plovers, teal, and other wild fowl, and
small game of all sorts and kinds, were placed to roast on the
dripping-pans, and turned from time to time. The kitchen chimney, as
well as the oven, was all taken up with the pies. Besides all the more
common pies—such as those of pigeons and poultry, of rabbits and hares,
of mullet and bass, veal and parsley—we had many sorts of savoury herby
pies even at that season of the year, from the abundance of beets,
round-robins, young nettle-tops, patience docks, sorrel, and other new
things that are always sprouting in the sunny hedges and slopes of the
sheltered spot above the mill-stream that we call the Ladies’ Garden,
besides many new roots and things that the gardener is getting into the
place every year, and which gives us plenty of herbs all the time. Then
we had the great savoury squab pies, sweet giblet pies and other
nick-nacks, and sweet pies for the ladies.

As soon as the large things were taken from the oven, cakes and pasties
were ready to be put in, the oven continuing hot enough to bake small
odds and ends all the day long. The great Christmas puddings had to be
boiled in the parlour chimney, every other fireplace being taken up with
cooking something or other.

The squire, with some of the elderly hunters and the ladies who went up
to the hills and carns to see the chase, returned soon after noon. Then
the table was laid, and from that time till long after dark, company
after company kept coming home laden with game and as hungry as hounds.
As the squire had nobody but myself to take care of him and to look
after everything in the house, dear old Madam Pendar came down from
Trevider early in the morning to receive the company, lend hand about
the small kickshaws, to see that everything was in order, and laid out
on the hall table with the proper garnishing that the squire likes to
see. By the time that all was arranged in the grand old-fashioned style,
the squire and visitors from a distance were marshalled into the hall,
summoned by the music of the bugle; but, long before the dinner was

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

over, all the grandeur, garniture, and style might have gone to the Old
One, for what did anyone who had to do with the cooking or eating care
about the roasted apples stuck in the mouths of the roasted pigs, or the
garlands and sprigs of rosemary and other faldelals stuck about this and
that? We told the last hunters, who came home when the smoking bowls of
punch, tankards of spiced ale, and roasted apples were placed on the
board, that they might help themselves from the spits, still before the
fire—they might cut and come again or go without, for what we cared, as
we were quite runned down and worn out with so much cooking and serving
from long before daylight till after dark.

Then some of the ladies came out of the parlour, and turned to with
right good will to serve the youngsters, who showed them good sport in
the morning, and who would join them in many a lively dance and jolly
game before bedtime.

Didn't the old house look grand and glorious that night—decked out with
branches of holly, box, and bays, with garlands and wreaths of ivy and
other greens on window and wall, and chimney and board; the painted
candles in the great high burnished candlesticks; between the steaming
bowls and tankards, piles of apples roasted and raw, and heaps of sweet
cakes? The light of the candles was little wanted, with the flaming logs
of ash and oak that kept the chimney all albaze.

Then the squire looked to grand and so happy when the stately old ladies
came with him and other gentlemen into the hall to see the guise-dance
of "St. George and the Turkish Knight," with many other such sports and
pastimes as they say are not known up the country. On the whole the best
fun we had was in the game of "Burning the Witch." <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) Many a tumble we got from the pole, and
hard qualks (falls) on the stones of the floor, before we could burn the
paper effigy of some rank witches, and some we could not set ablaze at
all.

The young folks enjoyed themselves in playing blind-bucca-Davy (blind
man's bluff) in the kitchens, or hide-and-seek in the long dark passages
and holes and corners of the old house, where they can kiss in comfort.
To tell of all the sports and pastimes we had that night would take all
day.

After the guise-dance, Bet of the Mill carne in with her crowde to beat
up the time to the old ballads she sang for the dancers in the hall.

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> At the same time
the boots of others were stamping to the same tunes on the caunce
(pavement) outside the windows. The older folks called on the miller for
some of the drolls that they have heard scores of times before, yet they
never tire of hearing the same old stories about the ancient places and
people over and over again; and the miller has learned the trick of
weaving such things as only happened yesterday (as one may say) into the
old drolls, so that they seem ever new and fresh to us: when the squire
had pledged the droll-teller, and sent him the great goblet brimming
with spiced ale, the miller began the droll of the Giant of Nancledrea
and Tom, and Jack the Tinker and the High-country folks. Between the
different parts of this long old droll, other joined in a three-man
song, to give the miller time to drain the cup and breathe awhile.

I was helped to bed long before the story was ended and when the fun was
at the highest, that I might rest my weary bones and aching head, which
got quite light with the steam and the merest taste of the different
sorts of drinks. All in vain to think of having a wink of sleep, for
right under the chamber window more dancing was going on by the
moonlight to the tunes they beat up on pewter platters and small brass
pans. At last, thank goodness, some time in the small hours of the
morning. I heard the cheers for the jolly squire and the healths drunk
outside the door from the parting-cup by the few on horseback who were
not going to remain over Christmas, and I fell asleep in wishing—

*A Merry Christmas and Happy New Year to One and All*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[224:\*](swc134.htm#fr_8) The above carols were
the greatest favourites, among many others equally quaint and old, which
were sung in the western churches and round the firesides, until about
fifty years ago, and in some places even later. Versions of these
carols, somewhat different from those known at the Land's-end, are to be
found in "Christmas Carols, Ancient and Modern," by William Sandys,
F.S.A. The same author also gives the old guise-dance of Saint George,
and describes in part the old Christmas pastime of "Burning the
Witches." He does not seem to be aware that the intent of the game was
to try who were witches and who were not, by either setting the witch on
fire, or getting a fall upon the floor.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[226:\*](swc134.htm#fr_9) To play the game of
burning the old witch, a pole about five feet long, such as a pike-staff
or shovel-hilt, is placed with each end resting on a low stool. A
lighted candle is placed on the floor at a short distance from the pole,
on which the person who undertakes to burn the witch endeavours to keep
sitting, with the feet also (crossed at the ankles) resting on the pole
clear of any other support or help, except the paper, or rag figure, to
represent the witch to be burnt for fun, by the person sitting in this
ticklish position, who often falls many times before the paper figure
can be burnt at the candle on the floor.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bosava: The Demon Mason; and Lenine the Cobbler](swc135)

</div>
