[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mst06)  [Next](mst08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0374517541/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Nostradamus, the Man Who Saw Through Time*, by Lee McCann \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

<span id="img_10900"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Through this old
gate traveled Nostradamus on errands of mercy and
friendship.](tn/10900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/10900.jpg)  
Through this old gate traveled Nostradamus on errands of mercy and
friendship.  
</span>

### CHAPTER FIVE

### The Plague Returns

NOSTRADAMUS HAS SAID, concerning his psychic gift, that it was
inherited. Undoubtedly he had been conscious for a long time that he
possessed it, and had used it to divert friends occasionally, as his
grandfather had amused him when he was a child. During the period of his
wanderings, under the emotional tension of sorrow and loneliness, such a
faculty would tend to develop even without encouragement. Occult friends
and associations, if such there were, would have given impetus to
experiment with this perception, and fresh insight perhaps into the laws
under which it manifests.

It is said that the first striking experience of his gift came to him
while he was travelling in Lorraine. If this is so, it holds a peculiar
interest, because Lorraine was the home of that other great French
mystic, Jeanne d’Arc. There are two incidents from his early prophetic
experiences which have been handed down and are retold by all writers on
Nostradamus. These stories date from the period of his travels though
the time of their occurrence is not known. One of these is

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

amusing and bears out the idea that he often used the gift to astonish
and delight close friends. Had this ability not been known to them and
accepted in that way, his host would hardly have been free to tease the
doctor as he tried to do.

Nostradamus was a guest of Lord Florinville at the castle of Faim, where
he was attending professionally on Lord Florinville's mother. The doctor
and his host were crossing the courtyard where two little pigs, a black
one and a white one, were running about as was the casual custom of
livestock in those days. Lord Florinville said to the doctor,

"I suppose you can even foretell the fate of those two pigs!"

"Certainly I can," replied the doctor. "We shall eat the black one, and
a wolf will eat the white one."

Lord Florinville saw a chance for a good joke on his guest. He privately
instructed the cook to roast the white pig for supper. That evening,
while they were feasting on succulent young pork, his lordship with huge
mirth told Nostradamus that he was eating white pig. This the prophet
vigorously denied. The pig, he said, was the black one, as he had
foretold. The cook was finally called to settle the argument. "Yes,"
said the cook fearfully, "the pig was the black." The white one had been
killed and prepared as directed. But she had stepped out of the kitchen,
before putting the pig in the oven, and a tame wolf had stepped in and
was doing himself very well on the pig when the cook returned.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Not supposing that
it would make any difference, the black one had then been quickly killed
and served, exactly as predicted. This episode occurred long before the
writing of the prophecies, and certainly indicates that the doctor's
uncanny faculty must have been well known to a select number of his
friends and patients.

The other incident happened during his stay in Italy. In the
neighborhood of Ancona, along the road, Nostradamus passed a group of
Franciscan Friars. Among them was a young lad, a country boy, who had
but recently left his father's farm to join the order. On seeing him,
Nostradamus dismounted from his mule, went up to him and dropped on his
knee before him. The astonished monks asked why he did this.

"Because I must kneel before His Holiness," he told them.

They were probably more astonished than ever, and it seems that little
attention was paid to such an unlikely forecast. But it was remembered
by those present, and told by them when, years after Nostradamus had
died, that country boy, Felice Peretti, became Pope Sixtus V. It must be
inferred from his homage that Nostradamus did not confuse principle with
personality. He knelt to the symbol of his religion and the office of
the Holy See, not to the man, Peretti, who became Pope. Nostradamus did
not admire Sixtus V. This is what he had to say of him in one of the
quatrains.

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Roman clergy in the year 1609  
Will hold an election at the beginning of the year.  
They will elect one who comes from the country, and wears the black and
gray robe,  
And never was there one more sly.

</div>

The story is that during the election Cardinal Peretti pretended to be a
cripple, perhaps to create sympathy or drama. Once assured of success,
he threw away his crutches and sang loudly for joy. That may have no
foundation. Nostradamus disliked Sixtus for his compromising complacence
in dealing with Henry of Navarre, who in the prophet's uncompromising
opinion was a turn-coat and a heretic. The prophet had little
[sympathy](errata.htm#5) with what he thought was the Pope's weakness.
In another verse he speaks of Sixtus as being "afraid to take off his
shirt at night for fear of its being stolen." Which was a sarcastic
reference to the despoiling of the Church at the hands of the
Protestants and ambitious rulers.

The year, during Nostradamus’ lifetime, began in France with the Spring
Equinox. Sixtus V was elevated to the papacy in 1585, and the election
was held April 24. If 24 is added to the number of the year it gives
1609, just one of the prophet's little subtleties which make life
difficult for his interpreters! It is at least an interesting
coincidence, and to those who follow astrology something more, that
these three men whose lives were strangely intertwined, Nostradamus,
Henry IV, and Sixtus V, all had the same birthday,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

with the Sun in the second degree of Capricorn. It was to Henry of
Navarre that the verses of Nostradamus called *Presages* and *Sixains*
were presented after the prophet's death. Henry II, the king who
summoned Nostradamus to Paris, had the same degree of Capricorn on the
zenith of his horoscope.

When the new dimension of time swung wide its strange doors to
Nostradamus, giving upon vistas of the future in extraordinary visions,
he must have suffered for a time grave concern, even though long
accustomed to slighter manifestations. Such a condition would have, even
for the strongest nature, a somewhat terrifying aspect. Nostradamus,
too, would have pondered its source, its rightness; his conscience as a
churchman would have scrutinized it. For this was the era when there was
nothing more dreaded than possession by the Devil. He is thought to have
spent a long retreat within a severe monastery. Some believe that it was
here that he began the writing of the *Centuries*. It is more likely
that he went for the purpose of thoroughly examining his gift within
consecrated walls, under a rigid religious routine, and also to take
counsel with the Abbot concerning this gift of prophecy. The Church was
ever the friend of this prophet; he stood on firm ground with its heads.
Although the cry of sorcery was raised madly against him, the
Inquisition took no notice of it, and his first Almanachs were dedicated
to the Pope. Nostradamus, alert to the dangers of his age, would have
made sure of the approval of the Church before he launched himself upon
a career

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

as prophet. All the more so because his prophecies were not the usual
vague cries of woes to come, but specific information dealing with
political destinies.

The Abbot was a very learned man. He would have questioned the physician
closely as to whether there were any sorcerous phenomena appearing with
the visions. Were there any indications that the Devil was -trying to
work through him? Nostradamus thought not. It was the reason that he had
come to the Abbey, where its strict ritual was well calculated to
discourage any such ideas of the evil one.

"In fact," he told the Abbot, "it is my very love of God, my fasting, my
praise of Him and my prayers, which seem to draw the visions closer.
Surely, such white and holy light as appears to me then, could come from
none but heavenly sources."

"That is so," the Abbot agreed. "The pure, ineffable white flame has
ever been a sign of God's favor. ’Tis very well known that the evil one
must use the red flames of hell; he has no other kind of light.

"You say," continued the Abbot, "that this peculiar foresight is
inherited. To what extent did your grand-sires experience it?"

"Not to the extent that I have. Their gift was more personal, they could
foresee matters affecting the family or members of the community. But
they foresaw these things less frequently, and never the wide scope of
the world which is opening before me."

The prelate eyed him shrewdly. "My son, I will not

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

ask you if you have gone further in efforts to develop this gift than
did your grandsires. That is a matter between yourself and the
confessional. But I am not unaware that there is much dark knowledge in
the world."

"And I swear before Almighty God that never have I broken his Holy law
touching such matters. I have done only that which I believed to be
right. But if God Himself opens a door in my understanding, shall I
defeat His purpose, shall I refuse to enter that door? Is not that the
meaning of prophecy?"

"Yes," the Abbot said very thoughtfully, "when it is really prophecy."
He touched some closely written sheets of parchment on the table beside
him. "These visions you have set down touching the near future of France
are depressing. I can hope, my son, that in these matters your foresight
will be proved wrong."

"It will not be," said the doctor with conviction, "though I hope it no
less fervently than do you."

"Well," the Abbot told him, "you have done wisely to set down the
impressions that have come to you. Now we shall keep a check on this
record. My advice is that you write them down, but do not show them
about. Not yet. Many devout men have prophesied for a day, some have
been given the sight here within these walls. Later, they are often
proved mistaken in what they saw. Again sometimes, even when they were
right, the vision left them as swiftly and mysteriously as it had come.
That may happen to you. But if you find that over the stretch of years
this knowledge

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

continues to come to you, and that its visions are true, then you may, I
think, accept it as a signal token of inspiration. It is odd, though,"
the Abbot said thoughtfully, "I have served Him on my knees these many
years, and never have I had a vision such as nightly comes to you. It
passes understanding."

After the prophet had returned to his cell, the Abbot's mind continued
to dwell on this peculiar man. A goodly soul, he thought, strange, but
genuinely devout. There was a power of some kind that dwelt in him, he
could himself sense it, and the doctor had wrought some wondrous cures
among the monks. True, his prophecies might, in the long run, not work
out. So few did. Still the Abbot believed he was an honest man. He, as a
churchman, could not be too careful in dealing with what might be
Satan's wiles, but as yet he could see nothing in Doctor Nostradamus
meriting the condemnation of the Church.

Something besides this new increase in his power was beginning at this
time to make itself felt in the breast of the prophet. He realized
suddenly that he was homesick. He was tired of the road. He wanted to
settle down in Provence in a place of his own once more, where he could
have about him his books and scientific paraphernalia. Where he could
meditate and work on the knowledge and experience garnered in these
long, weary years. He was now turned forty, time to stop tramping.

The question was, where should he settle? He could not return to Agen
with its sadness of memories. The

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

thing to do was to go back to Provence, look about and then decide on a
new home. This he did, and no sooner did word of his return get about
than it seemed as if every town in that part of the world was begging
him to settle there. Friends were active, telling him of just the right
house for him, and keeping him busy with kindly advice.

The City of Marseilles thought it would be wonderful if they could get
this famous man to live in their midst, and sent a deputation to invite
him and offer inducements. He finally decided on the little old town of
Salon, because, he told his friends, it was central to Avignon, and to
the other cities of Provence, and he would have a radius which would
allow him to keep in touch with a wider circle, and see more of his
friends than in the other places under consideration. His real reason
was probably the smallness of Salon. Just as when he had fought the
plague, he had been compelled to go to places that were isolated to
carry out his ideas, he knew that in a different way he still faced that
necessity. The jealousy and criticism, the constant watchfulness of his
colleagues in larger towns would have spelled trouble in short order. In
little Salon he hoped to avoid this. Besides, it was a sweet old town,
and he wanted peace. Salon was overjoyed, it did its best for him. The
old commentators say that "Salon gave him a wife who was well born and
wealthy." Her name was Anne Ponsart Jumelle. Whether the lady was a gift
from the town's grateful chamber of commerce, or whether the doctor did
his own selecting,

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

he did marry again, not long after his return. Settled down comfortably
in a house fronting a narrow street, once more prospects for some
durable happiness seemed bright. He resumed his medical practice with
all of his old-time popularity. Soon, too, there was the first child, a
son, to bind him even more closely to his love of home. Life once more
was quiet, normal and carefree.

When their boy was born the parents named him César. One wonders if
Nostradamus chose this name in memory of his happy days spent in the
company of Julius Caesar Scaliger before their friendship ended. He may
have thought that such a compliment might heal the breach when Scaliger
heard of it. But there is no record that the haughty ego of Scaliger
ever softened toward his one-time friend.

It was the month of May, 1544, when a traveler coming from Aix, passing
through Salon, brought the disturbing news that plague had broken out in
the capital. Wealthy people were already leaving the city, though it was
not known yet whether there would be few cases or an epidemic. This time
the pest was the hideous *charbon* scourge, so called because its
victims turned completely black, so that in death they resembled charred
logs.

Then new rumors reached Salon that the plague cases were increasing and
conditions in Aix were becoming serious. Nostradamus’ young wife spoke
to her husband in apprehension.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

"Michel, is there any danger that you may be called to Aix to fight this
scourge?"

"Probably not," he comforted her. "It is a plague which has occurred
before. I have never handled a case, but other doctors have treated it
and may have found certain remedies efficacious. There are a number of
good doctors in Aix who will perhaps be able to arrest the contagion."

Actually he was not so sure. There was no cure for this pestilence
known. The only hopeful sign that he could see was that he had not been
sent for. That should mean that the pest was lessening, getting under
control so that he was not needed. On the other hand it was just
possible that he was needed, and badly, but that professional jealousy
was keeping him from being called. He knew too well that there were
doctors who would for this reason let their patients die rather than
call him in, and he was too proud to offer his services unasked.

In Salon, they were wondering about this too. Strange, people said, that
if the plague was really bad Aix did not send for the one man in France
who had ever been able to cope with it. True, this time it was a
different pest, but still a plague was a plague, was it not? And if you
could cure one, why not another? Then came the news that the plague was
appalling, that people were dying like flies, and still no call came in
for the services of Doctor Nostradamus.

"And for that I give thanks to the Virgin and all

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the Saints," said Anne Nostradamus, thinking of her baby.

"Nonsense," Nostradamus told her. "You are married to a doctor. And a
doctor goes where he is needed. And they must need me." He walked
restlessly about the room. He was worried. Some of his dearest
associations were with Aix. He should be there, helping their distress.

Came a day, some weeks after the first news of the outbreak, when a
little group of hard-riding men with despair in their faces drew rein
outside the house of Doctor Nostradamus. They were men from the town
council of Aix.

"We have come to beg your help, Doctor Nostradamus," their spokesman
said. "The situation in Aix is completely out of hand. The doctors there
are powerless. The whole city is affected, and the pest is still
spreading. If it cannot be checked it will spread beyond Aix, and who
knows where it will reach? Our only hope is now in you."

"Why," asked the doctor coldly, "was I not sent for before this plague
had gained such headway?" Inwardly he was seething with indignation, for
in Aix of all places, where his grandfathers had been great, and his
family known for generations, he had the right to expect trust and
understanding.

There was a moment of embarrassed silence, then the councillors all
began to talk at once. They had not anticipated such a rapid, deadly
progress of the disease. They had thought the physicians resident in Aix
could

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

handle it, they had not wanted to ask Doctor Nostradamus to leave his
young wife and child--for these and more reasons they had waited.

Nostradamus refused to spare them. "I know why you have not come before.
And if you think that I am Satan's agent, you have done ill to call me
now. No--" he raised his hand against their trembling protest. "This
must be straightened out now. Otherwise I shall be of no use to you."

"Michel," cried one of the councillors piteously, who had known the de
Nostradame family for a long time, "do not reproach us. Help us, and we
will bless your name forever."

The doctor's quick sympathy could not withstand this appeal. "Very
well," he replied. "Then let us get on with it at once. My servant will
bring you refreshment and look to your needs while I get together a few
requirements, then we shall ride at once."

"They have come for me," he told his wife soberly.

"Oh, Michel." She held their baby in her arms, and struggled to keep
back the tears. Beside these two, to whom happiness had so lately come,
there stood a specter now, and each knew that the other saw it. It was
the vision of three narrow graves beneath the trees of Agen. What new
toll might now be exacted by the grisly visitor of pest? Yet it never
occurred to the doctor to consider personal interest and safety. A few
simple preparations, a brief, tender farewell to the wife and baby he
might never see again, and he was

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

riding with the others at top speed down the road to Aix.

When they stopped at an inn for a quick bite and a change of horses,
Nostradamus received more information about the situation.

One of the councillors told him how the cemeteries were choked with
bodies. "Even piling them together," he said, "there is no more space in
consecrated ground. My wife and daughter lie buried in the open field
with the corpses of peasants."

"People die so fast," another told him hopelessly, "the doctors have no
time for treatment or study of the remedies. In two days the stricken
are dead."

Crime, they said, was complicating the problem, too. The people thought
they were abandoned by God, that they had no time left to live, and they
must snatch terribly at any pleasure or indulgence that was remaining.
Theft, rape and even murder were stalking hand in hand with the
pestilence.

"How many doctors have you there, and who are they?" Nostradamus wanted
to know.

It appeared from the shamefaced admissions that there had already been a
very large corps of doctors, some of them quite famous, who had been
called in from outside Aix. A number of these had fallen victims of the
plague, the mortality among the doctors being but little less than among
the rest of the population. Some, too, had fled the place, unable to
stand the horror of the scene. The rest were carrying on as best they
could, but utterly helpless to save the victims or

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

arrest the spread. It was the same familiar, tragic situation the doctor
had faced fifteen years before.

Already Nostradamus was mapping his plan of campaign. "I want a good
laboratory, and some trained pharmaceutical helpers," he told them.
"Once I decide on a remedy, I shall want it made up in quantity. I shall
give you a list of herbs and essences, and you can check your supplies
at all pharmacies against it, and make arrangements to send elsewhere as
shortages develop."

"We will do these things while you are resting a little when we get to
Aix," they assured him.

"I want no rest," he replied. "There is not a moment to lose."

"But won't you wish to consult with the other doctors, and hear their
professional accounts and findings?" he was asked.

"No," he answered with grim positiveness. "I shall not. If they knew
anything, I need not have come. I shall get my information from the
victims."

"Michel," the councillor who knew him best spoke hesitantly, "what
precautions are you using against taking the contagion? I mean, is there
something you can suggest to us that we--?"

"Nothing. I know too little as yet to recommend precautions. Of what
good to plug up the nose and deprive yourself of air when the contagion
may come from food or some other carrier? A clean body, internally and
externally, is a general measure at all times. But the one important
thing at this time is to control

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

your fears, for fear is a killer. Put your trust in God, have courage,
and pray as never before."

Nostradamus knew that these were brave men, but they had been under a
terrible strain for weeks, they were exhausted and near the breaking
point. It would not do to sympathize with them. His calm, matter-of-fact
attitude took hold of them. Some power seemed to go out from him and
reach their spirits. They were conscious of being at the same time
relaxed and strengthened by his personality. Each breathed a sigh, as if
a heavy load had been shouldered by another and stronger. In this man,
they felt, was help. They rose to resume the ride and finish the
journey, which was a full day's ride.

Along the rutted roads, where they were making all speed possible, sweet
buds were bursting into blossom, framed in the fresh green leaves of the
year's loveliest season. The rustle of brook-song and the notes of birds
were carried on the woodland breezes. Sheep and cattle browsed content
under ancient trees. Here was Nature upsurging in all her vivid beauty,
with the rose of Spring at her breast. And beyond, at Aix, the stricken
children of Earth were dying like the seared boughs of lightning-struck
trees. As the group approached the suburbs of Aix, the doctor noted
increasingly the processions of burial carts heaped high with human clay
on its way to fields already thickly pitted with newly dug graves. Soon
he breathed the fever-foulness weighting the air. From the town came the
mournful sound, faint at first, rising in volume as they drew

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

nearer, of the church bells tolling unceasingly their terrifying dirges.

Doctor Nostradamus preferred to stop at an inn to becoming a guest of
one of the councillors. He would have more freedom at a public hostelry.
Most of these had closed, but one was found which was willing to admit
him to its empty rooms.

"Everything is dead, Doctor," the innkeeper told him hysterically. "The
palace is closed, all the shops and every kind of business. Of course,
places of amusement shut down first of all. Now even the money-lenders
have put up their shutters. When that happens," he spread his hands in a
weary, cynical gesture, "then truly there is no life left."

When Nostradamus had washed and put on fresh linen, he found a member of
the council waiting for him accompanied by one of the Aix doctors.

The physician greeted Nostradamus cordially and said he had come to
offer his services, he would be glad to work under Doctor Nostradamus,
since there had seemed little that he could accomplish working alone.
Nostradamus looked at him in pity, for his appearance was enough to
frighten a beholder without the plague. He looked utterly exhausted,
white and sunken as death itself after his long bout. He was bundled up
in so much clothing that no one could say how much was man and how much
wrappings. Since it was hot weather, and he was sweating profusely,
perspiration mingling with the medicinal oils had soaked through his
coat. Garlic added to these made the odor which he

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

had brought into the room nearly unbearable. Nostradamus said that he
was ready to begin work, and that he would like to go first to the
hospital and pest-houses. He wanted to see the arrangements for handling
the cases, and then settle down to a study of the symptoms and progress
of the disease. He could not say how long it would be before he could
begin to improvise and experiment with remedies, since he was entirely
unfamiliar with the charbon plague.

When Nostradamus stepped from the cool, shadowed interior of the inn
once more into the blazing Midi sunshine of the deserted streets, it was
to begin his first of two hundred and seventy days of fierce and
unremitting battle against the plague, days filled with unending sights
of black, twisted agony, and heavy with the stench of putrefaction which
no breeze could freshen. Along the way to the hospital, he saw how many
of the beautiful old houses, empty now, had suffered injury from vandals
and looters. There were, the other doctors told him in answer to his
comment, no magistrates sitting, no pretense of the administration of
justice or the apprehension of criminals. Everything was being looted,
he said, and live stock driven away. People of good repute were too
disconsolate to take action, those, that is, who had remained in the
city. Several times in the course of their progress the doctors were
forced to dodge quickly to escape being hit by corpses tossed callously
from windows to lie hideously in the streets until the burial carts
picked them up. Nostradamus

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

saw that hope was indeed an exile from this ancient and opulent city.

The churches were as empty as the rest of the buildings, Nostradamus’
companion said. No one, he thought, believed any longer in prayer. As
for the priests they were as confused as rabbits, they ran around in
utter helplessness, accomplishing little even in the way of solace.

Nostradamus found the hospital staffed by gaunt, utterly weary men. The
stamp of terror was on every face there as elsewhere in the city. There
was the disorganization caused by insufficient attendants and the
crowding of patients far beyond hospital capacity. Sanitation, food,
attention of every kind was suffering from neglect or lacking. The
woebegone staff of doctors and nurses greeted him with joy and
thankfulness. Hope stirred faintly in his wake like a salt sea breeze.
Fear slackened in the presence of this man for whom it did not exist.
Serenely he made the round of the hospital, studying conditions
deliberately, questioning, now and then making some practical
suggestion. He sat for a time at the bedside of the victims in various
stages of the disease, observing symptoms and conditions, leaving some
blessed ray of comfort where he passed.

One disadvantage in the study of this and other plagues had been the
fear of contagion, which was so great it prevented the doctors from
spending enough time with the victims to study properly the course of

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

the disease, its character, and the patients’ reaction to the remedies
that were tried out, though the latter were still for the most part
cordials, bleeding and purging. Nostradamus began by spending hours at
bedsides, observing. Forman thinks that he studied excreta and may have
been the father of modern ideas of antisepsis. One of the old
commentators, Astruc, says that he paid careful attention to
arrangements for patients, their transportation by whatever was the
sixteenth-century equivalent of ambulances, and the disposition of
corpses. This undoubtedly was an effort to limit the carrying of the
disease.

Only after prolonged study did Nostradamus begin to try out some
remedial ideas. How much trial and failure was necessary we have no
record. Evidently, from the length of time the plague persisted, a great
deal. Here was no easy success such as had been his youthful conquest of
the plague. This bears out the idea that he had some inherited, little
known and untried *recepte* which, in the first experience, he used with
brilliant results. In the plague of Aix, he had no such assistance, he
was face to face with a contagion of which he was ignorant, without
theories, and on the same footing with all of the other doctors in
charge.

The peculiar remedy which he at last evolved was a kind of troche to be
held in the mouth. That is all that he used. Eugene Bareste, a scholarly
and highly intelligent French commentator, writing in 1840 tells of his
discovery of a rare little volume by Nostradamus.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He found it, lying
ancient and dusty in the Library of Saint Geneviève, such a rarity that
not even the Library of France possessed a copy. It is entitled *A
Collection of Numerous Receipts For Perfumes and Lotions For Beautifying
The Face and Preserving Bodily Wholeness. Also Various Liquid
Confections And Other Receipts Not Hitherto Presented*. It was
originally in two volumes, but one, alas, had disappeared. The remaining
volume, however, contained Nostradamus’ description of the plague at
Aix, and his formula for the troche.

Nostradamus says in this account that neither bleeding nor medical
cordials had the least efficacy. "Nor was any found but this (his own
remedy). All who carried it in the mouth were preserved." Here is the
receipt, as given by Nostradamus himself.

"Take of the distillation of the branch of the greenest cypress-wood,
one ounce; of Iris of Florence, six ounces; of cloves, three ounces, of
sweet-flag, three drams, of ligni aloes, six drams. Reduce these to a
mixture not overly evaporated. Then take of blood-red roses two or three
hundred, completely fresh and gathered before dawn; pound these
thoroughly, then blend them with the mixture. When the whole has been
well mingled, make it into small pats, like troches, and set them to dry
in the shade. In addition to the excellence and fragrance which this
prescription affords, when held in the mouth it sweetens the breath for
an entire day and relieves gaseous stomach conditions."

How, one ponders, could such slight, fragrant, medicinal

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

pot-pourri afford resistance to the mortality of a deadly contagion?
Perhaps in several ways. All historians of plagues, from Thucydides
down, stress their accompaniment of destroying terror. The rose-pats of
Nostradamus, considered only as bread-pills backed by his sensational
reputation, would have helped enormously to relieve the fear. Anyone who
could obtain something that this celebrated doctor said would save them,
had already conquered fear and acquired resistance. But there is more to
this old recepte than just that. One of the first symptoms of the
charbon plague was frightful bleeding at the nose. Nostradamus must have
believed that the infection entered through the mouth or nasal passages.
This pungent, delightful little cake was designed to both stimulate and
relax the nerves and passages of nose and throat, and perhaps give a
mild antisepsis. There is a close connection between these nerves and
the brain, so that terror in itself tends to congest them, lessening
resistance to infection. His troche would have affected both physically
and psychologically the particular head-area which appeared most
vulnerable to the contagion.

Nostradamus, in the infinite subtlety of his mind, may have considered,
too, that the red rose has been from time immemorial the symbol of life
and happiness, Its fragrance and flavor would carry that message and
symbolism to patients even though they were unconscious of it. It was
the substitution of the idea of life and hope replacing that of death
and despair. Roses are becoming a rarity in modern life;

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

a grouping behind the plate-glass window of a florist's shop, or a few
in the vases of the fortunate. They were a more vital and plentiful
treasure of the ancient world, and put to many uses. Marvelous rose
cordials were made by carefully guarded family receipts sometimes
centuries old. The bloom was also sacred to the making of odorous
pot-pourri which gave summer fragrance to the house through the winter.
And confitures of rose leaves were a frequent delicacy. It would be
strange if in the ancient world these glorious blooms should not have
been used in some remedial way that old scientists might believe infused
something of their vivid life into the fading vitality of illness.
Nostradamus was fortunate in being summoned to Aix in the season when
roses were abundant. The picture of him, which history presents, calling
those who stood in the midst of the whirlwind of death to go into the
dew-laden dawn and gather the red roses of summer for healing, is in
itself symbolic of the way in which the skill and spirit of this great
man touched the lives of those who turned to him for help.

For the efficacy of Nostradamus’ prescription there is testimony of the
most practical kind. When the plague had been at long last conquered,
the city of Aix gave him the highest and most grateful credit and
praise. They paid him in full for the nine months of his service, and in
addition, the parliament voted him a substantial life pension which was
paid to him as long as he lived. Nostradamus writing of this, says: "And
it is true that in 1544 I was chosen and received

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

compensation from the City of Aix in Provence, where by the parliament
and the people I was entrusted with the preservation of the city . . .
Toward the end of the plague it was clearly demonstrated that I had
preserved a world of people."

Wealthy citizens, besides all this, made him rich presents of money.
These he distributed with his customary generosity among families
victimized in the plague.

Weary with the long pull, laden with glory, he returned to Salon and his
family. He had been away almost a year. The small rural town is now
almost bursting with pride in their star, and richer than their wildest
dreams had ever imagined. For Nostradamus, after this triumph, more than
ever means business to the little place. The nobility from all the
country around are pouring in to see and consult him. The nobles from
Arles, Avignon, Aix, Marseilles, choke the street leading to his home
with their horses, coaches and litters. These educated, sophisticated
people of the great world were enchanted with a doctor whose skill could
cure them while he diverted them with his learning and witty
conversation. But in the background there was always the enmity of his
own profession, insanely jealous of a man who could do what other
doctors could not, and accomplish it by means they despised, envied, and
could not comprehend. It was openly said in regard to medical
innovations generally, indeed it was the credo of the old-line
physicians, that it was much better for people to die under treatment

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

approved by the majority of doctors than to have their lives saved by
unorthodox methods. The only trouble with this theory was that the man
whose life was at stake wasn't likely to agree, not until he got well,
anyhow.

Nostradamus was now openly accused by the doctors of using bootlegged
knowledge gained through association with secret, heretical societies
and outlawed alchemists. These accusations were not without effect. The
times were so deeply superstitious, so rent by all sorts of hatreds,
that many listened, though not enough to jeopardize his position. But
the snapping at his heels continued.

Nearly a year went by in which he was peaceful and happy in his home
life, popular and sought after. Then came the news, once again, of the
coming of the charbon plague. This time the outbreak was at Lyons, and
on this occasion Nostradamus was early called on to help. When he
arrived at Lyons, however, he found Jean-Antoine Sarrazin already in the
field and directing the work. Sarrazin, according to the history of both
Lyons and Montpellier, was considered one of the great medical figures
of his day, his reputation was of the highest. He was extremely
ambitious, and eager to make a record in stamping out the plague in
Lyons that would equal if not surpass the work of Nostradamus for the
city of Aix. He had the devotion and the courage to do this, but lacked
the science. The coming of Nostradamus immediately roused his jealousy,
and he stated that he intended to work alone.

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nostradamus,
always a modest man, having no desire except to save those whom he
might, agreed at once. He said that he would gladly share with Sarrazin
what had been learned about the plague in Aix, and then he and Sarrazin
would take separate routes which were not in conflict. This was done.

The situation at Lyons was somewhat different from that at Aix. Lyons
was one of the largest and most important cities of France. It had a
long medical tradition, for it was there that the first hospital in
France had been established by Childebert in the sixth century. An
interesting description of a sixteenth-century hospital which may be
taken as typical of the best institutions, such as that at Lyons, exists
in a document sent by the Hospital of Santa Maria Nuova, at Florence, to
Henry VIII. This was written at the request of the king for information
which would aid him in improving the hospitals of England. The hospital
staff, according to his letter, comprised a number of internes who lived
in, and a larger number of visiting surgeons who paid daily visits, just
as today. The hospital maintained a dispensary for the treatment of
ulcers and slight disorders. This was conducted by the foremost surgeon
in the city who, with his assistants, gave their services without charge
to the poor, and supplied them with free medicines from the hospital
pharmacy. The modern clinic continues this tradition. The large
hospitals were all independently wealthy, owning extensive vineyards and
other properties and industries. Revenue from these was supplemented

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

by taxes. But since then, as now, there was never as much money as was
needed, wealthy patrons endowed beds, gave annuities, and assumed
responsibilities for particular comforts and various needs of the
patients. All of which sounds surprisingly modern.

The Church administered the hospitals, and appears to have done so in a
skilled and highly responsible way. Even Martin Luther confessed that
under the papacy generous provision had always been made for all classes
of suffering, while among his own followers no one contributed to the
maintenance of the sick and poor. Architecturally, the hospitals were
constructed on the religious pattern of the cross as established by the
Crusaders. The beds were arranged in rows in one enormous room, the long
section of the cross. There was no such thing as private rooms, or
separate wards. Some of the hospitals provided screens which could be
used to partition off the beds. But this was in the interest of privacy
when religious rites were administered, rather than any consideration
for the patient at other times. In times of plague, the accommodations
of even the largest institution were but a drop in the bucket of need,
though they served all they could. However, the hospital was the focal
agency from which all plans and effort were put forth.

In the Lyons hospital Nostradamus found a trained efficiency and order,
even under plague conditions, far beyond the limited facilities he had
worked with at Aix. The institution had two thousand beds and a large
staff of well-known doctors. Association, as doctor or

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

interne, with the Lyons hospital carried a certain prestige such as the
great medical institutions of today confer upon their chosen staffs. It
was also a hotbed of gossip, hatred and controversy over new techniques
and theories, and watched over with a malicious eye by the fanatics of
the Sorbonne. But a few years previous, Rabelais had been a member of
the staff, when his friend, the distinguished physician, Etienne Dôle,
was burned at the stake by order of the Sorbonne. No liberal scholarship
which was boldly acknowledged could consider itself safe here, for there
were always spies. Nostradamus braved more than the plague when he
excited the enmity of Sarrazin.

In the pestilence at Lyons it soon became apparent that Doctor Sarrazin,
with all of his zeal, was killing a great many more people than his
methods were helping. Citizens from Sarrazin's territory began rushing
pell-mell to Nostradamus, who wanted no trouble with his jealous
*confrère*. Crowds threw themselves at his feet and implored him not to
abandon them. Nostradamus finally said to these groups:

"I want to help you, but you must let me experiment in my own way. I
honor Doctor Sarrazin, who is my colleague, but our remedies are
different. So you must choose which one of us you want to remain as
medical director of the city. You must decide at once for one of us,
myself or Doctor Sarrazin."

The whole deputation cried out, "We choose Doctor Nostradamus, the
deliverer of Aix." Sarrazin left, discredited and furious.

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

One month later the plague at Lyons was completely stamped out and over.
Once again the little roseleaf cakes had done their work. Once more
Nostradamus took his leave heaped with glory and gratitude. A deputation
of members of the city government as an escort of honor accompanied him
on his return to Salon.

The municipal histories of Aix and Lyons report in detail the work of
Nostradamus in these two plagues. Whatever room for controversy there is
in minor matters of the physician's life, these medical achievements are
incontestable. Sarrazin immediately accused Nostradamus of magical
practice and spread evil rumors far and wide. This was followed a year
later by a book published in Avignon bitterly attacking him, branding
him as a charlatan and worse. It was the hatred of the man of today
which almost invariably pursues the man of tomorrow. It is said that in
later years Nostradamus was deeply wounded when, on a visit to Lyons, he
found that he was no longer popular there. This was after the
misrepresentations through imitations and pirating of his writings. The
doctors, too, who were his enemies had no doubt reminded the former
patients of Nostradamus many a time that if they had been left to die,
they would by then be enjoying the delights of Paradise. That having
been cured by sorcery, they might have forever forfeited those delights.
A potent argument in the sixteenth century.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Six: A Prophet's Eyry](mst08)
