[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Nostradamus](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](mst10)  [Next](mst12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0374517541/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Nostradamus, the Man Who Saw Through Time*, by Lee McCann \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span id="img_22400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![&lt;i&gt;Blois,
setting of royal splendors and tragic
destinies&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/22400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22400.jpg)  
*Blois, setting of royal splendors and tragic destinies*.  
</span>

### CHAPTER NINE

### The Court of the Valois

THE ARRIVAL OF THE PROPHET in Paris had stimulated afresh the popular
interest in his book. Everyone who had not seen it before was reading
and talking about it now. Speculation centered particularly on a few of
the quatrains that seemed to yield more promise of immediate fruition
than the rest. There was one which spoke of a new king, crowned at
Rheims when Saturn was in water, who would "slaughter the innocents." It
would be in a water sign, Cancer, again in 1561. Was that the end of
Henry II, and who were the innocents? Of course if 1561-3 went by and
nothing happened, then the prophecy couldn't take place for another
seven or eight years. But maybe something would happen, because there
was that other verse about the old lion being killed, fighting in a
golden cage. The astrologers had said Henry II would die in a duel, and
only a king vv as privileged to wear gilded armor. Henry II didn't have
long then, did he, they gossiped.

There was the verse, too, about the Bailiff of

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Orleans. Would
that be Jerome Groslot, the present bailiff? Condemned to die, deserving
to, but saved from death--what could bring that about?

Then there was that wicked verse about *Bossu*. Everybody knew who that
was--young Louis de Bourbon, the hunchback Prince of Condé. Well, the
gossips said, he wouldn't be the first Bourbon to turn traitor and get
shot for it. Already he was of the religion, like others of his family.

*Bossu* was then in Paris. While the fanfare of the prophet's arrival
was being noised abroad, he dropped in at Admiral Coligny's quarters
fuming with anger.

"You would think that God Himself had come to town," he raged. "The
entire court, I hear, are making complete fools of themselves over this
charlatan."

Coligny, his brother Francis d’Andelot and some other Protestant
gentlemen who were present gave Condé ready agreement. D’Andelot said,

"The old sorcerer ought to be tied to the stake and a very slow fire
lighted under him."

They spoke of what they considered the outrage of the quatrain about the
Prince de Condé. One of the gentlemen had not heard it, and Condé
repeated it:

III-41

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Hunchback will be elected by the council,  
A more hideous monster never appeared on earth,  
A deliberately fired shot will pierce the eye  
Of the traitor who had accepted the obligation of fealty to his king.

</div>

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

A shocked silence greeted the words. Coligny's stern face was dark with
pity and resentment as he looked at the brilliant young prince already
important in Protestant councils. Louis de Bourbon, though
hump-shouldered, was a very winning, virile figure. Women felt the charm
of his merry blue eyes and clever, sensitive face. He was far from being
a monster in appearance or character. The verse, mentioning his
deformity in such bitter words, is the most bitingly cruel that
Nostradamus ever wrote. Inasmuch as the young man was living and could
not fail to see and recognize himself in the lines, it seems nothing
short of vicious. Yet one has always to bear in mind that Nostradamus
was a mediaeval Catholic, fanatically against the new heresy. He was,
besides this, a political prophet who saw in the ambition of such men as
Condé and Coligny the blade that would cleave France in twain, and he
foresaw that the cleavage would never be completely healed, but would
lead to untold tragedy and horror through the years. Condé had become to
him the symbol of all that was twisted, hideous, and, from his point of
view, false in the politico-religious scene rapidly developing into a
death struggle between the Protestant and Catholic creeds. Nor did he
see Condé as the gay young courtier whom others in that room saw and
loved. He saw the later Condé, elected general by a council of Calvinist
nobles. He saw the menace of his military genius, and he was glad that
he could see the shot that put an end to him at the battle of Jarnac.
Nostradamus could view

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

psychically with pitiless satisfaction this gallant fighter, his leg
broken by a horse's kick, helpless on the ground, deliberately shot
through the eye by Henry of Anjou's captain of the guard, just as the
verse described it.

Francis d’Andelot thought Nostradamus could do a great deal of harm.
Coligny took the opposite view. He said

"'What can he do but feed the hopes of those who are already doing all
the harm they can? Francis of Guise already thinks himself the coming
Charlemagne, and is out to crush us at the first opportunity. Besides,
the more the court indulges in such superstitious, ungodly nonsense as
this Maître [Nostradamus](errata.htm#9) purveys, the more quickly the
intelligent masses will rally to our side."

"Has any of you seen this man?" asked one of the other gentlemen. It
seemed none had.

"My dear uncle of Montmorency is shepherding him around," said Coligny
disgustedly. "And my kinsman the Cardinal of Châtillon is like to burst
with curiosity. I shouldn't be surprised if he paid his respects.
Faugh!"

"I wonder if he has brought a vial of the Elixir of Life to Madame
Diane," sneered d’Andelot.

"Does she need it?" asked Condé mockingly.

Nostradamus did not include in this first volume his bitter verses on
Coligny; they came later. Coligny was at this time in no danger. He was
the brave admiral of forty, needed and valued for his services in

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

spite of his religion. But Nostradamus had seen a vision of Coligny
whitened by age, watched for three nights by the murderous thugs of
Guise as he sat reading his Bible. He had seen, without a qualm, the old
man murdered, his body insulted and mutilated. He believed that it was
the ambition of these Protestant leaders rather than the faults of
Church or Crown which would precipitate the nation's tragedy.

Naturally during Nostradamus’ visit Protestants were conspicuous at
court by their absence, except a few drawn by curiosity to join those
who gathered at the Louvre, or called to pay their respects and ask for
consultation at the Hôtel de Sens, though Nostradamus had as yet no time
except for royal audiences.

Next in order, after his interview with the King, had been his reception
by the Queen. Catherine was accustomed to prophets. She had been brought
up with them as a family tradition of the Medici, and she usually, since
her marriage, patronized those who had a reputation. With Nostradamus
she was calmly gracious and, as to the matter in hand, most practical
and businesslike. There were certain definite things which she wanted if
possible to learn. If Maître Nostradamus knew them and could tell her,
Catherine was not at all concerned with whether he got his knowledge
from God or Devil.

She received the prophet in company with the dauphin and Mary Stuart,
his betrothed, to whom she presented Nostradamus.

"This is our son who will in time assume the royal

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

burdens of his father. And this is our dearly loved royal daughter of
Scotland who will, as my son's wife, adorn the crown with her character
and learning."

Nostradamus saw a frail boy of twelve, with a kindly, ineffectual face
that showed neither mentally nor physically the making of a king. He
felt his heart contract as he looked into the pure, sensitive face of
the fair Scottish girl whose fate he foresaw. What awful troubles beauty
could bring to nations! Mary smiled at him charmingly and greeted him
with a brief salutation in Latin. She was nearly two years older than
Francis and her poise and assured bearing were already that of a queen.
There was little curiosity in her frank regard, and the prophet was glad
to see that she was too young and too happy to be as yet mistrustful of
fortune's favors. Francis looked bored with the meeting. Catherine sent
them away after the introductions, explaining when they had gone that
she had thought the meeting might make it easier for the prophet to
frame their forecasts.

Old commentators have indulged in dramatic speculation as to what went
on at the sessions between Catherine and the prophet. It was said by
some that he "bodied forth the angel Anael" to predict for her, others
said that he made the future pass before her eyes in a magic mirror.
Such suggestions of midnight spells and mystic incantations are arrant
nonsense of course. Catherine was too intelligent to expect anything of
that kind.

Just as Henry's interest was in the extension of the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

kingdom and in winning victories over other nations, Catherine was
concerned with her particular problems which were of a different sort.
Catherine's questions pertained to her personal power; there lay her
difficulty. Her concern was on how to acquire power, which she had never
possessed, what were its instruments which she could use to best
advantage, and how could she most securely hold the power once she had
obtained it. Undoubtedly she had accepted and thoroughly believed the
prophecies of Henry's death, and she knew it might not be far off. As a
practical woman she was making her plans to be ready, plotting her moves
and policies that would pave the way for her ambition. Already she
foresaw the coming struggle. She dreaded the influence which Francis of
Guise and his brother, the Cardinal of Lorraine, would be able to use
through their niece, Mary Stuart, when Mary became queen. If on the
other hand, she, Catherine, played in with the Protestants to offset
this, there was the predicted threat from the house of Bourbon-Navarre
which the astrologers said would supplant the line of Valois. She saw
herself between the frying-pan and the fire. She wanted a prophet who
could show her a way out. She wanted assurance that the power she had
waited for and dreamed of for years would be hers.

There had been plenty of prophecies made, and Catherine had written
records of them all. Ruggiero she trusted, because he was from her home,
and her family had long employed his family. But she wanted

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

a check-up on his predictions to see where this new man would confirm
and where he would differ with Ruggiero's findings.

The Queen, without doubt, had ready for the prophet her entire
collection of family birth-charts together with those of the Guise and
Navarre families. In Catherine's secret archives, guarded by hidden
panels, there probably reposed the most complete collection of court
horoscopes to be found in Europe. A large part of Ruggiero's work would
have been to keep the more important charts up-to-date in the matter of
progressions, eclipses, mutations and significant transits. In this way
the Queen could get a coup d’oeil of what might be expected. When the
Navarre charts were in difficulties she could plan her course, either an
attempt to further crush them, or win their gratitude with a helping
hand. She could plot the rising curve of the Guises’ power and estimate
how far it might go, at what time it would show weakness, when she might
dare to attack it. However handy Ruggiero may or may not have been with
poison and such accessories to Catherine's power as history has credited
him with, he was a very fine scholar, and his astrological work must
have been well organized and adequate. Catherine was herself an expert
in this line and could put up a chart and read it with the best of them.
Since this was a branch in which she was qualified and proud of her
knowledge she would have wanted Nostradamus’ opinion on her charts, as
well as in his own chosen field of prophecy.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

She would have discussed with him her plan, which she later carried out,
of building a private observatory at Blois and requested that he note
the intended placing of it, when he went there, and tell her if he
thought it good.

How Ruggiero regarded this new-risen star is not known. Like his
mistress, he had been well schooled in repression over many years. He
may have welcomed some new light on his heavy responsibilities to
Catherine. At any rate, one may be sure that this suave, stately Italian
scholar greeted his confrère in prophecy with all cordiality and placed
the resources of his laboratory at Maître Nostradamus’ disposal.

What Nostradamus told the Queen in their first talks cannot even be
surmised, except that it is known that Catherine was interested and
impressed, but obviously she did not get all that she wanted to know.
Whether the prophet hedged or not cannot be said. But Catherine
requested him to go to Blois, where her other children were, in order to
see them personally and make a closer prediction than he had so far made
of their fates.

There must have been some delightful talks between these two keen minds,
when prophecy was temporarily in abeyance. Catherine had an objective,
intellectual grasp of many things to which emotionally she could not
measure up. She could talk and write interestingly and with an
impressively high moral tone, strikingly at variance with the cynical
remarks made in other moods and with her actions.

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

Nostradamus’ travels in Italy would have interested Catherine, where he
went, whom he met, what he thought of Italian alchemy and astrology. As
a pope's niece she would have been particularly eager to question him
about the two fine verses in which he prophesied that the Church would
confirm the doctrine of transubstantiation, which was done seven years
later by the Council of Trent in 1563.

The Church had for some time been at work on various reforms with which
to combat the theology of Luther and Calvin. Many people today do not
realize that it was not until the time of the Council of Trent that the
rite of the bread and wine became accepted as miraculous reality. These
are the quatrains in which Nostradamus prophesied acceptance of this
doctrine:

III-2

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

The Divine Word shall become flesh,  
Through the mystical act (of transubstantiation), and the ritual of
occult manifestation, celebrated on earth, shall give attunement with
heaven,  
And the ground beneath man's feet shall become as the footstool of God.

</div>

II-13

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

No longer will man's body be a soul-less sacrifice,  
The day of death will be thought of as a day of birth  
When the Divine Spirit shall give the soul felicity,  
Perceiving The Word in its eternity.

</div>

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

Nostradamus expressed his wish to visit while in the city the great
shrines which were the sacred pride of Paris. The Queen approved this
pious desire and assured him that the guardian prelates would be happy
to show him their treasures.

The prophet's first night in Paris was destined to be a restless one.
From early morning he had been in the thick of audiences and
introductions, and he was still not rested from his wearing journey.
With more such days ahead, his bed at the Hôtel de Sens looked very
good, even to a man who required but little sleep. Late in the night he
was disturbed by noise at his front door. Looking out from his window he
saw one of the royal pages hammering in a youth-must-be-served fashion
on the portal.

"What is it, page?" called out the prophet. "You are making a lot of
noise about a lost dog. Go down the Orleans road and you will find your
dog being led on a leash."

This page, who came of the aristocratic family of Beauveau, had lost one
of his pedigreed hounds. Perhaps he wanted to show off to his friends
that he wasn't afraid of the old prophet who, he would bet, wouldn't
know where his hound was anyhow. But Nostradamus did know, and the
excited boy found his dog being brought home on leash by a servant, just
where Nostradamus had said, on the Orleans road. Such minor incidents
caught popular fancy and spread the prophet's fame, because they could
be understood better than his impressively puzzling stanzas.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

Naturally the Seneschal Diane, and the King's sister, Marguerite of
Valois, were not kept waiting for their turn with the oracle.
Nostradamus was presented to these two ladies next in order after the
royal audiences.

Diane de Poictiers was then a miracle of fifty-seven years. "The old
hag," her enemies called her, attacking her in street verses of
scurrilous ribaldry. But this missed its mark, for she was still
beautiful, still the enchantress of the King. Some said that her secret
was cold baths, some said it was sorcery--whichever it was, her "pretty
and pompous dress," which was always of black and white, encased her
northern fairness as the printer's art holds the time-defying lines of a
love-sonnet. Perhaps the prophet paid her some such compliment. It was
her daily meed, but coming from a fresh source it was always pleasant.
She may have inquired if he meant to immortalize her in his prophecies,
as Goujon did in his sculpture. If so, he might have told her,

"A prophecy dies when it is fulfilled. But true poetry lives forever. I,
Your Grace, am a prophet telling of times and seasons. Your beauty
belongs to poetry, which is timeless."

Nostradamus makes few mentions of women in his prophecies, and only in
their capacity as heads of state. This seems strange in a country so
politically affected by women throughout its history. Perhaps the
prophet disapproved of this. Or it may have been his respect

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

for the Salic law of France forbidding women to rule in their own right,
except as regent for a child.

Studying the pictured face of Diane, cool and strong like the women of
old Germanic Gaul, one does not get the feeling that she would have been
much interested in prophecy. She knew her strength. She could hold
Henry. But with his passing her destiny would end. She had heard all
about the prophecies of the King's duel and death. Did she really want
to know if and when this would occur? Probably not.

In the King's sister, Marguerite, the prophet made a genuine and
delightful friend. History does not tell a great deal of this princess,
but it does say that she was witty and wise and learned. She was charmed
with Nostradamus’ conversation and ideas. They talked together of books,
personalities and public trends. Nostradamus had foreseen, and indicated
in a verse not then published, the marriage, eventually, of Marguerite
to Emmanuel-Philibert, Duke of Savoy. He would have taken delight in
informing the lively princess of the admirable and apparently happy
match in store for her, and also in sketching the illustrious future of
the house of Savoy destined long after to rule a united Italy.

"My brother, the King, has wanted Piedmont for years," Marguerite said.
"I shall tease him about my conquest of Savoy, where his armies have
failed."

Nostradamus did not tell her that the event of her betrothal to the Duke
would also be the sad occasion of her brother's death in the midst of a
gay tournament

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

staged to celebrate the marriages of Marguerite and the King's young
daughter, Elizabeth.

"Maître Nostradamus," Marguerite told the prophet seriously, "I shall
see you again after you leave Paris. This is not the end of the
friendship which you inspire in me. But there are too many people trying
to talk to you now. It is bad enough with all those of my own sex
appealing to your prophetic gifts, but when I must also compete with my
brother and all the gentlemen of the court to get a word with you, what
chance have I to talk of the things I long to know? I am going to seek
you out some day in Salon!"

Nostradamus smiled indulgently at the charming young woman.

"The royal Pearl of Paris would be a glorious jewel for Provence to
honor."

"You turn a compliment," the princess said, "as neatly as any courtier,
yet you have spent your years far from the court."

"It is because we Provençals live in the sun, and we know that in France
the sun and the monarchy are one."

Throughout the *Centuries* the prophet's favorite and radiant symbol for
the French monarchy is *Le Sol*. In astrology the sun is held to rule
kings in general, but the prophet applies the meaning only to the
sovereign of his own country.

"I shall pick a time to come to Salon," Marguerite continued, "when all
the gentlemen have gone to war, and all the ladies are occupied with
children. And I

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

shall hope, Maître Nostradamus, that all your patients will be cured.
And then we shall talk, and talk!"

It was to be some time before the democratic Marguerite made good her
promise, but she meant it, and eventually she did find her way to the
prophet's door in Provence.

The Queen was impatient to have Nostradamus go to Blois and see the
other children.

"We have not yet asked you, Maître Nostradamus," Catherine said to him,
"concerning your two verses which appear to refer to our children. But
surely you understand how they disturb us. It may be that when you have
seen and studied all of the children, you will be able to give us an
encouraging report. The health of the dauphin gives cause for anxiety,
but he is young, and our physician, Ambroise Paré, thinks that he may
outgrow his delicate constitution. The other children are sturdy and
promising. But since, as you know, we have already been saddened by the
loss of three children, a mother's heart beats in anxious solicitude for
the others."

"Indeed, Madame, I comprehend that," Nostradamus gravely assured her.

Blois is about a hundred miles southwest of Paris, which meant another
not inconsiderable trip for the prophet. He probably traveled in a
ponderous, much begilded royal coach, but the trip required more than
two days on the road. Still, it was August, with fair, warm weather, and
the country, delightful all the way, was enchanting the nearer he came
to the banks of

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

the Loire. When the plateau of the palace at last loomed before his eyes
and he had his first sight of the castle, its fabulous size and the
enormous dignity of its towers and broad flat roofs seemed to him, more
than any other building in France, to symbolize the might of the
monarchy.

The kings of France always loved the banks of the Loire for their
country residences, and of all the beautiful castles they built there,
Blois is the one which bears the most regal stamp of the magnificence of
the Orleans and Valois princes. It was set on a triangle-plateau
separated from the town by a stream. Its position was isolated and
formerly a strongly defended one. But its military strength was now more
apparent than real, and perhaps this, too, was a symbol of the Valois
dynasty which had made the latest contributions to its architectural
splendor. We would like to know to which room in this vast pile the
major-domo directed the steps of the prophet. All that is certain is
that it was in the most modern wing, which Francis I had built, and
which housed the apartments and guest rooms of the present royal family.
The private rooms all faced north to escape the heat. Their balconied,
arcaded windows looked out over the country of the Vendômois and the
moats of the town. It was in the midst of the carved and frescoed
magnificence of one of these rooms that Nostradamus was installed.

As the prophet followed the steward to his apartment, he hardly knew
where to look, so bewildered was his vision by the multiplicity and
variety of fantastic

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

beauty. The stone staircase which he mounted wound upward through a
hexagonal hollow tower, "an arabesque device invented by giants and
executed by dwarfs to give the effect of a dream. The delicate,
ingenious marvels of workmanship are like super-wrought, deeply cut
Chinese ivories." So Balzac describes the staircase which the prophet is
now ascending. As he mounts he can see further and further over the
Loire, its living color framed in the pale, elaborate artifice of stone.

The apartments of Catherine and Henry occupied the entire first floor.
The monarchs spent, however, little time at Blois, for Henry preferred
other châteaux. Not until his death would Blois resume its historic role
as the setting for the royal drama. When Nostradamus had rested and had
something to eat he asked to see the royal children, whose laughter had
already reached him from some unseen play-nook.

Blois was well staffed while the children were in residence. Besides the
major-domo and his staff, there was a confessor who looked after the
spiritual welfare of the young charges and the household. Each of the
children had a personal nurse. Over the nurses were Madame de Curton,
the governess of the three little girls, a woman whose superior virtues
and abilities were eulogized in the writings of the day; and the Abbé
Amyot, the instructor of the three boys, who would one day be the source
of a bitter quarrel between Charles IX and Catherine, through the young
king's love and loyalty toward his childhood teacher.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

The confessor and the two instructors welcomed Nostradamus cordially.
They, too, were used to prophets. Their young charges had been
horoscoped and studied by owlish men of purported wisdom ever since
their birth. To them, Nostradamus, whatever his reputation, was just one
more of the same. Each was so devoted to the royal charges and so loved
in return, that to imagine fate as ever cruel to these lovely children
was more than their simple faith could compass. The prophet quickly
established friendly relations by encouraging them to talk about the
children. Enthusiastically they told him in what this one excelled, how
modest the deportment of that one, and where another needed curbing. The
Princess Elizabeth was so fine a Latin scholar, Madame de Curton vowed,
that soon she would rival the young Queen of Scotland. Claude, it
seemed, was somewhat stubborn, like her father, but with her mother's
good sense. As for baby Margot, the whole staff adored her. The Abbé
Amyot allowed Madame de Curton to take the floor, and when she asked in
what arrangement Maitre Nostradamus would like to see the children,
Amyot said promptly,

"Ladies first. Display your charges, Madame."

Elizabeth, the eldest of the daughters of Catherine and Henry, was at
this time eleven years old. Nostradamus was charmed with the singular
sweetness and strength of her young face, which still glows through the
stiff conventionality of her portraits. It was this quality which so
captivated Philip II of Spain, three years later, that he married her,
although she was

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

intended for his son. "He cut the ground under his son's feet," writes
Brantôme, "and took her for himself, beginning all charity at home."

Catherine, who had expected, after Elizabeth's marriage, to pump her
advantageously about the state affairs of Spain, ran up against a sense
of honor rare in the Valois family. [Elizabeth](errata.htm#10) refused
to betray Spanish confidence. She was only twenty-three when she died,
and about her passing has always hung the dark aura of suspicion. Philip
may not, as was reported, have poisoned his charming young wife out of
jealousy of his mad son, Carlos. But the legend that he did has
persisted.

She smiled on the prophet and gave him her carefully coached greeting in
faultless Latin, which he praised to Madame de Curton's content. Then he
talked to Elizabeth a little of her studies and her interest in flowers.

Mademoiselle Claude, who was nine, came next. She would grow up to marry
the Duke of Lorraine, and to try, weeping, to shield her newly married
little sister, Margot, from the horror of blood on Saint Bartholomew's
night. Her life lacked the spectacular elements of the other two
daughters, for which she was doubtless grateful. She, too, made her
little Latin speech, but was more reserved than the frank Elizabeth.

Baby Margot was only three years old. Nostradamus had met the two older
girls in one of the formal

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

galleries. Now Madame de Curton guided the prophet to the nursery in the
Queen's apartments, which occupied the first floor. These rooms had
formerly been those of Queen Claude, the wife of Francis I. They were
still adorned with her delicate sculpture of double C's, with a device
in pure white of swans and lilies signifying her motto *Candidior
Candidis*, the whitest of the white. The entire apartments were
gorgeously furnished, and to the heavier pieces were added a profusion
of little inlaid and silver tables, ivories, enamels and other objets
d’art, which were for the most part of Italian workmanship.

Baby Margot was already a siren and knew it. She stopped playing with
her doll when the governess and Nostradamus entered, and came running
toward them. She tossed her cloud of blue-black curls, and used
devastatingly her roguish brown eyes at the visitor. She chattered with
adorable fearlessness to the strange, grave man and promptly claimed
another conquest.

"Is she not beautiful! Is she not an angel!" cried Madame de Curton,
while the nurse stood by, beaming with the same adoration.

*La Reine Margot!* The dry pages of history still tingle electrically
with memories of her beauty, her grand romantic glamour, her loves, and
her tragedies. Yet something of all the future sadness which he
perceived, too, came momentarily into the prophet's eyes, causing the
governess to exclaim anxiously.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

"You will see no misfortune for my little ones, Maître Nostradamus? You
will foretell only happiness? Surely they are too good and sweet for
anything else. Is not each one a little queen of hearts?"

"Alas, Madame," the prophet told her, "hearts are the most uncertain of
all thrones. But you may be very sure that your pupils will grow up to
reflect every credit upon your admirable teaching, in the exalted
positions which all three shall fill."

Madame de Curton and the nurse exchanged pleased looks. They read into
the prophet's words their own interpretation, the fulfilled picture of a
wish, so different from the realization.

Later Nostradamus walked in the gardens with the Abbé Amyot, and saw the
three boys at their play. Charles, Duke of Orleans, and Henry of Anjou,
were but six and five years old, and the little Duke of Alençon was a
baby of two years. Nostradamus’ quick perception noted the nurse in
charge of the eldest boy, Charles, a deep-bosomed northern type with a
face of endless patience and brooding calm. When she looked at the
little boy, the prophet saw a passionate depth of devotion such as one
seldom sees except in the expression of the actual mother. He mentioned
it to the Abbé.

"Yes," the Abbé replied. "It is so, and she is a superb nurse. It is
unfortunate that she is a Huguenot, but she handles the child, who is
high-strung, so wonderfully that the Queen will not let her go. The
little prince, doctor, is going to make a splendid man," the

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Abbé told him,
smiling. "Look at his fine, honest blue eyes, the noble set of his
head."

A sick feeling swept over the prophet like a spiritual nausea. He turned
away from the Abbé lest it should show in his face.

This manly little child was the monarch he had seen in his visions. "The
savage king," he had called him. He was to be the one who would mount
the throne when Saturn came into water. He it was who would "slaughter
the innocents." Dear God, that loving, happy little boy, become the
bloodstained man at the palace window holding an arquebus in his hand
trained on Frenchmen! The Abbé was talking on, extolling the qualities
of his charge, but Nostradamus did not hear him. A tiger-kitten that
licked the hand of the man who fed him could one day tear that man to
bloody bits. So it would be with this child. And those who fed the tiger
his first meat, they were to blame, too.

Henry of Anjou, with two small dogs leaping about him, came shyly up and
stood by his teacher's knee and fixed his big violet eyes on
Nostradamus.

"Our young lord of Anjou is a fine prince too." Amyot stroked Henry's
wind-ruffled hair affectionately, yet his tone told the prophet that
Charles was his favorite.

"Who are you?" the child wanted to know of Nostradamus.

And who are you? The prophet's thoughts echoed in suffering, the child's
words. A man stood mistily

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

between him and the boy. A man with a weary, cynical, painted face and a
dagger in his hand. He could smell the perfume of his silken clothes.
This was the man that Henry of Anjou would be. Only the little dogs
playing at his feet were unchanged. It was unbearable. Abruptly
Nostradamus got up from the stone bench where he and the Abbé were
resting and walked toward the infant Duke of Alençon, who was learning
his first steps. The faltering efforts stopped at his approach, and eyes
that were too solemn above a nose too long for a baby fixed themselves
intently upon him.

"He is doing well with his steps," the nurse said proudly. "Soon he will
walk alone."

And one day to perdition and an early death, was the prophet's bitter
reflection. He recalled the words of Machiavelli: "It is probable that
the atmosphere is full of intelligences which announce the future out of
commiseration for mortals." What of commiseration was there in foresight
such as this? Nearer was he to calling his gift cursed than ever in his
life. Suddenly he wished to be away from Blois. A mist of blood seemed
to wreathe the castle and tint the pallid stone. He would have ordered
the coach and returned to Paris but that it was late afternoon. Not
until morning could he leave. The Abbé noticed his abstraction and
restless movements. Tactfully he suggested that the prophet might need a
little rest and reflection before they supped. Nostradamus was glad to
agree, he wanted to be alone.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

I-10

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

When the coffin is lowered behind the iron grille  
Where the seven children of the king shall be laid,  
The ancient and ancestral dead shall rise from the depths of the nether
world  
With outcry, seeing the death of this their withered fruit.

</div>

He should have changed that line, he thought. Their ancestors should
rejoice for France, to see the dropping of such rotted fruit.

That evening the prophet ate little. He summoned his self-control and
talked with brilliance. But he retired to his room early. He said that
he was a night-owl and asked if it would be disturbing if he should roam
about the castle in the late hours. The others, having heard that such
visions as his usually came by night, were a little awed by his request.
He was assured that he would be free to ramble, and the guard should be
so instructed. Yes, the castle was all open, he could go where he liked.

Deep in the night, while all but the guards were sleeping, the prophet
left his room and by the light of a lonely candle traversed the dim
length of empty corridors to the moon-haunted chapel of the ancient
kings of Blois who had built their temple to God in an age of surer
faith. As he went his way down endless stretches of chilly stone, the
ghosts of the past and the ghosts of the future peopled the shadowed
halls. Out of the blackness gleamed faintly old crowns of

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

pointed gold above stern faces, or was it a pattern of yellow moonlight?
Surely the presence of Louis XII, who had so loved this castle, was
near, with that of his friend, the Cardinal d’Amboise. Near, too, was
the dagger, not yet forged, which would strike down young Balafré, the
Guise. And here walked Catherine, the Queen, and the pale young dauphin
with reproachful eyes upon his mother. From farther in the future peered
the fat face of the other Medici, Marie, with treacherous d’Epernon.
Some seemed to follow the prophet within the chapel, others whose hands
were red, halted outside the door.

The prophet entered and knelt before the Christ and Virgin, dim in the
uncertain candlelight. His fingers touched the beads of his rosary, his
lips moved in prayer. The candle burned lower, guttered into blackness,
unnoticed by the man whose ceaselessly moving lips pleaded for pity on
the seven children of the King.

In the morning Nostradamus said farewell to Blois and left for Paris. He
was beginning to feel the strain of all he was experiencing. On the way
back his mind was busy with his coming interview with the Queen.
Carefully he composed the answers he would make to her questions. He
knew he could satisfy her ambitions. But if she asked his guidance and
advice that would be difficult. There was so little to be said that
would be acceptable to her or that she would follow. He sighed heavily
as he thought how futile was, after all, such a gift as his to change
conditions.

Catherine, who had been impatiently awaiting his

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

return, sent for him at once on hearing that he was back. No one knows
what took place at that interview. The Venetian ambassador, Lorenzo,
writing in 1560, refers to Nostradamus’ forecast to Catherine as very
well known in France, and as predicting that her three eldest sons would
all occupy the throne. The ambassador speaks of this as a prophecy which
menaced the lives of the princes, since their succession could only come
about through death. Many commentators have quoted this accepted story
of what Catherine heard from the prophet. It would, if true, however,
have been but a small part of the amplitude of information which
Catherine would have demanded. All that we really know of what
Nostradamus predicted are his brilliantly accurate, published verses.
That, and one thing more. He satisfied the Queen and retained her
confidence and friendship. Had this not been the case she would not have
sought him out again, as she did.

The interview over, Nostradamus returned to the Hôtel de Sens a sick
man. His foot was paining him with what appeared to be a somewhat
serious attack of his enemy the gout. The food in Paris had been very
hard on him. It was heavy, with too much meat, spices and sweets. He
missed his green vegetables, garlic and simple, wholesome stews that he
had at home, and his wife's good housekeeping. He was sick at heart,
too, in the midst of all the adulation he was receiving. Paris was
filled with greed, ambition and wickedness. She was like Agrippina, the
mother of Nero. And Paris would pay for her sins, and then the

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

whole of France would be involved and would suffer. He saw it coming
with dreadful clarity of vision.

His foot swelled and grew steadily worse. He had to take to his bed,
hating it, and remain in it helpless for ten days. The acid condition
induced by change of diet and water combined with the long traveling and
emotional strain of Blois were too much for him. He could no longer
stand what he used to. Everyone was wonderfully kind to him in his
illness. The King and Queen sent constant inquiries for his welfare, and
each sent a purse heavy with a hundred gold écus. The Princess Margaret
came to see him and sent him more of the indigestible food and heating
wines of which he could not partake.

Ronsard sent him a tribute of verses, which pleased him greatly,
likening him to an antique oracle and rebuking the scoffers. This more
than offset the Latin distych of Jodelle, another famous poet of the
day, who attacked Nostradamus with this punning rhyme:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"Nostradamus cum falsa damus, nam fallere nostrum est,  
 Et cum falsa damus, nil nisi nostra damus."

</div>

Which means, though it has a double interpretation with a play on the
name,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

"We give our own when we give lies, for cheating is our affair,  
 When we give what is false, we give nothing but what is our own."

</div>

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

His friends countered in this merry, malicious little war with a couplet
using almost the same words but changed enough to give an opposite
meaning.

The Hôtel de Sens was busy receiving and answering inquiries from the
stream of callers that came and went all day. Scholars, physicians,
prelates mingled with the courtiers in their puffed and slashed velvet
costumes, their jewels and feathers. As soon as Nostradamus felt well
enough, he received some of the more important of these visitors in his
room.

Of the notables who prayed the exercise of his vision, the great Duke
Francis of Guise was not to be denied, nor his crafty brother, the dark
Cardinal of Lorraine. Even more than the Bourbons, these two were the
most ambitious men in the kingdom. As the uncles of Mary Stuart, they
seemed in a fair way to realize the dreams of their house, if and when
the King did pass on in a duel, and the dauphin, Mary's betrothed, came
to the throne. Duke Francis, the hero of the siege of Metz, was the
military idol of France. A very handsome, very haughty man, he claimed
descent from Charlemagne, and had pretensions to the throne itself. He
had married Anne d’Este, a granddaughter of Louis XII, and daughter of
the tolerant, scholarly Renée, Duchess of Ferrara. The Duke brought his
wife with him, both eager for a forecast for their son Henry, whom Henry
III was one day to murder in the castle of Blois.

"My mother, the Duchess of Ferrara, has rare skill with astrology," the
Duchess of Guise told the

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

prophet. "I have known her tell marvelous things. I wish that she might
return to France if only for the mutual pleasure which she and the Queen
might have in. such discussion."

When Renée did return several years later, one of the few bright spots
in her life was the conversations which she and Catherine had on the
subject of the stars in the Queen's new observatory at Blois.

Both the Duc de Guise and the Cardinal of Lorraine plied the prophet
with questions. Nostradamus predicted a considerable advance in the
Guise fortunes. He would scarcely have courted trouble from these
fierce, proud, determined men by revealing the ultimate tragedy of their
house, but he has set it down in his verses with a full sense of its
dramatic significance and its disaster to France.

If he had told them that they would lose to the Bourbons, then very
weak, they would probably have scoffed at him. Their star was then too
powerful for the concept of defeat to enter into their minds.

The gout wore off slowly, but at last Nostradamus was free of it for the
time being, and in spite of all flattery and solicitation, he was
anxious to return to Salon. Nor would he be deterred. His room at the
Hôtel de Sens looked like a dream of Christmas, so loaded was it with
presents of every description. Some of the King's servants packed them
for him, while he, himself, packed his valued ink horn and writing
materials, his treasured Aristotle and the other simple needs he had
brought.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

César Nostradamus, writing of these gifts, after his father's death,
says of them:

"As to the honors, royal gifts, and presents of jewels which he received
from their Majesties, I would rather have their list on the tip of my
tongue than to give myself the exquisite pleasure of relating them,
fearing lest I should say more than modesty permits."

When all was in readiness for departure, Nostradamus went to the Louvre
to say his farewells to royalty.

"Your Majesty," he told the King with genuine feeling, "I never thought
that I should envy any man. Yet now I find myself very much envying
those who have the gift of ready and golden speech. Lacking this I am
but helpless to express my opinion of Your Majesty's grandeur and
generosity of nature, and of the kindness which I, your humblest
servant, have received from you. The treasures of gifts which your royal
goodness has bestowed on me are even surpassed by the treasure of royal
memories which I take away with me to brighten all my years."

The King smiled at him with genial regard.

"We have, Maitre Nostradamus, one more, and I think well deserved, token
of our favor. You are herewith appointed by us to the rank of
Physician-in-Ordinary and Councilor to ourself."

The prophet, deeply moved, bowed low. "Your Majesty, I am overcome with
this further honor."

"We have enjoyed your visit," the King said, "and

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

hope to profit by those matters in which you have advised us. Now, the
Queen is waiting to see you."

Catherine, like Marguerite, told the prophet, "We shall see you again,
Maître Nostradamus, and meanwhile you may hear from us by letter
touching some further service which you can render, or some point on
which we can better act through your advice."

The last farewell was finally said, the last handshake given. Over the
bridge the way led, past the soot-blackened beauty of Notre Dame and the
Ile de la Cité, across to the left bank, and the road to Lyons.
Nostradamus looked back at the spires and towers of Paris, scene of his
proudest triumph. He lifted his hand in salute to the city.

"*Vale Lutetia! Ave Salona!*"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Ten: Towards Familiar Country](mst12)
