[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Yoga](../../hin/yoga/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sob15) 
[Next](sob17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662006/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Science of Breath*, by Yogi Ramacharaka, pseud. William Atkinson,
\[1904\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

### Chapter XV

### MORE PHENOMENA

### OF YOGI PSYCHIC BREATHING

\(1\) THOUGHT PROJECTION

Thoughts may be projected by following the last mentioned method
(Distant Healing) and others will feel the effect of thought so sent
forth, it being remembered always that no evil thought can ever injure
another person whose thoughts are good. Good thoughts are always
positive to bad ones, and bad ones always negative to good ones. One
can, however, [excite](errata.htm#27) the interest and attention of
another by sending him thought waves in this way, charging the prana
with the message he wishes to convey. If you desire another's love and
sympathy, and possess love and sympathy for him, you can send him
thoughts of this kind with effect, providing your motives are pure.
Never, however, attempt to influence another to his hurt, or from impure
or selfish motives, as such thoughts only recoil upon the sender with
redoubled force, and injure him, while the innocent party is not
affected. Psychic force when legitimately used is all right, but beware
of "black magic" or improper and unholy uses of it, as such attempts are
like playing with a dynamo, and the person attempting such things will
be surely punished by the result of the act itself. However, no person
of impure motives ever acquires a great degree of psychic power, and a
pure heart and mind is an invulnerable shield against improper psychic
power. Keep yourself pure and nothing can hurt you.

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

\(2\) FORMING AN AURA

If you are ever in the company of persons of a low order of mind, and
you feel the depressing influence of their thought, breathe
[rhythmically](errata.htm#28) a few times, thus generating an additional
supply of prana, and then by means of the mental image method surround
yourself with an egg-shape thought aura, which will protect you from the
gross thought and [disturbing](errata.htm#29) influences of others.

\(3\) RECHARGING YOURSELF

If you feel that your vital energy is at a low ebb, and that you need to
store up a new supply quickly, the best plan is to place the feet close
together (side by side, of course) and to lock the fingers of both hands
in any way that seems the most comfortable. This closes the circuit, as
it were, and prevents any escape of prana through the extremities. Then
breathe rhythmically a few times, and you will feel the effect of the
recharging.

\(4\) RECHARGING OTHERS

If some friend is deficient in vitality you may aid him by sitting in
front of him, your toes touching his, and his hands in yours. Then both
breathe rhythmically, you forming the mental image of sending prana into
his system, and he holding the mental image of receiving the prana.
Persons of weak vitality or passive will should be careful with whom
they try this experiment, as the prana of a person of evil desires will
be colored with the thoughts of that person, and may give him a
temporary influence over the weaker person. The latter, however, may
easily remove such influence by closing the circuit (as before
mentioned)

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

and breathing a few rhythmic breaths, [closing](errata.htm#30) with the
Cleansing Breath.

\(5\) CHARGING WATER

Water may be charged with prana, by breathing rhythmically, and holding
the glass of water by the bottom, in the left hand, and then gathering
the fingers of the right hand together and shaking them gently over the
water, as if you were shaking drops of water off of your finger tips
into the glass. The mental image of the prana being passed into the
water must also be held. Water thus charged is found stimulating to weak
or sick persons, particularly if a healing thought accompanies the
mental image of the transfer of the prana. The caution given in the last
exercise applies also to this one, although the danger exists only in a
greatly lessened degree.

\(6\) ACQUIRING MENTAL QUALITIES

Not only can the body be controlled by the mind under direction of the
will, but the mind itself can be trained and cultivated by the exercise
of the controlling will. This, which the Western world knows as "Mental
Science," etc., has proved to the West portions of that truth which the
Yogi has known for ages. The mere calm demand of the Will will
accomplish wonders in this direction, but if the mental exercise is
accompanied by rhythmic breathing, the effect is greatly increased.
Desirable qualities may be acquired by holding the proper mental image
of what is desired during rhythmic breathing. Poise and Self Control,
desirable qualities; increased power, etc., may be acquired in this way.
Undesirable qualities may be eliminated by cultivating the opposite
qualities. Any or all the "Mental Science" exercises, "treatments" and

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

"affirmations" may be used with the Yogi Rhythmic Breath. The following
is a good general exercise for the acquirement and development of
desirable mental qualities:

Lie in a passive attitude, or sit erect. Picture to yourself the
qualities you desire to cultivate, seeing yourself as possessed of the
qualities, and demanding that your mind develop the quality. Breathe
rhythmically, holding the mental picture firmly. Carry the mental
picture with you as much as possible, and endeavor to live up to the
ideal you have set up in your mind. You will find yourself gradually
growing up to your ideal. The rhythm of the breathing assists the mind
in forming new combinations, and the student who has followed the
Western system will find the Yogi Rhythmic (Breath) a wonderful ally in
his "Mental [Science](errata.htm#31)" works.

\(7\) ACQUIRING PHYSICAL QUALITIES

Physical qualities may be acquired by the same methods as above
mentioned in connection with mental qualities. We do not mean, of
course, that short men can be made tall, or that amputated limbs may be
replaced, or similar miracles. But the expression of the countenance may
be changed; courage and general physical characteristics improved by the
control of the Will, accompanied by rhythmic breathing. As a man thinks
so does he look, act, walk, sit, etc. Improved thinking will mean
improved looks and actions. To develop any part of the body, direct the
attention to it, while breathing rhythmically, holding the mental
picture that you are sending an increased amount of prana, or nerve
force, to the part, and thus increasing its vitality and developing

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

it. This plan applies equally well to any part of the body which you
wish to develop. Many Western athletes use a modification of this plan
in their exercises. The student who has followed our instructions so far
will readily understand how to apply the Yogi principles in the above
work. The general rule of exercise is the same as in the preceding
exercise (acquiring Mental Qualities) . We have touched upon the subject
of the care of physical ailments in preceding pages.

\(8\) CONTROLLING THE EMOTIONS

The undesirable emotions, such as Fear, Worry, Anxiety, Hate, Anger,
Jealousy, Envy, Melancholy, Excitement, Grief, etc., are amenable to the
control of the Will, and the Will is enabled to operate more easily in
such cases if rhythmic breathing is practiced while the student is
"willing." The following exercise has been found most effective by the
Yogi students, although the advanced Yogi has but little need of it, as
he has long since gotten rid of these undesirable mental qualities by
growing spiritually beyond them. The Yogi student, however, finds the
exercise a great help to him while he is growing.

Breathe rhythmically, concentrating the attention upon the Solar Plexus,
and sending to it the mental command "Get Out." Send the mental command
firmly, just as you begin to exhale, and form the mental picture of the
undesirable emotions being carried away with the exhaled breath. Repeat
seven times, and finish with the Cleansing Breath, and then see how good
you feel. The mental command must be given "in earnest," as trifling
will not do the work.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

\(9\) TRANSMUTATION OF THE REPRODUCTIVE

ENERGY

The Yogis possess great knowledge regarding the use and abuse of the
reproductive principle in both sexes. Some hints of this esoteric
knowledge have filtered out and have been used by Western writers on the
subject, and much good has been accomplished in this way. In this little
book we cannot do more than touch upon the subject, and omitting all
except a bare mention of theory, we will give a practical breathing
exercise whereby the student will be enabled to transmute the
reproductive energy into vitality for the entire system, instead of
dissipating and wasting it in lustful indulgences in or out of the
marriage relations. The reproductive energy is creative energy, and may
be taken up by the system and transmuted into strength and vitality,
thus serving the purpose of regeneration instead of generation. If the
young men of the Western world understood these underlying principles
they would be saved much misery and unhappiness in after years, and
would be stronger mentally, morally and physically.

This transmutation of the reproductive energy gives great vitality to
those practicing it. They will be filled with great vital force, which
will radiate from them and will manifest in what has been called
"personal magnetism." The energy thus transmuted may be turned into new
channels and used to great advantage. Nature has condensed one of its
most powerful manifestations of prana into reproductive energy, as its
purpose is to create. The greatest amount of vital force is concentrated
in the smallest area. The reproductive organism is the most powerful
storage battery in animal life, and its force can be drawn

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

upward and used, as well as expended in the ordinary functions of
reproduction, or wasted in riotous lust. The majority of our students
know something of the theories of regeneration, and we can do little
more than to state the above facts, without attempting to prove them.

The Yogi exercise for transmuting reproductive energy is simple. It is
coupled with rhythmic breathing, and can be easily performed. It may be
practiced at any time, but is specially recommended when one feels the
instinct most strongly, at which time the reproductive energy is
manifesting and may be most easily transmuted for regenerative purposes.
The exercise is as follows:

Keep the mind fixed on the idea of Energy, and away from ordinary sexual
thoughts or imaginings. If these thoughts come into the mind do not be
discouraged, but regard them as manifestations of a force which you
intend using for the purposes of strengthening the body and mind. Lie
passively or sit erect, and fix your mind on the idea of drawing the
reproductive energy upward to the Solar Plexus, where it will be
transmuted and stored away as a reserve force of vital energy. Then
breathe rhythmically, forming the mental image of drawing up the
reproductive energy with each inhalation. With each inhalation make a
command of the Will that the energy be drawn upward from the
reproductive organization to the Solar Plexus. If the rhythm is fairly
established and the mental image is clear, you will be conscious of the
upward passage of the energy, and will feel its stimulating effect. If
you desire an increase in mental force, you may draw it up to the brain
instead of to the Solar Plexus, by giving the

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

mental command and holding the mental image of the transmission to the
brain.

The man or woman doing mental creative work, or bodily creative work,
will be able to use this creative energy in their work by following the
above exercise, drawing up the energy with the inhalation and sending it
forth with the exhalation. In this last form of exercise, only such
portions as are needed in the work will pass into the work being done,
the balance remaining stored up in the Solar Plexus.

You will understand, of course, that it is not the reproductive fluids
which are drawn up and used, but the etheric pranic energy which
animates the latter, the soul of the reproductive organism, as it were.
It is usual to allow the head to bend forward easily and naturally
during the transmuting exercise.

\(10\) BRAIN STIMULATING

The Yogis have found the following exercise most useful in stimulating
the action of the brain for the purpose of producing clear thinking and
reasoning. It has a wonderful effect in clearing the brain and nervous
system, and those engaged in mental work will find it most useful to
them, both in the direction of enabling them to do better work and also
as a means of refreshing the mind and clearing it after arduous mental
labor.

Sit in an erect posture, keeping the spinal column straight, and the
eyes well to the front, letting the hands rest on the upper part of the
legs. Breathe rhythmically, but instead of breathing through both
nostrils as in the ordinary exercises, press the left nostril close with
the thumb, and inhale through the right nostril. Then remove the thumb,
and close the right nostril with the finger, and then exhale through

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

the left nostril. Then, without changing the fingers, inhale through the
left nostril, and changing fingers, exhale through the right. Then
inhale through right and exhale through left, and so on, alternating
nostrils as above mentioned, closing the unused nostril with the thumb
or forefinger. This is one of the oldest forms of Yogi breathing, and is
quite important and valuable, and is well worthy of acquirement. But it
is quite amusing to the Yogis to know that to the Western world this
method is often held out as being the "whole secret" of Yogi Breathing.
To the minds of many Western readers, "Yogi Breathing" suggests nothing
more than a picture of a Hindu, sitting erect, and alternating nostrils
in the act of breathing. "Only this and nothing more." We trust that
this little work will open the eyes of the Western world to the great
possibilities of Yogi Breathing, and the numerous methods whereby it may
be employed.

\(11\) THE GRAND YOGI PSYCHIC BREATH

The Yogis have a favorite form of psychic breathing which they practice
occasionally, to which has been given a Sancrit term of which the above
is a general equivalent. We have given it last, as it requires practice
on the part of the student in the line of rhythmic breathing and mental
imagery, which he has now acquired by means of the preceding exercises.
The general principles of the Grand Breath may be summed up in the old
Hindu saying: "Blessed is the Yogi who can breathe through his bones."
This exercise will fill the entire system with prana, and the student
will emerge from it with every bone, muscle, nerve, cell, tissue, organ
and part energized

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

and attuned by the prana and the rhythm of the breath. It is a general
housecleaning of the system, and he who practices it carefully will feel
as if he had been given a new body, freshly created, from the crown of
his head to the tips of his toes. We will let the exercise speak for
itself.

\(1\) Lie in a relaxed position, at perfect ease.

\(2\) Breathe rhythmically until the rhythm is perfectly established.

\(3\) Then, inhaling and exhaling, [form](errata.htm#32) the mental
image of the breath being drawn upon through the bones of the legs, and
then forced out through them; then through the bones of the arms; then
through the top of the skull; then through the stomach; then through the
reproductive region; then as if it were traveling upward and downward
along the spinal column; and then as if the breath were being inhaled
and exhaled through every pore of the skin, the whole body being filled
with prana and life.

\(4\) Then (breathing rhythmically) send the current of prana to the
Seven Vital Centers, in turn, as follows, using the mental picture as in
previous exercises:

\(a\) To the forehead.

\(b\) To the back of the head.

\(c\) To the base of the brain.

\(d\) To the Solar Plexus.

\(e\) To the Sacral Region (lower part of the spine) .

\(f\) To the region of the navel.

\(g\) To the reproductive region.

Finish by sweeping the current of prana, to and fro from head to feet
several times.

\(5\) Finish with Cleansing Breath.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI. Yogi Spiritual Breathing](sob17)
