[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bfd24)  [Next](bfd26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402152167/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Book of Filial Duty*, by Ivan Chen, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### No. IV

*Clad in a Single Garment, he was obedient to his Mother*

During the Chou dynasty lived Min Sun, a disciple of Confucius, who in
early life lost his mother. His father subsequently married another
wife, who bore him two children, but disliked Sun. In winter she clothed
him in garments made of rushes, while her own children wore cotton
clothes. Min was employed in driving his father's chariot, and his body
was so cold that the reins dropped from his hands, for which

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

carelessness his father chastised him; yet he did not vindicate himself.
When his father knew the circumstances, he determined to divorce his
second wife; but Sun said, "Whilst mother remains, one son is cold; if
mother departs, three sons will be destitute." The father desisted from
his purpose; and after this the mother was led to repentance, and became
a good and virtuous parent.

The filial piety of the renowned Shun influenced Heaven, whilst that of
Min renovated mankind. If Heaven be influenced, all below it will be
transformed; if men be renovated, from them will spring a power able to
cause their families to become good. In all ages men have exhibited a
great love for their wives; but dutiful children have often met with
unkindness. Min carefully concealed all his grievances, and refused to
indulge in any complaint; even while suffering severely from cold and
hunger, he maintained his affection unabated. During the long period
which he endured this oppressive treatment, his good disposition became
manifest; and by his own conduct he was able to maintain the harmony of
the family unimpaired. His father and mother were influenced by his
filial devotion; and his brothers joined in extolling his virtues. All
his friends and acquaintances, with united voice, celebrated his merits;
and the men of his native village joyfully combined to spread the fame

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

of his actions. The memory of his agreeable countenance and pleasing
manners was perpetuated to the remotest ages; and his example was in
many respects like that of Shun, whose parents were equally perverse.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. V: He carried Rice for his Parents](bfd26)
