[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bfd37)  [Next](bfd39.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402152167/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Filial Duty*, by Ivan Chen, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### No. XVII

*On hearing the Thunder he wept at the Tomb*

In the country of Wei lived Wang P‘ou, a very dutiful child, whose
mother, when alive, was much afraid of thunder. After her death her
grave was dug in the hilly forest; and whenever it blew and rained
furiously, and Wang heard the sound of the chariot of the
Thunder-goddess rolling along, he hastened immediately to the grave,
and, reverently kneeling, besought her with tears, saying: "I am here,
dear mother; do not be alarmed." And afterwards, whenever he read in
*The Book of Odes* this sentence, "Children should have deep and ardent
affection for their parents, who have endured so much anxiety in
nourishing them," the tears flowed abundantly at the recollection of his
mother.

Suddenly the black clouds arise from the wilderness, whirled by the
wind; he hears the distant mutter of thunder from the southern hills.
Heedless of the rain, hastily he speeds over the rugged path leading to
the tomb, and as he goes round the grave his tones of grief and entreaty
are heard. The roaring of the dreadful thunder affrights the ears of
men, one clap following another in quick succession. If his kind mother,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

when alive, always dreaded the voice of Heaven's majesty, how much more
will she now, when lying alone in the depths of the wild forest! If P‘ou
was with his mother, he knew she would be comforted; and he thinks that
if in the green hills she has a companion, she will not be terrified.
Afterwards, being successful, he refused to take the duties of an
officer under the Emperor Ssŭ-ma, because he wished to go frequently to
visit the grave of his parent. And when he was going and returning from
it, he would weep at the recollection of his mother, and ask himself:
"If I have not yet recompensed the care and trouble my mother endured
for me, what more can I do?" And to this day, whenever scholars read the
pages of the *Liu O,* they remember how tears bedewed the cheeks of Wang
P‘ou.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XVIII: He wept to the Bamboos, and Shoots sprang up](bfd39.md)
