[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Confucianism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bfd43)  [Next](bfd45.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1402152167/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Book of Filial Duty*, by Ivan Chen, \[1908\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### No. XXIII

*He resigned Office to seek his Mother*

In the Sung dynasty lived Chu Shou-ch‘ang, whose mother, Liu, when he
was seven years of age, left the family because she was hated by his
father's wife; and mother and son did not see each other for about fifty
years. It was during the reign of Shên Tsung that Chu resigned his
official station and went into the Ch‘in country, and there made an
engagement with his family "that he would not return until he had found
his mother." He then travelled into T‘ung-chou, where he discovered his
mother, who at that time was over seventy years of age.

Thus Chu exclaimed: "I have a mother; but, alas! separated, we abide in
different villages.

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It was not the
free will of my mother which led her thus to forsake her son, but the
envious mistress who compelled her to go. Without a mother, on whom
shall I rely? to whom shall I pour out my sorrows and cares? Now I am
grown older and have become an officer, but as yet I have been unable to
return the kindness of my parent. In what place, among all the countries
under heaven, does she live? I am determined to resign my office and
seek her abode, not deterred from the trouble of the search. To effect
it, I will part from my family and no longer be a companion with them; I
will not return till I find my mother, and they need not await in
expectation of me." Heaven directed his way, and he came into
T‘ung-chou, where she resided. When the mother and the son met each
other, joy and grief arose together—joy for the meeting after fifty
years, sorrow that they had been so long apart. But now, in one hour,
all their long-accumulated griefs were laid aside, and joy and gladness
filled their hearts. Chu possesses the true heavenly disposition, and
honours and riches cannot destroy his affection for his mother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: No. XXIV: He watched by his Mother's Bedside](bfd45.md)
