[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pps03)  [Next](pps05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Prophets and Psalms*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1761\], tr. by J.E.
Schreck \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Prophets and Psalms

<span class="margnote"><span id="151.">151.</span></span>

Chapter 28 \[Ezekiel\] 1-5 Since they believe that they are learned from
mere knowledges \[cognitiones\] and say in their heart that they are
most intelligent from themselves, 2 6-10 therefore they will falsify all
knowledges \[cognitiones\] of truth, and will perish thereby. 2, 3 11
Respecting learning from the Word. 2 12 From the Word they have all
truths and goods of heaven and of the church; 2 12-18 in consequence of
which they were in intelligence at first, but afterwards this was
dissipated by means of their pride. 2 19, 20 Natural love consumed all
things of the church, resulting in their destruction. 3 21-23 Of the
understanding of truth, which is meant by "Zidon": it will perish by
means of falsities. 2 24 Their destruction, lest the church should be
still further destroyed. 3 25, 26 A new church will come into existence,
when the former has been condemned. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="152.">152.</span></span>

Chapter 29 \[Ezekiel\] 1-3 Of the natural man who, in things Divine,
trusts nothing but His knowledges \[scientifica\]. 2 4, 5 Such will
pervert the truths of the church by applying their knowledges to
falsities. 2 6, 7 Because truths have been perverted in this manner, all
power, which is of truth, has been destroyed in their case, 3 8-12 and
all truth will be utterly devastated, until they will no longer have
truth. 3 13-16 Nevertheless something of a church will be established
out of those who are natural and in knowledges \[scientifica\]. 11 17-18
Reasonings from knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural man will not
destroy knowledges \[cognitiones\] of truth with them; 11 19, 20 but
these will be destroyed by reasonings from the natural man with those
who trust knowledges \[scientifica\] alone, and have perverted the
truths of the church. 2 21 Those who are of the church that the Lord
will establish will have truths of doctrine. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="153.">153.</span></span>

Chapter 30 \[Ezekiel\] 1-5 The Coming of the Lord when all things of the
church have been destroyed by knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural
man. 1, 3 6-9 Then all who trust in these knowledges will perish through
evil loves. 3 10-12 By such the truths of the church will be destroyed
through reasonings from the natural man, derived from falsities, even
until there is nothing left but falsities. 3 13-19 All things which are
of the knowledge \[scientia\] of the natural man, of every sort, will
become hell. 3, 15 20-23 They will have no truth, thus no power. 3 24-26
This will take place through reasonings from the natural man. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="154.">154.</span></span>

Chapter 31 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 Of the natural man who is in knowledges
\[scientifica\]. 11 3-9 In the Ancient Church a rational flourished that
was derived from knowledges \[scientifica\] of every kind, through their
confirming, by means of these, the Divine things of the church; and from
this source they had spiritual intelligence. 11 10-13 The pride of
self-intelligence, from which comes a trust in learning, has wholly cast
them down from intelligence, and has deprived them of all the truths of
the church. 3 14 They are cast into hell, that they may no longer
destroy. 3, 15 15-18 There they are shut up, lest, while continuing in
their falsifications, they should spread their falsities abroad. 3, 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="155.">155.</span></span>

Chapter 32 \[Ezekiel\] Lament over those who by knowledges \[scientiae\]
have perverted the holy things of the church. 3 1, 2 They pervert all
truths of the church. 3 3-8 They fall into all falsities of evil, until
they no longer see what is good and true. 3 9, 10 Those who are outside
the church are horrified at their falsities. 3 11, 12 They destroy all
things of the church by reasonings from the natural man. 3 13-16 They
shall be cast into hell, that they may no longer pervert truths in those
who are in an affection for truth. 15 15 17-23 In hell they will be
associated with those who have profaned the holy things of the Word; 15
24, 25 also with those who have falsified truths of doctrine; 15 26-30
with those who have falsified the sense of the letter of the Word. 31,
32 All of these will be with those who by knowledges \[scientiae\] have
perverted the holy things of the church, and thus they will be separated
from those who are of the church, lest they persecute them. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="156.">156.</span></span>

Chapter 33 \[Ezekiel\] Of those who instruct and are instructed. 2 1-5
Those who are instructed by the preacher concerning falsities and do not
take heed, perish; 2 6, 7 when the preacher sees falsities and does not
give instruction concerning them, he perishes. 2 8, 9 The same is true
of everyone who teaches doctrine, when he teaches and is not heard, or
when he does not teach. 2 10, 11 So now in the church, they must be
taught in order that they may be converted, because the Lord wishes the
salvation of all. 2 12-16 If the evil man becomes good, His evil is
forgiven; if the good man becomes evil, His good is not regarded. 2
17-20 These things are Divine justice. 2 21-26 A perverted church
declares that it is the church because it has the Word; nevertheless it
falsifies the Word, worships another god and does evil, 2 27-29 and will
perish by reason of falsities of evil, 3 30-33 notwithstanding its
hearing the Word, and being in external worship. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="157.">157.</span></span>

Chapter 34 \[Ezekiel\] 1-4 Respecting teachers who regard their own good
only, and not the good of the church. 2 5, 6 In consequence those who
are of the church come into an evil life. 2 7-10 Being such, everything
of the church is taken from them. 3 11-16 When the Lord comes into the
world He will gather the church together, and will teach it Divine
truths. 11 16, 17 The evil among them He will separate. 3, 11 18-20 Evil
shepherds destroy everything of the church, 3 21 and destroy the simple.
\[3\] 22-25 When the Lord comes He will teach and save these. 1, 11
26-31 He will both teach them and protect them from falsities, and they
will acknowledge Him. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="158.">158.</span></span>

Chapter 35 \[Ezekiel\] Respecting falsities of faith. 3 1-5 All truth of
faith among them perishes through falsities. 3 6-9 Falsification of the
Word from this, until there is nothing but falsity. 3 10 They claim that
the church is with them. 3 11-13 They speak against the church and
against the Lord. 3 14, 15 When the church comes into existence, they
will be devastated in respect to everything of the Word. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="159.">159.</span></span>

Chapter 36 \[Ezekiel\] The perverted church in general. 3 1, 2 It has
been destroyed by evils and falsities. 3 3-7 Because it has been
destroyed even to its ultimates, those that have been destroyed will
perish. 3 8-12 A new church will be established by the Lord, which will
be in truths and goods. 11 13-15 The evils and falsities of the
perverted church will no longer do any harm. 11 16-19 That perverted
church will perish utterly. 2 20-23 Yet it will still be tolerated
because of the Word, and because the Lord is known by means of the Word.
2 24-30 A new church will then be established, which, being freed from
falsities and evils, will be in truths and goods, and will acknowledge
the Lord. 11 31, 32 It will reject evils. 11 33-36 Its intelligence will
gradually grow by means of Divine truths. 11 37, 38 The Lord will be
acknowledged in it, and there will be the worship of Him. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="160.">160.</span></span>

Chapter 37 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 It is represented that the church was
destitute of all life from good and truth. 3 3-6 It is foretold that a
new church will come into existence, in which will be life. 11 7, 8 This
also came to pass when that church was first instructed in truths, and
was thus made fit for receiving, 11 9, 10, and it then received life. 11
11-14 Thus the Lord did when He came into the world, and a new church
was established by Him. 1, 11 15-20 There were two churches, the
celestial and the spiritual, and the two together were one. 11 21-25
This will be under the Lord, and the two will become one church from the
Lord, and will be protected from infernal evils and falsities. 11 26-28
The church will be different because the conjunction will be different.
11

<span class="margnote"><span id="161.">161.</span></span>

Chapter 38 \[Ezekiel\] 1, 2 Those who are in the mere sense of the
letter of the Word, and in a worship therefrom which is external without
an internal, are meant by "Gog." 2 3-7 Everything and all things of that
worship will perish. 2 8-16 That worship will possess the church, and
will vastate it, and it will thus be in externals without internals. 2
17-19 The state of the church will therefore be changed. 2 20-23 And the
truths and goods of religion will perish in consequence, and falsities
will succeed in their place. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="162.">162.</span></span>

Chapter 39 \[Ezekiel\] 1-6 Those who are in the mere sense of the letter
and in external worship, will come into the church, but will perish.
These are meant by "Gog." 2 7, 8 This will take place when the Lord
comes and establishes the church. 3, 1, 11 9, 10, This church will then
disperse all the evils and falsities of such, 3 11-16 and will wholly
destroy them. 3 17-21\[, 22\] The new church that will be established by
the Lord will be imbued with goods of all kinds, 11 23, 24 and the
former church will be destroyed because of evils and falsities. 3 25-29
The Lord will then gather together a church from all nations. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="163.">163.</span></span>

Chapter 40 \[Ezekiel\] 1 Respecting a new church from the Lord, after
the Jewish church has been destroyed. 12 2-5 What its quality will be.
12 6-23 All things of doctrine in respect to celestial good and truth;
12 24-34 all things of it in respect to spiritual good and truth; 12
35-49 all things of it in respect to external good and truth. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="164.">164.</span></span>

Chapter 41 \[Ezekiel\] 1-26 All things of worship of the internal church
in respect to good and truth. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="165.">165.</span></span>

Chapter 42 \[Ezekiel\] 1-20 All things of worship of that external
church in respect to good and truth. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="166.">166.</span></span>

Chapter 43 \[Ezekiel\] 1-11 The Word in that church, in respect to the
sense of its letter. 12 12-27 Worship of the Lord from good of love in
that church. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="167.">167.</span></span>

Chapter 44 \[Ezekiel\] 1-3 Every good of the church and of worship is
from the Lord. 12 4-8 The Jewish nation destroyed the church. 12 9-14
That nation will \[not\] be in that church, 12 15-31 but others, of whom
the new church will consist, which will acknowledge the Lord; concerning
which, and its life, doctrine, worship, and ministry. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="168.">168.</span></span>

Chapter 45 \[Ezekiel\] 1-5 Concerning that church: its outmosts will be
holy. 12 6-8 The holy of doctrine. 12 9-25 Its statutes. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="169.">169.</span></span>

Chapter 46 \[Ezekiel\] 1-3 Influx of the Lord from Divine love. 12 4-24
Worship of the Lord there. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="170.">170.</span></span>

Chapter 47 \[Ezekiel\] 1-12 Influx of Divine good and Divine truth from
the Lord; from this influx the angels of the three heavens, and men,
have spiritual life, and from the Divine good and Divine truth they have
intelligence and charity. 12 13-23 Inheritances or partitions of the
church and heaven according to goods and truths in the whole complex,
which is "according to the tribes of Israel." 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="171.">171.</span></span>

Chapter 48 \[Ezekiel\] 1-8 That partition continued, 12 9-20 for those
who are in the third heaven, who are the "priests and Levites." 12 21,
22 The Lord is in the midst of them. 12 23-29 The further partition or
inheritance continued. 12 30-34 The knowledges \[cognitiones\] of that
church, which are introductory truths. 12 35 This church is the Lord's
church. 12

<span class="margnote"><span id="172.">172.</span></span>

Daniel Chapter 1 1, 2 When the church among the Jewish nation had been
destroyed, "Babylon" appropriated to herself all things pertaining to
it. 2 2 3-21 She wished to know all things of the church, and to acquire
an understanding of them, and this was the beginning of "Babylon." 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="173.">173.</span></span>

Chapter 2 \[Daniel\] 1, 2 The future character of "Babylon" foretold. 2
3-11 This was not known to those who made common cause with "Babylon." 2
12, 13 They were blinded, 2 14-30 but it was disclosed by revelation
from the Lord to those who were of the church. 2 31-35 The progress of
the Babylonish religion follows: first the rulers would learn and teach
the goods and truths of heaven and the church; and afterwards they would
backslide, until nothing remained except what was adulterated, thus what
was merely false and evil, and then the Lord would come. 2 36-38 First
the Word will be taught there according to truths of doctrine drawn from
it. 2 39 Afterwards the church will prevail, not from spiritual good,
but from natural good. 2 40-43 Finally all good and truth will be
changed by adulterations into evil and falsity, prevailing only through
civil diabolic power. 3 44, 45 Then the Lord will come, and destroy that
religion, and will institute a church that will be in Divine truth from
Him. 1, 3, 11 46-49 This was the beginning of "Babylon," when it
worshipped the God of heaven, and magnified doctrine from the Word. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="174.">174.</span></span>

Chapter 3 \[Daniel\] 1, 2 "Babylon" was minded to depart from the
worship of the Lord to the worship of another god, which is the "statue
of gold set up by Nebuchadnezzar." 2 2, 15 3-7 All such agreed together,
threatening all that they would otherwise be cast into hell. 2,15 8-12
Those rulers who worshipped the Lord did not obey; 11 13-21 they were
therefore excommunicated and condemned to hell by "Babylon," together
with all things of the Lord's church; 3, 11 22-25 but still no harm came
to them, and it was clearly seen that they were protected by the Lord.
11 26-30, 4:1-3 (H.B. 26-33) "Babylon" was compelled by this to
acknowledge and worship the Lord. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="175.">175.</span></span>

Chapter 4 \[Daniel\] 1-3 (H.B. 3:31-33) \[See above, end of chapter 3.\]
11 It is foretold what "Babylon" will be, and whither their mind was
moved. 2 4-7 (H.B. 1-4) This was not known to those who were "Babylon."
2 8, 9 (H.B. 5, 6) It was known to those who were of the Lord's church.
2 10-12 (H.B. 7-9) They purposed to have dominion over heaven and the
church when that religion should extend over much territory. 2 13, 14
(H.B. 10, 11) Then they would no longer have any goods and truths of
heaven and the church. 2 15-17 (H.B. 12-14) Nevertheless the Word would
remain with them, although perverted. 2 18, 19 (H.B. 15, 16) Then those
who were of the Lord's church perceived what those of the Babylonish
religion were interiorly, and how far they wished to extend their
dominion. 11 20-33 (H.B. 17-30) They were so stupid in respect to the
truths and goods of the church, as to be no longer men, and this fact
was confirmed from heaven, where they were seen to be such. 2 34-37
(H.B. 31-34) They feared as yet to extend their dominion over heaven and
the church, but acknowledged the Lord before those who were under
obedience to them. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="176.">176.</span></span>

Chapter 5 \[Daniel\] 1-4 "Babylon" profaned all things of heaven and of
the church. 3 5, 6 It was perceived from the Word, that it was profane,
3 7-9 but it was not perceived by the primates who were in that
religion. 3 10-24 It was confirmed by those who were in the truths of
the church, that it was contrary to the Word for them to have exalted
themselves above the Lord, and that thus they profaned things holy. 3
25-28 That religion was at an end because there was no longer good and
truth of the church. 3 29, 30 Thus everything of the church there, came
to an end. 3 31, 6:1-3 (H.B. 6:1-4) Worship of the Lord was thought
about, as in the church. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="177.">177.</span></span>

Chapter 6 \[Daniel\] 1-3 (H.B. 2-4 \[See above, end of chapter v\].) 2
4-9 (H.B. 5-10) They deliberated about this, and concluded that they
should be worshipped in place of the Lord; 2 10-17 (H.B. 11-18) which
decree being gainsaid by those who were of the Lord's church, it was
ordained that they should undergo the punishment of the inquisition,
which is "the lion's den into which Daniel was cast";2 18-23 (H.B.
19-24) but still they were guarded by the Lord, that they might not
undergo that punishment; 11 24 (H.B. 25) but on the contrary, those who
invented that crime were cast into hell, 15 25-28 (H.B. 26-29) and those
who were in worship of the Lord were saved. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="178.">178.</span></span>

Chapter 7 \[Daniel\] 1-3 Revelation concerning the successive changes of
state of the church: 2 4 The first, while they were in the understanding
of truth; 2 5 The second, when they studied only the sense of the letter
of the Word; 2 6 The third, when the sense of the letter of the Word was
falsified, and falsity was made to appear as truth; 2 7 The fourth, when
there was faith alone, which destroyed all things of the church, 3 8 and
which was confirmed by the sense of the letter of the Word; 3 9, 10 they
were judged from the Word, 3 11 and that faith was wholly destroyed, 3
12 and \[those who were in\] the former \[states\] were judged according
to their life, 3 13, 14 and the church became the Lord's. 11 15, 16
Further explanation of those things: 2 17, 18 four successive states of
the church are meant; 2 19-21 the last state is faith alone confirmed by
reasonings and by the Word falsified, by virtue of which they would
prevail; 2 22 and this until the Lord shall institute the church 11 23,
24 which has been destroyed by faith alone, \[3\] 25 and which despises
the Lord Himself. 3 26, 27 Finally those who are in faith alone will be
judged, 15 and a new church will be established by the Lord. 11 28 Thus
comes the end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="179.">179.</span></span>

Chapter 8 \[Daniel\] Prediction concerning the church in respect to
charity and in respect to faith. 11 1-3 The church which is in faith and
in charity, and its power. 11 4 It will increase in truths and goods. 11
5 Faith alone will wholly destroy charity. 2 6-10 It will prevail
through reasonings, by which it will dissipate the truths of doctrine
that are derived from the Word. 2 11, 12 It will destroy the worship of
the Lord, together with Divine truths. 2 13, 14 This will go on until
the Coming of the Lord. 1 15-19 It is further explained, that this will
be when the Lord comes. 2, 1 20-25 Faith alone will destroy the church,
and despise the Lord. 3, 4 26 This is the end of the church. 3 27 It is
a sad time. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="180.">180.</span></span>

Chapter 9 \[Daniel\] The Coming of the Lord, and the end of each church,
the old and the new. 1, 3 1-3 Revelation respecting the end of the
church. 1, 3 4-19 Confession respecting the Jewish church destroyed. 3
20-23 Revelation. \[1\] 24 After the church has been consummated, the
judgment will come, and the Word will cease, 15 and so the Lord will
glorify His Human. 10 25 Afterwards a new church will be established,
but not easily. 11 26 Afterwards falsity will invade that church and
will destroy it. 3 27 Still there will be a reformation, but this church
will also perish from mere falsities and evils (Matt. 24:15) 11, 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="181.">181.</span></span>

Chapter 10 \[Daniel\] 1-6 Manifestation of the Lord, 1 7-21 to reveal
those things that will be in the new church respecting such as are in
faith alone, and respecting such as are in truths from good, who are
meant here by "Michael." 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="182.">182.</span></span>

Chapter 11 \[Daniel\] The "king of the south" here means the church
which is in truths of faith from good of charity, and the "king of the
north" means the religion that is in faith separate from charity; how
the changes followed each other did not appear in the world, but in
heaven. 11, 2 1-4 The church among the Jewish nation will be destroyed.
3 5 Then a new church will be established, which will be in faith from
charity. 11 6 Charity will be conjoined to faith, but faith will
prevail; 11, 3 7-9 and yet with some charity will prevail, and will
therefore be the first thing of the church. 11 10-12 Their posterity
will fight for faith and will conquer. 3 13-16 Faith will gain strength
against charity and consequent faith, and will overcome the latter. 3 17
The dogma followed that charity is from faith. 3 18-20 Contention about
various sayings respecting this subject from the Word. 2 21-23 They
simulated the dogma of charity, from which they had a quasi
consociation. 2, 11 24-26 Confirmations from the Word in favor of
charity were explained perversely, and they destroyed faith originating
in charity. 2 27, 28 Painful conjunction. 2 29-31 Faith broke up the
painful conjunction, adulterated the Word itself, and thus destroyed the
church. 2 32-35 It was objected to by many, nevertheless they were
overcome. 2 36, 37 Finally faith alone obtained-a religion which
destroys all fear of God and the whole church. 2 38, 39 It worships
another god than the Lord. 2 40, 41 Thus faith originating in charity
was subjugated. 2 41 Nevertheless those who believe the Word in
simplicity will remain. 11 42, 43 Faith alone will also destroy by
reasonings from the natural man. 2 44, 45 When the end comes, those who
are natural-sensual will be persistent. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="183.">183.</span></span>

Chapter 12 \[Daniel\] 1 Near the end, a new church will begin, in which
the Lord will be worshipped, and the faith of charity will be received.
11, 1 2, 3 Then those who are in that faith will come into heaven, but
not the rest. 11 4 They will become intelligent. 11 5-7 All this will
come to pass at the consummation. 3 8, 9 This revelation is from the
Lord. 11 10 The evil will not understand, but the good. 11 11-13 The
beginning of that church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="184.">184.</span></span>

Hosea Chapter 1 Verses 1-3 The prophet represented the falsification of
the Word with the Jewish nation. 3 3-5 That profane church will be
destroyed when the Lord comes. 3, 1 6 No pity is possible; 3,1 7 but the
Lord will pity those who will be of His new church. 1, 11 7-9 When
nothing of the church will any longer remain, 3 10, 11 then the new
church will grow, and will acknowledge the Lord. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="185.">185.</span></span>

Chapter 2 \[Hosea\] 1-4 Exhortation to abstain from the falsifications
of the Word, otherwise there will be no church, but it will be without
goods and truths, as before. 11, 2 5-7 They will become as before when
they loved evil and falsity, but they will be withheld. 11, 2 8 They
will return to God whom they worshipped at that time, and from whom they
received good, not knowing that this was from the Lord; 11, 2 9-13 but
because they still did not worship Him, but another god, goods and
truths will be vastated. 11, 2 14-17 Those who will be of the new
church, are to be purified by temptations, and prepared, 11 18-20 and a
new church constituted of such will come into existence, which will
acknowledge the Lord. 11 21-23 Then they will receive all things of
heaven and the church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="186.">186.</span></span>

Chapter 3 \[Hosea\] A new church to be established by the Lord. 11 1-5
They will live for a long time without the truths and goods of the
church, but they will become a church from the Lord, when He comes, and
will acknowledge Him. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="187.">187.</span></span>

Chapter 4 \[Hosea\] 1-3 There is in the church nothing but evil and
falsity from the falsified Word; 3 4-9 and because nothing of the law
and doctrine remains, the church has been destroyed. 3 10-12 Because
they have falsified the Word they are no longer able to understand
truth, but will behold falsity. 3 13 For this reason their worship will
be from falsities. 3 14 Will they not perish on this account? 3 15-19
Likewise those in the spiritual church: these will go away into
falsities. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="188.">188.</span></span>

Chapter 5 \[Hosea\] 1-3 Those who represented the celestial things of
the church and those who represented its spiritual and intellectual
things, falsified and adulterated the truths of the Word. 3 4 They
cannot turn back, 3 5-9 but all will perish. 3 10-14 They no longer have
any understanding of truth, but in place of truth they understand
falsity. 3 15 Nevertheless there will be a new thing of the church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="189.">189.</span></span>

Chapter 6 \[Hosea\] 1-3 A new church will be established, which will
acknowledge the Lord; 11 4-6 it will understand truth, 11 7-10 as there
are perversities in the former church, 3 11 when the new church will be
established. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="190.">190.</span></span>

Chapter 7 \[Hosea\] 1-5 They have perverted all the truths of the Word
and of doctrine. 3 6-10 They have perverted them by evil loves, 3 11 and
by the knowledges \[scientifica\] of the natural man. 3 12-16 Therefore
they cannot be led back, because they are in falsities. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="191.">191.</span></span>

Chapter 8 \[Hosea\] 1-7 They have perverted the church; they have turned
its goods and truths into evils and falsities. 3 8-11 By reasonings from
the natural man they have put off everything of the church, 3 12-14 and
also everything of the worship of the church; therefore they cannot but
perish. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="192.">192.</span></span>

Chapter 9 \[Hosea\] 1-3 They have falsified the truths of the church,
therefore the church has been destroyed, and they will be natural,
abiding only in reasonings from the natural man. 3 4, 5 Consequently
there is no Divine worship. 3 6 All truth and good is turned into
falsity and evil. 3 7-9 They will perish on the day of judgment. 3 10,
13 The first of them were also such, they had no understanding of truth;
so also their posterity, although instructed. 3 14-17 The posterity of
these cannot but become such. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="193.">193.</span></span>

Chapter 10 \[Hosea\] 1-3 The church that was devastated in respect to
truths, has a worship similar to this one, and they say that they have
truth. 3 4, 5 At heart they worship another god. 3 6 They will reason
against truths. 3 7, 8 They will be cast into hell, where there is such
\[evil\]. 3, 15 9, 10, The evils of punishment come upon them, but in
vain. 2 11, 12 They have been taught truths and goods, and admonished, 2
13-15 and yet they persisted in falsities of evil. Their destruction, in
consequence, on the day of judgment. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="194.">194.</span></span>

Chapter 11 \[Hosea\] 1 That "Israel," the Lord, was "brought down into
Egypt," means that they were instructed in the first principles of the
church. 1 2 They were there in natural desire and knowledge
\[scientia\]. 11 3, 4 They were instructed in cognitions and knowledges
\[scientiae\]. 11 5-8 When they have become spiritual, they will no
longer be natural, since they will thus destroy truths and the
understanding of them; 11 9-11 but from their having been in knowledges
\[scientiae\] they will have intelligence from the Lord. 11 12 (H.B.
12:1) The understanding of the Word was falsified, although the Word is
the Lord's. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="195.">195.</span></span>

Chapter 12 \[Hosea\] 1 (H.B. 2) Falsities grow by reasonings originating
in the delights of the natural man. 2 2-5 (H.B. 3-6) The Lord strove
with the posterity of Jacob from their infancy. 2 6, 7 (H.B. 7, 8)
Exhortation to be converted and not falsify truths. 2 8-14 (H.B. 9-15)
The church gloried in its possession of the Word, and on account of
their representative worship, and they were continually guarded by the
Lord; and yet they falsified and adulterated the Word and the worship. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="196.">196.</span></span>

Chapter 13 \[Hosea\] 1-3 From their self-intelligence they have
perverted all Divine worship, and hence will perish, 2 4 yet the Lord
alone is God. 16 5, 6 When they became rich in knowledges
\[cognitiones\] from the Word, they forsook the Lord by reason of their
self-glorification. 2 7-9 Hence their destruction, 3 10, 11 because
there is no longer any truth of the church. 3 12, 13 The truth of the
church has been interiorly destroyed. 3 14, 15 They are to be kept from
destruction, until all truth of the church has been destroyed. 2 16
(H.B. 14:1) Those who have worshipped another god will perish. 4

<span class="margnote"><span id="197.">197.</span></span>

Chapter 14 \[Hosea\] 1-3 (H.B. 2-4) Exhortation to be converted. 11 3
(H.B. 4) because salvation comes from no other source. 17 4-7 (H.B. 5-8)
Thus they will be received into the church and instructed in its truths
and goods. 11 8 (H.B. 9) Falsities will be rejected, 11 9 (H.B. 10) and
in consequence there will be understanding from rational light. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="198.">198.</span></span>

Joel Chapter 1 \[Joel\] 1-3 To all who are of the church. 2 4 Falsity
from the sensual man and afterwards evil therefrom has consumed all
things of the church. 2 5-7 Let them repent, for evil from the sensual
man has destroyed the different things of the church. 2 8-13 Mourning
over the destruction of the goods and truths of the church. 2 14
Exhortation to be converted, 2 15 and to reflect that thus will be the
last time, when the Lord will come, 1 16, 17 and that everything of the
church has been devastated; 3 18-20 for which reason there is
lamentation. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="199.">199.</span></span>

Chapter 2 \[Joel\] 1, 2 The Lord will come and will execute judgment 1,
15 2, 3 when falsity and evil from the sensual has destroyed the whole
church. 3 4-9 Falsity of evil will destroy all things of it by various
insanities. 3 10 All good and truth has been dispersed, together with
the knowledges \[cognitiones\] of them. 3 11 The Lord will fight with
them. 7 12-17 Exhortation to be converted to Him, to repent, and to be
wise. 2 18, 19 The Lord will establish the church, to which He will give
its goods and truths, 1111 20 and will remove falsities of evil, and
thus hell. 11 21-25 They will have trust in the Lord, from which they
will have goods and felicities, 11 26, 27 and acknowledgment from the
heart. 11 28, 29 (H.B. 3:1, 2) By His Divine the Lord will fill those
who are of that church with all things and will vivify them. 11 30, 31
(H.B. 3:3, 4) Falsities of evil and evils of falsity will dissipate
influx on the day of judgment, 3, 15 32 (H.B. 3:5) but those who
acknowledge and worship the Lord will be saved. 17

<span class="margnote"><span id="200.">200.</span></span>

Chapter 3 (H.B. 4) \[Joel\] 1 Then the church will be gathered together,
11 2, 3 and then judgment will be executed upon those who have scattered
the goods and truths of the church; 15 4-8 upon those who are in
knowledges \[cognitiones\] alone and in faith alone, and have thereby
destroyed the truths of the Word and of doctrine. 15 9-12 Combat of good
and truth against evils and falsities at that time. 15 13-15 Then evil
is consummated. 3 16, 17 This is from the Lord, whom they will then also
acknowledge, and from whom is the church. 11 18, 19 The Lord will then
teach them the Word, and falsifications of the Word will be removed. 11
20, 21 Then the church will be the Lord's, and from the Word. 11

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 201-250](pps05.md)
