[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pps08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Prophets and Psalms*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1761\], tr. by J.E.
Schreck \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Prophets and Psalms

<span class="margnote"><span id="401.">401.</span></span>

The Historical Parts of the Word \[The Historical parts of the Word,
like the prophetical parts, contain a spiritual sense within themselves,
in which there is nothing Historical of the world, as in the sense of
the letter, but there are heavenly things which relate to the church,
and in the highest sense to the Lord, just like the prophetical parts.
The Historical parts there are representative, and all the senses with
their expressions are correspondences. It ought to be known, that all
the churches, down to the Coming of the Lord, were representative
churches; they represented the church, and in the highest sense, the
Lord; it is from this that the Word is spiritual and Divine. But the
representative churches ceased when the Lord came into the world,
because all things of the Word, those that are prophetical, as also
those that are Historical, signified and represented Him and this is why
the Lord is called "the Word." There were three notable changes of the
representative churches: the first, which was before the "flood," shall
be called the Most Ancient Church; the second, which was after the
"flood," the Ancient Church; and the third, which followed the Ancient,
the Israelitish and Jewish church. The Most Ancient Church is described
briefly by "Adam" and His posterity; the Ancient Church, by "Noah" and
His posterity; and the Israelitish and Jewish church by the Historical
portions of the Word. The former churches are described in like manner,
but by more interior correspondences, in the Word that is mentioned by
Moses; but this Word has been effaced, and in its place the Word was
given that exists at the present day. The church that followed these
three is the Christian church, which church is internal, differing from
the Jewish church as a moonlight night differs from a dark night. But as
this church has come to its end, by the accomplishment of the last
judgment, a new church is now being instituted by the Lord, which is
called, in Revelation, the "new Jerusalem," to which the things that are
being published by me at the present day will be of service; it is also
being instituted elsewhere. The Historical parts of the Word involve in
a summary the things that follow.\]

<span class="margnote"><span id="402.">402.</span></span>

Genesis Chapter 1 \[1-31\] In the spiritual sense the new creation or
the regeneration of the men of the Most Ancient Church is here
described; the process of their regeneration from firsts to lasts is
here contained in its order.

<span class="margnote"><span id="403.">403.</span></span>

Chapter 2 \[Genesis\] \[1-25\] The intelligence and wisdom of those men,
while they were being regenerated, is described; for that church was a
celestial church, the first of all on this earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="404.">404.</span></span>

Chapter 3 \[Genesis\] \[1-24\] Fall and end of that church, as they
departed from the celestial to the natural man, from this they had
intelligence from what was their own \[proprium\] in place of
intelligence from the Lord.

<span class="margnote"><span id="405.">405.</span></span>

Chapter 4 \[Genesis\] \[1-26\] Division of that church, which took place
between those who made everything of the church and thus of salvation to
consist in the mere doctrine and knowledge \[scientia\] of cognitions
(who were "Cain"); and those who made it to consist also in a life of
love and charity (who were "Abel"); and, abstractly, that a mere
knowledge \[scientia\] of doctrinals, like faith alone, when all of
religion is made to consist in it alone, slays charity. But those who
made a church out of mere doctrine, and did not at the same time make it
consist in life, were rejected.

<span class="margnote"><span id="406.">406.</span></span>

Chapter 5 \[Genesis\] \[1-32\] Divisions and changes in that church are
described, being meant by the "posterity of Adam from Sheth."

<span class="margnote"><span id="407.">407.</span></span>

Chapter 6 \[Genesis\] 1-6, \[?7\], 10-12 \[?11-13\] End of that church,
when there was no longer any truth or good, because they were in their
own intelligence; \[8-10, 14-22\] and the beginning of a new church,
which is meant by "Noah" and His "three sons."

<span class="margnote"><span id="408.">408.</span></span>

Chapter 7 \[Genesis\] \[1-24\] The destruction of the Most Ancient
Church is described by the "flood," and the beginning of a new one, by
the "ark" and its preservation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="409.">409.</span></span>

Chapter 8 \[Genesis\] \[1-22\] The end of the Most Ancient Church, and
the beginning of the Ancient Church.

<span class="margnote"><span id="410.">410.</span></span>

Chapter 9 \[Genesis\] 1-17 Precepts and statutes for that church. 18-28
\[29\] That church is "Noah," its celestial is "Shem," its spiritual is
"Japheth," and its natural is "Ham."

<span class="margnote"><span id="411.">411.</span></span>

Chapter 10 \[Genesis\] \[1-32\] As that church spread over a great part
of the Asiatic world, and consequently there were divisions, these are
described by the "posterity of Noah," or of His "three sons."

<span class="margnote"><span id="412.">412.</span></span>

Chapter 11 \[Genesis\] 1-9 The beginning of Babylon and its destruction.
\[10-32\] Continuation respecting the various states of that church and
the nature of them even to the end, when it became idolatrous and
magical.

<span class="margnote"><span id="413.">413.</span></span>

Chapter 12 \[Genesis\] 1-8 The institution of the Israelitish and Jewish
church, which was from Eber, and therefore was called the Hebrew church,
and its first institution from Abram, who was commanded to go into the
land of Canaan, for the reason that all places in that land, and those
round about it, had been allotted spiritual significations by the men of
the Most Ancient Church, and these were to be mentioned by name in the
new Word that was to be written among them, in which the names of those
places were to be employed. \[9-20\] The first instruction of that
church, which is the instruction of the natural man, by means of
knowledges \[scientiae\] which are meant by "Egypt," in which country
Abram was at that time.

<span class="margnote"><span id="414.">414.</span></span>

Chapter 13 \[Genesis\] \[1-18\] Growth in the knowledges \[cognitiones\]
of the church, and separation of spiritual knowledges, which are
"Abram," from natural knowledges, which are "Lot."

<span class="margnote"><span id="415.">415.</span></span>

Chapter 14 \[Genesis\] 1-17 Combat in the natural man, between the
truths and goods and the evils and falsities there, and when victory
hung on the side of the evil or of hell, the spiritual man attacked them
and overthrew them. 18-24 Thus the natural man became spiritual-natural,
and removed evils and falsities from Himself.

<span class="margnote"><span id="416.">416.</span></span>

Chapter 15 \[Genesis\] 1-6 Since there was as yet only multiplication of
truth, and not the fructification of good, and thus not the church, He
was urgent that the church might exist with Him; 7-21 but it is foretold
what the church and its conjunction with the Lord would be, namely, that
it would be perverted.

<span class="margnote"><span id="417.">417.</span></span>

Chapter 16 \[Genesis\] \[1-16\] Conjunction of the truth and good of the
natural man, from which there would be only an external church, which is
rational. But concerning all this see Arcana Coelestia, where \[it is
explained that\] these things pertaining to the church signify things
pertaining to the Lord; for all things of the Word in the spiritual
sense treat of the church and heaven, but in the celestial sense of the
Lord.
