[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Swedenborg](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pps01)  [Next](pps03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Prophets and Psalms*, by Emanuel Swedenborg, \[1761\], tr. by J.E.
Schreck \[1900\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Prophets and Psalms

<span class="margnote"><span id="51.">51.</span></span>

Chapter 51 \[Isaiah\] 1, 2 The worshipers of God look unto the Lord from
whom, and to the church through which \[come reformation and
regeneration\]; 17 3 because the Lord will fill them with intelligence,
and will make them happy; 17 4, 5 because from Him is all good and
truth, and in Him does every nation trust; 17, 11 6 nothing abides to
eternity except that which is from Him. 17 7, 8 Let those who love good
look to Him, and make nothing of the oppositions of men, because they
will perish, owing to falsities and evils. 17 9-11 To the Lord, because
He has Divine power, that He may act, because He has strength to remove
the hells, that they may joyfully pass over without harm. 17 12, 13
There is nothing to fear from the evils thence arising, nor from
infestation by them. 17 14, 15 The Lord will lead them forth safe,
however much hell may resist. 17, 8 16 From His Divine He will set
heaven and the church in order, 17, 8, 12 17, 18 constituted of those
who have been in falsities of ignorance. 11 19, 20 Heretofore there has
been a lack of truth and good, a source of falsities beyond measure. 2
21, 22 These the Lord will take away, 3 23 and they will be given to
those who contemptuously reject the good. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="52.">52.</span></span>

Chapter 52 \[Isaiah\] 1 To the new church: let it embrace the doctrine
of truth, that falsities may not break in, 11 2 and let it reject
falsities, 11 3 by which they have been made captive, and from which
they will be freed. 11 4 Because they have been imbued with knowledges
\[cognitiones\] of falsity confirmed by reasonings, 11 5 therefore there
is evil and ignorance of God; 11 6, 7 but they will know their God when
He comes into the world, 11, 1 8, 9 when He will restore the church, 11,
1 10 and will manifest Himself; 1 11 and then they will forsake the
religiosities in which there are such falsities. 11 12, 13 The Lord will
lead them out by degrees. 11, 1 14 He will appear in humility. 1 14, 15
Then those who are in goods and truths will see and draw near. 11, 1

<span class="margnote"><span id="53.">53.</span></span>

Chapter 53 \[Isaiah\] Of the Lord's appearance in the state of
humiliation. 13, 4 1 It is scarcely believed that the omnipotence of God
is in the Lord, 13, 4 2, 3 because He will appear as vile, and therefore
to be despised; 13, 4 4 and He appeared as if the Divine were not in
Him, 13, 4 5 and yet through it is salvation. 17 6-8 He bore all things
even to the passion of the cross, 9 9 and subjugated the hells. 8 10, 11
Through the passion of the cross a new church will come into existence;
9, 11 12 and because He bore such things He will go forth a victor. 9, 8

<span class="margnote"><span id="54.">54.</span></span>

Chapter 54 \[Isaiah\] 1-3 Those with whom the church had not before
existed will have many truths of the church, which will be multiplied.
11 4, 5 The former falsities will not be remembered, because the Lord
will be the God of the church. 10, 17 5, 6 They have been for some time
as though without God. 11 7, 8 This came to pass when there was no
church, although it is to be restored by the Lord. 11 9, 10 at a time
when there is no truth, whereas afterwards it will not be lacking. 11
11-13 The doctrinals will be full of spiritual and celestial truths from
the Lord. 11, 17 14, 15 Falsities from hell will no longer be feared.
17, 3 16, 17 Those who are against the church because of these falsities
will be cast into hell. 17, 3, 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="55.">55.</span></span>

Chapter 55 \[Isaiah\] 1 They will receive truths from the Lord gratis.
11, 17 2 They will reject such things as have no spiritual life in them.
11, 17 3, 4 Truth, in which there is life, and by which there is
conjunction, will be given by the Lord. 11, 17 5, 6 Those will draw nigh
to the Lord who had not known Him before. 11 7 Concerning repentance. 11
8, 9 The way by which is salvation is not known; 17 10, 11 it is
effected through the Coming of the Lord. 17 12 Through this alone is
heavenly happiness, 17 13 and instead of evil and falsity there is good
and truth to eternity. 11, 17

<span class="margnote"><span id="56.">56.</span></span>

Chapter 56 \[Isaiah\] 1 The Lord the savior will come. 1, 17 2 Happy is
He who esteems holy the union of the Divine and the Human, and of the
Lord with the church; 10, 17 3 and let no one believe that He is
separated from the Lord. 10, 17 4, 5 Strangers, who esteem that union
holy, are to be received into the church in preference to others, 11, 10
6, 7 and those also, who are in falsities from ignorance are to be
introduced, and their worship will be accepted. 11 8, 9 The rest are
also to be brought near, 11 10, 11 because they have been seduced by
those who have evil cupidities, 11, 2 12 and who lust for nothing else
than to be insane in falsities. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="57.">57.</span></span>

Chapter 57 \[Isaiah\] 1, 2 Truth and good and life are no longer in
them, 2, 3 3 because they have falsified and adulterated them, 3 4
speaking against the Divine. 3 5 They love all falsities whatsoever, and
destroy all truths whatsoever, 3 6 and worship those things that come
from their own intelligence, 3 7 and extol doctrine derived therefrom
even to worshipping it, 3 8 and have published it before all, and have
extended it to falsities of every kind, 3 9 and call them heavenly goods
and truths, and adore them with all submission. 3 10 They have not
retracted, because this was from their own intelligence. 3, 4 11, 12
This they have done because they have not consulted the Lord, who might
teach them. 3, 4 13, 14 Falsities will destroy them; it is otherwise
with those who so love the Lord that He may teach them truths and remove
falsities. 3, 11 15 The Lord does this with those who are humble at
heart; 11 16, 17 he is not able to do this for those who are wise from
what is their own \[proprium\], 3 18, \[19\] but only for those who
grieve over it, 11 20, 21 not with those who bring forth from their
natural nothing but evils and falsities, from which they are never
removed. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="58.">58.</span></span>

Chapter 58 \[Isaiah\] 1 The iniquity of the old church, which is to be
disclosed. 2 2 They are as those who love truth, 2 3 and as those who
are converted; 11 4 but their conversion originates in evil. 11 5, 6
Conversion does not consist in speaking in a devout manner, but in
shunning evils, 11 7 and in exercising charity; 11 8-11 then they will
have truths in abundance, and the Lord will be with them; 11 12 thus the
church will be with them, and they will restore all things of the
church. 11 13, 14 If they regard the union of the Lord with the church
as holy, they will come into heaven. 11, 10

<span class="margnote"><span id="59.">59.</span></span>

Chapter 59 \[Isaiah\] 1, 2 The Lord hears and is able to do all things,
but falsities and evils stand in the way. 2 3, 4 By these, truths have
been falsified, and this is the source of evils of life and falsities of
doctrine. 2 5 They hatch out such things as captivate and deceive, and
afterwards kill. 2 6 Those things with them that are of doctrine and of
life are of no avail for anything. 2 7 They are diligent at perverting,
whence comes vastation. 2 8 He that follows, destroys the truths of the
church in Himself. 2 9, 10 For this reason they are in falsities and see
nothing in noonday light. 2 11 Hence there is no salvation, 2 12-15
because there is nothing but evils, and a turning away from truths, thus
from the Lord. 2, 4 16, 17 Inasmuch as no one was in truth, and no one
was on the Lord's side, He alone fought from Divine truth with His own
power, 2, 4, 7 18 seemingly from revenge; 7 19, 20 therefore Divine
worship belongs to Him, for from Him is redemption, 17 21 and from His
Divine is every truth of the church to eternity. 17

<span class="margnote"><span id="60.">60.</span></span>

Chapter 60 \[Isaiah\] 1, 2 The Coming of the Lord with Divine truth,
when there is nothing but falsity and evil of falsity. 1, 3 2 The Divine
is in the Lord only. 10 3-5 They will draw nigh to Him from all parts in
great numbers, even those who are external, 11 6, 7 and they will
worship the Lord from good and truth. 11 8 Those who are in the shade of
truth will draw near. 11 9, 10 The truths of the church and the church
will be in them. 11 11, 12 There will be a continual approach for the
sake of salvation. 11 13 The spiritual-moral will draw near, 11 14 even
those who had not known the Lord before, 11 15, 16 and these will learn
spiritual truths from the Lord. 11 17 Their natural will become
spiritual; 11, 17 18 perversion of truth and good will be no more, 11,
17 19 nor the love of evil and falsity, but love to the Lord, 11, 17 20
and this to eternity, 11, 17 21, 22 in heaven with growing intelligence.
11, 17 22 These things will be when the Lord comes. \[1, \]11, 17

<span class="margnote"><span id="61.">61.</span></span>

Chapter 61 \[Isaiah\] 1-3 The Coming of the Lord, to save those who are
ignorant of truth and who desire it, and when the judgment is to be
executed, 1, 11, 15 4 then the things of the church which have perished
are to be restored: 11 5 externals of the church, 11 6 internals of the
church, 11 7 more than ever before. 11 8 Conjunction by means of their
truths and goods. 11 9 These to be acknowledged. 11 10, 11 Such things
of the church will exist, when the Lord comes. 11, 1

<span class="margnote"><span id="62.">62.</span></span>

Chapter 62 \[Isaiah\] The Coming of the Lord and the church at that
time, and its quality. 1, 11 1-3 A church will come into existence which
will acknowledge the Lord; the very truths of heaven will be in it, and
more than before. 1, 11 4, 5 They will not be separated from the Lord,
as before, but conjoined with Him. 11, 17 6, 7 This gospel will be
preached even until it takes place. 11, 17 8, 9 Then the truths of the
Word will not be for those who falsity them, but for those who receive
them. 11, 17 10 Preparation is being made, 1 10, 11 and announcement
that the Lord will come, 1 12 and that that church will be from Him. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="63.">63.</span></span>

Chapter 63 \[Isaiah\] The Lord and His Combats. 1, 7 1 The Lord as to
the Divine truth, or the Word, from which He has Divine power. 1, 7 2
The Word has been wholly adulterated and destroyed. 3 3-6 No one is in
truths, and therefore the Lord alone has fought and conquered, that the
faithful may obtain salvation. 3, 7, 17 7, 8 This has been done from
mercy, that those who wish to receive truth may be saved by Him, 17 9
that He, from Divine love, might lead them. 17 10 Those who were
formerly of His church have turned away. 17 11-14 Yet, before that
church existed, He led men and protected them in the midst of hell. 17
15, 16 Prayer to the Lord that He may have pity, because He alone has
redeemed them. 17, 16 17, 18 Otherwise they would have perished, and
hell would have had dominion over them. 17, 7 19 (H.B. 19a) When the
Lord comes there will be power. 17, 7

<span class="margnote"><span id="64.">64.</span></span>

Chapter 64 \[Isaiah\] 1 (H.B. 63:19b) When the Lord comes there will be
power. 17, 7 2, 3 (H.B. 1, 2) The Lord causes the infernals to perish,
when He comes with Divine power. 7, 15 4 (H.B. 3) This has not been
heard or done before. 17 5 (H.B. 4) Thus He saves the faithful. 17 6, 7
(H.B. 5, 6) All are in sins, and there is safety for no one, unless He
come, 17, 1 8 (H.B. 7) and yet all have been created by Him, 17 9 (H.B.
8) Oh! that He might therefore have regard to them, 11 10, 11 (H.B. 9,
10) when all things of the church have been laid waste. 3 12 (H.B. 11)
The Lord cannot endure this.

<span class="margnote"><span id="65.">65.</span></span>

Chapter 65 \[Isaiah\] 1-5 The Lord had been present with those who are
against Him, who are in dire loves of falsity and evil, and who reject
Him. 4 6, 7 They will perish in consequence of their contrary worship; 3
8-10 still, not all things of the church will perish, because there must
be a church; 11 11, 12 but those who have perverted the Word will perish
because of falsities. 3 13, 14 They will become wretched; others, happy.
3, 11 15, 16 They will be conjoined with the Lord. 11 17, 18 The Lord
will establish a new church, 11 19-21 in which will be all goods and
truths, thus all things of heaven; 11 22, 23 and that church will not
perish. 11, 17 24 The Lord will teach. 11, 17 25 Falsities and evils
will no longer destroy. 11, 17

<span class="margnote"><span id="66.">66.</span></span>

Chapter 66 \[Isaiah\] 1, 2 Heaven and the church are with those who live
in humility and in accordance with the commandments. 11, 12 3 It is
otherwise with those who have perverted all worship into evil. 3 4 Those
things will be requited them because they have not obeyed. 3 5 Those who
are outside of the church will obey and will be received in their stead.
11 6 Destruction of the evil. 3 7, 8 Before they perish, the church is
established among others, 11, 3 9 and will be established. 11, 3 10, 11
They will drink in Divine truth with joy. 11 12-14 They will have all
goods and truths. 11 14, 15 Those who are against them will come to an
end; 3 16 and those will perish 3 17 who have perverted the holy things
of the church. 3 18 Men will draw near to the Lord from all parts, 11 19
and from every religion. 11 20 They will be in all truth of doctrine of
the church, 11 21 and in its good. 11 22 Those things which are of
heaven and the church will abide with them. 11, 17 23 They will
continually worship the Lord. 11 24 Those who have rejected Him will
remain forever in their falsities and evils. 4

<span class="margnote"><span id="67.">67.</span></span>

Jeremiah Chapter 1 Verses 1-3 The perverted state of the church. 2 4-8
Of the Lord, who is here meant by "Jeremiah"; He will be born, in order
that He may teach all men Divine truth. 11 9, 10 From His Divine He will
teach the truths and goods of the church, and will destroy falsities and
evils. 11, 2 11, 12 Truths of every good have been given them through
the Word; 2 13 but they have perverted them; 2 14, 15 which is the
source of all kinds of falsities that are contrary to the truths of the
church, 2 16 and from this arises a contrary worship. 2 17-19 The Lord
will admit them to fight against Him, and they will succumb, because the
Divine is the Lord's. 5, 7, 8

<span class="margnote"><span id="68.">68.</span></span>

Chapter 2 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 The church established among the ancients:
11, 2 Its primitive state when it was defended from falsities and evils.
4-6 For no reason they departed from Him who had led and protected them,
2 7, 8 and had taught them all things of the church, which they
nevertheless perverted, both its truths and its goods, by departing from
the Lord. 2 9 Still He will teach them with difficulty. 2 10, 11 No
nation has changed its religion as they have done. 4 12, 13 It is
horrible, their rejecting the Lord, and their hatching falsities of
doctrine for themselves. 4 14, 15 Consequently the church and its
doctrine have been devastated 3 16 by falsities out of the natural man.
3 17 This has taken place because they have rejected the Lord4, 3 18 by
means of knowledges \[scientifica\] and reasonings. 4, 3 19, 20 They
draw punishments upon themselves, because they have separated themselves
from the Lord, and have worshipped things infernal, 4 21 and even though
genuine truths have been given to them, yet they have become such. 3 22,
23 Howsoever they may worship in like ways in externals, yet interiorly
they are infernal. 3 24, 25 They desire eagerly to be in falsities and
evils, and shun truths and goods. 3 26, 27 Evils and falsities are their
worship. 3 28 This is true of all of them. 3 29, 30 They are not willing
to return, even when chastised. 3 31, 32 Nevertheless they have not been
forsaken by the Lord, but they have forsaken Him. 3 33, 34, \[35?\] They
fight to confirm falsities and evils by falsifications of the Word. 3 36
And they have confirmed them by reasonings from the natural man. 3 37
And yet confirmations are of no avail. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="69.">69.</span></span>

Chapter 3 \[Jeremiah\] The spiritual church, or the truths of the
church. 1, 2 They have departed and falsified truths. 2 3 They are
unwilling to understand truths. 2 4, 5 They have merely acknowledged the
Word outwardly in the letter, and not even with the Word \[in mind\],
but with falsities. 2 6, 7 The church in respect to truths, has
falsified truths, and has not been willing to be reformed. 2 7-9 The
celestial church, that is, the church in respect to good, has done
likewise; as the spiritual church has falsified truths, so the celestial
church has adulterated goods. 2 10, 11 They worship falsities of evil,
and have perverted goods more than truths. 2 12-14 Exhortation to reject
falsity and to receive truth, that there may be conjunction and a
church, 2\[, 11\] 15 and that there may then be knowledge \[cognitio\].
\[11\] 16, 17 When the Lord comes there will no longer be the
representative of a church, but a church, wherein the Lord Himself will
be in place of that representative. 1, 11 18 Then truth and good will
make one. 11 19 Those who will draw near shall be adopted as children by
the Lord; 11 20\[, 21\] but the church has become perverted. 3 22-25
Those who will be of the new church will acknowledge and confess that
they have falsities and evils. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="70.">70.</span></span>

Chapter 4 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 Exhortation to refrain from evils and to
acknowledge the Lord, from whom those who are in goods and truths will
have salvation. 2 3, 4 Unless they refrain and turn back, they will
utterly perish. 2 5, 6 Those who will acknowledge must be removed while
the destruction lasts, 2 7 because devastation of all things of the
church is at hand, 3 8 which does not come to an end through outward
mourning, 3 9, 10 nor through complaints that they are perishing,
although it is said in the Word that they shall be saved. 3 11, 12 It is
answered that they are not willing to acknowledge and receive. 3 13
Falsities are breaking in. 3 14, 15 Corruption of the church. 3 16 in
respect to doctrine, 3 17 in respect to the Word. 3 18-21 Lamentation
thereat. 3 22 There is no longer any understanding of truth. 3 22-27 All
things of the church have been destroyed, even until nothing remains, 3
28, 29 and the church has become none. 3 30 The things of the church
could not have been restored among them in any way. 3 31 Despair of
those of whom the new church will consist. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="71.">71.</span></span>

Chapter 5 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 There is no truth in doctrine or in the
church, and if they believe, it is falsity. 2 3 They were urged by
punishments, but still they did not receive. 2 4, 5 This nonreception is
due, not to simplicity, but to application and industry; 2 6 therefore
all falsities and evils of falsity have broken in upon them. 2 7, 8 They
have rejected all mercy, because they have perverted all truths and
goods, which they had in all abundance. 2 9, 10 Therefore they cannot
but perish, 2 11, 12 for they have acknowledged evils and falsities as
goods and truths, because they have departed from the Lord, 2 13 and
have annihilated the Word. 2 14-17 Therefore infernal evil will invade
them, and will still further destroy all the goods and truths of the
church; 2 18 but not quite, as yet. 2 19, 20 This comes upon them
because they have forsaken the Lord, 2 21-24 and yet it is in their
power to know that the Lord alone can do all things, but they are
unwilling to know that He is God from whom are all truths and goods. 2
25-27 This has come to pass because it is delightful to them to pervert
and deceive, 2 27, 28 and for this reason they are held in esteem. 2 29
They cannot but perish, 3 30, 31 because all goods and truths from
firsts to lasts have been perverted in such wise; also because all of
them, from the highest to the lowest, do thus. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="72.">72.</span></span>

Chapter 6 \[Jeremiah\] Those who have conjunction with the Lord in the
lowest heaven; these are meant by "the children of Benjamin." 2 1, 2 The
church among them is destroyed by falsities of evil. 2 2 3-5 They no
longer have truth and good, but falsity and evil, and these destroy
them. 2 6, 7 By means of these the church amongst them is destroyed. 2
8, 9 There are still some truths; let them beware lest they destroy
them; 2 10 but they hearken not. 3 11 Therefore all things are being
destroyed. 3 12 Thus others are being received in their stead. 11 13, 14
Because everything there has been so perverted that there is no
protection against falsity, 3 15 which they do not acknowledge to be
falsities, 3 16, 17 and they repudiate truths, 3 18, 19 therefore they
will come to an end; 3 20 hence they regard the works of their worship
as of no value. 3 21 Destruction comes upon them3 22, 23 through
falsities, from which they reason against the truths of the church. 3
24-26 Those who are separated and grieve over them. 3 27-30 The perverse
are tested, and found incapable of restoration. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="73.">73.</span></span>

Chapter 7 \[Jeremiah\] Those who are in the lowest heaven with whom is
the church in respect to good. 3 1, 2 To such: 3 3 let them look to
truths and goods; 3 4 let them not believe that the church is with them;
3 5, 6 unless they live according to the commandments, and do no
violence to the Word, 3 3 7 goods and truths do not cause them to be a
church. 3 8-10 If the life is contrary to the commandments, there is no
church worship. 3 11 The church of the Lord is not with those who
profane holy things. 3 12-15 By such profanation the destruction of the
church is brought about, as elsewhere, so also here. 3 16 Intercession
is of no avail, 3 17-19 because it is certain that they profane the
truths and goods of heaven. 3 20 Hence is the destruction of all. 33
21-24 They rely on externals of worship, which are of no account,
because they have no internals of worship. 3 25, 26 They have
obstinately rejected internals, even from the beginning. 2 27-31 Since
their reformation is vain, everything of their worship is rejected,
because they profane all things of the church. 15 32, 33 They will be
cast into hell, where there is nothing but falsity and evil. 15 34 Thus
that church will perish. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="74.">74.</span></span>

Chapter 8 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 The profaners of truth will be cast into
hell and abide in their profanities. 15 3 And all their remains will
likewise perish. 15 4-6 They are such that they cannot be converted and
led back. 3 7-9 They are not willing to know any truth from the Word,
but reject it. 3 10 Therefore the things they have will be given to
others. 3 11, 12 They defend their falsities, and call them truths of
the church; they do not want it to be otherwise. 3 13 Therefore, because
they no longer have truth or good, they will perish. 3 14, 15 They have
recourse to the Word, but in vain. 3 16, 17 Then fallacies of the
sensual man, and reasonings therefrom, will destroy them and infect them
with poison. 3 18-22, 9:1 (H.B. 18-23) Reciprocal grief and lamentation
that the time is so long drawn out before a new church consisting of
others can be established. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="75.">75.</span></span>

Chapter 9 \[Jeremiah\] 1 (H.B. 8:23) \[See above, end of chapter 8.\] 11
2, 3 (H.B. 9:1, 2) In the church is nothing but what is falsified and
evil therefrom, because they depart from the Lord. 3 4-6 (H.B. 3-5) One
falsity comes from another even until there is nothing but falsity in
which \[they are\]. 3 7, 8 (H.B. 6, 7) When they are being taught they
feign that they wish it, but they do not. 3 9 (H.B. 8) Must they not
perish? 3 10-12 (H.B. 9-11) Grief because of the destruction of all
things of the church, even until nothing remains. 3 13-15 (H.B. 12-14)
Because they have repudiated the Word, and have obeyed their own lusts,
they are in falsities of evil; 3 16 (H.B. 15) and therefore they will be
destroyed by evils, and falsities therefrom. 3 17-19 (H.B. 16-18)
Lamentation over devastation. 3 20, 21 (H.B. 19, 20) Lamentation that
from this there is destruction, 3 22 (H.B. 21) because they have
infernal evil and falsity. 3 23, 24 (H.B. 22, 23) Let it be known that
everything of truth and good, and hence everything of power and wisdom,
is from acknowledgment of the Lord. 15, 11 25, 26 (H.B. 24, 25) The
Coming of the Lord to judgment upon all who are in externals without
internals. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="76.">76.</span></span>

Chapter 10 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 Let not those be feared who wish to prevail
by their own intelligence and by means of artifices. 3 3-5 It is
described how they make evil to appear like good, and make themselves
appear powerful, 3 6, 7 whereas the Lord alone has power. 16 8, 9 To do
this they abuse the Word; 3 10 but the Lord alone reigns, 16 11 and
those who do not acknowledge Him vanish. 4 12, 13 All truth is from the
Lord. 16 14, 15 Self-intelligence amounts to nothing at all; it will
perish. 2, 3 11 16 It is otherwise with a church that trusts in the
Lord. 17, 18 The preparation of these during the destruction of the
former. 11, 3 19-21 Grief because of the backsliding of the church from
the Lord, and its vastation. 3, 11, 4 22 Their end. 3 23-25 Prayer to
the Lord that they may not perish together with the evil. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="77.">77.</span></span>

Chapter 11 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 Let them do the commandments and acknowledge
the Lord; this is meant by the "covenant." 3 4 It was with them when
they were reformed. 3 5, 6 Every good and truth of the church is theirs
by means of it. 3 7, 8 This they were often told, but they did not obey,
3 9, 10 but all did the contrary, and acknowledged another god. 3 11-13
Therefore there is no help for them, because they all love falsities and
worship other gods. 3 14 Intercession will not avail. 3 15, 16, \[17\]
They have profaned the church and its good and truth. 3 18, 19 This was
made manifest by their delivering the Lord up to death. 9 20 Therefore
retribution awaits them. 15 21 They do not wish to hear about the Lord.
4 22, 23 They will perish by means of falsities on the day of judgment.
15

<span class="margnote"><span id="78.">78.</span></span>

Chapter 12 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 The church that expects the Lord asks why
the wicked flourish. 11, 1 3 Oh! that He would come, and that the evil
might be removed. 11, 1 4 Because there are no longer truths and goods
with them, 3 5 they have self-intelligence, 3 6 and they wish to know
nothing more. 3 7-12 The church where the Word is turns against the
Lord, and has embraced falsities, whence she has been utterly desolated
and vastated. 3 13 Goods are turned into evils. 3 14, 15 Therefore they
are to be expelled, and others, of whom the church is to be formed, are
to be accepted in their place. 3 16, 17 As long as they acknowledge the
Lord they will remain. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="79.">79.</span></span>

Chapter 13 \[Jeremiah\] 1-7 That the truth of the church would gradually
perish by means of reasonings from the natural man, was represented by
the "girdle of linen." 2 8-11 The like has come to pass with the church
where the Word is, where they have backslidden from the Lord, and
consequently from truths; 2 12, 13 and afterwards there were falsities
for truths, 2 14 and consequent destruction. 2 15, 16 Let them beware
lest mere falsity take the place of truth. 2 17 Grief on this account. 2
18, 19 It may be seen that all truth of the Word perishes. 2 20
Falsities take the place of truth. 3 21 Hence destruction is at hand. 3
22 The cause of this is, that they are interiorly evil and hence become
also outwardly evil. 15, 3 23 It cannot be otherwise; 15, 3 24, 25
therefore destruction visits them, because they have forsaken the Lord,
and hence they have falsities; 15, 3 26, 27 and in consequence their
interiors, which are evil, will be laid open. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="80.">80.</span></span>

Chapter 14 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 Truth is wholly lacking in the church. 2 4-6
He that seeks does not find it. 2 7-9 Prayer to the Lord to have pity. 2
10 Answer is made, that they have backslidden; 2 11, 12 therefore no
attention is given either to their prayer or to their worship. 2 13 They
are flattered into believing that there is no lack and no desolation of
truth. 2 14-16 This is from their doctrine of falsity, which will
perish, and together with it, those who live according to it. 3 17, 18
Grief that there is no truth either in the church or in doctrine. 3 19
Complaint thereat. 9, 3 20-22 Prayer for them. 9, 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="81.">81.</span></span>

Chapter 15 \[Jeremiah\] 1 Answer is made, that no intercession for them
can be of any avail. 3 2, 3 They will be cast into hell, where are
falsities and evils of every kind. 15 4, 5 They are to be driven out
from the church, 3 6 because they have backslidden. 3 7 They have no
truth. 3 8 Because there is no truth, there is falsity. 3 9, 10 The
church with them has come to an end. 3 11 At the time of the judgment
they will be destroyed. 15 12-14 Having been destroyed by falsities from
the natural man, they have no truths from the Word; these will be taken
away from them. 3 15, 16 The Lord, and His combats from Divine truth. 1,
7 17, 18 His grief over their falsities. 7 19-21 His victory over them.
8

<span class="margnote"><span id="82.">82.</span></span>

Chapter 16 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 There is no conjunction of the Lord with
that church, because no truths and goods are there. 3 4 They cannot but
be cast into hell. 15 5-7 No compassion can be shown. 15 8 Because no
good and truth can be received by them, 3 9 all conjunction with the
Lord has perished with them. 3 10, 11 This comes of their having
departed from worshipping the Lord; hence their worship is not worship
of God; 3 12 therefore everyone wishes to be wise from Himself; 3 13
consequently they must be in hell. 15 14, 15 Others are to be brought to
the church by the Lord, 11 16\[, 17\] both those who are natural and
those who are rational. 11 18 Retribution will visit those who have
previously profaned the church. 3 19-21 Those of whom the church will
consist will acknowledge the Lord. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="83.">83.</span></span>

Chapter 17 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 It is in their internals to worship only
externals. 3 3 All true knowledges \[scientifica\] will be taken away; 3
4 but not yet. They will come into hell. 3 5, 6 Because they trust in
themselves, they perceive nothing of truth and good. 3 7, 8 On the other
hand, those who trust in the Lord always have good and truth. 11 9, 10
The Lord knows what lies hidden interiorly, howsoever the external may
appear. 3 11 The truths which they learn are of no use to them. 3 12, 13
Because the Lord is heaven and the church, those who depart from Him are
damned. 15 14-18 Prayer to the Lord, and acknowledgment, that the evil
may be removed. 3 19, 20 The Lord, to those who are in externals: 3
21-24 that they ought to acknowledge His Divine, which is meant by the
"Sabbath," and not violate it; 16 25 then they will possess an
understanding of the Word, 16 26 and then their worship will be from
truths. 16 27 If they will not acknowledge, the externals will perish
from internals. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="84.">84.</span></span>

Chapter 18 \[Jeremiah\] 1-4 It is represented that those who are in
falsities and evils can be reformed by the Lord. 11 5-8 Therefore those
who are converted after repentance, are accepted by the Lord, although
they are in falsities and evils. 11 9, 10 On the other hand, those who
are in truths and in good, and do evil, perish. 3 \[11\], 12, 13 Those
who are in the church are told to repent and be converted; but they will
not, 3 14-16 because they love falsities of every kind, and thereby
annihilate the church with themselves. 3 17 Therefore they will be
destroyed. 3 18 They exalt themselves against the Lord and consequently
against His Word, despising Him, and falsifying it. 3 19, 20 Lamentation
over this. 3 21, 22 They have no truth of the church, and they act
craftily. 23 They cannot be forgiven. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="85.">85.</span></span>

Chapter 19 \[Jeremiah\] 1 The church has been instituted; 3 2, 3 but
they have destroyed its truths by dire falsities, and therefore the
church has perished. 3 4, 5 They have forsaken the Lord, and have loved
evils that gush forth from the love of self. 3 6 Therefore the church is
no longer there, but hell. 3 7, 8 There they will be among profaners, 3
9 where there is deadly hatred for one another. 3 9-11 It is represented
that the church there has been destroyed, so that it cannot be restored.
3 12, 13 Hell is actually there, because there is nothing but the lust
of the love of self. 3 14, 15 This was foretold to them through the
Word. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="86.">86.</span></span>

Chapter 20 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 They blaspheme the Word. 3 4 They will come
among those who blaspheme and adulterate the Word. 3 5 They will
disperse all the truths and goods of the Word, 3 6 and will thus perish
with these. 3 7-10 Lamentation over the blasphemies against the Lord,
and against the Word; 3 11-13 and the Lord's confidence during combats,
that the Word is being protected. 3 14-18 Despair that the Word is so
treated. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="87.">87.</span></span>

Chapter 21 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 The hell of blasphemers of the Lord and of
profaners of the Word was present. 3 3-5 The Lord cannot turn this away,
because they ally it to themselves. 3 6 Everything that they have is
such; 3 7 and they will all perish. 3, 15 8-10 Those who study the Word
are worse off because they study it from something profane that is
within. 3, 15 11, 12 There is no good and truth. 3, 15 13 Their heart is
stubborn. 3, 15 14 Hence their destruction. 3, 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="88.">88.</span></span>

Chapter 22 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 To those in the church who possess a
knowledge \[scientia\] of things. 2 3, 4 If they do according to the
truths of the Word and the knowledge \[scientia\] they possess, and do
not pervert these, they will have intelligence. 2 5, 6 Otherwise all of
their intelligence will perish, 2 7-9 and everything pertaining to their
knowledge \[scientia\], because they have separated themselves from the
Lord. 2 10 There is no restitution. 2 11, 12 The church no longer
consists of such, 2 13, 14 because they have made a religion for
themselves by reasonings from falsities. 2 15, 16 Those who were before
them in the church were not of such a character; 2 17 but they perverted
the church by falsities of every kind. 3 18, 19 There can be no pity,
but they must be cast out as profane. 3 20, 21 They are unwilling to
give heed to the Word, 3 22 because they have been imbued with falsities
of religion. 3 23, 24 They can have no protection through the Word,
howsoever they acknowledge it with their lips. 3, 15 25-27 They will
come among those who profane the Word, and by means of it make for
themselves a religion that is contrary to the truths of the church, from
which religion they cannot recede. 3 28-30 They have not a truth which
has not been perverted and profaned. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="89.">89.</span></span>

Chapter 23 \[Jeremiah\] 1, 2 Against those who have perverted the good
of the Word, and by means of it have destroyed the church, who are meant
by the "shepherds." 3 3, 4 They will perish, and the Lord will establish
a church from others, who will teach and learn its good. 11 5, 6 The
Lord will do this, and then those who are of His church will be saved.
11 7\[, 8\] Then they will acknowledge that the Lord is Jehovah, and
that the church is His. 16, 11 9 Against those who pervert the truths of
the Word, who are meant by the "prophets." 3 10 From their perversions
the church is full of falsities and is perverted, 3 11 and there is no
longer truth or good, excepting such as is external. 3 12 Because they
do not see truths, they perish on the day of judgment. 15, 3 13 Truths
are perverted by false principles, which are of religion. 3 14 But the
Word is perverted, this is the worst. 3 15 They will possess nothing but
falsity, 3 16, 17 which they also confirm from the Word, 3 18 saying
that it is Divine. 3 19, 20 They will perish on the day of judgment. 15
21, 22 They learn from themselves, and not from the Lord; if they
learned from the Lord, they would depart from evils; 3 23, 24 thus the
Lord would be with them. 3 25, 26 They pervert by means of false
interpretation. 3 27 Hence they have no understanding of truth, 3 28, 29
because they have none from the Lord, who also is the Word, in which
truth from Him makes itself manifest. 3 30, 31 Those who call themselves
enlightened pervert truth still more, 3 32 whereas they are not
enlightened. 3 33 The Divine truth shows that they have gone back. 3 34
He who says otherwise will suffer. 3 35, 36 Moreover they will not know
what Divine truth is; 3 37-40 and because they call that which is false,
Divine truth, the truth of the church will be removed from them; hence
their destruction. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="90.">90.</span></span>

Chapter 24 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 After the whole church had adulterated and
profaned the Word, it was represented that part of them were of such a
character that they could be reformed, but part could not; these are
meant by the "two baskets of figs, in one of which were good ones, and
in the other bad ones." 2, 11 4-7 Those who could be reformed, were
those who had been completely vastated, so that they did not know what
is true and what is good; these can at last be taught, can acknowledge
the Lord, can be received, and can become a church. 2, 11 8, 9 But those
who could not be reformed, were those who desired still to be in worship
from the Word, which worship they would then continually profane. 3 9,
10 With these, everything holy would be profaned, and they would perish.
3

<span class="margnote"><span id="91.">91.</span></span>

Chapter 25 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 The Lord to those with whom the church has
been instituted. 11, 2 4-7 He taught them continually by the Word, that
they should refrain from evils, and not go away to any other worship
than that of the Lord; but they did not obey. 2 8-11 Therefore
everything of the church among them will perish, and they will be in
temptations from those who profane things holy. 2 12 Retribution will
afterwards visit the tempters. 2, 11 13, 14 It will so come to pass. 2,
11 15-27 Knowledges \[cognitiones\] of truth and good, and also truths
of every kind and sort will perish. 3 28-30 This cannot otherwise than
come to pass, even with those who are in knowledges \[cognitiones\] from
the Word. 3 31-33 There is no longer any truth that has not been
profaned. 3 34-38 Lamentation by those who are in good, and in truths
therefrom. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="92.">92.</span></span>

Chapter 26 \[Jeremiah\] 1-5 Exhortation by the Lord to repent, and live
according to His commandments in the Word. 2 6 Otherwise the church with
them will be destroyed. 2 7-9 Evil and falsity of religion condemned Him
to death, 9 10-16 but because He spoke from the Divine, the truths of
the church acquitted Him. 9 17-19 An instance of their not condemning to
death one who spoke from inspiration, 9 20-23 excepting one who spoke
falsely. 9 24 The Lord was not condemned on account of the people. 9, 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="93.">93.</span></span>

Chapter 27 \[Jeremiah\] 1-8 Since there is an end to the church, and to
all things of it, they ought no longer to be there, lest they should
profane it; therefore they were carried off to "Babylon," where they
could not profane its holy things, and those who would not go, were
profaners, and will perish. 3 9-11 Those who teach anything else, teach
falsities. 3 12, 13 All with whom the church has been instituted will
depart, or otherwise they would profane it, and will perish. 3 14, 15
Let them not believe anything else. 3 16-21 Nothing of things holy, not
even of its externals, will remain, because it has been profaned. 3 22
The church will be constituted of others, after it has been delivered
from the profane. 11 This was because the land of Canaan and all things
therein represented the church, and as these are mentioned by name in
the Word, those who profaned holy things could not be tolerated there. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="94.">94.</span></span>

Chapter 28 \[Jeremiah\] 1-17 They understood the Word in a contrary
sense, and from this they persuaded themselves that the profanities of
their religion were the holy things of the church, and consequently they
were not to be carried away from the land; but they were told that they
had persuaded themselves of falsities. 2

<span class="margnote"><span id="95.">95.</span></span>

Chapter 29 \[Jeremiah\] 1-7 Those in spiritual captivity are told that
they should study truths and do goods, and continue in them, 11 8, 9 and
not become imbued with falsities, 11 10-15 since when their spiritual
captivity ceases, a new church will be instituted of those who are of
such a character, and who acknowledge the Lord. 11 16-19 Those who were
formerly of the church will profane the holy things of the church, and
will therefore perish. 3 20-23 Those who have falsely interpreted the
Word are condemned. 3 24-32 Those who persuasively established
falsities, will abide in falsities, and will not perceive truth. 3

<span class="margnote"><span id="96.">96.</span></span>

Chapter 30 \[Jeremiah\] 1-3 Establishment of the church with those who
have been in spiritual captivity, or in ignorance of truth. 11 4-7 Then
the last judgment will be executed with those who are of the church. 15
8, 9 Then they are to be brought to the church, and will worship the
Lord. 11 10, 11 Then their spiritual captivity will cease. 11 12-15 They
have been infested by evils and falsities, and there is no remedy, 11, 3
16 but those who have destroyed, will be destroyed. 3 17, 18 There will
be a remedy from the Lord, who will restore the church. 11 19, 20 They
will be perfected in truths, and it will last. 11 21, 22 This will be
done by the Lord, when He will come, and He will be their God. 11, 1 23,
24 He will execute judgment upon the wicked. 15

<span class="margnote"><span id="97.">97.</span></span>

Chapter 31 \[Jeremiah\] Of the new church that will be established by
the Lord. This is meant by "Israel" and "Zion." 1, 11 1 The Lord will be
their God. 1, 11 2-5 The loved one will receive the goods of the church.
11 6-8 They are to be brought near. 11 9 They will come, and will
understand truths. 11 10, 11 The redeemed will be guarded against
falsities, 11, 17 12-14 and will receive things spiritual and celestial.
11, 17 15 They are as dead, 11 16, 17 but they will finally return. 11
18-21 They will come out of ignorance of truth into the truths of
heaven. 11 22 They will understand them. 11 23-28 They will be imbued
with wisdom. 11 29, 30 They will have no falsity of evil. 11 31-34 They
will be conjoined with the Lord, and from that conjunction truths will
be inscribed on their life. 11 35-37 This will be established to
eternity. 11 38-40 They will have abundant and extended doctrine of
life. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="98.">98.</span></span>

Chapter 32 \[Jeremiah\] 1-5 Indignation that the Jewish church will be
destroyed,3 6-15 yet the Lord's church will be preserved. 11 16-22, 25
Prayer that it may be preserved, 11 23-25 but the former church will be
destroyed,3 26-33 and it will be reproved because of its evils, which
have also been with them from the beginning, although they had the Word
and doctrine from it. 3 34, 35 They have profaned holy things. 3 36-40
When this has been done, a new church is to be instituted, which will be
conjoined with the Lord, and will not be separated from Him. 11 41, 42
They will have every good. 11 43, 44 They will then have everything of
the church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="99.">99.</span></span>

Chapter 33 \[Jeremiah\] 1-5 A new church. It will be established when
the former church has been destroyed. 11 6-9 After its destruction those
are to be brought near who are to be led out of falsities, 11 10, 11 who
will worship the Lord from an affection for truth and good, 11 12, 13
and who will be in truths of every kind after the former church has
ceased to be. 11 14-16 This will take place when the Lord comes, who
will institute it. 1, 11 17, 18 Then truth and good will not be wanting.
11 19-21 The spiritual and that natural will be in agreement. 11 22 Then
there will be truths in all abundance. 11 23-26 Unless spiritual and
natural truth and good become concordant, there can be no church. 11

<span class="margnote"><span id="100.">100.</span></span>

Chapter 34 \[Jeremiah\] 1-7 The Jewish church will be destroyed,
although its truth will be preserved. 3, 11 8-11 Those who are of the
church will be free, \[11\] 12-16 but they have of themselves become
slaves. 3 17-19 They will be slaves to falsities, because they have
departed from conjunction with the Lord; 3 20 and because of profanation
of truth. 3 21, 22 Therefore they will die the death of profaners. 3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 101-150](pps03.md)
