[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index.md)  [Celtic
Fairies](../../celt/index.htm#fairies)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cof06)  [Next](cof08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

### CHAPTER IV

### THE SECOND SERIES

When Mr. Gardner was in Yorkshire in July, he left a good camera with
Elsie, for he learned that her cousin Frances was about to visit her
again and that there would be a chance of more photographs. One of our
difficulties has been that the associated aura of the two girls is
needful. This joining of auras to produce a stronger effect than either
can get singly is common enough in psychic matters. We wished to make
full use of the combined power of the girls in August. My last words to
Mr. Gardner, therefore, before starting for Australia were that I should
open no letter more eagerly than that which would tell me the result of
our new venture. In my heart I hardly expected success, for three years
had passed, and I was well aware that the processes of puberty are often
fatal to psychic power.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

I was surprised, therefore, as well as delighted, when I had his letter
at Melbourne, informing me of complete success and enclosing three more
wonderful prints, all taken in the fairy glen. Any doubts which had
remained in my mind as to honesty were completely overcome, for it was
clear that these pictures, specially the one of the fairies in the bush,
were altogether beyond the possibility of fake. Even now, however,
having a wide experience of transference of pictures in psychic
photography and the effect of thought upon ectoplasmic images, I feel
that there is a possible alternative explanation in this direction, and
I have never quite lost sight of the fact that it is a curious
coincidence that so unique an event should have happened in a family
some members of which were already inclined to occult study, and might
be imagined to have formed thought-pictures of occult appearances. Such
suppositions, though not to be entirely dismissed, are, as it seems to
me, far-fetched and remote.

Here is the joyous letter which reached me at Melbourne:

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

September 6, 1920.      

MY DEAR DOYLE,

Greetings and best wishes! Your last words to me before we parted were
that you would open my letter with the greatest interest. You will not
be disappointed--for the wonderful thing has happened!

I have received from Elsie three more negatives taken a few days back. I
need not describe them, for enclosed are the three prints in a separate
envelope. The "Flying Fairy" and the "Fairies' Bower" are the most
amazing that any modern eye has ever seen surely! I received these
plates on Friday morning last and have since been thinking furiously.

A nice little letter came with them saying how sorry they were (!) that
they couldn't send more, but the weather had been bad (it has been
abominably cold), and on only two afternoons had Elsie and Frances been
able to visit the glen. (Frances has now returned to Scarborough at the
call of school.) All quite simple and straightforward and concluding
with the hope that I might be

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

able to spend another day with them at the end of this month.

I went over to Harrow at once, and Snelling without hesitation
pronounced the three as bearing the same proofs of genuineness as the
first two, declaring further that at any rate the "bower" one was
utterly beyond any possibility of faking! While on this point I might
add that to-day I have interviewed Illingworth's people and somewhat to
my surprise they endorsed this view. (Now if you have not yet opened the
envelope please do so and I will continue . . . )

I am going to Yorkshire on the 23rd inst. to fill some lecture
engagements and shall spend a day at C., and of course take photos of
these spots and examine and take away any "spoilt" negatives that will
serve as useful accompaniments. The bower negative, by the way, the
girls simply could not understand at all. They saw the sedate-looking
fairy to the right, and without waiting to get in the picture Elsie
pushed the camera close up to the tall grasses and took the snap. . . .

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

To this letter I made answer as follows:

 

Melbourne,        
*October* 21, 1920.

DEAR GARDNER,

My heart was gladdened when out here in far Australia I had your note
and the three wonderful prints which are confirmatory of our published
results. You and I needed no confirmation, but the whole line of thought
will be so novel to the ordinary busy man who has not followed psychic
inquiry, that he will need that it be repeated again and yet again
before he realizes that this new order of life is really established and
has to be taken into serious account, just as the pigmies of Central
Africa.

I felt guilty when I laid a delay-action mine and left the country,
leaving you to face the consequences of the explosion. You knew,
however, that it was unavoidable. I rejoice now that you should have
this complete shield against those attacks which will very likely take
the form of a clamour for further pictures, unaware that such pictures
actually exist.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

The matter does not bear directly upon the more vital question of our
own fate and that of those we have lost, which has brought me out here.
But anything which extends man's mental horizon, and proves to him that
matter as we have known it is not really the limit of our universe, must
have a good effect in breaking down materialism and leading human
thought to a broader and more spiritual level.

It almost seems to me that those wise entities who are conducting this
campaign from the other side, and using some of us as humble
instruments, have recoiled before that sullen stupidity against which
Goethe said the gods themselves fight in vain, and have opened up an
entirely new line of advance, which will turn that so-called
"religious," and essentially irreligious, position, which has helped to
bar our way. They can't destroy fairies by antediluvian texts, and when
once fairies are admitted other psychic phenomena will find a more ready
acceptance.

Good-bye, my dear Gardner, I am proud to have been associated with you
in this

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

epoch-making incident. We have had continued messages at seances for
some time that a visible sign was coming through--and perhaps this was
what is meant. The human race does not deserve fresh evidence, since it
has not troubled, as a rule, to examine that which already exists.
However, our friends beyond are very long-suffering and more charitable
than I, for I will confess that my soul is filled with a cold contempt
for the muddle-headed indifference and the moral cowardice which I see
around me.

Yours sincerely,        
ARTHUR CONAN DOYLE.

 

The next letters from Mr. Gardner told me that in September, immediately
after this second series was taken, he had gone north again, and came
away more convinced than ever of the honesty of the whole Wright family
and of the genuine nature of the photographs. From this letter I take
the following extracts:

 

"My visit to Yorkshire was very profitable. I spent the whole day with
the family

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

and took photographs of the new sites, which proved to be in close
proximity to the others. I enclose a few prints of these. It was beside
the pond shown that the 'cradle' or bower photograph was taken. The
fairy that is in the air was leaping rather than flying. It had leapt up
from the bush below five or six times, Elsie said, and seemed to hover
at the top of its spring. It was about the fifth time that it did so
that she snapped the shutter. Unfortunately, Frances thought the fairy
was leaping on to her face, the action was so vigorous, and tossed her
head back. The motion can be detected in the print. The fairy who is
looking at Elsie in the other photograph is holding a bunch of fairy
hare-bells. I thought this one had 'bobbed' hair and was altogether
quite in the fashion, her dress is so up-to-date! But Elsie says her
hair was close-curled, not bobbed. With regard to the 'cradle' Elsie
tells me they both saw the fairy on the right and the demure-looking
sprite on the left, but not the bower. Or rather, she says there was
only a wreath of faint mist in between and she could make

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

nothing of it. We have now succeeded in bringing this print out
splendidly, and as I can get certificates from experts giving the
opinion that this negative could not possibly be 'faked' we seem to be
on perfectly safe ground. The exposure times in each case were
one-fiftieth of a second, the distance about three to four feet, the
camera was the selected 'Cameo' that I had sent to Elsie, and the plates
were of those that I had sent too.

"The colours of dresses and wings, etc., I have complete, but will post
these particulars on when writing at length a little later and have the
above more fully written out." . . .

 

November 27, 1920.      

"The photographs:

"When I was in Yorkshire in September investigating the second series, I
took photos of the spots, of course, and the full account of the
success. The children only had two brief hours or so of decent sunshine
during the whole of that fortnight they were together in August. On the
Thursday they

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

took two and on the Saturday one. If it had been normal weather we might
have obtained a score or more. Possibly, however, it is better to go
slowly--though I propose we take the matter further again in May or
June. The camera I had sent was the one used, and also the plates (which
had all been marked privately by the Illingworth Co., independently of
me). The three new fairy negatives proved to be of these and can be
certified so to be by the manager. The Cradle or Bower negative is, as I
think I told you, declared to be utterly unfakeable, and I can get
statements to this effect. . . ."

 

In a subsequent fuller account Mr. Gardner says:

"On Thursday afternoon, August 26, a fairly bright and sunny day,
fortunately (for the unseasonably cold weather experienced generally
could hardly have been worse for the task), a number of photographs were
taken, and again on Saturday, August 28. The three reproduced here are
the most striking and amazing of the number. I only wish every reader
could see the

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

superlatively beautiful enlargements made directly from the actual
negatives. The exquisite grace of the flying fairy baffles
description--all fairies, indeed, seem to be super-Pavlovas in
miniature. The next, of the fairy offering a flower--an etheric
harebell--to Iris, is a model of gentle and dignified pose, but it is to
the third that I would draw special and detailed attention. Never
before, or otherwhere, surely, has a fairy's bower been photographed!

"The central ethereal cocoon shape, something between a cocoon and an
open chrysalis in appearance, lightly suspended amid the grasses, is the
bower or cradle. Seated on the upper left-hand edge with wing well
displayed is an undraped fairy apparently considering whether it is time
to get up. An earlier riser of more mature age is seen on the right
possessing abundant hair and wonderful wings. Her slightly denser body
can be glimpsed within her fairy dress. Just beyond, still on the right,
is the clear-cut head of a mischievous but smiling elf wearing a
close-fitting cap. On the extreme left is a demure-looking sprite, with
a pair

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

of very diaphanous wings, while just above, rather badly out of focus,
however, is another with wings still widely extended, and with outspread
arms, apparently just alighting on the grass tops. The face in half
profile can just be traced in a very clear and carefully toned print
that I have. Altogether, perhaps, this of the bower is the most
astonishing and interesting of the more successful photographs, though
some may prefer the marvellous grace of the flying figure.

"The comparative lack of definition in this photograph is probably
accounted for by the absence of the much denser human element. To
introduce us in this way directly to a charming bower of the fairies was
quite an unexpected result on the part of the girls, by the way. They
saw the somewhat sedate fairy on the right in the long grasses, and,
making no attempt this time to get in the picture themselves, Iris put
the camera very close up and obtained the snap. It was simply good
fortune that the bower was close by. In showing me the negative,

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Iris only remarked it as being a quaint little
picture that she could not make out!"

 

There the matter stands, and nothing has occurred from that time onwards
to shake the validity of the photographs. We were naturally desirous of
obtaining more, and in August 1921 the girls were brought together once
again, and the very best photographic equipment, including a
stereoscopic camera and a cinema camera, were placed at their disposal.
The Fates, however, were most unkind, and a combination of circumstances
stood in the way of success. There was only a fortnight during which
Frances could be at Cottingley, and it was a fortnight of almost
incessant rain, the long drought breaking at the end of July in
Yorkshire. In addition, a small seam of coal had been found in the Fairy
Glen, and it had been greatly polluted by human magnetism. These
conditions might perhaps have been overcome, but the chief impediment of
all was the change in the girls, the one through womanhood and the other
through board-school education.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

There was one development, however, which is worth recording. Although
they were unable to materialize the images to such an extent as to catch
them upon a plate, the girls had not lost their clairvoyant powers, and
were able, as of old, to see the sprites and elves which still abounded
in the glen. The sceptic will naturally say that we have only their own
word for that, but this is not so. Mr. Gardner had a friend, whom I will
call Mr. Sergeant, who held a commission in the Tank Corps in the war,
and is an honourable gentleman with neither the will to deceive nor any
conceivable object in doing so. This gentleman has long had the enviable
gift of clairvoyance in a very high degree, and it occurred to Mr.
Gardner that we might use him as a cheek upon the statements of the
girls. With great good humour, he sacrificed a week of his scanty
holiday--for he is a hard-worked man--in this curious manner. But the
results seem to have amply repaid him. I have before me his reports,
which are in the form of notes made as he actually watched the phenomena
recorded. The weather was, as stated, bad on

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

the whole, though clearing occasionally. Seated with the girls, he saw
all that they saw, and more, for his powers proved to be considerably
greater. Having distinguished a psychic object, he would point in the
direction and ask them for a description, which he always obtained
correctly within the limit of their powers. The whole glen, according to
his account, was swarming with many forms of elemental life, and he saw
not only wood-elves, gnomes, and goblins, but the rarer undines,
floating over the stream. I take a long extract from his rather
disjointed notes, which may form a separate chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. Observations of a Clairvoyant in the Cottingley Glen,
August 1921](cof08.md)
