[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Celtic
Fairies](../../celt/index.htm#fairies)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cof07)  [Next](cof09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

### CHAPTER V

### OBSERVATIONS OF A CLAIRVOYANT IN THE COTTINGLEY GLEN, AUGUST 1921

Gnomes and Fairies. In the field we saw figures about the size of the
gnome. They were making weird faces and grotesque contortions at the
group. One in particular took great delight in knocking his knees
together. These forms appeared to Elsie singly--one dissolving and
another appearing in its place. I, however, saw them in a group with one
figure more prominently visible than the rest. Elsie saw also a gnome
like the one in the photograph, but not so bright and not coloured. I
saw a group of female figures playing a game, somewhat resembling the
children's game of oranges and lemons. They played in a ring; the game
resembled the grand chain in the Lancers. One fairy stood in the centre
of the ring more or less motionless, while the remainder,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

who appeared to be decked with flowers and to show colours, not normally
their own, danced round her. Some joined hands and made an archway for
the others, who moved in and out as in a maze. I noticed that the result
of the game appeared to be the forming of a vortex of force which
streamed upwards to an apparent distance of four or five feet above the
ground. I also noticed that in those parts of the field where the grass
was thicker and darker, there appeared to be a correspondingly extra
activity among the fairy creatures.

Water Nymph. In the beck itself, near the large rock, at a slight fall
in the water, I saw a water sprite. It was an entirely nude female
figure with long fair hair, which it appeared to be combing or passing
through its fingers. I was not sure whether it had any feet or not. Its
form was of a dazzling rosy whiteness, and its face very beautiful. The
arms, which were long and graceful, were moved with a wave-like motion.
It sometimes appeared to be singing, though no sound was heard. It was
in a kind of cave, formed by a projecting piece of rock

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

and some moss. Apparently it had no wings, and it moved with a sinuous,
almost snakelike motion, in a semi-horizontal position. Its atmosphere
and feeling was quite different from that of the fairies. It showed no
consciousness of my presence, and, though I waited with the camera in
the hope of taking it, it did not detach itself from the surroundings in
which it was in some way merged.

Wood Elves. (Under the old beeches in the wood, Cottingley, August 12,
192l.) Two tiny wood elves came racing over the ground past us as we sat
on a fallen tree trunk. Seeing us, they pulled up short about five feet
away, and stood regarding us with considerable amusement but no fear.
They appeared as if completely covered in a tight-fitting one-piece
skin, which shone slightly as if wet. They had hands and feet large and
out of proportion to their bodies. Their legs were somewhat thin, ears
large and pointed upwards, being almost pear-shaped. There were a large
number of these figures racing about the ground. Their noses appeared
almost pointed and their mouths wide. No teeth and no structure inside
the

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

mouth, not even a tongue, so far as I could see. It was as if the whole
were made up of a piece of jelly. Surrounding them, as an etheric double
surrounds a physical form, is a greenish light, something like chemical
vapour. As Frances came up and sat within a foot of them they withdrew,
as if in alarm, a distance of eight feet or so, where they remained
apparently regarding us and comparing notes of their impressions. These
two live in the roots of a huge beech tree--they disappeared through a
crevice into which they walked (as one might walk into a cave) and sank
below the ground.

Water Fairy. (August 14, 1921.) By a small waterfall, which threw up a
fine spray, was seen poised in the spray a diminutive fairy form of an
exceedingly tenuous nature. It appeared to have two main colourings, the
upper part of its body and aura being pale violet, the lower portion
pale pink. This colouring appeared to penetrate right through aura and
denser body, the outline of the latter merging into the former. This
creature hung poised, its body curved gracefully backwards, its left arm
held high above

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

its head, as if upheld by the vital force in the spray, much as a
seagull supports itself against the wind. It was as if lying on its back
in a curved position against the flow of the stream. It was human in
shape, but did not show any characteristics of sex. It remained
motionless in this position for some moments, then flashed out of view.
I did not notice any wings.

Fairy, Elves, Gnomes, and Brownie. (Sunday, August 14, 9 p.m. In the
field.) Lovely still moonlight evening. The field appears to be densely
populated with native spirits of various kinds-a brownie, fairies,
elves, and gnomes.

A Brownie. He is rather taller than the normal, say eight inches,
dressed entirely in brown with facings of a darker shade, bag.. shaped
cap, almost conical, knee breeches, stockings, thin ankles, and large
pointed feet--like gnomes' feet. He stands facing us, in no way afraid,
perfectly friendly and much interested; he gazes wide-eyed upon us with
a curious expression as of dawning intellect. It is as if he were
reaching after something just beyond his mental grasp. He

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

looks behind him at a group of fairies who are approaching us and moves
to one side as if to make way. His mental attitude is semi-dreamlike, as
of a child who would say "I can stand and watch this all day without
being tired." He clearly sees much of our auras and is strongly affected
by our emanations.

Fairies. Frances sees tiny fairies dancing in a circle, the figures
gradually expanding in size till they reached eighteen inches, the ring
widening in proportion. Elsie sees a vertical circle of dancing fairies
flying slowly round; as each one touched the grass he appeared to
perform a few quick steps and then continued his slow motion round the
circle. The fairies who are dancing have long skirts, through which
their limbs can be seen; viewed astrally the circle is bathed in golden
yellow light, with the outer edges of many hues, violet predominating.
The movement of the fairies is reminiscent of that of the great wheel at
Earl's Court. The fairies float very slowly, remaining motionless as far
as bodies and limbs are concerned, until they come round to the ground
again.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

\[paragraph continues\] There is a tinkling music accompanying all this.
It appears to have more of the aspect of a ceremony than a game. Frances
sees two fairy figures performing as if on the stage, one with wings,
one without. Their bodies shine with the effect of rippling water in the
sun. The fairy without wings has bent over backwards like a
contortionist till its head touches the ground, while the winged figure
bends over it. Frances sees a small Punch-like figure, with a kind of
Welsh hat, doing a kind of dancing by striking its heel on the ground
and at the same time raising his hat and bowing. Elsie sees a flower
fairy, like a carnation in shape, the head appearing where the stalk
touches the flower and the green sepals forming a tunic from which the
arms protrude, while the petals form a skirt, below which are rather
thin legs. It is tripping across the grass. Its colouring is pink like a
carnation in a pale, suffused sort of way. (Written by the light of the
moon.) I see couples a foot high, female and male, dancing in a slow
waltz-like motion in the middle of the field. They appear even to
reverse. They are clothed in

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

etheric matter and rather ghost-like in appearance. Their bodies are
outlined with grey light and show little detail.

Elsie sees a small imp reminiscent of a monkey, revolving slowly round a
stalk to the top of which he was clinging. He has an impish face and is
looking our way as if performing for our benefit.

The brownie appears during all this to have taken upon himself the
duties of showman. I see what may be described as a fairy fountain about
twenty feet ahead. It is caused by an uprush of fairy force from the
ground--and spreading fish-tail fashion higher into the air--it is
many-hued. This was also seen by Frances.

(Monday, August 15. In the field.) I saw three figures racing from the
field into the wood-the same figures previously seen in the wood. When
about a distance of ten yards from the wall they leapt over it into the
wood and disappeared. Elsie sees in centre of field a very beautiful
fairy figure, somewhat resembling a figure of Mercury, without winged
sandals, but has fairy wings. Nude, light curly hair, kneeling down in a

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

dark clump of grass, with its attention fixed on something in the
ground. It changes its position; first it is sitting back on its heels,
and then it is rising to its full kneeling height. Much larger than
usual, probably eighteen inches high. It waves its arms over some object
on the ground. It has picked up something from the ground (as I think a
baby) and holds it to its breast and seems to be praying. Has Greek
features and resembles a Greek statue--like a figure out of a Greek
tragedy.

(Tuesday, August 16, 10 p.m. In the field.) By the light of a small
photographic lamp.

Fairies. Elsie sees a circle of fairies tripping round, hands joined,
facing outwards. A figure appears in the centre of the ring, at the same
time the fairies faced inwards.

Goblins. A group of goblins came running towards us from the wood to
within fifteen feet of us. They differ somewhat from the wood elves,
having more the look of gnomes, though they are smaller, being about the
size of small brownies.

Fairy. Elsie sees a beautiful fairy quite

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

near; it is nude, with golden hair, and is kneeling in the grass,
looking this way with hands on knees, smiling at us. It has a very
beautiful face, and is concentrating its gaze on me. This figure came
within five feet of us, and, after being described, faded away.

Elf. Elsie sees a kind of elf who seems to be going so fast that it
blows his hair back; one can sense the wind round him, yet he is
stationary, though he looks to be busily hurrying along.

Goblins. Elsie sees a flight of little mannikins, imp-like in
appearance, descending slantwise on to the grass. They form into two
lines which cross each other as they come down. One line is coming
vertically down, feet touching head, the other comes across them
shoulder to shoulder. On reaching the ground they all run off in
different directions, all serious, as if intent upon some business. The
elves from the wood appear to be chiefly engaged in racing across the
field, though no other purpose appears to be served by their speed or
presence. Few of them pass near us without pulling up to stare. The
elves seem to be the most curious of all

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

the fairy creatures. Frances sees three and calls them goblins.

Fairy. A blue fairy. A fairy with wings and general colouring of
sea-blue and pale pink. The wings are webbed and marked in varying
colours like those of a butterfly. The form is perfectly modelled and
practically nude. A golden star shines in the hair. The fairy is a
director, though not apparently with any band for the present.

Fairy Band. There has suddenly arrived in the field a fairy director
with a band of fairy people. Their arrival causes a bright radiance to
shine in the field, visible to us sixty yards away. She is very
autocratic and definite in her orders, holding unquestioned command.
They spread themselves out into a gradually widening circle around her,
and as they do so, a soft glow spreads out over the grass. They are
actually vivifying and stimulating the growth in the field. This is a
moving band which arrives in this field swinging high over the tree tops
as if from a considerable distance. Inside a space of two minutes the
circle has spread to approximately twelve feet wide and is wonderfully

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

radiant with light. Each member of the band is connected to the leader
by a thin stream of light. These streams are of different colour, though
chiefly yellow, deepening to orange. They meet in the centre, merging in
her aura, and there is a constant flow backwards and forwards among
them. The form produced by this is something like an inverted fruit
dish, with the central fairy as the stem, and the lines of light which
flow in a graceful even curve forming the sides of the bowl. This party
is in intense activity, as if it had much to do and little time in which
to do it. The director is vivified and instructed from within herself,
and appears to have her consciousness seated upon a more subtle plane
than that upon which she is working.

Fairy. Elsie sees a tall and stately fairy come across the field to a
clump of harebells. It is carrying in its arms something which may be a
baby fairy, wrapped in gauzy substance. It lays this in the clump of
harebells and kneels down as though stroking something, and after a time
fades away. We catch impressions of four-footed

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

creatures being ridden by winged figures who are thin and bend over
their mounts like jockeys. It is no known animal which they bestride,
having a face something like that of a caterpillar.

Amongst this fairy activity which appears all over the field, one
glimpses an occasional gnome-like form walking with serious mien across
the field, whilst the wood elves and other imp-like forms run about
amongst their more seriously employed fairy kind. All three of us keep
seeing weird creatures as of elemental essence.

Elsie sees about a dozen fairies moving towards us in a crescent-shaped
flight. As they drew near she remarked with ecstasy upon their perfect
beauty of form--even while she did so they became as ugly as sin, as if
to give the lie to her words. They all leered at her and disappeared. In
this episode it may be that one contacts a phase of the antagonism and
dislike which so many of the fairy creatures feel for humans at this
stage of evolution.

Frances saw seven wee fairies quite near

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

\[paragraph continues\] --weird little figures-lying face downwards.

(In the Glen, 18th, 2 p.m.) Frances sees a fairy as big as herself,
clothed in tights and a garment scalloped round the hips; the whole is
tight-fitting and flesh-coloured; she has very large wings which she
opens above her head; then she raises her arms from her side up above
her head and waves them gracefully in the air. She has a very beautiful
face with an expression as if inviting Frances into Fairyland. Her hair
is apparently bobbed and her wings are transparent.

Golden Fairy. One specially beautiful one has a body clothed in
iridescent shimmering golden light. She has tall wings, each of which is
almost divided into upper and lower portions. The lower portion, which
is smaller than the upper, appears to be elongated to a point like the
wings of certain butterflies. She, too, is moving her arms and
fluttering her wings. I can only describe her as a golden wonder. She
smiles and clearly sees us. She places her finger on her lips. She
remains watching us with smiling countenance

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

in amongst the leaves and branches of the willow. She is not objectively
visible on the physical plane. She points with her right hand, moving it
in a circle round her feet, and I see a number, perhaps six or seven,
cherubs (winged faces); these appear to be held in shape by some
invisible will. She has cast a fairy spell over me completely
subjugating the mental principle--leaves me staring wild-eyed in amongst
the leaves and flowers.

An elf-like creature runs up the slanting branch of the willow from the
ground where the fairy stands. He is not a very pleasant visitor--I
should describe him as distinctly low class.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Independent Evidence for Fairies](cof09)
