[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index.md)  [Celtic
Fairies](../../celt/index.htm#fairies)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cof04)  [Next](cof06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

### CHAPTER II

### THE FIRST PUBLISHED ACCOUNT--"STRAND" CHRISTMAS NUMBER, 1920

Should the incidents here narrated, and the photographs attached, hold
their own against the criticism which they will excite, it is no
exaggeration to say that they will mark an epoch in human thought. I put
them and all the evidence before the public for examination and
judgment. If I am myself asked whether I consider the case to be
absolutely and finally proved, I should answer that in order to remove
the last faint shadow of doubt I should wish to see the result repeated
before a disinterested witness. At the same time, I recognize the
difficulty of such a request, since rare results must be obtained when
and how they can. But short of final and absolute proof, I consider,
after carefully going into every possible source of error, that a strong
*prima-facie* 

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

case has been built up. The cry of "fake" is sure to be raised, and will
make some impression upon those who have not had the opportunity of
knowing the people concerned, or the place. On the photographic side
every objection has been considered and adequately met. The pictures
stand or fall together. Both are false, or both are true. All the
circumstances point to the latter alternative, and yet in a matter
involving so tremendous a new departure one needs overpowering evidence
before one can say that there is no conceivable loophole for error.

It was about the month of May in this year that I received the
information from Miss Felicia Scatcherd, so well known in several
departments of human thought, to the effect that two photographs of
fairies had been taken in the North of England under circumstances which
seemed to put fraud out of the question. The statement would have
appealed to me at any time, but I happened at the moment to be
collecting material for an article on fairies, now completed, and I had
accumulated a surprising

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

number of cases of people who claimed to be able to see these little
creatures. The evidence was so complete and detailed, with such good
names attached to it, that it was difficult to believe that it was
false; but, being by nature of a somewhat sceptical turn, I felt that
something closer was needed before I could feel personal conviction and
assure myself that these were not thought-forms conjured up by the
imagination or expectation of the seers. The rumour of the photographs
interested me deeply, therefore, and following the matter up from one
lady informant to another, I came at last upon Mr. Edward L. Gardner,
who has been ever since my most efficient collaborator, to whom all
credit is due. Mr. Gardner, it may be remarked, is a member of the
Executive Committee of the Theosophical Society, and a well-known
lecturer upon occult subjects.

He had not himself at that time mastered the whole case, but all he had
he placed freely at my disposal. I had already seen prints of the
photographs, but I was relieved to find that he had the actual
negatives, and that it was from them, and not from the

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

prints, that two expert photographers, especially Mr. Snelling of 26 The
Bridge, Wealdstone, Harrow, had already formed their conclusions in
favour of the genuineness of the pictures. Mr. Gardner tells his own
story presently, so I will simply say that at that period he had got
into direct and friendly touch with the Carpenter family. We are
compelled to use a pseudonym and to withhold the exact address, for it
is clear that their lives would be much interrupted by correspondence
and callers if their identity were too clearly indicated. At the same
time there would be, no doubt, no objection to any small committee of
inquiry verifying the facts for themselves if this anonymity were
respected. For the present, however, we shall simply call them the
Carpenter family in the village of Dalesby, West Riding.

Some three years before, according to our information, the daughter and
the niece of Mr. Carpenter, the former being sixteen and the other ten
years of age, had taken the two photographs--the one in summer, the
other in early autumn. The father was quite

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

agnostic in the matter, but as his daughter claimed that she and her
cousin when they were together continually saw fairies in the wood and
had come to be on familiar and friendly terms with them, he entrusted
her with one plate in his camera. The result was the picture of the
dancing elves, which considerably amazed the father when he developed
the film that evening. The little girl looking across at her playmate,
to intimate that the time had come to press the button, is Alice, the
niece, while the older girl, who was taken some months later with the
quaint gnome, is Iris, the daughter. The story ran that the girls were
so excited in the evening that one pressed her way into the small
dark-room in which the father was about to develop, and that as she saw
the forms of the fairies showing through the solution she cried out to
the other girl, who was palpitating outside the door: "Oh, Alice, Alice,
the fairies are on the plate--they are on the plate!" It was indeed a
triumph for the children, who had been smiled at, as so many children
are smiled at by an incredulous

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

world for stating what their own senses have actually recorded.

The father holds a position of trust in connection with some local
factory, and the family are well known and respected. That they are
cultivated is shown by the fact that Mr. Gardner's advances towards them
were made more easy because Mrs. Carpenter was a reader of theosophical
teachings and had gained spiritual good from them. A correspondence had
arisen and all their letters were frank and honest, professing some
amazement at the stir which the affair seemed likely to produce.

Thus the matter stood after my meeting with Mr. Gardner, but it was
clear that this was not enough. We must get closer to the facts. The
negatives were taken round to Kodak, Ltd., where two experts were unable
to find any flaw, but refused to testify to the genuineness of them, in
view of some possible trap. An amateur photographer of experience
refused to accept them on the ground of the elaborate and Parisian
coiffure of the little ladies. Another photographic company, which it
would be cruel to

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

name, declared that the background consisted of theatrical properties,
and that therefore the picture was a worthless fake. I leaned heavily
upon Mr. Snelling's wholehearted endorsement, quoted later in this
article, and also consoled myself by the broad view that if the local
conditions were as reported, which we proposed to test, then it was
surely impossible that a little village with an amateur photographer
could have the plant and the skill to turn out a fake which could not be
detected by the best experts in London.

The matter being in this state, Mr. Gardner volunteered to go up at once
and report--an expedition which I should have wished to share had it not
been for the pressure of work before my approaching departure for
Australia. Mr. Gardner's report is here appended:

 

5 *Craven Road, Harlesden, N.W*. 10,        
*July* 29, 1920.

It was early in this year, 1920, that I heard from a friend of
photographs of fairies having been successfully taken in the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

\[paragraph continues\] North of England. I made some inquiries, and
these led to prints being sent to me with the names and address of the
children who were said to have taken them. The correspondence that
followed seemed so innocent and promising that I begged the loan of the
actual negatives--and two quarter-plates came by post a few days after.
One was a fairly clear one, the other much underexposed.

The negatives proved to be truly astonishing photographs indeed, for
there was no sign of double exposure nor anything other than ordinary
straightforward work. I cycled over to Harrow to consult an expert
photographer of thirty years' practical experience whom I knew I could
trust for a sound opinion. Without any explanation I passed the plates
over and asked what he thought of them. After examining the "fairies"
negative carefully, exclamations began: "This is the most extraordinary
thing I've ever seen!" "Single exposure!" "Figures have moved!" "Why,
it's a genuine photograph! Wherever did it come from?"

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

I need hardly add that enlargements were made and subjected to searching
examination--without any modification of opinion. The immediate upshot
was that a "positive" was taken from each negative, that the originals
might be preserved carefully untouched, and then new negatives were
prepared and intensified to serve as better printing mediums. The
originals are just as received and in my keeping now. Some good prints
and lantern slides were soon prepared.

In May I used the slides, with others, to illustrate a lecture given in
the Mortimer Hall, London, and this aroused considerable interest,
largely because of these pictures and their story. A week or so later I
received a letter from Sir A. Conan Doyle asking for information
concerning them, some report, I understood, having reached him from a
mutual friend. A meeting with Sir Arthur followed, and the outcome was
that I agreed to hasten my proposed personal investigation into the
origin of the photographs, and carry this through at once instead

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

of waiting till September, when I should be in the North on other
matters.

In consequence, to-day, July 29, I am just back in London from one of
the most interesting and surprising excursions that it has ever been my
fortune to make!

We had time, before I went, to obtain opinions on the original negatives
from other expert photographers, and one or two of these were adverse
rather than favourable. Not that any would say positively that the
photographs were faked, but two did claim that they could produce the
same class of negative by studio work involving painted models, etc.,
and it was suggested further that the little girl in the first picture
was standing behind a table heaped up with fern and moss, that the
toad-stool was unnatural, that in the gnome photo the girl's hand was
not her own, that uniform shading was questionable, and so on. All of
this had its weight, and though I went North with as little bias one way
or the other as possible, I felt quite prepared to find that a personal
investigation would disclose some evidence of falsity.

The lengthy journey completed, I reached

 

<span id="img_04800"></span>

[![ELSIE IN 1920, STANDING NEAR WHERE THE GNOME WAS TAKEN IN
1917](tn/04800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04800.jpg.md)  
ELSIE IN 1920, STANDING NEAR WHERE THE GNOME WAS TAKEN IN 1917  

<span id="img_04801"></span>

[![FRANCES IN 1920](tn/04801.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04801.jpg.md)  
FRANCES IN 1920  

<span id="img_04900"></span>

[![A. FRANCES AND THE FAIRIES](tn/04900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04900.jpg.md)  
A. FRANCES AND THE FAIRIES  

Photograph taken by Elsie. Bright sunny day in July, 1917. The "Midg"
camera. Distance, 4 ft. Time, 1/50th sec. The original negative is
asserted by expert photographers to bear not the slightest trace of
combination work, retouching, or, anything whatever to mark it as other
than a perfectly straight single-exposure photograph, taken in the open
air under natural conditions. The negative is sufficiently, Indeed.
somewhat over-exposed. The waterfall and rocks are about 20 ft. behind
Frances, who is standing against the bank of the beck. A fifth fairy may
be seen between and behind the two on the right. The colouring of the
fairies is described by the girls as being of very pale pink, green,
lavender, and mauve, most marked in the wings and fading to almost pure
white, in the limbs and drapery. Each fairy has its own special colour.

 

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

a quaint, old-world village in Yorkshire, found the house, and was
cordially received. Mrs. C. and her daughter I. (the girl as shown
playing with the gnome) were both at home to meet me, and Mr. G, the
father, came in shortly afterwards.

Several of the objections raised by the professionals were disposed of
almost at once, as, a half-hour after reaching the house, I was
exploring a charming little valley, directly at the rear, with a stream
of water running through, where the children had been accustomed to see
and play with the fairies. I found the bank behind which the child, with
her shoes and stockings off, is shown as standing; toad-stools exactly
as in the photograph were about in plenty, quite as big and
hearty-looking. And the girl's hand? Well, she laughingly made me
promise not to say much about it, it is so very long! I stood on the
spots shown and easily identified every feature. Then, in course of
eliciting all that one could learn about the affair, I gathered the
following, which, for the sake of conciseness, I set out below:

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

Camera used: "The Midg" quarter-plate. Plates: Imperial Rapid.

Fairies photo: July 1917. Day brilliantly hot and sunny. About 3 p. m.
Distance: 4 feet. Time: 1-50th second.

Gnome photo: September 1917. Day bright, but not as above. About 4
o'clock. Distance: 8 feet. Time: 1-50th second.

 

I. was sixteen years old; her cousin A. was ten years. Other photographs
were attempted but proved partial failures, and plates were not kept.

Colouring: The palest of green, pink, mauve. Much more in the wings than
in the bodies, which are very pale to white. The gnome is described as
seeming to be in black tights, reddish-brown jersey, and red pointed
cap. He was swinging his pipes, holding them in his left hand and was
just stepping up on to I.'s knee when A. snapped him.

A., the visiting cousin, went away soon after, and I. says they must be
together to "take photographs." Fortunately they will meet in a few
weeks' time, and they promise

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

me to try to get some more. I. added she would very much like to send me
one of a fairy flying.

Mr. C.'s testimony was clear and decisive. His daughter had pleaded to
be allowed to use the camera. At first he demurred, but ultimately,
after dinner one Saturday, he put just one plate in the Midg and gave it
to the girls. They returned in less than an hour and begged him to
develop the plate as I. had "taken a photograph." He did so, with, to
him, the bewildering result shown in the print of the fairies!

Mrs. C. says she remembers quite well that the girls were only away from
the house a short time before they brought the camera back.

Extraordinary and amazing as these photographs may appear, I am now
quite convinced of their entire genuineness, as indeed would everyone
else be who had the same evidence of transparent honesty and simplicity
that I had. I am adding nothing by way of explanations or theories of my
own, though the need for two people, preferably children, is fairly
obvious for photography,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

in order to assist in the strengthening of the etheric bodies. Beyond
this I prefer to leave the above statement as a plain, unvarnished
narrative of my connection with the incidents.

I need only add that no attempt appears ever to have been made by the
family to make these photographs public, and whatever has been done in
that direction locally has not been pressed by any of them, nor has
there been any money payment in connection with them.

EDWARD L. GARDNER.      

 

I may add as a footnote to Mr. Gardner's report that the girl informed
him in conversation that she had no power of any sort over the actions
of the fairies, and that the way to "’tice them," as she called it, was
to sit passively with her mind quietly turned in that direction; then,
when faint stirrings or movements in the distance heralded their
presence, to beckon towards them and show that they were welcome. It was
Iris who pointed out the pipes of the gnome, which we had both taken as
being the markings of

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

the moth-like under-wing. She added that if there was not too much
rustling in the wood it was possible to hear the very faint and high
sound of the pipes. To the objections of photographers that the fairy
figures show quite different shadows to those of the human our answer is
that ectoplasm, as the etheric protoplasm has been named, has a faint
luminosity of its own, which would largely modify shadows.

To the very clear and, as I think, entirely convincing report of Mr.
Gardner's, let me add the exact words which Mr. Snelling, the expert
photographer, allows us to use. Mr. Snelling has shown great strength of
mind, and rendered signal service to psychic study, by taking a strong
line, and putting his professional reputation as an expert upon the
scales. He has had a varied connection of over thirty years with the
Autotype Company and Illingworth's large photographic factory, and has
himself turned out some beautiful work of every kind of natural and
artificial studio studies. He laughs at the idea that any expert in
England could deceive him with a faked photograph. "These

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

two negatives," he says, "are entirely genuine, unfaked photographs of
single exposure, open-air work, show movement in the fairy figures, and
there is no trace whatever of studio work involving card or paper
models, dark backgrounds, painted figures, etc. In my opinion, they are
both straight untouched pictures."

A second independent opinion is equally clear as to the genuine
character of the photographs, founded upon a large experience of
practical photography.

There is our case, fortified by pictures of the places which the unhappy
critic has declared to be theatrical properties. How well we know that
type of critic in all our, psychic work, though it is not always
possible to at once show his absurdity to other people.

I will now make a few comments upon the two pictures, which I have
studied long and earnestly with a high-power lens.

One fact of interest is this presence of a double pipe--the very sort
which the ancients associated with fauns and naiads--in each picture.
But if pipes, why not everything else? Does it not suggest a complete

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

range of utensils and instruments for their own life? Their clothing is
substantial enough. It seems to me that with fuller knowledge and with
fresh means of vision these people are destined to become just as solid
and real as the Eskimos. There is an ornamental rim to the pipe of the
elves which shows that the graces of art are not unknown among them. And
what joy is in the complete abandon of their little graceful figures as
they let themselves go in the dance! They may have their shadows and
trials as we have, but at least there is a great gladness manifest in
this demonstration of their life.

A second general observation is that the elves are a compound of the
human and the butterfly, while the gnome has more of the moth. This may
be merely the result of under-exposure of the negative and dullness of
the weather. Perhaps the little gnome is really of the same tribe, but
represents an elderly male, while the elves are romping young women.
Most observers of fairy life have reported, however, that there are
separate species, varying very much in size, appearance,

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

and locality--the wood fairy, the water fairy, the fairy of the plains,
etc.

Can these be thought-forms? The fact that they are so like our
conventional idea of fairies is in favour of the idea. But if they move
rapidly, have musical instruments, and so forth, then it is impossible
to talk of "thought-forms," a term which suggests something vague and
intangible. In a sense we are all thought-forms, since we can only be
perceived through the senses, but these little figures would seem to
have an objective reality, as we have ourselves, even if their
vibrations should prove to be such that it takes either psychic power or
a sensitive plate to record them. If they are conventional it may be
that fairies have really been seen in every generation, and so some
correct description of them has been retained.

There is one point of Mr. Gardner's investigation which should be
mentioned. It had come to our knowledge that Iris could draw, and had
actually at one time done some designs for a jeweller. This naturally
demanded caution, though the girl's own

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

frank nature is, I understand, a sufficient guarantee for those who know
her. Mr. Gardner, however, tested her powers of drawing, and found that,
while she could do landscapes cleverly, the fairy figures which she had
attempted in imitation of those she had seen were entirely uninspired,
and bore no possible resemblance to those in the photograph. Another
point which may be commended to the careful critic with a strong lens is
that the apparent pencilled face at the side of the figure on the right
is really only the edge of her hair, and not, as might appear, a drawn
profile.

I must confess that after months of thought I am unable to get the true
bearings of this event. One or two consequences are obvious. The
experiences of children will be taken more seriously. Cameras will be
forthcoming. Other well-authenticated cases will come along. These
little folk who appear to be our neighbours, with only some small
difference of vibration to separate us, will become familiar. The
thought of them, even when unseen, will add a charm to every brook and
valley and give romantic interest

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to every country walk. The recognition of their existence will jolt the
material twentieth-century mind out of its heavy ruts in the mud, and
will make it admit that there is a glamour and a mystery to life. Having
discovered this, the world will not find it so difficult to accept that
spiritual message supported by physical facts which has already been so
convincingly put before it. All this I see, but there may be much more.
When Columbus knelt in prayer upon the edge of America, what prophetic
eye saw all that a new continent might do to affect the destinies of the
world? We also seem to be on the edge of a new continent, separated not
by oceans but by subtle and surmountable psychic conditions. I look at
the prospect with awe. May those little creatures suffer from the
contact and some Las Casas bewail their ruin! If so, it would be an evil
day when the world defined their existence. But there is a guiding hand
in the affairs of man, and we can but trust and follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Reception of the First Photographs](cof06.md)
