[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Celtic
Fairies](../../celt/index.htm#fairies)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cof09)  [Next](cof11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

### CHAPTER VII

### SOME SUBSEQUENT CASES

From the foregoing chapter it will be clear that there was a good deal
of evidence which cannot easily be brushed aside as to the existence of
these little creatures before the discovery of the photographs. These
various witnesses have nothing to gain by their testimony, and it is not
tainted by any mercenary consideration. The same remark applies to a
number of cases which were communicated to me after the appearance of
the articles in the *Strand*. One or two were more or less ingenious
practical jokes, but from the others I have selected some which appear
to be altogether reliable.

The gentleman whom I have already quoted under the name of Lancaster--he
who was so doubtful as to the validity of the photographs--is himself a
seer. He says:

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

"Personally I should describe fairies as being about 2 feet 6 inches to
3 feet in height, and dressed in duffle brown clothes. The nearest
approach I can get to them is to say that they are spiritual monkeys.
They have the active brains of monkeys, and their general instinct is to
avoid mankind, but they are capable individually of becoming extremely
attached to humans--or a human--but at any time they may bite you, like
a monkey, and repent immediately afterwards. They have thousands of
years of collective experience, call it 'inherited memory' if you like,
but no reasoning faculties. They are just Peter Pans--children who never
grow up.

"I remember asking one of our spirit group bow one could get into touch
with the brownies. He replied that when you could go into the woods and
call the brown rabbits to you the other brownies will also come to you.
Speaking generally, I should imagine that anyone who has had any truck
with fairies must have obeyed the scriptural injunction to 'become as a
little child,' i.e. he or she must be either simple or a Buddha."

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

This last phrase is a striking one, and it is curiously confirmed by a
gentleman named Matthews, writing on January 3, 1921, from San Antonio,
Texas. He declared that his three daughters, now married women, could
all see fairies before the age of puberty, but never after it. The
fairies said to them: "We are not of the human evolution. Very few
humans have ever visited us. Only old souls well advanced in evolution
or in a state of sex innocence can come to us." This repeats
independently the idea of Mr. Lancaster.

These children seem to have gone into a trance state before they found
themselves in the country of the fairies--a country of intelligent
beings, very small, 12 to 18 inches high. According to their accounts,
they were invited to attend banquets or celebrations, excursions on
beautiful lakes, etc. Each child was able to entrance instantly. This
they always did when they visited Fairyland, but when the fairies came
to them, which was generally in the twilight, they sat in chairs in
normal state watching them dance. The father adds: "My own children
learned

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

in this way to dance, so that at local entertainments audiences were
delighted, though they never knew from what source they learned."

My correspondent does not say whether there is a marked difference
between the European and the American type of fairy. No doubt, if these
results are confirmed and followed up, there will be an exact
classification in the future. If Bishop Leadbeater's clairvoyance can be
trusted, there is, as will afterwards be shown, a very clear distinction
between the elemental life of various countries, as well as many
varieties in each particular country.

One remarkable first-hand case of seeing fairies came from the Rev.
Arnold J. Holmes. He wrote:

 

"Being brought up in the Isle of Man one breathed the atmosphere of
superstition (if you like to call it), the simple, beautiful faith of
the Manx fisher folk, the childlike trust of the Manx girls, who to this
day will not forget the bit of wood and coal put ready at the side of
the fireplace in case

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

the 'little people' call and need a fire. A good husband is the ultimate
reward, and neglect in this respect a bad husband or no husband at all.
The startling phenomena occurred on my journey home from Peel Town at
night to St. Mark's (where I was Incumbent).

"After passing Sir Hall Caine's beautiful residence, Greeba Castle, my
horse--a spirited one--suddenly stopped dead, and looking ahead I saw
amid the obscure light and misty moonbeams what appeared to be a small
army of indistinct figures--very small, clad in gossamer garments. They
appeared to be perfectly happy, scampering and tripping along the road,
having come from the direction of the beautiful sylvan glen of Greeba
and St. Trinian's Roofless Church. The legend is that it has ever been
the fairies' haunt, and when an attempt has been made on two occasions
to put a roof on, the fairies have removed all the work during the
night, and for a century no further attempts have been made. It has
therefore been left to the 'little people' who claimed it as their own.

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

"I watched spellbound, my horse half mad with fear. The little happy
army then turned in the direction of Witch's Hill, and mounted a mossy
bank; one 'little man' of larger stature than the rest, about 14 inches
high, stood at attention until all had passed him dancing, singing, with
happy abandon, across the Valley fields towards St. John's Mount."

 

The wide distribution of the fairies may be judged by the following
extremely interesting narrative from Mrs. Hardy, the wife of a settler
in the Maori districts of New Zealand:

"After reading about what others have seen I am encouraged to give you
an experience of my own, which happened about five years ago. Will you
please excuse my mentioning a few domestic details connected with the
story? Our home is built on the top of a ridge. The ground was levelled
for some distance to allow for sites for the house, buildings, lawns,
etc. The ground on either side slopes steeply down to an orchard on the
left, and shrubbery and paddock on the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

right, bounded by the main road. One evening when it was getting dusk I
went into the yard to hang the tea-towels on the clothes-line. As I
stepped off the verandah, I heard a sound of soft galloping coming from
the direction of the orchard. I thought I must be mistaken, and that the
sound came from the road, where the Maoris often gallop their horses. I
crossed the yard to get the pegs, and heard the galloping coming nearer.
I walked to the clothes-line, and stood under it with my arms uplifted
to peg the towel on the line, when I was aware of the galloping close
behind me, and suddenly a little figure, riding a tiny pony, rode right
under my uplifted arms. I looked round, to see that I was surrounded by
eight or ten tiny figures on tiny ponies like dwarf Shetlands. The
little figure who came so close to me stood out quite clearly in the
light that came from the window, but he had his back to it, and I could
not see his face. The faces of the others were quite brown, also the
ponies were brown. If they wore clothes they were close-fitting like a
child's jersey suit. They were like tiny dwarfs, or children

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

of about two years of age. I was very startled, and called out,
'Goodness I what is this?' I think I must have frightened them, for at
the sound of my voice they all rode through the rose trellis across the
drive, and down the shrubbery. I heard the soft galloping dying away
into the distance, and listened until the sound was gone, then went into
the house. My daughter, who has had several psychic experiences, said to
me: 'Mother, how white and startled you look! What have you seen? And
who were you speaking to just now in the yard?' I said, 'I have seen the
fairies ride!'"

 

The little fairy horses are mentioned by several writers, and yet it
must be admitted that their presence makes the whole situation far more
complicated and difficult to understand. If horses, why not dogs? And we
find ourselves in a whole new world upon the fairy scale. I have
convinced myself that there is overwhelming evidence for the fairies,
but I have by no means been able to assure myself of these adjuncts.

The following letter from a young lady in

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Canada, daughter of one of the leading citizens
of Montreal, and personally known to me, is interesting on account of
the enclosed photograph here reproduced. She says:

 

"The enclosed photograph was taken this summer at Waterville, New
Hampshire, with a 2A Brownie camera (portrait lens attached) by Alverda,
eleven years old. The father is able, clear-headed, enthusiastic on golf
and billiards; the mother on Japanese art; neither interested in psychic
matters much. The child has been frail and imaginative, but sweet and
incapable of deceit.

"The mother tells me she was with the child when the picture was taken.
The mushrooms pleased the little girl, and she knelt down and
photographed them. As an indication of their ordinary size, they are
*Amainta muscaria*.

"There was no such figure to be seen as appears in the picture.

"There was no double exposure. The picture astonished them when
developed. The parents guarantee its honesty, but are mystified.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

"Do you think shadows, etc., can explain it? I think the line of the
right shoulder and arm especially are too decisive to be thus brushed
away."

 

I rather agree with the writer, but it is a point which each reader can
decide for himself upon examination of the photograph. It is certainly
very vague after the Yorkshire examples.

New Zealand would appear to be quite a fairy centre, for I have another
letter from a lady in those beautiful islands, which is hardly less
interesting and definite than the one already quoted. She says:

"I have seen fairies in all parts of New Zealand, but especially in the
fern-clad gullies of the North Island. Most of my unfoldment for
mediumship was carried out in Auckland, and during that time I spent
hours in my garden, and saw the fairies most often in the evening just
after sunset. From observation I notice they usually lived or else
appeared about the perennial plants. I saw brown fairies and green
fairies, and they all had wings of a filmy

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

appearance. I used to talk to them and ask them to make special pet
plants and cuttings I put in the garden grow well, and I am sure they
did, by the results I got. Since I came to Sydney, I have also seen the
green fairies. I tried an experiment last spring. I had some
pheasant-eye narcissus growing in the garden. I saw the green fairies
about them. I transplanted one of the bulbs to a pot when half-grown,
and took it with me when I went away for a short holiday. I asked the
fairies to keep it growing. I watched it closely every evening--a
green-clad fairy, sometimes two or three of them, would appear on the
pot under the plant and whatever they did to it during the night I do
not know, but next morning it was very much bigger, and, although
transplanted, etc., it flowered three weeks before those in the garden.
I am now living at Rochdale, Sydney, with friends both Australians and
Spiritualists, and they also have seen the fairies from childhood up. I
am sure animals see them. The fairies appear every evening in a little
wild corner of the garden we leave for them, and our cat sits and

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

watches them intently, but never attempts to spring at them as he does
at other moving objects. If you care to make use of the information
contained in this letter, you are welcome to do so."

 

I had another interesting letter from Mrs. Roberts, of Dunedin, one of
the most gifted women in psychic matters whom I met during my Australian
wanderings, in which she describes, as the last writer has done, the
intimate connection between these elemental forms of life and the
flowers, asserting that she has continually seen them tending the plants
in her own garden.

From Ireland I received several fairy stories which seemed to be
honestly told, even if some margin must be left for errors of
observation. One of these seems to link up the fairy kingdom with
spiritual communication, for the writer, Miss Winter, of Blarney, in
Cork says:

 

"We received communications from a fairy named Bebel several times, one
of them lasting nearly an hour. The communication

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

was as decided and swift as from the most powerful spirit. He told us
that he was a Leprechaun (male), but that in a ruined fort near us dwelt
the Pixies. Our demesne had been the habitation of Leprechauns always,
and they with their Queen Picel, mounted on her gorgeous dragon-fly,
found all they required in our grounds.

"He asked most lovingly about my little grandchildren, who visit us
frequently, and since then he has been in the habit of communicating
with them, when we have yielded the table to them entirely, and just
listened to the pure fun he and they were having together. He told them
that the fairies find it quite easy to talk to the rabbits, and that
they disliked the dogs because they chased them. They have great fun
with the hens, on whose backs they ride, but they do not like them
because they 'jeer' at them. When he mentioned the old fort, I thought
he referred to Blarney Castle, not far away, but on relating the
incident to a farmer's daughter, whose family has been in the
neighbourhood for a very long time, she informed me that a labourer's
cottage at the entrance to

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

our avenue is built on the site of an old fort, information absolutely
new to us."

 

A few more may be added to my list of witnesses, which might be greatly
extended. Miss Hall, of Bristol, writes:

"I, too, have seen fairies, but never until now have I dared to mention
it for fear of ridicule. It was many years ago. I was quite a child of
six or seven years, and then, as now, passionately fond of all flowers,
which always seem to me living creatures. I was seated in the middle of
a road in some cornfields, playing with a group of poppies, and never
shall I forget my utter astonishment at seeing a funny little man
playing hide-and-seek among these flowers to amuse me, as I thought. He
was quick as a dart. I watched him for quite a long time, then he
disappeared. He seemed a merry little fellow, but I cannot ever remember
his face. In colour he was a sage-green, his limbs were round and had
the appearance of geranium stalks. He did not seem to be clothed, and
was about three inches high and slender. I

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

often looked for him again, but without success."

 

Mr. J. Foot Young, the well-known water diviner, writes:

"Some years ago I was one of a party invited to spend the afternoon on
the lovely slopes of Oxeford Hill, in the county of Dorset. The absence
of both trees and hedges in this locality enables one to see without
obstruction for long distances. I was walking with my companion, who
lives in the locality, some little distance from the main party, when to
my astonishment I saw a number of what I thought to be very small
children, about a score in number, and all dressed in little
gaily-coloured short skirts, their legs being bare. Their hands were
joined, and all held up, as they merrily danced round in a perfect
circle. We stood watching them, when in an instant they all vanished
from our sight. My companion told me they were fairies, and that they
often came to that particular part to hold their revels. It may be our
presence disturbed them."

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

Mrs. Ethel Enid Wilson, of Worthing, writes:

"I quite believe in fairies. Of course, they are really nature spirits.
I have often seen them on fine sunny days playing in the sea, and riding
on the waves, but no one I have ever been with at the time has been able
to see them, excepting once my little nephews and nieces saw them too.
They were like little dolls, quite small, with beautiful bright hair,
and they were constantly moving and dancing about."

 

Mrs. Rose, of Southend-on-Sea, told us in a chat on the subject:

"I think I have always seen fairies. I see them constantly here in the
shrubbery by the sea. They congregate under the trees and float around
about the trees, and gnomes come around to protect them. The gnomes are
like little old men, with little green caps, and their clothes are
generally neutral green. The fairies themselves are in light draperies.
I have also seen them in the conservatory of my house, floating about
among

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

the flowers and plants. The fairies appear to be perpetually playing,
excepting when they go to rest on the turf or in a tree, and I once saw
a group of gnomes standing on each others' shoulders, like gymnasts on
the stage. They seemed to be living as much as I am. It is not
imagination. I have seen the gnomes arranging a sort of moss bed for the
fairies, just like a mother-bird putting her chicks to bed. I don't hear
any sounds from the gnomes or fairies, but they always look happy, as if
they were having a real good time."

 

Miss Eva Longbottom, L.R.A.M., A.R.C. M., of Bristol, a charming
vocalist, who has been blind from birth, told us in an interview:

"I have seen many fairies with my mind's eyes (that is, clairvoyantly).
They are of various kinds, the ones I see. The music fairies are very
beautiful. 'Argent' describes them, for they make you think of silver,
and they have dulcet silvery voices. They speak and sing, but more in
sound than in distinct words--a language of their own.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

a fairy tongue. Their music is a thing we cannot translate. It exists in
itself. I don't think Mendelssohn has truly caught it, but Mr.
Coleridge-Taylor's music reminds me of the music I have heard from the
fairies themselves; his fairy ballads are very charming.

"Then there are dancing fairies. Their dancing is dainty and full of
grace, a sweet old style of dance, without any tangles in it. I am
generally alone when I see them, not necessarily in a woodland, but
wherever the atmosphere is poetical. They are quite real.

"Another kind is the poem fairies. They are more ethereal, and of a
violet shade. If you could imagine Perdita in the *Midsummer Night's
Dream*, translated from the stage into a real fairy, you would have a
good idea of the poem fairy. She has a very beautiful girlish character.
The same might be said of Miranda, but she is more sentimental.

"The colour fairies are also most interesting. If you can imagine each
colour transformed into a fairy you may get an idea of what they are
like. They are in airy forms

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

and dance and sing in the tone of their colours. I have not seen any
brownies, as I do not take so much interest in the domestic side of the
fairies' life.

"When I was young I had it so much impressed on me that fairies were
imaginary beings that I would not believe in them, but when I was about
fourteen I began to realize them, and now I love them. Perhaps it was
the deeper study of the arts that brought them to me. I have felt a
sympathetic vibration for them and they have made me feel that we were
friends. I have had a great deal of happiness and good fortune in my
life, and perhaps I can attribute some of that to the fairies."

 

These last examples I owe to Mr. John Lewis, Editor of the *Psychic
Gazette*, who collected them. I think I may fairly claim that if all of
them be added to those which I have quoted in my original article, and
these again be linked up with the Cottingley children and photographs,
we are in a position to present our case with some confidence to the
public.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Theosophic View of Fairies](cof11)
