<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc260)  [Next](swc262.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

## <span class="smallcaps">Notes, Illustrative Anecdotes</span>, &c.

### <span class="smallcaps">Miracle Plays, Christmas Plays</span>, &c. Page [1](swc202.htm#page_1.md).

<span id="img_26800"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/26800.jpg) |

THE accounts published last spring of Miracle Plays being acted in
Yorkshire, by a company of Congregationalists under the direction of a
Roman Catholic priest, would seem to indicate a primitive state of
society in the north—good feeling and sympathy between members of old
mother church and the followers of new lights; and that Yorkshire folks
are as much attached to ancient customs as are the Cornish, or even
more. Mummery, and the acting of such old Christmas plays as St. George
and the Dragon, with the King of Egypt and Fair Sabra his daughter, were
favourite pastimes in the northern counties long after they fell into
disuse in other parts except Cornwall. These old plays, like our
guise-dances, are of very remote origin, and founded probably on the old
mysteries now reproduced in Yorkshire; the subject of St. George being
introduced at the time of the Crusades. And, if tradition may be
credited, our old guise-dances were also often founded on more homely
and familiar legends, and these formed the connecting link between old
mysteries and the modern drama.

The subject of miracle plays is interesting to us because almost the
only remains of ancient Cornish literature are mystery plays. One of
them, "The Creation of the World," by William Gordon, of Helstone, in
1611, has been published by the late Mr. Davies Gilbert. Others, of
earlier date, have been translated and published by Mr. Norris, to which
we may add St. Meriseck, lately translated by Mr. Whitley Stokes. Many
of our ancient amphitheatres, where the "Guary miracle" used to be
acted—still exist, as the "Round," or plain, in St. Just Church-town;
the Plan-an-guary, Redruth; and others farther eastward. In this age of
restoration (would it were also one of restitution) these old
Plan-an-guaries should be rebuilt and restored as public places of
recreation, common to all.

We know that miracle plays continued to be performed in the western
parishes during Queen Elizabeth's reign, and probably much later. A
short time ago William Sandys Esq., F.S.A.,

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

published in his learned paper, entitled the "Cornish Drama," in the
"Journal of the Royal Institution of Cornwall," an extract from a MS.
volume, entitled, "A Book declaring the Royalties of which Sir John
Arundell, of Lanhern, and his ancestors, have had within the Hundred of
Penwith," &c. which sayeth that—

"Ao. 10, E. John Veal of Boraine, gentleman, of the age of 78. Sworn at
a Court holden at Penzance the 20th day of June, Ano decimo E., by
William Gilbert, under Steward of the Hundred Court of Penwyth, being
upon his oath examined touching the liberties of Connerton, and the
Hundred of Penwyth appendant unto the same manor, saith that when he was
a Boy of good remembrance his grandfath. and his Father both dwelling
then at Sancras, within the hundred of Penwyth, did see one Sr. John
Trwrye (or Trevrye) knight, a sanctuary man at St. Borains, which had
committed some great offence then against the King, and thereupon
committed to the Tower, and by means of a servant which he had, broke
prison and came into Cornwall to St. Borian, and claimed the priviledge
of the Sanctuary. It fortuned within a while after there was a mirable
(sic) Play at Sanckras Parish, divers men came to the play amongst whom
came a servant of this Mr. Trevrye, named Quenall and (in the place
before the play began) the said Quenall fell at variance with one
Richard James Veane, and so both went out of the Play and fought
together, the said Quenall had a sword and a buckler, and the other had
a single sword, the said Quenall was a very tall man in his Fight, the
other gave back and fell over a mole Hill, and ere he could recover
himself the said Quenall thrust his sword through him and so he
immediately dyed, and Quenall taken and bound to the end of the Play and
before the Play was done his Mastr. hearing thereof came to the Place
with other Sanctuarymen and by force would have taken him away from his
said Grandfather, Mr. Veal, and others, but he was not able so to do,
but with a sufficient Guard he was carried to Conertone Gaol, where he
was after hanged on the Gallows in Conerton Down, and so was more in his
time, for there was no prisoner then carried to Launston Gaol."

It will be observed that the name of the parish where the miracle play
"fortuned" to be held is, in this interesting document, spelt as the
country folk still pronounce it—Sanckras. The name has been much
speculated ion, and antiquaries are undecided whether the proper
designation is Sancreed, Sancrist; Sancrus, or Sancras, (both holy
cross.) Now it happens, however, that the learned antiquary, to whom we
are indebted for the above, has also preserved in his interesting work,
"Christmas-tide," another legend which we think will throw some light on
the matter and show that the popular name is probably

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

correct; or that, like many other places, it has long rejoiced in two
names.

There is a curious story on the subject, (the true cross) related in
Harl. MS., 2252 (temp. Hen. 8) entitled, 'A grete myracle of a knyghte,
callyde Syr Roger Wallysborrow.' Being in the Holy Land, he wished to
bring off privily a piece of the cross, and, praying to that effect, his
thigh opened miraculously, and received it. He then returned to
Cornwall, his native country, having, in the course of his voyage, by
virtue of the fragment of the cross, appeased the elements, and
prevented shipwreck. On his arrival his thigh opened to liberate the
precious relic, of which he gave part to the parish where this happened,
hence called Cross parish, and the remainder to. St. Buryan, where his
lands were."

Those who came to Sancras play got more entertainment than vas promised
in the bill. And Carew in his "Survey of the County," gives an anecdote
of the stupidity, feigned or real, of a performer in the Plan-an-guary,
St. Just, that afforded much amusement. It having come his turn, the
ordinary, or manager, said, "Goe forthe men, and shew thyselfe." The
actor stepped forward and gravely repeated, "Goe forthe man, and, show
thyselfe." The ordinary, in dismay, whispered to him, "Oh, you marre all
the play!" The actor, in very emphatic gesture, repeated aloud, "Oh, you
marre all the play!" The prompter, then losing his patience, reviled the
actor with all the bitter terms he could think of, which the actor
repeated with a serious countenance as part of the play. The ordinary
was at last obliged to give over, the assembly having received a great
deal more sport than twenty such guaries could have afforded.

We are become too fastidious and pious to be amused with such rude
entertainment as the old guary miracles afforded to our simple
forefathers. One might even think parts of these ancient dramas
irreverent, if not profane; for example, a scene in Noah's flood, where
the venerable patriarch and his wife have a scuffle because she wouldn't
enter the ark before she had a gossip, with another dame, about a piece
of anti-diluvian scandal. She swears by St. John that she will not enter
the ark without her gossips, every one; and when she is at last forced
in, she salutes Noah with a hearty box on the ear. In the Cornish
Mystery of the Creation of the World, by Jordan, the lady is much more
civil, and like a thrifty Cornish housewife, is very careful to collect
all her property, because, as she says, "they cost store of money." No
doubt she took good care to carry into the ark all her milking-pans and
bussa-pots, as well as temberan things and gaard for scouring them, not
forgetting her brandes and baking-iron, and the clome in the dresser.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

In one of the Townly Mysteries, Mak, the buffoon of the piece, steals a
sheep from the shepherds, while they are asleep, and takes it home to
his wife, who puts it into the cradle, endeavouring to make it pass for
a child, and praying that if ever she beguiled the shepherds, who have
come in search of it, she may eat the child lying there. The trick,
however, is discovered. One of the shepherds going to kiss the child,
finds the long snout.

There are many other comic passages in these mysteries, which would now
be considered rather gross than witty. Yet, with all that and their
ludicrous anachronisms, those who take an interest in ancient manners
and customs will be gratified by their perusal.

Mr. Sandys, in the work from which we have largely quoted, also gives us
the following interesting bit of information:—

"In 1428, a sum of four pounds was given to Jakke Trevaill and his
companions, for making various plays and interludes before the king at
Christmas."

Surely Jakke and his comrades went up from St. Just or Sancras, to show
king Henry VI what a Cornish guise-dance was like.

The re-introduction of mediaeval mysteries and other middle-age
mummeries, as well as the federation of extreme religionists, is a
curious and significant sign of these times, in which all unite to
pleasantly "trickle the trout," or to extend the good work, as parties
of different views may choose to regard this rare union of extreme
links.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Levelis, of Trewoof](swc262.md)

</div>
