<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc210)  [Next](swc212.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">The Story of Madam Noy</span>.

After Betty had gained her ends with Tom Trenoweth, nobody ventured to
deny her anything she coveted except Madam Noy, of Pendre. From the
little known of this lady, she seems to have been a strong-minded
close-fisted termagant. She was fond of going to law, and had always
suits on hand concerning the bounds and common rights of her lands. She
is said also to have kept the best hunter and hounds in the West
Country, and that she coursed with them daily as she rode over her
farms, across hedges and ditches, to inspect her work-people and stock.
We suppose she was a widow then, or if she had a husband he made too
little noise in his time to be remembered. She took great pride in her
poultry; above all, in her rare breed of hens with large tufts or
[cops](errata.htm#13.md) on their heads. Now Betty knew that Madam had
often refused to give or sell any eggs from her coppies to her best
friends, yet one morning early she put on her steeple-crown hat and
mantle, took her morning and stick hobbled down to Pendre, and seated
herself on a style entering the town-place. In a few minutes she saw
Madam Noy come from the barn with a bowl of corn in her hands to feed
her poultry of all sorts and sizes. "Good morrow to your honour," said
Betty, as she went up curtseying and nodding to Madam, "Dear me, how
well you are lookan, you're gettan to look younger and younger I do
declare, and what beautiful hens, ducks, and geese, you've got! The
finest in the parish I do believe. Do ’e know, Madam dear, that I've got
an old cluckan hen that I should like to put to set, of you would spare
me a dozen eggs, the sort of your coppies I'd like best." "Arrea! Betty,
I suppose you would," said Madam, "but I've no eggs to spare from my
hens with cops nor the ones without, while I've so many of my own
clucking hens about. And dust thee think, than, that when I've refused
to sell any of any new sort to my own sister Dame Pendar, or to my
cousin Madam Trezillian, that I would spare them to the likes of you?"
"I don't care a cuss whether you do or no," Betty replied, "but if you
won't sell me some eggs you shall wish your cake dough." "Now go thee
way’st home thou deceitful

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

old bitch," said the lady in a rage, "and what business hast thee here
pryan about the place and covetan all thee cust spy with thy evil eye,
I'd like to know. Begone, or I'll set the dogs at thee, and throw fire
over thee, dosn’t think that I'm afraid of thy witchcraft."

"I am on the church-road through the town-place, said Betty, and here I
will stop as long as I like in spite of you and your lawyers too." Madam
Noy and Betty continued their threats and abuse until the lady became so
enraged, at the old woman's persistence to stay in her town-place, that
she snatched up a stone, threw it at Betty, and hit her right on her
noddle with a blow that made her jaws rattle. Betty, limped to the stile
mumbling to herself, "now may the devil help me and by all that's evil
here I will rest till I've curst thee to my heart's content." Standing
on the stile she pointed her finger at Madam Noy and made the lady
'shake in her shoes;' whilst she nodded her head, waved her
out-stretched hand, and ill-wished her by saying,—

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

"Mary Noy, thou ugly, old, and spiteful plague,  
 I give thee the collick, the palsy, and ague.  
 All the eggs thy fowls lay, from this shall be addle,  
 All thy hens have the pip and die with the straddle.  
 And before nine moons have come and gone,  
 Of all thy coppies there shan't live one:  
 Thy arm and thy hand, that cast the stone,  
 Shall wither and waste to skin and bone,"

</div>

Madam Noy was never well from that day, her fowls’ eggs were always bad,
and all Betty's spells took effect. Before six months were past she lost
her coppies every one; for, in place of gay tufts of feathers, the
chickens’ brains came out on all those hatched from her coppies’ eggs.

A noted old droll-teller and clock-cleaner of Sancreed, called Billy
Foss, used to recite this, and many other stories, in a sort of doggrel,
in which he mostly half said and half sung his drolls. We remember but
little more of Billy's verse, in this story, than the few lines given
above; these are enough, however, for a sample of the kind of
composition that was much in vogue with our old droll-tellers.

’Tis said that Betty owed her proficiency in the black art to her
frequent conferences with Old Nick, (or her familiar, whatever his name
might have been,) who almost nightly took the form of An’ Mally Perase's
black bull, and, under that shape, met the witch on the northern side of
Burian churchyard. Much more is related of Betty's transactions, but
nothing new in the annals of witchcraft; and enough has been stated to
serve as an

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

example of the faith and practices in such matters long ago; indeed, we
may say that such beliefs and doings are anything but extinct; something
turns up, every now and then, to show that, notwithstanding all the
teaching and preaching, faith in witchcraft, and other dreary
superstitions, are nearly as rife as ever.

We give the following instance as just related.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Modern Sancreed Witch](swc212.md)

</div>
