<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc249)  [Next](swc251.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Wreck of Admiral Sir Cloudesley Shovel</span>.

<span id="img_23101"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/23101.jpg) |

WE are reminded by the above of the wreck of Admiral Sir Cloudesley
Shovel's ship, the "Association," at Scilly; and of a tradition, common
to the Islands, which attributes that disaster to the reading or
reciting of the 109th Psalm, shortly before death, by one of Sir
Cloudesley's crew, whom he unjustly condemned to be hanged.

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

The Admiral was returning with his fleet from Toulon, when, on the
evening of the 22nd October, 1707, his ship struck on the Gilstone,
about three miles and a half from St. Agnes; and in a few minutes
afterwards she went down, and everybody on board perished, except one
man, who saved himself by floating on a piece of timber to a rock called
Hellweathers,—about two miles and a half from the Gilstone,—where he
remained some days before the weather permitted any boat to approach and
take him off to St. Agnes.

He is said to have stated that the day before the Admiral's ship was
wrecked, one of the crew, who was a native of Scilly, and well
acquainted with the channel, represented to Sir Cloudesley that the
course the ship was taking would bring her on Scilly rocks. The Admiral
and his officers were incensed at the man's interference; and because he
persisted in affirming that the ship's way was wrong and would bring
them to destruction, Sir Cloudesley Shovel—rather summarily, one might
now think—condemned the man to be hanged for insubordination and
endeavouring to excite a mutiny.

When the poor fellow was tied to the mast, preparatory to his being
suspended by his neck, from the yard-arm, he begged, as a last favour,
that a Psalm might be read before his execution. His request being
granted, he selected the 109th,, and repeated certain imprecatory
portions of it after the reader; and the last words he uttered were to
the effect that Sir Cloudesley Shovel and those who saw him hanged
should never reach the land alive.

His body, shrouded in a hammock, with a shot to sink it, was cast into
the deep, and but little heed paid to the dying sailor's sentence.
Shortly after, however, the sky, had been gloomy all day, much darker;
black, lowering, hung over the fleet like a funeral pall, and the gale
rose to a violent tempest. Then the hanged man's curse was dreaded; and
lo, to the crew's consternation, they beheld his corpse—divested of its
rude winding-sheet—floating near the doomed ship, which it closely
followed, with its face turned towards her,—in all her varying course,
through eddying currents,—until she struck on the Gilstone; when the
hanged man went down with the ship and his messmates.

At this unfortunate time there perished, besides the Admiral, several
officers, and about two thousand men, belonging to then "Association"
and other vessels of the fleet.

Sir Cloudesley Shovel's body was washed ashore at Porth-Hellick Bay, in
St. Mary's, about eight miles from the Oilstone. It was quite naked, and
on the hatch of a ship, on which he had endeavoured to save himself,—and
a little dog lay by him,—when he was found by a soldier and his wife,
who only knew him to be

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

the Admiral by a diamond ring on his finger. They buried him in the
sand, where a pit on Porth-Hellick Bank still marks Sir Cloudesley
Shovel's grave. The pit never fills up in the greatest storms; and no
grass ever grows on this blasted grave, although the ground around it is
often green.

"So the hanged seaman had as sweet a bit of revenge as one could wish
for," said our narrator, with a motion of his head which showed his
satisfaction at the Fates' award.

Connected with this unfortunate occurrence, there is a gratifying bit of
true history—we cannot say so much for all the above—which says that
Lady Shovel, on having her husband's ring,—by which his body was
identified,—sent her by the soldier, she gave him a pension for life;
and the Admiral was deposited in Westminster Abbey, where his monument
recalls the direful tale.

<span id="img_23300"></span> ![](img/23300.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Night's Ride to Scilly](swc251.md)

</div>
