<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc269)  [Next](swc271) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Men-an-tol, Constantine Tolmen</span>, &c. Page [242](swc253.htm#page_242).

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

"D’un passé sans mémoire incertaines reliques,  
 Mystères d’un vieux monde en mystères écrits."  
                                    <span
class="smallcaps">Lamartine</span>.

</div>

Mr. L. T. Blight, F.S.A., gives the following graphic description of
various perforated stones in Cornwall, and elsewhere.

"In the western part of Cornwall there are several ancient monuments
known by the name of 'Holed Stones.' They consist of thin slabs of
Granite, each being pierced by a round hole, generally near its centre.
They vary in size and in form. That near the Men-Scryfa in Madron,
better known than others, is placed between, or rather arranged
triangularly with, two other upright stones. Other holed stones which
have hitherto been noticed are not so accompanied. The late Mr. Buller,
in his

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Account of the
Parish of St. Just,' describes some such stones which he found near Carn
Kenidjac. One may still be seen in the Vicarage grounds of St. Just; and
two others near Bolleit, in St. Buryan.

The monument to which I would now more particularly call attention is at
Tolven Cross (Tolven is Cornish for Holed Stone), in the parish of St.
Constantine, a few yards west of the road from (week to the Helston and
Falmouth turnpike. Dr. Borlase refers to a holed stone about a mile west
of St. Constantine Church. The subject of the present notice is twice
that distance from the Church; it is therefore uncertain whether or not
the Doctor alludes to the same monument. It is the largest 'holed stone'
in Cornwall, being 8 feet 6 inches high by 8 feet 11 inches wide at the
base, diminishing to a point at the summit; thus it is of a triangular
form. Its average thickness is about one foot; but it is a little
thicker at the bottom than at the top. The hole, almost perfectly
circular, is 17 inches in diameter. Though within the slate district,
the stone is of granite.

Formerly it was a conspicuous object by the way-side; but within the
last 12 or 14 years a house has been built betwixt it and the road. It
now forms part of a garden hedge.

In a field adjoining the opposite side of the road, perhaps 18 yards
from the stone, is a low irregular barrow, about 20 yards in diameter,
and studded with small mounds.

Dr. Borlase has alluded to the superstitious practice of drawing
children through the Holed Stone at Madron, to cure them of weakness or
pains in the back—a practice still observed at the Holed Stone at St.
Constantine. I was told that some remarkable cures had been effected
there only a few weeks since. The ceremony consists of passing the child
nine times through the hole, alternately from one side to the other; and
it is essential to success that the operation should finish on that side
where there is a little grassy mound, recently made, on which the
patient must sleep, with a six-pence under his head. A trough-like
stone, called the 'cradle,' on the eastern side of the barrow, was
formerly used for this purpose. This stone, unfortunately, has long been
destroyed. That holed stones were not originally constructed for the
observance of this peculiar custom is evident, for in some instances the
holes are not more than five or six inches in diameter.

A few years ago, a person digging close to the Tolven, discovered a pit
in which were fragments of pottery, arranged in circular order, the
whole being covered by a flat slab of stone. Imagining that he had
disturbed some mysterious place, with commendable reverence he
immediately filled up the pit again. Taking the proximity of the barrow
in connection with the pit,

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

it seems most probable that the Tolven is a sepulchral monument, stones
of this kind being erected perhaps to a peculiar class of personages.

It is well known that the Circle is an ancient symbol of eternity, and
it was sometimes adopted as typical of Deity itself. The triangular form
of the stone may not be accidental. The holed stones at Madron also form
part of a triangular arrangement. Whether a significant connection was
intended in this union of the circle and the triangle is perhaps worthy
of consideration. Though holed stones are sometimes found near what are
termed Druidic Circles, I perceive no traces of monuments of that
description near the Tolven. The holed stones at Kenidjac, St. Just, are
near ancient [circles](errata.htm#25); and the two holed stones at
Bolleit are not more than 100 yards from the well-known stone circle,
called 'Dawns Myin.'"

<span id="img_28200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Standing stone
with hole](tn/28200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/28200.jpg)  
  
</span>

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

Within the memory of many persons now living, there was to be seen, in
the town-places of many western villages, an unhewn table-like stone
called the Garrack Zans. This stone was the usual meeting place of the
villagers, and regarded by them as . public property. Old residents in
Escols have often told me of one which stood near the middle of that
hamlet on an open space where a maypole was also erected. This Garrack
Zans they described as nearly round, about three feet high, and nine in
diameter, with a level top. A bonfire was shade on it and danced around
at Midsummer. When petty offences were committed by unknown persons,
those who wished to prove their innocence, and to discover the guilty,
were accustomed to light a furse-fire on the Garrack Zans; each person
who assisted took a stick of fire from the pile, and those who could
extinguish the fire in their sticks, by spitting on them, were deemed
innocent; if the injured handed a fire-stick to any persons, who failed
to do so, they were declared guilty.

Most evenings young persons, linked hand in hand, danced around the
Garrack Zans, and many old folks passed round it nine times daily from
some notion that it was lucky and good against witchcraft.

The stone now known as Table-mên was called the Garrack Zans by old
people of Sennen.

If our traditions may be relied on, there was also in Treen a large one,
around which a market was held in days of yore, as mentioned at page
[77](swc215.htm#page_77).

There was a Garrack Zans in Sowah only a few years since, and one may
still be seen in Roskestal, St. Levan.

Nothing, seems to be known respecting their original use; yet the
significant name, and a belief—held by old folks at least—that it is
unlucky to remove them, denote that they were regarded as sacred
objects.

Venerated stones, known by the same name, were long preserved in other
villages until removed by strange owners and occupiers, who are, for the
most part, regardless of our ancient monuments.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Divination by Rushes and Ivy-Leaves](swc271)

</div>
