<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc227)  [Next](swc229) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Legends of St. Levan</span>.

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

They had their lodges in the wilderness,  
Or built them cells beside the shadowy sea,  
And there they dwelt with angels, like a dream!  
                                  Rev. <span class="smallcaps">R. S.
Hawker</span>.

</div>

### <span class="smallcaps">St. Levan and His Sister</span>.

<span id="img_14500"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/14500.jpg) |

AN old habitation, in which, according to tradition, St. Levan dwelt, is
still standing. This humble dwelling, situated in Bodellan, is on the
eastern side of Parcurno Bottom, near its upper part within a hundred
yards of the road, towards which stands the end that contains its sole
fire-place. The hearthstone may still be there, much as it was when St.
Levan's sister, the good midwife, St. Breage, cooked on it the fatal
chads which choked her children.

The story says that good old St. Levan was one evening down -fishing
from his accustomed place in Rospeltha cliff—still called Old St.
Levan's Rocks. He cast in his hook-and-line, intending to take one fish
only for his supper, from the multitude that always came around the rock
on which he stood as soon as he cast in "browse" (garbage to attract
fish). Contrary to St. Levan's wish, two chads, or young breams,
fastened on his hook at the same time, and not to show favour to either
he threw both of them into the sea again. And no sooner was: his
hook-and-line in the waves a second time than the same chads, or two

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

others, hooked themselves together again, and were again restored to the
sea. For the third time he cast in his line; and, seeing two fishes on
his hook again, he regarded this occurrence as a providential intimation
that he was to take them both home, and acted accordingly. When he came
to Bodellan he found that his sister, St. Breage, had just arrived with
two children. The chads were boiled for supper, and St. Breage's hungry
children, being careless of bones, got choked, and remembrance of this
event is handed down in St. Levan's parish by chads being there called
"chuck-cheeld" to this day.

Some thirty-five years ago the writer often noticed, on a bench-end in
St. Levan church, near the belfry door, a panel, or shield, on which two
fishes, with their heads touching each other, were carved in bold
relief. The fishes were much like chads, or young breams, in outline,
and the foregoing legend might have suggested this design, or the device
have originated the story. It is to be feared that this bench-end, and
much more tastefully-designed and boldly-wrought carving, disappeared
before the Rev. C. C. Anstey came to preserve and restore the
interesting remains of this once beautiful church. Loads of as fine
carved work, and no more decayed than what remains, were, from thirty or
forty years since, carried off by the carpenters, who were, every now
and then, employed to demolish the curious old oak benches, and to
replace them with painted deal boxes, in many variations of ugliness.

It is said that the path which St. Levan took across Rospeltha fields to
his accustomed fishing-place, may still be traced by the ground his holy
footsteps trod bearing finer grain when in corn, and by the grass being
greener when in pasture than in other parts of the fields.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Johanna's Garden](swc229)

</div>
