<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc218)  [Next](swc220) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Unexpected Visitors</span>.

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

                    With fairest flowers,  
Whilst summer lasts, and I live here, Fidele,  
I'll sweeten thy sad grave.  
                                        *Cymbeline*.

</div>

A little above Penberth Cove, and near the Green, there is an ancient
cottage in an orchard. In this dwelling lived an old dame called Joan
Taskes, who kept a kind of public-house, as liquors and other goods were
entrusted to her, by smugglers, for sale.

One afternoon, about nineteen or twenty years after Willy's

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

death—when he and the I’ans were almost forgotten—An’ Joan, whilst busy
spinning flax with a treadle-turn heard a knock at her open door, and,
thinking it was somebody come to buy liquor, or "honey-pins"—a sweet
apple for which her orchard was noted without rising she called out,
"Come ’e in cheeld, and don't ’e stay knacking at the door." But An’
Joan was rather startled when, on looking round, she saw two ladies
standing near her. They were both tall. One appeared about fifty and the
other near twenty years of age. Their dresses made her think they must
be foreigners. The elder was clad in some kind of white woollen stuff,
by whatever name one might call her garb: it had loose, hanging in
sleeves, and its ample folds were confined by a girdle to her waist.
Over her head she wore a square of black serge; its ends hanging on her
shoulders, and shading her face gave it a pallid appearance, which was
rendered somewhat ghastly by a white linen band across her forehead. The
younger wore a silver-grey dress of more ordinary mode, and for
head-dress a lace veil that covered, without concealing, her braided
dark brown hair.

An’ Joan, rising, drew out her form and said, "Pray be seated, ladies,
and excuse me, as I thought you might have been some neighbours’
children knocking at the door."

"We called," the elder lady replied, "to enquire if there be any small
dwelling unoccupied in Penberth, or Treen, or in any place near."

"Be pleased to sit, ladies, and leave me think a moment," said the dame;
"but I havn't heard of any place that would be good enough for you, and
the only one I know of, close at hand, is Chynance. Why it seems to me,"
she continued, "as if I had heard the sound of your voice, years agone,
somewhere, but can't call ’e to mind."

"Look at me well, Aunt Joan," the lady rejoined, "and tell me if you can
think of anyone you ever saw like me."

The dame having adjusted her barnacles, peered at the lady's face and at
length said in tremulous tones, "You can't be a spirit to come here high
by day! Yet now I look at ’e again there's the dark brown eyes, straight
nose, small mouth, and pitted chin of our poor lost Beatie! You can't be
she? But with that white band across your forehead one can't see a lock
of your hair; her's was of the darkest chesnut colour; besides the .the
black kerchief or scarf, over your head, shades your face."

"If you saw my hair, now nearly as white as your own, you wouldn't know
me by that," the lady answered. "But don't be frightened, dear An’
Joan," continued she, in folding back her veil, "look again and you will
see Beatrice I’an, and this dear girl my daughter is daughter Mary."

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

An’ Joan sprung from her seat, kissed Mary, clasped Beaton to her
breast, and wept aloud for joy. She then took from her cupboard a bottle
of brandy and another of sweet-drink (mead), filled two rummers with a
mixture of the strong and sweet, saying, "Hear, dears, drink this, and
help yourselves to more while I get something for ’e to eat before I
hear another word."

The old dame skipped about as if the sight of Beaton and her daughter
had made her twenty years younger.

In a few minutes An’ Joan fried fish, boiled eggs, and placed on the
board milk, cream, and butter, with bread and honey, apple pasties, a
jug of beer, and more bottles of her choice cordials. When all three had
done ample justice to the repast, Beaton, looking round the dwelling,
said, "Now Aunt Joan, I am again at home and as happy as I can ever hope
to be, but I always felt like one banished for all the years I dwelt in
the land where Mary was born and bred. Everything here looks the same as
long ago, when my delight was to run down for some of your choice fruit
and sweet flowers, and to play with your turns till you learnt me to
spin just as well as yourself." Seeing Mary's gaze fixed on the dresser,
she continued, "You may well admire that, dear, and all its shelves
contain; a dresser is the crowning glory of every Cornish cottage. You
have never seen such quaint looking old jugs, ornamented with queer
figures and wry faces, grinning amidst flowers and fruit, as those on
the upper shelf; see on the next there are bright coloured glasses with
long threaded or twisted stems, and scores of rare pretty things
besides, brought from over sea or saved from wrecks; the dresser-bed is
covered with a cloth as white as snow, and many ladies would covet the
bowls and other vessels of old china that rest on it; and one might take
the bright pewter flagons and platters for silver. A brass warming-pan,
such as you see on the other side, is an article for ornament rather
than use, but every couple here, however poor, think they must get one
before they be married. And that shelf of wooden trenches,
butter-prints, mustard-bowls, and other 'temberan things,' scoured with
'gard,' have a look of cleanliness not to be surpassed by more costly
furniture."

On the chimney-piece they might have noticed an hour-glass between tall
brass candlesticks, branches of choral, sea-birds’ eggs, sea-urchins,
and foreign shells. Turning to An’ Joan, Beaton remarked as if
delighted, "there, too, beside the door is the same sweet-brier;
rosemary, thyme, and other sweet flowers, blooming all over the garden;
and the house swarming with bees, as of old, coming and going through
the open window, and alighting on your cap as if to tell e’ they were
going on well, and to see how you were looking."

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

"I hope, dears, you are now come home to live for the rest of your
days," said Joan. "Your grand old house is cut to pieces, and three
families dwelling in it; but most of your furniture is still there,
packed away in the best chamber, with all in that room as you left it,
and the door hasn't been unlocked for many years,—scarcely opened,
indeed, since you last slept there." Beaton replied to the effect that
during all the time she lived abroad, her greatest desire was to return
and end her days where she was born, and to be buried beside the one she
loved above all the world; and that she intended, after a short rest, to
go along the cliff to church-town to see his grave, and that she wished
to go alone.

"Poor dear Willy, the Lord rest with him," said An’ Joan, "you will see
by his grave that he hasn't been forgotten. On his breast there's a
rosemary, the pride of my heart, grown to a bush that overtops his
tombstone; a box-tree grows at the foot, and betwixt them sweet-brier,
tansy, ace and such other long-lived and evergreen plants as are
herb-of-grace, for remembrance besides a border of pinks and lillies.
You'll see that none in the church-hay have been more lovingly tended,
for I and others have planted on his grave fresh flowers when old ones
died."

When Cribba Head threw its shadow over the water, Beaton started on her
sad pilgrimage, saying to her daughter, who wished to accompany her,
"Remain, dear, with our old friend; tell her all about your uncle John,
and how we lived in Brittany; she is longing to know but don't like to
ask."

The kind dame took Mary round her garden, well stocked with sweet
old-fashioned flowers and many hives of bees; then passing through her
orchard from one tree of choice fruit to another, equally good, they
came to a clear brook, overhung by branches weighed down by their load
of apples, pears, and plums that often fell in the stream and floated
out to sea, unless found on their passage by children who often watched
the water, gurgling among reeds and rocks below the orchard, for An’
Joan's apples and plums.

Milking time being come, Joan took her bucket, and the up to Penberth
Green where the old dame's cow—little and good—was waiting to be milked.
At that time, and long after, almost every cotter kept a cow, which
found sufficient pasture in green lanes, and commons. An’ Joan, having
finished her out-door evening work, made a mullet-and-parsley pie, as
that was a favourite supper dish. When placed on the hearth to bake, she
said, "I have, for many years, been longing to know how it fared with
your mother and uncle and had given up all hopes of ever again seeing
them, not knowing if they

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

were alive or dead; and you, poor lonely flower, have no other relations
on your mother's side that I know of."

"I have a good many cousins in Brittany," replied Mary, "as my uncle has
a large family." She then related what she had heard from her mother,
and what she remembered, to the effect that when I’an settled in
Brittany he hired a small farm, and soon after married a person of good
property. For a short time, he cultivated the land acquired by his
marriage, but he soon tired of a farmer's life, and went to sea as
captain of a large ship; he was often away for years together. Mary
seldom saw him, as there appeared to be little desire, on the part of
brother or sister, for such intimacy. Yet, on his return from a voyage,
he always sent them money and goods, which they didn't require, because
Beaton, by her spinning, and Mary, by her lace-work and embroidery,
gained more than 'sufficed for their needs. Her uncle often took her
lace-work abroad, where he traded, and brought her more for it than its
weight in gold.

Although they wanted for nothing, and everybody was kind to them, Beaton
was always pining to return; and in spite of I’an's wishes for them to
remain, she made a vow that before Mary became of age, she would go home
and pass the rest of her life in the practice of some devotion for the
repose of Mary's father. About a week ago, Beaton having heard there was
a smuggling craft from Cornwall in a cove near their dwelling, she
packed up all her household goods that she cared about, and they left,
bag and baggage, in the boat which landed them in Mousal that morning.
When Mary had just ended her recital, her mother silently glided in,
kissed her, and placed in her bosom a few flowers, saying, "Cherish
these from a garden I prize above all others, and we will soon plant it
with choicest flowers." "And now," she continued, "we must bid dear Aunt
Joan good-bye, and proceed to Buryan Church-town, where we can remain
for the night." "No, my dears," An’ Joan interposed, "there's a pie
baking for your supper, and a spare bed on the talfat as good as any in
Church-town, though I say it; remain with me till you have found a
better place, or hired Chynance for a time, as there may be more delay
than you calculate before our house in Treen will be ready for ’e." Both
ladies gladly accepted the kind dame's hearty welcome, and enjoyed her
savoury pie and good ale, of her own brewing; no woman their expected to
get a husband, unless she knew how to make a good barley-brew, and they
say that people of that day, who drank good beer as their ordinary
beverage, were stronger by far than their descendants, raised on
tea-wash.

Beaton hired Chynance, procured a few articles of furniture—in addition
to what she brought from over sea—also a cow and

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

poultry; had the garden planted, the house thatched, and comfortably
arranged for winter. Owing to delay in getting possession of Beaton's
property in Treen they lived here a year or more, and, when all was
ready for their removal, Mary would have much preferred to remain in
that sunny sheltered cot, nestled at the foot of Buryan Hill; but her
mother got into a restless fidgetty state that caused An’ Joan to look
more grave than was her wont. She had heard that as far back as there
was any record, many of the I’an family—particularly the women—when
between forty-five and fifty years of age, either went mad or died; and
she feared that the gloomy grandeur of Beaton's old home, with the sad
remembrances, likely to be renewed thereby, would tend to bring on this
family infirmity. It was all in vain, however, for Mary to say, "Dear
mother let us remain here in this sunny nook, where flowers grow all the
year; spotted trout sport in the stream; and our goats, lambs, and
poultry can range at their own sweet will." When all was arranged in
Beaton's part of the mansion, so as to give it an air of its former
state, thither they removed, but still retained Chynance for the sake of
having pasture for their cow, and to please Mary, who took a great fancy
to it.

Beaton was not in her old habitation many days when she had her 'turn'
and other spinning utensils taken into the chamber where Taskes breathed
his last. There she passed most of her time, and often kept all night at
her work; the rumble of her spinning-wheel and doleful noises that she
frequently made, soon caused those living in parts of the house, not in
her possession, to quit rather than have their rest nightly disturbed;
and she rejoiced that the house was cleared of all strangers and
interlopers, as she styled its other occupants. Often she would be away
to St. Levan churchyard at dead of night—unknown to Mary and their
servant—pass hours, in prayer it was supposed, beside Willy's grave; and
bring thence flowers, wet with morning dew, to be kept in her chamber,
and when withered all were laid by in her chest. This penance, as much
inspired by love as enjoined by her faith, was duly observed, in spite
of her failing health. On dark, stormy nights, she would often be met
wandering along the cliffs between Church-town and Treen; or seen
kneeling on the rock where her lover received his fatal hurt.

Many persons were startled by encountering, at unexpected times, her
phantom-like figure, gliding along the clever or amongst the carns of
Castle-Treen, in her strange dress of white robe, black veil, and
ghastly linen band across her forehead, that made her look like one
escaped from a grave in a winding-sheet and shroud. It was evident that
Beaton was at times

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

insane; yet, sad as such a state seems, it may not have been the most
melancholy portion of this poor soul's destiny; for when her mind was
burthened with more grief than it could bear, her reason became
unsettled, and her memory infolded with clouds that were often of
roseate hue. Old crones whispered that they had heard of more than one
Beatrice I’an, and men of that family as well, who went crazy; and that
their madness began in melancholy seclusion, and the practice of
old-fashioned devotions that few cared about since they were declared
Popish and unlawful. Yet, the same old dames took good care to preserve
many charms for the cure of diseases, and to use them as in Catholic
times, and the same are retained and practised by their descendants to
this day, with others that are probably transmitted from an age when
sun-worship was in vogue.

As Penberth and Mousal fair-traders maintained a constant intercourse
with Roscroff, I’an's family often sent Beaton presents of flax,
clothing, and other goods; they did not require them, however, for Mary,
like her mother, was an excellent spinster and skilful in embroidery and
lace-work. Treen being a noted place for good weavers, they provided
them with plenty of spinning-work; and when Mary showed her rare lace to
An’ Joan, she assured her that ladies, within a short distance, paid
large sums to smugglers for what was no better. The old dame took it
round to gentlemen's seats, and soon returned with much more money than
Mary expected for her wares; and with orders for more lace-work than she
could execute in a long time.

Beaton's lucid intervals became less and less frequent. When crazy fits
prevailed, she seemed happy, nay joyful; but when reason,—such as it
was,—or more sober moods intervened, she would talk regretfully, often
moaning to herself, "The Lord help me, alas it was all my fault, I
brought blood on my brother's head, he can never have rest, nor I, no,
nevermore, not even in the grave." One of her strange freaks was to
sleep by day and to visit the churchyard or spin by night. Sometimes she
knitted stockings and other things for her Willy; these were to be put
in her coffin. She would often say, "Willy, dear, I am working for thee,
love, and will soon fetch thee back; we will live here, nobody shall
ever put us out of this chamber. Oh! what delight I took in spinning
years ago, when thou didst card the wool of winter's nights. I can never
pass the time in singing, for ever singing. I should be weary in a day,
and would rather spin the time away with thee to card the wool; and as
of old thou shalt give me a kiss, such a long sweet kiss, with every
rull I take from the cards."

Her last whim was to spin and knit herself a shroud, which she called
her wedding-dress. This was made of the whitest

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

and finest lamb's-wool she could procure. Mary, to please her, had to
give much of her best lace for trimming this 'wisht' garment; and at
length after much alteration, she had it to her mind, and repeated to
her daughter and An’ Joan all her whimsical fancies about her bridal
arrangements, as she called her funeral ceremonies. The following night
she walked alone to the churchyard, and returned late.

About midnight Mary, as was her custom, looked into her mother's room,
and saw by the glimmering light of a chill (iron lamp), hanging on the
wall, her mother sitting in a high-backed chair, apparently in a sweet
sleep, with a placid smile on her countenance; as she sometimes dosed in
her chair, Mary, loath to disturb her, stepped quietly back to her own
room; but feeling uneasy from her mother's unusual silence she lay awake
till daybreak and then returned to her mother. On approaching her, Mary
noticed that over a fine white dress she wore her shroud, with its
face-cloth turned back on her head. Mary took her hand, and feeling it
cold and stiff, the truth struck her that her mother was dead. Yet she
hoped that it might only be a trance, as she looked so life-like and
pleasant, as when asleep, in her happiest moods. But a neighbour, who
was called in, assured Mary that her mother had been dead some hours.
"Yet to behold her thus," said the dame, "sitting in her chair, with
fresh flowers in her bosom, the hour-glass beside her, and beads in her
hand, one would think she had only fallen asleep whilst saying her
prayers; the Lord rest her poor soul." On looking round, when the rising
sun-beams streamed in-through an open window, they saw that her best
quilt was spread on the bed, and on that the clothes Taskes wore on that
unlucky night when he received his death-wound, and other things that
belonged to him. Where, or how, Beaton could have kept them so long no
one knew. An’ Joan had these, and withered flowers, with other things
that Beaton prized, put into her coffin, in hopes to give her spirit
rest; and Beatrice I’an, according to her oft-repeated request, was laid
in St. Levan churchyard, beside the dust of Willy Taskes.

"And we Treen people" said the old man who related her story," would
have been glad if she had stayed there, but she hadn't been under the
turf three days when she was back again and spinning, as she always said
she would, in the chamber that was locked up with everything with in it
as it stood when she was carried out; and it was supposed that other
spirits came back with her, by the capperouse they often made." We will
leave them, however, and their ghostly doings, for a while, to follow
Mary's destiny.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Proud Pendars](swc220)

</div>
