<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc228)  [Next](swc230.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Johanna's Garden</span>.

St. Levan road passed by a small enclosure in Rospeltha, called
Johanna's Garden, (at least it retained that name a few years ago when
the writer knew it well).

One Sunday morning the holy hermit, going down to cliff to get a fish
for his dinner, in passing by this garden saw a woman called Johanna
gathering pot-herbs. St. Levan rested the end of his rocking-rod on the
ground, stopped, and gave her a kindly greeting. But she, looking over
the hedge, exclaimed, "Oh sinful man that you are, for going a fishing
of a Sunday! Whatever can ’e think will become of ’e?"

"Self-righteous hypocrite that thou art," answered the saint, in looking
for other people's faults thou canst not behold

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

thine own. Think not that thou—with thy fingers spread out and thy eyes
turned up—art better than others, for a more strict or a more lazy
observance of Sunday. And tell me," he continued, "sharp as thou art to
mark others faults, and blind as thou art to thine own, wherefore should
it be a sin for me to take my daily fish from the sea any more than for
thee to gather herbs from thy garden?"

St. Levan said much more, but all in vain were his endeavours to bring
the woman to reason, for, in spite of all he could say, she would still
have the last word and contend that there was more sin in catching fish
than in pi eking greens of a Sunday.

At last the good man being provoked by her obstinacy, pretended piety,
and conceited clack, raised his hand and cursed her, saying, "From this
time, for ever, thou shalt be known, if known at all, as the Foolish
Johanna! And thy garden shall ever continue, as now, to bear more
hemlock and nettles than leeks and lentils. Moreover," he continued,
"mark this—To make thy remembrance the more accursed for all time to
come, if any child by thy name be baptised in the waters of Parchapel
Well it shall become a fool like thyself and bad luck follow it."

Down to very recent times, so great was the fear of old St. Levan's
curse that anyone in this parish desirous of having a child named
Johanna took it to Sennen to be christened.

It may be remarked that, until the roof fell into St. Levan's Well, and
it became choked up, the sexton always kept it clean and fetched water
thence for the baptismal office.

We don't know what state "Johanna's Garden" is now in, but some thirty
years ago it always bore more weeds, than pot-herbs.

These simple traditions—thus handed down and kept alive by St. Levan
people, who believed them to be literally true—mark a lingering
veneration for the holy fisherman who, in this secluded place, led his
tranquil life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The St. Levan Stone](swc230.md)

</div>
