<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc270)  [Next](swc272) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Divination by Rushes and Ivy-Leaves</span>. Page [217](swc245.htm#page_217).

Many persons, who were anxious to know their future fate with regard to
love and marriage, or for mere fun, were in the habit of assembling, on
twelfth night, in a farm house kitchen, which had a large open
fire-place—used for burning furse and turf. A fire was laid that would
make plenty of "umers" (embers) and hot ashes, such being required for
working theses; then each person touched the "cravel" (mantle stone)
with his or her forehead, and departed in single file and silence, which
was

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

required to be observed, until, having gathered the rushes and
ivy-leaves, they returned and again touched the "cravel" with their
heads. The procession was often waylaid or followed by some who tried to
make the spell-workers break silence; if any of them spoke they had to
return and again touch the "cravel."

Those who wished to know their own luck in love and marriage, or that of
different couples who were said to be sweethearts, placed in the hot
ashes and "umers" two pieces of rush—named or intended for the
respective parties;—if both rushes burnt kindly together, those they
represented would be married. As the pairs were consumed, united or
parted, such would be the course of their love. The one which burnt
longest would outlive the other. When it was decided who were to be
married together an ivy-leaf was cast into the fire, and the number of
cracks it made in burning told the years to pass before the couple would
be wed. Then two leaves for the wedded pair were buried in the hot
ashes, and the cracks they made showed how many children the happy
couple would be blessed with. Other presages, which afforded much
amusement, were drawn from the appearance and behaviour of rushes and
ivy-leaves—or lovers and married folks—in their fiery bed.

Meanwhile old people—who in general were the most anxious to know if
they or others were destined to live or die during the ensuing year—drew
an ivy-leaf for each person, either named or thought of, through a gold
ring, and cast the leaves into a vessel of spring water, which was
placed on the hearth-stone and left there over night. Next morning, the
leaves that were found to have turned black or to be specked with reds
is like blood, showed that those black, whom the were intended would for
dead ere next twelfth night. The blood spots betokened a violent end.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Recent Ill-Wishing](swc272)

</div>
