<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc205)  [Next](swc207) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Menheres</span>.

The most striking objects seen after passing through the hamlet are two
large long stones or pillars of granite, sometimes called the pipers,
but formerly known as the hurlers, which stand in the fields on the
north side of the road. Antiquaries are far from being unanimous in
their conjectures as to the purpose intended to be served in the
erection of these remarkable stones. Whether they were astronomical,
sacerdotal, or sepulchral monuments—Whether erected for all or neither
of these objects—the learned think it premature to decide. There is no
mark on these mysterious stones to throw any light on the subject. Yet
it is pretty certain that all the large menhere stood in pairs; that
their bearing is generally east and west; that they are mostly on an
open plain near other Celtic monuments, and the vestiges of ancient
British habitations; and we may be sure they were formerly more numerous
and regarded as objects of great importance, from the number of
dwelling-places, enclosures, and names of old Cornish families
terminating in Menhere, as Tremenhere, or Tremener, (Longstone place)
Polmener, (Long-stone pool) Goonmenhere, (Longstone downs) and many
others. Probably many of the companion stones of the erect single
pillars may be still, found lying along in some hedge, at no great
distance, (about the twelfth of the circle north of east or south of
west), from those which remain where placed thousands of years ago.

If the menhere (as has been conjectured from being found in pairs,
bearing nearly east and west) were intended to mark the times of the
equinox or solstice, these seasons being sacred festivals of Baal or the
Sun, the desire of the early Christians to obliterate all remembrances
of Pagan rites may account for the prostration or destruction of such
objects as must have been regarded with religious veneration, from their
importance to show the times to sow the grain, and do various kinds of
work pertaining to pastoral life; and, above all, to denote the sacred
festivals of

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

our forefathers, which we still commemorate in our Midsummer bonfires.
These long stones at Boleigh are the more interesting because there are
not many of the original pairs to be found standing in the west. There
is another pair near Newbridge, and one may be seen lying prostrate in
Escols lane, Sennen, at a short distance from the stile on the pathway
to Escols village.

There is a tradition that this menhere was taken down from where it
stood, in the middle of the field, by a giant, who lived in Escols, by
him rolled into the hedge, and his son, ten years of age, placed the
trigg (propping stone) as we may still see it. An old lady of Escols
informed me that the other stone of the pair was in a hedge at no great
distance, prostrate also. The erection of these huge monoliths proves
that the animal powers and mechanical skill of our ancestors were of no
mean order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Holed Stones, &c](swc207)

</div>
