<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc251)  [Next](swc253.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Ancient Bridal Customs</span>.

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

With the past and with the present,  
   Quaint old manners still are link’d;  
Olden customs, grave and pleasant,  
   Ling’ring still, though nigh extinct.  
                                     C. T. C.

</div>

<span id="img_23700"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/23700.jpg) |

SOME West Country folks still observe a few old-fashioned marriage
usages; one of which the following sketch will explain. It was given us,
as inserted, by a young man who was one of the wedding guests.

"In the winter of 1860 we were invited to a wedding at a place called
the Grambler in Sancreed; with strict orders to be in time to accompany
the "weddenars" to church at ten o'clock the following Saturday morning.

Not caring to take part in-the ceremony, we only left Penzance at one
o'clock in the afternoon. On our arriving at New Bridge we found a
messenger awaiting our arrival to guide us to the bride's parents’ house
where the wedding was being held. He also brought a bottle of brandy
which An’ Nancy, the bride's mother, sent for the "strangers from
Penzance to drink on the way, to keep out the cold."

On nearing the house, we heard music and dancing, when our guide
hastened on before to let the party know we were come. "My dear boys,"
said An’ Nancy, meeting us at the door, "come ’e in quick out of the
cold, we've ben afeerd you woddan coman."

All the company received us with hearty kindness; being placed at the
board, our host said, "We've had dennar, my dears, but there's plenty
left for ’e," at the same time pitching on each of our plates a piece of
roast beef of not less than four pounds, "Aet that fust" he continued,
"then you shall have some more." My companion looking rather surprised
at the liberal supply, An’ Nancy exclaimed, "What's the matter weth thee
my boy, dossena like et? Well than thee shust have somethan else;" and
without waiting a reply, took away the plate of beef and replaced it
with one of roast goose and a dish of boiled pudding, saying, "Now
there, my dear boy, aet that, I s’ppose the beef was too tough for ’e."

Meanwhile the wedding-party—most of whom were young people—awaited us in
another room; we soon joined them and

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

found good drink and cakes in abundance. Uncle Will, the bride's father,
being called upon for a toast, he gave:—

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

"Here's to the bridegroom and the bride,  
 May they stick to each other's side;  
 I hope their life will be of joy,  
 And that the fust will be a boy."

</div>

which was received with roars of laughter and stamping of feet. Aunt
Nancy took from a buffet several bottles of cordials for the women and
others who liked them; amongst others were poppy blackberry syrups,
sweet-drink (mead),—that had been kept some years for this happy
occasion—and peppermint water, of her own distilling. Presently the
fiddle struck up with a jig. "Les have the double shuffle, Uncle Will,"
said the young people. Up he jumped as lively as a kid, though he was
near eighty, and footed it out to the delight of all.

Young Jan of Santust (St Just) followed, making the fire fly from the
heels of his boots, like flashes of lightning; and all the company were
quickly whirling, in reels, without much order.

Now, whilst the gaiety was at its height, the newly-wedded couple had
contrived to slip out quietly, and hasten to their new home. "They're
off, they're off," cried several voices; "come on soas, or else we shall
be too late; they will be in bed and lock the door." Away they all flew,
like mad devils, scampering over hedges and ditches for nearly a mile.
We followed—fortunately for us it was a clear moonlight night.

When we got to the house the foremost of the party were upstairs. Come
’e up, boys," shouted they; up we went and found the bride and
bridegroom in bed, with their clothes on, having had no time to lock the
door even, as the wedding guests were close on their heels.

We shall long remember the scene we then witnessed; the guests were
beating them in bed, with stockings, straps, braces, or anything they
could lay hands on. "Give them pepper," shouted young Jan, the groom's
best man; "give et them, boys," and pepper them they did right merrily.
Not wishing to be behind the rest, we took off our braces and followed
suit. They continued this strange sport for a good while, until the
leader said, "Les go back, soas, or else we shall be all ill-wisht, for
et’s nearly twelve a’clock."

Away they again rushed back to the old folks’ house; and each one on
arriving, before speaking, touched the cravel, (lintel or head-stone of
the hearth) with his or her head, for good luck.

The old couple seemed well satisfied when we returned, as it was not
quite midnight.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

Many elderly folks had arrived late in the evening to drink health and
long life to the newly-married; they assured us that it was an old
custom to tan young married people to bed, or else they would meet with
bad luck all their days. The good old souls had arranged for us to stay
over night; but as we deemed it best to return home they made us take
more to eat and drink to keep out the cold and help us on the road, they
said. Then amidst hearty leave-takings and promises to visit them again
soon, they allowed us to depart.

Well, somehow, we arrived home about daybreak, but often wished that we
had stopped at the Grambler till sunrise.

At more modish weddings the guests merely enter the bridal-chamber and
throw stockings in which stones or something to make weight are laced—at
the bride and bridegroom in bed. The first one hit, of the happy couple,
betokens the sex of their first-born.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It was an old custom, religiously observed, until lately, in Zennor and
adjacent parishes on the north coast, to waylay a married couple on
their wedding-night and flog them to bed with cords, sheep-spans, or
anything handy for the purpose; believing that this rough treatment
would ensure them happiness and the "heritage and gift that cometh from
the Lord," of a numerous family.

<span id="img_23900"></span> ![](img/23900.jpg)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Madron Well](swc253.md)

</div>
