<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](swc226)  [Next](swc228) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Traditions of Pacurno</span>.

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

A ghostly ship, with a ghostly crew,  
  In tempests she appears;  
And before the gale, or against the gale,  
She sails without a rag of sail;  
  Without a helmsman steers.  
                                  <span
class="smallcaps">Longfellow</span>.

</div>

<span id="img_14000"></span>

|                    |
|--------------------|
| ![](img/14000.jpg) |

NOT long since a general belief prevailed in the western parishes that
in ancient times Parcurno was the principal port of Cornwall, and that,
until the Cove became "sanded up" there was sufficient depth of water to
float the largest ships then made, in to the foot of an old caunce
(paved road) which may still be seen.

One old story ascribes the choking of Parcurno and Parchapel to the
mischievous spirit Tregeagle, who was sent to Gwenvor Cove and there
required to remain until he made a truss of sand—to be bound with ropes
spun of the same—and carried it to a rock above high-water mark. For
many years he toiled in vain at his task, and his howling would be heard
for many miles away when winds or waves scattered the sand he had piled
up during low water.

One very frosty night, however, by pouring water from Velan-Dreath brook
over his truss he succeeded in making it hold together and bore it to a
rock above the flow of spring tides.

Then, as some say, that very night, as he took his way over or along the
coast towards Helston, to revisit and torment those who raised him from
the grave, by way of showing his exultation at having completed his
task, or for mere deviltry perhaps, he swept all the sand out of
Nanjisel and around Pedn-pen-with into Parcurno and adjacent coves,
without letting any enter Pargwartha.

Another tradition says that sweeping the sand from Nanjisel to the east
of Tol-pedn was assigned to Tregeagle as a separate task.

After this exploit the troublesome spirit was again sent to Gwenvor to
make a truss of sand. There he remains toiling to

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

this day—unable to perform what is required in order to regain his
liberty, because he was bound not to use Velan-Dreath water or any
other.

There is also a very old belief that spectre ships frequently visited
Parcurno, both before and since its navigable channel became filled with
sand, and that they were often seen sailing up and down the valley, over
dry land the same as on the sea.

These naval apparitions were, in olden times, regarded as "tokens" that
enemies were about to make a descent; the number of phantom vessels
foreboded the sea-robbers’ approaching force.

This presage of yore was held for truth by many old folks but lately
deceased; yet latterly it has somehow changed its character and become
connected with the history of a person who, little more than a hundred
years ago, lived in a lone house called Chygwidden, about a mile inland
from Parcurno. This comparatively modern story also accounts for the
sand shifting, and has appropriated old traditions that had no
connection therewith.

It relates that, long ago, Chygwidden was the chief dwelling-place of a
family who flourished in St. Levan for a few generations and then all
its branches became so reduced, through riotous living, as to be obliged
to mortgage and sell much of their freehold lands.

The eldest and only son, by a former wife, of old Martin T——, who lived
there, took to a seafaring life when about twenty, on account of cruel
treatment received from his drunken father and a step-dame several years
younger than himself. On leaving he vowed that he would never return
whilst one lived who then darkened his father's doors.

Many years passed, and as no tidings had been received of young Martin,
as he was still called, most persons believed him dead. In the meantime,
his father, the step-dame, and her children, having all died within a
few years of each other, a distant relative, as heir-at-law, had taken
possession of what little property remained, and lived in Chygwidden.

Some ten years after the decease of all who had lived under old Martin's
roof when his eldest son was driven thence, a large ship hove-to within
a mile of Parcurno on a fine afternoon in harvest time.

People working in fields near the cliff noticed the unusual circumstance
and saw a boat leave the ship with two men, who landed in Parcurno with
several chests and other goods, and the ship proceeded on her course.

It was evident that one of those who came on shore was well acquainted
with the place, as he struck at once into a pathway over the cliff which
led, by a short cut, to Rospeltha where he

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

made himself known as young Martin T—— and procured horses and other
help to take several heavy chests and bales to Chygwidden.

There was great rejoicing when it was known that the wanderer had at
length returned to claim his own. His kinsfolks—a young man and his
sister Eleanor, a damsel in her teens—were ready to resign possession,
but Martin then cared little for house or land, and told them to keep
the place and welcome, for all he desired was to have a home there for
himself and his comrade whilst they remained, which he thought would
only be for a short spell. His tastes had changed with change of scene.
The place that he had once deemed the fairest on earth but then he had
seen no more of it than was visible from the nearest high hill—now
appeared dreary; and the people whom those of his own family excepted—he
once thought the best in the world now seemed a forlorn set of
consequential, grimly-religious nobodies to him, and above all to his
mate, who, by-the-bye, requires more particular notice than we have yet
bestowed on him.

Martin found the people, also, much altered from what they were in his
youthful days, for about the time of his return a new sect had sprung up
whose members, professing uncommon godliness, decried our ancient games
and merry-makings, which were wont on holidays to unite all ages and
classes. Their condemnation caused them to fall into disuse; and, on
account of the censorious and intolerant spirit which then prevailed,
there was much less heartiness and cordial intercourse amongst
neighbours than formerly.

In a short time, however, Martin, now called by most persons "The
Captain," became reconciled—one can't say attached—to his native place
and the "humdrum West Country folks," as he styled them, who marvelled
at his riches and the change which had taken place in his outward mien
and manner. Yet the homely people's surprise at the alteration in Martin
was nothing to their wonder, allied to fear, excited by his dusky
companion or slave, for no one knew in what relation they stood to each
other.

This stranger was seen to be a robust man, about thirty years of age
apparently, with a swarthy complexion, many shades darker than the
Captain's Spanish-mahogany tinted skin. Martin called this man José or
mate and he rarely spoke a word of English (though he could when he
pleased)or addressed anyone but Martin, with whom he always conversed in
some outlandish lingo which seemed more natural to the Captain than his
mother tongue. A tantalizing mystery shrouded the dark "outlander;" for
his master or friend would never answer any queries respecting him. He
was almost equally silent with regard to buccaneering or other
adventures, and rarely spoke of anything that occurred either

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

at home or abroad during his absence. The two strange beings often came
to high words and even to blows, but they would never allow anyone to
meddle in their quarrels. When Martin was drunk and off his guard he
would now and then ease his mind by swearing at his mate in plain
English, or grumble at him in the same, to the effect that he had risked
his life and spent a fortune to save him from being hanged at the
yard-arm. "Discontented devil of a blackamoor," he would say, "why canst
thou not be satisfied to live here? Thou art bound to me body and soul;
and do I not indulge thee with everything gold can purchase?"

José would sometimes murmur "Avast there; all our gold and diamonds
can't procure us here the bright sunshine and joyous people, nor the
rich fruits and wine, of my native clime."

He seldom, however, made other reply than by gloomy looks or fiery
glances which soon recalled Martin to his senses. It was remarked that
after these outbursts of passion he was for a long while like the humble
slave of his mate.

The boat in which they landed was kept at Parcurno, except for short
spells during stormy times of the year, when she was put into Penberth
or Pargwartha for greater safety; and, weeks together, they would remain
out at sea night and day till their provisions were used; then they
would come in, their craft laden with fish, and this cargo was free to
all-comers. Stormy weather seldom drove them to land; they seemed to
delight in a tempest.

Before winter came they procured a good number of hounds, and great part
of the hunting season was passed by them in coursing over all parts of
the West Country. Often of winter's nights, people far away would be
frightened by hearing or seeing these two wild-looking hunters and their
dogs chasm over some lone moor, and they gave rise to many a story of
Old Nick and his headless hounds.

When tired of the chase, weeks were often passed at a public-house in
Buryan Church-town. Martin treated one and all and scattered gold around
him like chaff. The tawny mate, however, at times restrained Martin's
lavish expenditure, took charge of his money-chests, and refused him the
keys.

José would occasionally condescend to express his wishes to Eleanor, who
was mistress of the rare establishment. She understood and humoured the
pair, who took pleasure in decking her in the richest stuffs and jewels
that their chests contained or that money could procure, and she
frequently stayed up alone best part of the night to await their return.

After being at home a year or so the Captain had a large half-decked
boat built, and several rocks removed in Parcurno to make a safer place
in which to moor her. They then took longer

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

trips, and were not seen in Chygwidden for months running. The two
eccentric beings passed many years in this way, and held but little
intercourse with their neighbours.

At length Martin perceived tokens of death, or what he took for such,
and made his man swear that when he saw signs of near dissolution he
would take him off to sea, let him die there, and send him to rest at
the ocean's bottom. He also bound his kinsman by oath not to oppose his
wishes, and invoked a curse on any one who would lay his dust beside the
remains of those who had driven him to range the wide world like a
vagabond.

They might have complied with his strange desires, but ere they could be
carried out he died in a hammock, suspended in his bed-room.

Now there comes a mystery, that is not likely to be cleared up.

It was known that a coffin,—followed by the cousins, José, and the dogs,
was taken to St. Levan Churchyard and buried near the ground in which
Martin's family lie. But it was rumoured that the coffin merely
contained earth to make weight.

The following night, however, the dark "outlander" had two chests
conveyed to Parcurno, the largest of which was said to contain the
remains of his friend, and the other money and valuables which belonged
to himself. The chests placed on board the half-decked vessel, José and
his favourite dog embarked, waited for the tide to rise, and put to sea;
but no one remained at the cove to behold their departure, and no more
was seen in the West of man, dog, or boat.

Eleanor disappeared on the funeral night and it was believed that she
left with the stranger, who was scarcely a league to sea ere a tempest
arose and continued with great fury for nearly a week; and, although it
was in winter, the sky of nights was all ablaze with lightning and the
days as dark as nights. During this storm Parcurno was choked with sand,
and no boat could be kept there since.

The tempest had scarcely lulled when an apparition of Martin's craft
would drive into Parcurno against wind and tide; oft-times she came in
the dusk of evening, and, without stopping at the Cove, took her course
up over the old caunce towards Chapel-Curno; thence she sailed away, her
keel just skimming the ground, or many yards above it, as she passed
over hill and dale till she arrived at Chygwidden.

The barque was generally shrouded in mist, and one could rarely get a
glimpse of her deck on which the shadowy figures of two men, a woman,
and a dog, were beheld now and then. This ship of the dead, with her
ghostly crew, hovered over the town-place a moment, then bore away to a
croft on the farm, and vanished near a rock where a large sum of foreign
coins was disinterred

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

many years ago, so it is said. Of late the ghostly ship has not been
known to have entered Parcurno, and on account of innovations recently
effected there she may nevermore be seen in that ancient port.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

It may be observed that traditions of phantom-ships sailing overland
were common to many places near the Land's End with which no stories are
connected; these appearances were merely supposed to forebode tempests
and wrecks.

The few incidents which form the groundwork of the above legend occurred
but little more than a century before it was related to me by an aged
farm labourer of St. Levan; yet in that short space it has assumed such
a mystic garb that the simple and true story can scarcely be perceived
under its embellishments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Levan and His Sister](swc228)

</div>
