<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](swc245)  [Next](swc247.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Traditions and Hearthside Stories of West Cornwall, Vol. 2*, by William
Bottrell, \[1873\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### *Part the Second*.

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

Blood, though it sleeps a time, yet never dies;  
The gods on murd’rers fix revengeful eyes.  
                                          <span
class="smallcaps">Chapman</span>.

</div>

After the old steward had retired from the dreaded room, its occupant
was in no haste to rest himself on the large stately looking bed; but
seemed never weary of examining the old portraits and quaint figures in
the arras (which might have been intended for portraits too), the
massive oak furniture with bold, grotesque, carvings, ancient armour,
coats of mail, and other interesting objects, which were suspended from
the walls, or in hanging presses, with all of which he appeared
familiar; so that it was near midnight when he sat down in the long
window-seat.

The storm had ceased and a full moon, shining on newly fallen snow, made
it almost as light as day. He opened the casement and looked into the
court, where he saw a company of young men and women passing out singly
and in silence.

The visitor, being well acquainted with West Country customs, knew—as
this was twelfth night—that the object of this silent procession was to
work some of the many spells, usually practised at this time, for the
purpose of gaining a knowledge of their future destiny with respect to
what they regarded as the most important of all events—marriage and
death.

So great was the desire of many young people to obtain an

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

insight of what the future had in store for them, that they often
practised singular rites,—still well-known in the West,—which are
probably vestiges of ancient magian ceremonials connected with
divination.

This night, however, the young peoples’ intention was simply to gather
ivy leaves and pull rushes; by the aid of which, with fire and water,
they hoped to discover who would be wedded, and with whom, or buried
before the new year was ended. There are many instances of predictions,
with regard to the latter event, conducing to accomplish their own
fulfilment, from their effects on people of melancholy temperament.

The pilgrim had not sat long, looking out of the open casement, when he
saw the company of young men and maidens come running back, apparently
in great fright. The doors were all immediately slammed to, the noisy
mirth and music suddenly ceased in the hall. The house, in a few
moments, was shrouded in thick fog; all was still as death about the
place for some minutes, then a noise was heard like the distant roaring
and moaning of the sea in a storm.

These ocean sounds seemed to approach nearer and nearer every instant,
until the waves were heard as if breaking and surging around the house.
In the wailing wind was heard a noise of oars rattling in their rowlocks
for another instant; then as of the casting of oars hastily into a boat.

This was followed by the hollow voices of the smugglers, drowned with
the old Squire, hailing their own names, as drowned men's ghosts are
said to do when they want the assistance of the living to procure them
rest.

All this time the green-court appeared as if filled with the sea, and
one could hear the breakers roaring as when standing on a cliff in a
storm.

All the buildings and trees surrounding the mansion disappeared as if
sunk into the ground.

At length the surging of waves and other sounds gradually died away
until they were only heard like the 'calling of cleeves' before a
tempest.

The steward had told the stranger of these noises and appearances, which
had become frequent of late, to the great terror of the household; but
he gave little heed to the old man's tales, thinking that such visions
were merely the creations of weak brains diseased by strong potions.

’Tis said that when the young folks reached the outer gate of the
avenue, near which they would find the plants required for their spells,
all keeping silence and taking care not to look behind them—as this or
speaking would spoil the charm—a female, who was a short distance ahead
of the others, saw what

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

appeared to be the sea coming over the moors before a driving fog. She
ran shrieking to join her companions, who also beheld the waves fast
approaching—rolling, curling, and breaking on the heath. They all ran up
to the house with their utmost speed; and some who had the courage to
look behind them, when near the court door, saw the curling breakers
within a few yards of them; and a boat, manned with a ghostly crew, came
out of the driving mist as they rushed into the house; and, not daring
to look out, they saw nothing more.

The weary wayfaring man, having a clear conscience, feared nothing evil
in what appeared to him an unaccountable mystery, even in that time of
marvels; and, having told his beads, he committed himself to good
spirits’ care.

The brave man was rather soothed than alarmed by a plaintive melody,
until there was a change in the harmonious strains, which grew more
distinct; and mingled with them were the tones of loved and once
familiar voices, calling, "William Penrose, arise and avenge the murder
of thy cousin's son!"

Casting a glance towards the window—whence the sound proceeded—he saw
just within it the apparition of a beautiful boy in white raiment. A
light which surrounded it showed the countenance of the lost heir of
Penrose. At the same time the room was filled with an odour like that of
sweet spring flowers.

The pilgrim, William Penrose, spoke to the spirit and conjured it,
according to the form prescribed by Holy Church, to speak and say what
he should do to give it rest.

The apparition, coming nearer, told how he had been murdered by the
pirate-captain of the smugglers, on the grand hunting day; and how his
uncle had given the pirate a great quantity of gold to do the bloody
deed—that he had been buried in the orchard under an apple-tree, that
would be known, even in winter, by its blasted appearance,—that the
murderer was then in Plymouth, keeping a public-house, the situation of
which was so plainly described by the spirit that William Penrose would
have no difficulty in finding it, and bringing the murderer to justice
by means of such proofs of his crime as would be found beneath the
blasted tree.

Moreover he told William that the spirits knew he was gone on a
pilgrimage for their repose; and that they all, through him, sought his
aid to enable them to rest in peace.

William Penrose, having promised to perform all according to the wishes
of the departed, music was again heard and the spirit gradually
disappeared in a cloud of light.

Then the weary man sunk into sound repose from which he only awoke at
break of day.

His cousin, the good Squire, had also appeared to him in a

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

dream, and told him that concealed in the wainscot, beneath a certain
piece of tapestry, he would find a secret cabinet, in which was
preserved good store of gold and jewels for the infant heir; and that
the key of this hidden treasury was behind a leaf of carved foliage
which ornamented the bed head. He was told to take what money he
required for his journey and to keep the key.

He found everything as indicated in his dream.

Jan of Penrose had often sought for this private recess—where heir-looms
and other valuables were concealed, and only made known to the heir when
of age, or to a trusty guardian, if a minor—but he was deterred from
further search by such an apparition as made him avoid the chamber, and
of which he would never speak after his fearful fright was past.

The pilgrim arose and requested the old steward to accompany him a short
distance on his journey.

Before they parted the stranger discovered himself, to the old man's
great delight, to be the long-lamented William Penrose; told him that he
was about to undertake a long journey for the repose of the dead; that
he would return when he had accomplished his mission; and bade the
steward adieu, without speaking of the apparition or the cause of
disturbances in the mansion.

William Penrose, having arrived in the ancient town of Plymouth, and
entered the mean public-house to which he had been directed by the
apparition, saw the person he sought lying stretched by the fireside in
a squalid apartment that served for kitchen, guest-chamber, and sleeping
room.

The former pirate-captain looked like a deserter from the churchyard (as
we say); the face of this child-murderer was the colour of one long in
the tomb; with but little signs of life except in the lurid glare of his
sunken eyes.

William Penrose with much difficulty induced the 'wisht-looking' object
to converse; and, after a while, led him to talk of the West Country,
then of Sennen. From that the pilgrim spoke of Penrose, and asked him if
he knew, in Penrose orchard, a certain apple-tree which he pointly
described. He had no sooner mentioned it than the inn-keeper exclaimed,
"I am a dead man."

The miserable wretch begged the pilgrim to have mercy on him and listen
to his confession, in which he declared he was driven to commit the
murder by his evil spirit that made him dislike the child, because he
had long hated his parents, more than from any love of gold given him by
Jan of Penrose, to remove the only obstacle to his possession of the
estate.

William Penrose—who was still unknown to the inn-keeper—

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

wondered what cause of ill-will he could ever have had against the good
old Squire or his wife, until the former pirate told how he was the
prodigal son—long supposed dead—of an ancient, respectable, but poor
family, whose ancestral seat was within a few miles of Penrose—how,
almost from his childhood, he had long and truly loved, and as he
trusted, had his love returned by the lady who became the wife of Squire
Penrose,—how that he had left his home in St. Just on a desperate
privateering expedition, in hopes of soon gaining sufficient riches to
make the lady's parents regard him with favour,—how, whilst he was
returning with gold enough to buy the parish, Penrose had wooed and won
the lady—his first and only love, for whom he had toiled and suffered
every hardship during many years.

He also related how when he came home so altered, by the burning suns of
the Spanish Main, that his nearest relatives knew him not, and found out
the ill return his lady-love had made him, that his only solace was the
hope of revenge.

Some of the gold that he had sweat blood to gain, for the sake of the
faithless fair, was laid out in a fast sailing craft, which might pass
for a merchantman, privateer, or pirate, as she was all in turn during a
few years that he roamed the British seas.

The vessel was manned with a desperate crew, most of them his old
comrades, who would do anything to please him. The design he had formed,
more through hate than love, was to carry the lady off to some foreign
land.

A year or so after his return he landed one night in Whitsand Bay,
accompanied by a great part of his well-armed crew, who took their way
towards Penrose, where he learned ere their arrival, that his design of
carrying off the lady was frustrated by her having been laid in the
grave a few days before.

After this he wandered over sea and land by turns, caring nothing what
became of him, until cast on Gwenvor Sands—poor and naked, as his ship
foundered in deep water, when all but himself were drowned; and, as bad
luck would have it, he reached the shore on some loose part of the
wreck.

The worst portion of his story from this time is already told; but no
one can tell, as he related, how the desire of gold—to enable him to
recommence his roving life, far away from the hated sight of the land
and everything else that recalled a remembrance of his blighted youthful
hopes—maddening drink, and a wicked heart, farther irritated by Jan
Penrose, made him murder the child that he would have given a hundred
lives to restore before he received the uncle's bloody gold.

Since then he had never a moment been free from remorse. He wished for
death, but feared to die. If he drank himself mad, that only increased
the horror of his thoughts.

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

He had scarcely finished his sad tale when William Penrose discovered
himself to be the well-remembered playmate of the wretched man's
innocent youth; and he had only time to beg Penrose to bestow in alms
his ill-got store, for the scarcely hoped for mitigation of future
punishment, when he breathed his last.

When William Penrose returned to Penrose and made himself known, to the
great joy of old servants and others, he found that what was thought to
be merely the gloomy and morose temper of its master frequently made him
shun all society, and wander about the hills or cliffs and other
solitary places, for days and nights together.

No one either loved, feared, or cared enough about the surly man to pay
him any regard. He was absent then in one of his melancholy moods, and
William with the steward, aided by other old trusty servants, removed
the child's remains from beneath the blasted tree to Sennen churchyard;
and out of respect to the honourable old family, little was said or
known about the sad occurrence.

Jan of Penrose was no more seen alive in the old mansion, for the same
night that his nephew's remains were buried in consecrated ground, he
hanged himself in the malt-house; and he haunted it long after.

Following the spirit's injunction William Penrose had still to find and
remove the bodies of the old Squire and his crew. Now it was supposed
that they were 'sanded'—that is sunk in the moist sand and covered by it
during a flowing tide—near Gwenvor Cove, because corpse-lights had
frequently been seen, and the drowned sailors had been heard there
"hailing there own names," as they are still accustomed to do when
requiring aid of the living.

Next day Penrose and others found the bodies of the old sailor-squire
and his crew near the place where fishermen had heard the "calling of
the dead," and their remains were laid to repose, with all holy rites,
in an ancient burying-ground near Chapel Idné, where the wind and waves
sing their everlasting requiem in music they loved well when alive:—

<div style="margin-left: 25%">

"Pie Jesu, Domine,  
Dona eis requiem.  
    Amen."

</div>

William Penrose, now heir-at-law of the, bartons of Penrose, Brew, and
other farms in the West Country,—disliking to live in the place
connected with such melancholy events—gave up his rights of heirship to
another branch of the family; resumed

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

his pilgrim's staff; and was supposed to have died in the Holy Land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Penroses still in the West are said to be descended from a younger
branch of the ancient family of Sennen; with whom the Pendreas or
Pendars were intermarried.

The family of Jones purchased the Penroses’ West Country property, and
it remained in their possession until the beginning of the last century.

We hear again of smugglers being kept in pay by the last Jones, of
Penrose, and by others who succeeded him. From the facilities afforded
by this secluded place for concealing contraband goods, it was always
noted as a favourite resort for western fair-traders.

Many people about the Land's End believe the old mansion was always
haunted; and it is said this was the principal reason for taking down
and rebuilding a portion of it a few years since.

<span id="img_22300"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/22300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/22300.jpg.md)</span>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Tregagle](swc247.md)

</div>
