[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh11) 
[Next](iggh13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### IX. The Two Kings

<span class="smallcaps">Then</span> said Indra: O low-voiced lady, when
did a woman's tongue ever lack excuses for her behaviour with her lover?
and thy ingenuity is not inferior to that of any of thy sex. And yet,
say what thou wilt, thou knowest that thy father will not share thy own
opinion in this matter: and thou and thy husband are likely to come to a
speedy and miserable end, as soon as he discovers where you are.

Then said Wanawallarí: Brahman, thou art partly in the right, for it is
possible that sudden anger may cause my father to act rashly. And yet
even here, time may show that thou art mistaken, for policy is the first
consideration with my father, and he may see reason to forgive us. But
let him do as he pleases, he cannot harm me. For whether he lets my
husband live, or kill him, he cannot now divide us, nor deprive me of my
right to follow him alive or dead, for a wife belongs not to her father
but to her husband. So if we live, we live, and if we die, we die
together. And death

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

is no evil, but only an inevitable change: and often for the better, if
the life to which it puts an end be one of works deserving a reward. For
once there were two kings of the desert, called Haya and Gaja <span
id="fr_27"></span>[s](#fn_27): and they were deadly enemies. And Gaja
set upon Haya, and killed his son and captured his wives and his capital
and drove him away. So being reduced to extremity, Haya entered the
service of Gaja, who did not know him by sight, as a personal retainer.
And while he waited for an opportunity to revenge himself, Gaja was
attacked and his army destroyed by a third king, and he fled into the
desert, badly wounded, with only Haya for his companion, hoping to cross
over the desert and get back to his own capital and be safe, So they two
went together over the desert. And having but one skin of water, they
could give none to their horses, which died: and they went on on foot.

Then Gaja said to Haya: There is hardly water in this skin to carry one
man across the desert; much less two: and now our fate is sure. And they
went on, and day by day the water shrank.

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> And Haya carried
the skin. And one night, as Gaja slept upon the sand, Haya remained
awake. And he looked at the skin of water, and said: One man could cross
the desert on this water, but not two. And now my enemy lies there
before me. So he sat in silence, with his naked sword in his hand, alone
in the desert with the twinkling stars, watching Gaja as he slept, all
night long. And in the morning they went on. And as the sun grew hotter,
Gaja grew fainter, for he was weakened by his wound, And he said to
Haya: Let us drink, even if we die. So they drank. But Haya put shut
lips to the water, and took none into his mouth. And so they went on day
by day, and Gaja drank the water, But Haya only put it to his mouth, and
looked at it with glittering eyes, and lips closed like the door of
death.

And at last there came a day, when Gaja said: My wound has robbed me of
my strength, and now I can go no further. Moreover, the water is done.
Then Haya said: Be strong: it is but one day more. But Gaja said: Go
thou on and save thyself, and leave me here to die. And he fell upon the
sand, and lay in a half-swoon.

And then Haya stooped, and took him in his arms, and staggered on. And
as he went, he grew giddy,

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

and his senses wandered, and the desert danced before his eyes. And he
heard in his ears the plash of water, and the drums of the desert rang
in his head, and behind him the spirits of the region of death called to
one another across the sand, and laughed and mocked him as he went like
one going in a dream. So he struggled on in the loneliness, while his
life ebbed away, withering like a flower in the burning fire of that
angry sun. And suddenly he heard in his dream the voice of Gaja, crying
above his head: Lo! yonder is the city away before us, and now we are
saved. Then Haya set him down. And he said: O King, I am Haya, and now I
have brought thee over the dusty death. And he fell with his face upon
the sand, and went to the other world. But Yama saw that action and
remembered it: and Haya rose in the next birth out of mortality and
became a spirit of the air.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_27"></span>[44:s](iggh12.htm#fr_27) 'Horse' and 'elephant,'
(Pronounce Gaj- to rhyme with -*trudge*)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. A Pariah Dog](iggh13)
