[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh15) 
[Next](iggh17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

### XIII. A King and Queen

<span class="smallcaps">Then</span> said Indra: O lady, whose body
diffuses all around it the camphor perfume of high *caste*, thy pleading
for thy culprit husband and thyself resembles the reflection of a
peacock's tail in silent water: for it is various and beautiful, and yet
it is nothing but illusion; for thou art bewildered and intoxicated with
the glamour of first love, which lends eloquence to thy tongue and makes
thee take a wandering Rajpoot for a god.

Then said Wanawallarí: O Brahman, all is illusion in this world, and yet
some illusions last longer than others: there is no other distinction or
difference between them. And what does it matter even if, as thou
sayest, my faith in my husband were illusion, provided only that it
lasts, at least as long as life? What can be more illusive than a dream,
yet who can discern the illusion of a dream, till by its coming to an
end he wakes? Is not illusion as good as reality, until it is discovered
to be illusion? Thy words are therefore naught, until my illusion is
destroyed. Yet this may never be, for time may be wanting to detect it.
It is a gain, even if it endure only for to-day, for who knows for
certain that he will see the rising of another sun? As once

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

there was a king, who was playing at midday in the season of hot weather
in the water with his queen. And standing in that cool and crystal
water, first he made her into statues, while he watched the pictures of
her attitudes reflected in its mirror: and afterwards he splashed her
with the water, till the queen began to look like a young moon peeping
through the clouds: for her wet clothes clung to her body, showing the
outline of her limbs, and her dark blue hair was loosened from its braid
and fell round her in a mass, and rained into the water. And when they
were tired, they rested together in the shade of the ruin of an arbour
that stood by the pool; and the king fell suddenly asleep with his head
on her lap. And he dreamed that he went hunting in the morning, and as
he went, he saw a Brahman lying asleep under a tree. And when at evening
he came back, there was the Brahman still asleep. So he sent his
attendants to awake him. Then after a while they returned, and said:
Mahárájá, this Brahman will not wake, do what we may: and yet he is not
dead, for he is warm, and breathes. Then the king had him brought into
the palace, and laid upon a bed. And there that sleeper lay for seven
years, while the king lived his life. And at last, one day, that Brahman

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

suddenly awoke. And he looked round in amazement, and exclaimed: What is
this? for only just now I lay down to sleep beneath a tree. And the king
said: Brahman, thou hast lain there asleep for seven years, and all the
while I have done my daily duties, and made wars and peaces, and
begotten sons and daughters, who have grown whilst thou didst sleep upon
the bed. And just as the Brahman was about to answer, the king suddenly
awoke himself. And he heard the voice of his queen, saying: *Aryaputra*,
art thou asleep? Then the king said: How long have I slept? And she
said: Thou hast only just laid thy head upon my lap. Then the king
looked at her with astonishment. And suddenly he exclaimed: Ha! all is
illusion, and all is momentary: what is time and what is a dream? I have
slept for seven years: and there are thy wet clothes still clinging to
the twins, that, like arrogant rebels, stand out from thy breast. And
beyond a doubt, thou and I are but dreaming, and presently we shall
awake. Kiss me quickly, without losing a moment, while yet there is
time. And she thought he was mad. But she bent obediently towards him,
with the *bimbá* <span id="fr_29"></span>[u](#fn_29) of her lower

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

lip pursed for a kiss. And at that very moment, the roof of that ruined
arbour fell in and crushed them, and they died on the spot: awaking from
their dream before they had time to kiss each other, as the king had
feared. And who can tell, O Brahman, whether it may not be our lot also,
to wake from the dream of our life, before there is time to wake from
the illusion of our love?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_29"></span>[56:u](iggh16.htm#fr_29) A fruit employed by
Hindoo poets as we speak of 'cherry' lips.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. Love the Fisherman](iggh17)
