[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh07) 
[Next](iggh09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### V. Man's Other Half

<span class="smallcaps">And</span> as Wanawallarí listened to his words,
she discerned instinctively danger to her husband from that old Brahman.
And she said to herself: Who is this that knows all about us already? Is
he a spy of my father's, who knows me by sight? Or can he be some god in
disguise, come down to injure my husband, or corrupt me for my beauty?
For such things have often happened before. And she looked at him
coldly, and said: Brahman, thou art an evil counsellor; and I should
indeed be more worthless than stubble, should I abandon my husband, for
whom I have only just abandoned my parents. Nor can I imagine, by what
means all should be known to thee, unless thou art a god. But wert thou
the very god whom, if thou speakest the

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

truth, my husband has offended, I would tell thee, that my husband did
well to scorn one who practises the very thing that he condemns in my
husband, in seeking to seduce the wife of another from her religion.
Dost thou not know that to a true wife her husband is a god? And if it
were the case, as thou sayest, that my husband had abandoned his gods,
would it make the case any better, if I should forsake him who is mine?

Then said Indra: O lady, luckless and lovelorn, art thou, alas! already
so far corrupted by associating with a scorner of the gods, as to side
with him against them? Know, that he shares the guilt of a crime who
approves of the criminal when it is done: and thou dost as it were
thyself offer insult to the deity by defending its offender.

Then said Wanawallarí: I know no deity but my husband, and follow him
without question or reason, as night follows day. And so far from being
wrong, this is the duty of a woman, for it is *dharma* <span
id="fr_24"></span>[p](#fn_24), established from the very beginning, and
having its roots in her nature and his. For once there was a time, when
there were neither men nor women, but the universe existed

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

alone. And then one day, when the Creator was meditating with a view to
further creation, he said to himself: Something is wanting to complete
this Creation which I have created. It is blind, and unconscious of its
own curious beauty and excellence. Thereupon he created a man. And
instantly the Creation became an object of wonder and beauty, being
reflected like a picture in the mirror of the mind of the man. Then the
man roamed alone in the world, wondering at the flowers and the trees
and the animals, and at last he came to a pool. And he looked in, and
saw himself. Then full of astonishment, he exclaimed: This is the most
beautiful creature of all. And he hunted incessantly through the whole
world to find it, not knowing that he was looking for himself. But when
he found that in spite of all his endeavours he could never do more than
see it on the surface of pools, he became sad, and ceased to care about
anything. Then the Creator, perceiving it, said to himself: Ha! this is
a difficulty which I never foresaw, arising naturally from the beauty of
my work. But now, what is to be done? For here is this man, whom I made
to be a mirror for my world, snared in the mirror of his own beauty. So
I must somehow or other cure this evil. But I cannot make another

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

man, for then there would be two centres to the circle of the universe.
Neither can I add anything to the circumference of Nature, for it is
perfect in itself. There is necessary, therefore, some third thing: not
real, for then it would disturb the balance of the universe; nor unreal,
for then it would be nothing: but poised on the border between reality
and non-entity. So he collected the reflections on the surface of the
pools, and made of them a woman. But she, as soon as she was made, began
to cry. And she said: Alas! alas! I am, and I am not. Then said the
Creator: Thou foolish intermediate creature, thou art a non-entity, only
when thou standest alone. But when thou art united to the man, thou art
real in participation with his substance. And thus, O Brahman, apart
from her husband a woman is a non-entity and a shadow without a
substance: being nothing but the mirror of himself, reflected on the
mirror of illusion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[33:p](iggh08.htm#fr_24) *Dharma* means law,
duty, custom and religion combined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VI. Wild Flowers](iggh09)
