[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[F.W. Bain](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](iggh17) 
[Next](iggh19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1406716642/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*In the Great God's Hair*, by F. W. Bain, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### XV. A Woman's Lord

<span class="smallcaps">Then</span> said Indra: O thou delicious lady,
Love has cast his spell upon thee, or as thou sayest, caught thee on his
hook; and now thou art like one who looks from afar upon the desert, and
admires its delusive beauty, not knowing, by reason of inexperience,
what its nature really is. And doubtless thou art right, and thy husband
will hold thee fast, while the blossom of thy beauty is fresh and
fragrant with morning dew; but when thou art worn and dusty in the heat
of the day, beware! lest he should throw thee away. Thou dost not know
what lies before the vagabond's wife.

Then said Wanawallarí: Brahman, she that

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

chooses her own husband resembles a bold gambler, that stakes his all
upon a single cast of the die. And if she has chosen lightly, guided
only by frivolity and the desire of selfish pleasure, evil and woe will
be her doom. But if she has made her choice not obeying her own
inebriation but rather spell-bound and appropriated by the master spirit
of her true husband and the fatal moment <span
id="fr_31"></span>[y](#fn_31) that brought her like a planet within his
grasp, then poor is her nature and feeble her devotion if she be not
prepared to follow him blindfold, and take all that fate in his form may
involve in her lot. For she that leaves all behind her and comes at the
call of her husband does so not out of pleasure, though the pleasure is
supreme, but as it were against her own will, and simply because she
cannot help it, because he is he. And thereafter nothing can befall her,
for the fruit of her birth is obtained. For it is better for a woman to
find her master, even if he should afterwards ill-use or desert her,
than never to discover him at all. For every woman needs a lord, but
many

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

never find him. But when she has found him, let him treat her how he
will, she is his. But if she finds the wrong man, though he may treat
her as a queen and adore her as a goddess, yet she never will love him
and her heart will not be happy, because she is not his, and he cannot
command her. For an elephant is held by a chain, and a woman by her
heart; and the essence of her love is the sense of obedience; for no
woman ever loves any man, unless she knows that he is her master to be
obeyed without a murmur whether she will or no. Yet in this is no
slavery, for she loves her chain, and likes to be dominated by the man
she adores. And for every woman, happiness is misery, with the man who
is not her true master: but misery is happiness with the husband who is.
And no one but a woman can understand the indescribable pleasure of
willing obedience to her lord; for it arises from the peculiarity of her
nature which man does not share; for his nature is not to obey but
command. And now, my husband is my lord, and I am his slave. And if he
continue to love me, it is well: and if not, still it is well, for he
cannot prevent me from worshipping him. For though the Creator may if he
pleases drive away the swan from the lotus-haunted pool that he loves,
he cannot with

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

all his omnipotence deprive him of his desire of the pool. Nor can any
destiny overpower the loyalty of a wife: for she whose devotion to her
husband is diminished by circumstance or change was never his wife, but
a stranger, joined to him by accident and error and called by a name
that was never hers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_31"></span>[60:y](iggh18.htm#fr_31) The Sanskrit word
*lagna*, meaning an astrological moment of planetary conjunction, has
become, in modern Maráthí, the common term for a marriage. It is, I
believe, essential for a Hindoo marriage that the horoscopes of the
bride and groom should correspond.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. A God abashed](iggh19)
