[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030014)  [Next](0030016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p2"></span>That I may refute more thoroughly these
charges, I will show that in part openly, in <span id="page_25">p.
25</span> <span id="iv.iii.ix-Page_25"></span>part secretly, practices
prevail among you which have led you perhaps to credit similar things
about us. Children were openly sacrificed in Africa to Saturn as lately
as the proconsulship of Tiberius, who exposed to public gaze the priests
suspended on the sacred trees overshadowing their temple—so many crosses
on which the punishment which justice craved overtook their crimes, as
the soldiers of our country still can testify who did that very work for
that proconsul. And even now that sacred crime still continues to be
done in secret. It is not only Christians, you see, who despise you; for
all that you do there is neither any crime thoroughly and abidingly
eradicated, nor does any of your gods reform his ways. When Saturn did
not spare his own children, he was not likely to spare the children of
others; whom indeed the very parents themselves were in the habit of
offering, gladly responding to the call which was made on them, and
keeping the little ones pleased on the occasion, that they might not die
in tears. At the same time, there is a vast difference between homicide
and parricide. A more advanced age was sacrificed to Mercury in Gaul. I
hand over the Tauric fables to their own theatres. Why, even in that
most religious city of the pious descendants of Æneas, there is a
certain Jupiter whom in their games they lave with human blood. It is
the blood of a beast-fighter, you say. Is it less, because of that, the
blood of a man? <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) Or is it viler
blood because it is from the veins of a wicked man? At any rate it is
shed in murder. O Jove, thyself a Christian, and in truth only son of
thy father in his cruelty! But in regard to child murder, as it does not
matter whether it is committed for a sacred object, or merely at one’s
own self-impulse—although there is a great difference, as we have said,
between parricide and homicide—I shall turn to the people generally. How
many, think you, of those crowding around and gaping for Christian
blood,—how many even of your rulers, notable for their justice to you
and for their severe measures against us, may I charge in their own
consciences with the sin of putting their offspring to death? As to any
difference in the kind of murder, it is certainly the more cruel way to
kill by drowning, or by exposure to cold and hunger and dogs. A maturer
age has always preferred death by the sword. In our case, murder being
once for all forbidden, we may not destroy even the fœtus in the womb,
while as yet the human being derives blood from other parts of the body
for its sustenance. To hinder a birth is merely a speedier man-killing;
nor does it matter whether you take away a life that is born, or destroy
one that is coming to the birth. That is a man which is going to be one;
you have the fruit already in its seed. As to meals of blood and such
tragic dishes, read—I am not sure where it is told (it is in Herodotus,
I think)—how blood taken from the arms, and tasted by both parties, has
been the treaty bond among some nations. I am not sure what it was that
was tasted in the time of Catiline. They say, too, that among some
Scythian tribes the dead are eaten by their friends. But I am going far
from home. At this day, among ourselves, blood consecrated to Bellona,
blood drawn from a punctured thigh and then partaken of, seals
initiation into the rites of that goddess. Those, too, who at the
gladiator shows, for the cure of epilepsy, quaff with greedy thirst the
blood of criminals slain in the arena, as it flows fresh from the wound,
and then rush off—to whom do they belong? those, also, who make meals on
the flesh of wild beasts at the place of combat—who have keen appetites
for bear and stag? That bear in the struggle was bedewed with the blood
of the man whom it lacerated:  that stag rolled itself in the
gladiator’s gore. The entrails of the very bears, loaded with as yet
undigested human viscera, are in great request. And you have men rifting
up man-fed flesh? If you partake of food like this, how do your repasts
differ from those you accuse us Christians of? And do those, who, with
savage lust, seize on human bodies, do less because they devour the
living? Have they less the pollution of human blood on them because they
only lick up what is to turn into blood? They make meals, it is plain,
not so much of infants, as of grown-up men. Blush for your vile ways
before the Christians, who have not even the blood of animals at their
meals of simple and natural food; who abstain from things strangled and
that die a natural death, for no other reason than that they may not
contract pollution, so much as from blood secreted in the viscera. To
clench the matter with a single example, you tempt Christians with
sausages of blood, just because you are perfectly aware that the thing
by which you thus try to get them to transgress they hold
unlawful. <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) And how unreasonable it
is to believe that those, of whom you are convinced that they regard
with horror the idea of tasting the blood of oxen, are eager after blood
of men; unless, mayhap, you have <span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span
id="iv.iii.ix-Page_26"></span>tried it, and found it sweeter to the
taste! Nay, in fact, there is here a test you should apply to discover
Christians, as well as the fire-pan and the censer. They should be
proved by their appetite for human blood, as well as by their refusal to
offer sacrifice; just as otherwise they should be affirmed to be free of
Christianity by their refusal to taste of blood, as by their
sacrificing; and there would be no want of blood of men, amply supplied
as that would be in the trial and condemnation of prisoners. Then who
are more given to the crime of incest than those who have enjoyed the
instruction of Jupiter himself? Ctesias tells us that the Persians have
illicit intercourse with their mothers.  The Macedonians, too, are
suspected on this point; for on first hearing the tragedy of Œdipus they
made mirth of the incest-doer’s grief, exclaiming, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.iii.ix-p4.1"></span>῾ἥλαυνε εἰς τὴν
μητέρα</span>. Even now reflect what opportunity there is for mistakes
leading to incestuous comminglings—your promiscuous looseness supplying
the materials. You first of all expose your children, that they may be
taken up by any compassionate passer-by, to whom they are quite unknown;
or you give them away, to be adopted by those who will do better to them
the part of parents. Well, some time or other, all memory of the
alienated progeny must be lost; and when once a mistake has been made,
the transmission of incest thence will still go on—the race and the
crime creeping on together. Then, further, wherever you are—at home,
abroad, over the seas—your lust is an attendant, whose general
indulgence, or even its indulgence in the most limited scale, may easily
and unwittingly anywhere beget children, so that in this way a progeny
scattered about in the commerce of life may have intercourse with those
who are their own kin, and have no notion that there is any incest in
the case. A persevering and stedfast chastity has protected us from
anything like this:  keeping as we do from adulteries and all
post-matrimonial unfaithfulness, we are not exposed to incestuous
mishaps. Some of us, making matters still more secure, beat away from
them entirely the power of sensual sin, by a virgin continence, still
boys in this respect when they are old.  If you would but take notice
that such sins as I have mentioned prevail among you, that would lead
you to see that they have no existence among Christians. The same eyes
would tell you of both facts. But the two blindnesses are apt to go
together; so that those who do not see what is, think they see what is
not. I shall show it to be so in everything. But now let me speak of
matters which are more clear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[25:87](0030015.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p3"></span> \[Another example of what Christianity
was doing for *man* as man.\]

<span id="fn_87"></span>[25:88](0030015.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="iv.iii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p4"></span> \[See Elucidation VII., p. 58, *infra*
in connection with usages in cap. xxxix.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.](0030016.md)
