[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030264)  [Next](0030266) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span> <span id="page_239">p. 239</span> <span
id="v.ii-Page_239"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.ii-p1.1"></span>Introduction, by the American Editor.</span>

<span id="v.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.ii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.ii-p3.1"></span>The</span> Second Class of Tertullian’s works,
according to the logical method I have endeavoured to carry out, is that
which includes his treatises against the heresies of his times. In
these, the genius of our author is brilliantly illustrated, while, in
melancholy fact, he is demonstrating the folly of his own final lapse
and the wickedness of that schism and heresy into which he fell away
from Truth. Were it not that history abounds in like examples of the
frailty of the human intellect and of the insufficiency of “man that
walketh to direct his steps,” we should be forced to a theory of mental
decay to account for inconsistencies so gross and for delusions so
besotted. “Genius to madness is *indeed* allied,” and who knows but
something like that imbecility which closed the career of Swift <span
id="fr_1845"></span>[1846](#fn_1845) may have been the fate of this
splendid wit and versatile man of parts? Charity, admiration and love
force this inquiry upon my own mind continually, as I explore his
fascinating pages. And the order in which the student will find them in
this series, will lead, I think, to similar reflections on the part of
many readers. We observe a natural bent and turn of mind, even in his
Catholic writings, which indicate his perils. These are more and more
apparent in his recent works, as his enthusiasm heats itself into a
frenzy which at last becomes a rage. He breaks down by degrees, as in
orthodoxy so also in force and in character. It is almost like the
collapse of Solomon or of Bacon. And though our own times have produced
no example of stars of equal magnitude, to become falling-stars, we have
seen illustrations the most humiliating, of those calm words of Bishop
Kaye: “Human nature often presents the curious phenomenon of an union of
the most opposite qualities in the same mind; of vigour, acuteness and
discrimination on some subjects, with imbecility, dulness and bigotry on
others.” Milton, himself another example of his own threnode, breaks
forth in this splendid utterance of lyrical confession:

<span id="v.ii-p6"></span>“God of our fathers what is man?

<span id="v.ii-p7"></span>Nor do I name of men the common rout,

<span id="v.ii-p8"></span>That, wandering loose about,

<span id="v.ii-p9"></span>Grow up and perish as the summer fly,

<span id="v.ii-p10"></span>Heads without name, no more remembered,

<span id="v.ii-p11"></span>But such as thou hast solemnly elected,

<span id="v.ii-p12"></span>With gifts and graces eminently adorned,

<span id="v.ii-p13"></span>To some great work, thy glory

<span id="v.ii-p14"></span>And people’s safety, *which in part they
effect*.”

<span id="v.ii-p15"></span>And here, I must venture a remark on the
ambiguity of the expressions concerning our author’s Montanism. In the
treatise against Marcion, written late in his career, Tertullian
identifies himself with the Church and strenuously defends its faith and
its apostolic order.  In only rare instances does his weakness for the
“new prophecy” crop out, and then, it is only as one identifies himself
with a school within the church. Precisely so Fenelon maintained his
milder Montanism, without a thought of deserting the Latin Church.
Afterwards Fenelon drew back, but at last poor Tertullian fell away. So
with the Jansenists. They credited the *miracles* and the *convulsions*
(or ecstasies) of their school, <span
id="fr_1846"></span>[1847](#fn_1846) and condemned those <span
id="page_240">p. 240</span> <span id="v.ii-Page_240"></span>who rejected
them, as Tertullian condemns the *Psychics*. The great expounder of the
Nicene Faith (Bp. Bull) does indeed speak very decidedly of Tertullian
as a *lapser*, even when he wrote his first book against Marcion. His
semi-schismatic position must be allowed. But, was it a *formal* lapse
at that time? The English non-jurors were long in communion with the
Church, even while they denounced their brethren and the “Erastianizing”
clergy, much as Tertullian does the *Psychics*. St. Augustine speaks of
*Tertullianists* <span id="fr_1847"></span>[1848](#fn_1847) with great
moderation, and notes the final downfall of our author as something
distinct from Tertullianism. When we reflect, therefore, that only four
of all his varied writings (now extant) are proofs of an accomplished
lapse, ought we not carefully to maintain the distinction between the
Montanistic Tertullian and Tertullian the Montanist? Bishop Bull, it
seems to me would not object to this way of putting it, when we consider
his own discrimination in the following weighty words.  He says:

<span id="v.ii-p18"></span>“A clear distinction must be made between
those works which Tertullian, when already a Montanist, wrote
specifically in defence of Montanism *against the church*, and those
which he composed, as a Montanist indeed, yet *not in defence of
Montanism against the church*, but rather, *in defence of the common
doctrines of the church*—and of Montanus, in opposition to other
heretics.”

<span id="v.ii-p19"></span>Now in arranging the works of this second
class, *the Prescription* comes logically first, because, written in
Orthodoxy, it forcibly upholds the Scriptural Rule of Faith, the
Catholic touchstone of all professed verity. It is also a necessary
Introduction to the great work against Marcion which I have placed next
in order; giving it the precedence to which it is entitled in part on
chronological ground, in part because of the general purity of its
material with the exhibition it presents of the author’s mental
processes and of his very gradual decline from Truth.

<span id="v.ii-p20"></span>Very fortunate were the Edinburgh Editors in
securing for this work and some others, the valuable labours of Dr.
Holmes, of whom I have elsewhere given some biographical particulars.
The merit and fulness of his annotations are so marked, that I have been
spared a great deal of work, such as I was forced to bestow on the
former volumes of this American Edition. But on the other hand these
pages have given me much patient study and toil as an editor, because of
the “shreds and patches” in which Tertullian comes to us, in the
Edinburgh Series; and because of some typographical peculiarities,
exceptional in that Series itself, and presenting complications, when
transferred to a new form of mechanical arrangement. For example, apart
from some valuable material which belongs to the General Preface, and
which I have transferred accordingly, the following dislocations
confronted me to begin with: The *Marcion* is presented to us in Volume
VII. apart from the other writings of Tertullian. At the close of Vol.
XI. we reach the *Ad Nationes*, of which Dr. Holmes is the translator,
another hand (Mr. Thelwall’s) having been employed on former pages of
that volume.  It is not till we reach Volume XV. that Tertullian again
appears, but this volume is wholly the work of Dr. Holmes.  Finally, in
Volume XVIII., we meet Tertullian again, (Mr. Thelwall the able
translator), but, here is placed the “Introduction” to all the works of
Tertullian, which, of course, I have, transferred to its proper place. I
make these explanations by no means censoriously, but to point out at
once the nature of my own task, and the advantage that accrues to the
reader, by the order in which the works of the great Tertullian appear
in this edition, enabling him to compare different or parallel passages,
all methodically arranged in consecutive pages, without a minute’s
search, or delay.

<span id="v.ii-p21"></span>Now, as to typographical difficulties to
which I have referred, Dr. Holmes marks all his multiplied and useful
notes with *brackets*, which are almost always superfluous, and which in
<span id="page_241">p. 241</span> <span id="v.ii-Page_241"></span>this
American Edition are used to designate my own contributions, when
printed with the text, or apart from Preface and Elucidations. These,
therefore, I have removed necessarily and with no appreciable loss to
the work, but great gain to the beauty of the page. But, again, Dr.
Holmes’ translations are all so heavily bracketed as to become an
eyesore, and the disfigured pages have been often complained of as
afflictive to the reader. Many words strictly implied by the original
Latin, and which should therefore be unmarked, are yet put between
brackets. Even minute words (*and*, or *to wit*, or *again*,) when, in
the nature of the case the English idiom requires them, are thus marked.
I have not retained these blemishes; but when an inconsiderable word or
a repetition does add to the sense, or qualify it, I have italicized
such words, throwing more important interpolations into parenthetical
marks, which are less painful to the sight than brackets. I have found
them quite as serviceable to denote the auxiliary word or phrase; and
where the author himself uses a parenthesis, I have observed very few
instances in which a sensible reader would confound it with the
translator’s efforts to eke out the sense. Sometimes, an awkward
interpolation has been thrown into a footnote.  Occasionally the crabbed
sentences of the great Carthaginian are so obscure that Dr. Holmes has
been unable to make them lucid, although, with the original in hand, he
probably felt a force in his own rendering which the mere English reader
must fail to perceive. In a few such instances, noting the fact in the
margin, I have tried to bring out the sense, by slight modifications of
punctuation and arrangement. Occasionally too I have dropped a
superfluous interpolation (such as *e.g.*, *to conclude*, or let me say
again,) when I have found that it only served to clog and overcharge a
sentence. Last of all, Dr. Holmes’ *headings* have sometimes been
condensed, to avoid phrases and sentences immediately recurring in the
chapter. <span id="fr_1848"></span>[1849](#fn_1848) These purely
mechanical parts require a terse form of statement, like those in the
English Bible, and I have frequently reduced them on that model,
dropping redundant adverbs and adjectives to bring out the catchwords.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1845"></span>[239:1846](0030265.htm#fr_1845) <span
id="v.ii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p4"></span> “From Marlboro’s eyes the tears of dotage
flow,

<span id="v.ii-p5"></span>And Swift expires a driveller and a show.”

<span id="fn_1846"></span>[239:1847](0030265.htm#fr_1846) <span
id="v.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p16"></span> See the story of the Abbé Paris, Guettée,
*<span id="v.ii-p16.1"></span>Histoire de L’Eglise de France*, Tom. xii.
p. 12.  Also, Parton, *Voltaire*, Vol. I. pp. 236, 261, etc.

<span id="fn_1847"></span>[240:1848](0030265.htm#fr_1847) <span
id="v.ii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p17"></span> See opp. Tom. viii. p. 46, Ed. Migne.

<span id="fn_1848"></span>[241:1849](0030265.htm#fr_1848) <span
id="v.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p22"></span> Take e.g. the heading to chapter xxiv. of
the *De Præscriptione*. It reads thus: “*St. Peter’s further
vindication. St. Paul was not at all superior to St. Peter in teaching.
Nothing was imparted to the former, in the “third heaven,” to enable him
to add to the faith—however foolishly the heretics may boast of him as
if they had, forsooth, been favoured with some of the secrets so
imparted to him in paradise.*” If the reader will turn to the chapter
referred to, he will observe an instance of condensation by which
nothing is forfeited that is requisite to a *heading*, though
redundancies are dropped.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Prescription Against Heretics.](0030266)
