[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030245)  [Next](0030247.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xlii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xlii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLII.—Sleep, the Mirror of Death, as
Introductory to the Consideration of Death.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlii-p2"></span>It now remains (that we discuss the
subject) of death, in order that our subject-matter may terminate where
the soul itself completes it; although Epicurus, indeed, in his pretty
widely known doctrine, has asserted that death does not appertain to us.
That, says he, which is dissolved lacks sensation; and that which is
without sensation is nothing to us. Well, but it is not actually death
which suffers dissolution and lacks sensation, but the human person who
experiences death. Yet even *he* has admitted suffering to be incidental
to the being to whom action belongs. Now, if it is in man to suffer
death, which dissolves the body and destroys the senses, how absurd to
say that so great a susceptibility belongs not to man! With much greater
precision does Seneca say: “After death all comes to an end, even
(death) itself.” From which position of his it must needs follow that
death will appertain to its own self, since itself comes to an end; and
much more to man, in the ending of whom amongst the “*all*,” itself also
ends. Death, (says Epicurus) belongs not to us; then at that rate, life
belongs not to us.  For certainly, if that which causes our dissolution
have no relation to us, that also which compacts and composes us must be
unconnected with us. If the deprivation of our sensation be nothing to
us, neither can the acquisition of sensation have anything to do with
us. The fact, however, is, he who destroys the very soul, (as Epicurus
does), cannot help destroying death also. As for ourselves, indeed,
(Christians as we are), we must treat of death just as we should of the
posthumous life and of some other province of the soul, (assuming) that
we at all events belong to death, if it does not pertain to us. And on
the same principle, even *sleep*, which is the very mirror of death, is
not alien from our subject-matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sleep a Natural Function as Shown by Other Considerations, and by
the Testimony of Scripture.](0030247.md)
