[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030026)  [Next](0030028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p2"></span>But having asserted that our religion is
supported by the writings of the Jews, the oldest which exist, though it
is generally known, and we fully admit that it dates from a
comparatively recent period—no further <span id="page_34">p. 34</span>
<span id="iv.iii.xxi-Page_34"></span>back indeed than the reign of
Tiberius—a question may perhaps be raised on this ground about its
standing, as if it were hiding something of its presumption under shadow
of an illustrious religion, one which has at any rate undoubted
allowance of the law, or because, apart from the question of age, we
neither accord with the Jews in their peculiarities in regard to food,
nor in their sacred days, nor even in their well-known bodily sign, nor
in the possession of a common name, which surely behoved to be the case
if we did homage to the same God as they. Then, too, the common people
have now some knowledge of Christ, and think of Him as but a man, one
indeed such as the Jews condemned, so that some may naturally enough
have taken up the idea that we are worshippers of a mere human being.
But we are neither ashamed of Christ—for we rejoice to be counted His
disciples, and in His name to suffer—nor do we differ from the Jews
concerning God. We must make, therefore, a remark or two as to Christ’s
divinity. In former times the Jews enjoyed much of God’s favour, when
the fathers of their race were noted for their righteousness and faith.
So it was that as a people they flourished greatly, and their kingdom
attained to a lofty eminence; and so highly blessed were they, that for
their instruction God spake to them in special revelations, pointing out
to them beforehand how they should merit His favor and avoid His
displeasure. But how deeply they have sinned, puffed up to their fall
with a false trust in their noble ancestors, turning from God’s way into
a way of sheer impiety, though they themselves should refuse to admit
it, their present national ruin would afford sufficient proof. Scattered
abroad, a race of wanderers, exiles from their own land and clime, they
roam over the whole world without either a human or a heavenly king, not
possessing even the stranger’s right to set so much as a simple footstep
in their native country. The sacred writers withal, in giving previous
warning of these things, all with equal clearness ever declared that, in
the last days of the world, God would, out of every nation, and people,
and country, choose for Himself more faithful worshippers, upon whom He
would bestow His grace, and that indeed in ampler measure, in keeping
with the enlarged capacities of a nobler dispensation.  Accordingly, He
appeared among us, whose coming to renovate and illuminate man’s nature
was pre-announced by God—I mean Christ, that Son of God. And so the
supreme Head and Master of this grace and discipline, the Enlightener
and Trainer of the human race, God’s own Son, was announced among us,
born—but not so born as to make Him ashamed of the name of Son or of His
paternal origin. It was not His lot to have as His father, by incest
with a sister, or by violation of a daughter or another’s wife, a god in
the shape of serpent, or ox, or bird, or lover, for his vile ends
transmuting himself into the gold of Danaus. They are your divinities
upon whom these base deeds of Jupiter were done. But the Son of God has
no mother in any sense which involves impurity; she, whom men suppose to
be His mother in the ordinary way, had never entered into the marriage
bond. <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) But, first, I shall
discuss His essential nature, and so the nature of His birth will be
understood. We have already asserted that God made the world, and all
which it contains, by His Word, and Reason, and Power. It is abundantly
plain that your philosophers, too, regard the Logos—that is, the Word
and Reason—as the Creator of the universe. For Zeno lays it down that he
is the creator, having made all things according to a determinate plan;
that his name is Fate, and God, and the soul of Jupiter, and the
necessity of all things. Cleanthes ascribes all this to spirit, which he
maintains pervades the universe. And we, in like manner, hold that the
Word, and Reason, and Power, by which we have said God made all, have
spirit as their proper and essential *substratum*, in which the Word has
in being to give forth utterances, and reason abides to dispose and
arrange, and power is over all to execute. We have been taught that He
proceeds forth from God, and in that procession He is generated; so that
He is the Son of God, and is called God from unity of substance with
God.  For God, too, is a Spirit. Even when the ray is shot from the sun,
it is still part of the parent mass; the sun will still be in the ray,
because it is a ray of the sun—there is no division of substance, but
merely an extension.  Thus Christ is Spirit of Spirit, and God of God,
as light of light is kindled. <span id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104.md)
The material matrix remains entire and unimpaired, though you derive
from it any number of shoots possessed of its qualities; so, too, that
which has come forth out of God is at once God and the Son of God, and
the two are one. In this way also, as He is Spirit of Spirit and God of
God, He is made a second in manner of existence—in position, not in
nature; and He did not withdraw from the original source, but went
forth.  This ray of God, then, as it was always foretold in ancient
times, descending into a certain virgin, and made flesh in her womb,
<span id="page_35">p. 35</span> <span id="iv.iii.xxi-Page_35"></span>is
in His birth God and man united. The flesh formed by the Spirit is
nourished, grows up to manhood, speaks, teaches, works, and is the
Christ. Receive meanwhile this fable, if you choose to call it so—it is
like some of your own—while we go on to show how Christ’s claims are
proved, and who the parties are with you by whom such fables have been
set a going to overthrow the truth, which they resemble. The Jews, too,
were well aware that Christ was coming, as those to whom the prophets
spake. Nay, even now His advent is expected by them; nor is there any
other contention between them and us, than that they believe the advent
has not yet occurred. For two comings of Christ having been revealed to
us:  a first, which has been fulfilled in the lowliness of a human lot;
a second, which impends over the world, now near its close, in all the
majesty of Deity unveiled; and, by misunderstanding the first, they have
concluded that the second—which, as matter of more manifest prediction,
they set their hopes on—is the only one. It was the merited punishment
of their sin not to understand the Lord’s first advent: for if they had,
they would have believed; and if they had believed, they would have
obtained salvation. They themselves read how it is written of them that
they are deprived of wisdom and understanding—of the use of eyes and
ears. <span id="fr_105"></span>[106](#fn_105.md) As, then, under the force
of their pre-judgment, they had convinced themselves from His lowly
guise that Christ was no more than man, it followed from that, as a
necessary consequence, that they should hold Him a magician from the
powers which He displayed,—expelling devils from men by a word,
restoring vision to the blind, cleansing the leprous, reinvigorating the
paralytic, summoning the dead to life again, making the very elements of
nature obey Him, stilling the storms and walking on the sea; proving
that He was the Logos of God, that primordial first-begotten Word,
accompanied by power and reason, and based on Spirit,—that He who was
now doing all things by His word, and He who had done that of old, were
one and the same. But the Jews were so exasperated by His teaching, by
which their rulers and chiefs were convicted of the truth, chiefly
because so many turned aside to Him, that at last they brought Him
before Pontius Pilate, at that time Roman governor of Syria; and, by the
violence of their outcries against Him, extorted a sentence giving Him
up to them to be crucified. He Himself had predicted this; which,
however, would have signified little had not the prophets of old done it
as well. And yet, nailed upon the cross, He exhibited many notable
signs, by which His death was distinguished from all others. At His own
free-will, He with a word dismissed from Him His spirit, anticipating
the executioner’s work. In the same hour, too, the light of day was
withdrawn, when the sun at the very time was in his meridian blaze.
Those who were not aware that this had been predicted about Christ, no
doubt thought it an eclipse. You yourselves have the account of the
world-portent still in your archives. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[107](#fn_106.md) Then, when His body was taken down
from the cross and placed in a sepulchre, the Jews in their eager
watchfulness surrounded it with a large military guard, lest, as He had
predicted His resurrection from the dead on the third day, His disciples
might remove by stealth His body, and deceive even the incredulous. But,
lo, on the third day there a was a sudden shock of earthquake, and the
stone which sealed the sepulchre was rolled away, and the guard fled off
in terror:  without a single disciple near, the grave was found empty of
all but the clothes of the buried One. But nevertheless, the leaders of
the Jews, whom it nearly concerned both to spread abroad a lie, and keep
back a people tributary and submissive to them from the faith, gave it
out that the body of Christ had been stolen by His followers. For the
Lord, you see, did not go forth into the public gaze, lest the wicked
should be delivered from their error; that faith also, destined to a
great reward, might hold its ground in difficulty. But He spent forty
days with some of His disciples down in Galilee, a region of Judea,
instructing them in the doctrines they were to teach to others. 
Thereafter, having given them commission to preach the gospel through
the world, He was encompassed with a cloud and taken up to heaven,—a
fact more certain far than the assertions of your Proculi concerning
Romulus. <span id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107.md) All these things Pilate
did to Christ; and now in fact a Christian in his own convictions, he
sent word of Him to the reigning Cæsar, who was at the time Tiberius. 
Yes, and the Cæsars too would have believed on Christ, if either the
Cæsars had not been necessary for the world, or if Christians could have
been Cæsars. His disciples also, spreading over the world, did as their
Divine Master bade them; and after suffering greatly themselves from the
persecutions of the Jews, and with no unwilling heart, as having faith
undoubting in the truth, at last by Nero’s cruel sword sowed the seed of
Christian blood at <span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-Page_36"></span>Rome. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108.md) Yes, and we shall prove that even your
own gods are effective witnesses for Christ.  It is a great matter if,
to give you faith in Christians, I can bring forward the authority of
the very beings on account of whom you refuse them credit. Thus far we
have carried out the plan we laid down. We have set forth this origin of
our sect and name, with this account of the Founder of Christianity. Let
no one henceforth charge us with infamous wickedness; let no one think
that it is otherwise than we have represented, for none may give a false
account of his religion. For in the very fact that he says he worships
another god than he really does, he is guilty of denying the object of
his worship, and transferring his worship and homage to another; and, in
the transference, he ceases to worship the god he has repudiated. We
say, and before all men we say, and torn and bleeding under your
tortures, we cry out, “We worship God through Christ.” Count Christ a
man, if you please; by Him and in Him God would be known and be adored. 
If the Jews object, we answer that Moses, who was but a man, taught them
their religion; against the Greeks we urge that Orpheus at Pieria,
Musæus at Athens, Melampus at Argos, Trophonius in Bœotia, imposed
religious rites; turning to yourselves, who exercise sway over the
nations, it was the man Numa Pompilius who laid on the Romans a heavy
load of costly superstitions. Surely Christ, then, had a right to reveal
Deity, which was in fact His own essential possession, not with the
object of bringing boors and savages by the dread of multitudinous gods,
whose favour must be won into some civilization, as was the case with
Numa; but as one who aimed to enlighten men already civilized, and under
illusions from their very culture, that they might come to the knowledge
of the truth. Search, then, and see if that divinity of Christ be true.
If it be of such a nature that the acceptance of it transforms a man,
and makes him truly good, there is implied in that the duty of
renouncing what is opposed to it as false; especially and on every
ground that which, hiding itself under the names and images of dead, the
labours to convince men of its divinity by certain signs, and miracles,
and oracles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_103"></span>[34:104](0030027.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p3"></span> \[That is, by the consummation of her
marriage with Joseph.\]

<span id="fn_104"></span>[34:105](0030027.htm#fr_104.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p4"></span> \[Language common among Christians, and
adopted afterwards into the Creed.\]

<span id="fn_105"></span>[35:106](0030027.htm#fr_105.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p5"></span> [Isa. vi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[35:107](0030027.htm#fr_106.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p6"></span> Elucidation V.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[35:108](0030027.htm#fr_107.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p7"></span> Proculus was a Roman senator who
affirmed that Romulus had appeared to him after his death.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[36:109](0030027.htm#fr_108.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxi-p8"></span> \[Chapter l. at close. “The blood of
Christians is the seed of the Church.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.](0030028.md)
