[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030133)  [Next](0030135) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p2"></span>We are worshippers of one God, of whose
existence and character Nature teaches all men; at whose lightnings and
thunders you tremble, whose benefits minister to your happiness. You
think that others, too, are gods, whom we know to be devils.  However,
it is a fundamental human right, a privilege of nature, that every man
should worship according to his own convictions: one man’s religion
neither harms nor helps another man. It is assuredly no part of religion
to compel religion—to which free-will and not force should lead us—the
sacrificial victims even being required of a willing mind. You will
render no real service to your gods by compelling us to sacrifice. For
they can have no desire of offerings from the unwilling, unless they are
animated by a spirit of contention, which is a thing altogether
undivine. Accordingly the true God bestows His blessings alike on wicked
men and on His own elect; upon which account He has appointed an eternal
judgment, when both thankful and unthankful will have to stand before
His bar. Yet you have never detected us—sacrilegious wretches though you
reckon us to be—in any theft, far less in any sacrilege. But the robbers
of your temples, all of them swear by your gods, and worship them; they
are not Christians, and yet it is they who are found guilty of
sacrilegious deeds. We have not time to unfold in how many other ways
your gods are mocked and despised by their own votaries. So, too,
treason is falsely laid to our charge, though no one has ever been able
to find followers of Albinus, or Niger, or Cassius, among Christians;
while the very men who had sworn by the genii of the emperors, who had
offered and vowed sacrifices for their safety, who had often pronounced
condemnation on Christ’s disciples, are till this day found traitors to
the imperial throne. A Christian is enemy to none, least of all to the
Emperor of Rome, whom he knows to be appointed by his God, and so cannot
but love and honour; and whose well-being moreover, he must needs
desire, with that of the empire over which he reigns so long as the
world shall stand—for so long as that shall Rome continue. <span
id="fr_446"></span>[447](#fn_446) To the emperor, therefore, we render
<span id="page_106">p. 106</span> <span
id="iv.vii.ii-Page_106"></span>such reverential homage as is lawful for
us and good for him; regarding him as the human being next to God who
from God has received all his power, and is less than God alone. And
this will be according to his own desires. For thus—as less only than
the true God—he is greater than all besides. Thus he is greater than the
very gods themselves, even they, too, being subject to him. We therefore
sacrifice for the emperor’s safety, but to our God and his, and after
the manner God has enjoined, in simple prayer. For God, Creator of the
universe, has no need of odours or of blood. These things are the food
of devils. <span id="fr_447"></span>[448](#fn_447) But we not only
reject those wicked spirits: we overcome them; we daily hold them up to
contempt; we exorcise them from their victims, as multitudes can
testify. So all the more we pray for the imperial well-being, as those
who seek it at the hands of Him who is able to bestow it. And one would
think it must be abundantly clear to you that the religious system under
whose rules we act is one inculcating a divine patience; since, though
our numbers are so great—constituting all but the majority in every
city—we conduct ourselves so quietly and modestly; I might perhaps say,
known rather as individuals than as organized communities, and
remarkable only for the reformation of our former vices. For far be it
from us to take it ill that we have laid on us the very things we wish,
or in any way plot the vengeance at our own hands, which we expect to
come from God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_446"></span>[105:447](0030134.htm#fr_446) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p3"></span> \[Kaye points out our author’s
inconsistencies on this matter.  If Caractacus ever made the speech
ascribed to him (Bede, or Gibbon, cap. lxxi.) it would confirm the
opinion of those who make him a convert to Christ: “Quando cadet Roma,
cadet et mundus.” Elucidation II.\]

<span id="fn_447"></span>[106:448](0030134.htm#fr_447) <span
id="iv.vii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vii.ii-p4"></span> \[On this sort of Demonology see Kaye,
pp. 203–207, with his useful references. See *De Spectaculis*, p. 80,
*supra*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](0030135)
