[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030249)  [Next](0030251.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xlvi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xlvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVI.—Diversity of Dreams and
Visions. Epicurus Thought Lightly of Them, Though Generally Most Highly
Valued. Instances of Dreams.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlvi-p2"></span>We now find ourselves constrained to
express an opinion about the character of the dreams by which the soul
is excited. And when shall we arrive at the subject of death? And on
such a question I would say, When God shall permit: that admits of no
long delay which must needs happen at all events. Epicurus has given it
as his opinion that dreams are altogether vain things; (but he says
this) when liberating the Deity from all sort of care, and dissolving
the entire order of the world, and giving to all things the aspect of
merest chance, casual in their issues, fortuitous in their nature. Well,
now, if such be the nature of things, there must be some chance even for
truth, because it is impossible for it to be the only thing to be
exempted from the fortune which is due to all things. Homer has assigned
two gates to dreams, <span id="fr_1769"></span>[1770](#fn_1769.md) —the
*horny* one of truth, the *ivory* one of error and delusion. For, they
say, it is possible to see through horn, whereas ivory is
untransparent.  Aristotle, while expressing his opinion that dreams are
in most cases untrue, yet acknowledges that there is some truth in them.
The people of Telmessus will not admit that dreams are in any case
unmeaning, but they blame their own weakness when unable to conjecture
their signification. Now, who is such a stranger to human experience as
not sometimes to have perceived some truth in dreams? I shall force a
blush from Epicurus, if I only glance at some few of the more remarkable
instances. Herodotus <span id="fr_1770"></span>[1771](#fn_1770.md) relates
how that Astyages, king of the Medes, saw in a dream issuing from the
womb of his virgin daughter a flood which inundated Asia; and again, in
the year which followed her marriage, he saw a vine growing out from the
same part of her person, which overspread the whole of Asia. The same
story is told prior to Herodotus by Charon of Lampsacus. Now they who
interpreted these visions did not deceive the mother when they destined
her son for so great an enterprise, for Cyrus both inundated and
overspread Asia. Philip of Macedon, before he became a father, had seen
imprinted on the pudenda of his consort Olympias the form of a small
ring, with a lion as a seal. He had concluded that an offspring from her
was out of the question (I suppose because the lion only becomes once a
father), when Aristodemus or Aristophon happened to conjecture that
nothing of an unmeaning or empty import lay under that seal, but that a
son of very illustrious character was portended. They who know anything
of Alexander recognise in him the lion of that small ring.  Ephorus
writes to this effect.  Again, Heraclides has told us, that a certain
woman of Himera beheld in a dream Dionysius’ tyranny over Sicily. 
Euphorion has publicly recorded as a fact, that, previous to giving
birth to Seleucus, his mother Laodice foresaw that he was destined for
the empire of Asia. I find again from Strabo, that it was owing to a
dream that even Mithridates took possession of Pontus; and I further
learn from Callisthenes that it was from the indication of a dream that
Baraliris the Illyrian stretched his dominion from the Molossi to the
frontiers of Macedon. The Romans, too, were acquainted with dreams of
this kind.  From a dream Marcus Tullius (Cicero) had learnt how that
one, who was yet only a little boy, and in a private station, who was
also plain Julius Octavius, and personally unknown to (Cicero) himself,
was the destined Augustus, <span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xlvi-Page_225"></span>and the suppressor and destroyer of
(Rome’s) civil discords. This is recorded in the Commentaries of
Vitellius. But visions of this prophetic kind were not confined to
predictions of supreme power; for they indicated perils also, and
catastrophes: as, for instance, when Cæsar was absent from the battle of
Philippi through illness, and thereby escaped the sword of Brutus and
Cassius, and then although he expected to encounter greater danger still
from the enemy in the field, he quitted his tent for it, in obedience to
a vision of Artorius, and so escaped (the capture by the enemy, who
shortly after took possession of the tent); as, again, when the daughter
of Polycrates of Samos foresaw the crucifixion which awaited him from
the anointing of the sun and the bath of Jupiter. <span
id="fr_1771"></span>[1772](#fn_1771.md) So likewise in sleep revelations
are made of high honours and eminent talents; remedies are also
discovered, thefts brought to light, and treasures indicated. Thus
Cicero’s eminence, whilst he was still a little boy, was foreseen by his
nurse. The swan from the breast of Socrates soothing men, is his
disciple Plato.  The boxer Leonymus is cured by Achilles in his dreams.
Sophocles the tragic poet discovers, as he was dreaming, the golden
crown, which had been lost from the citadel of Athens. Neoptolemus the
tragic actor, through intimations in his sleep from Ajax himself, saves
from destruction the hero’s tomb on the Rhoetean shore before Troy; and
as he removes the decayed stones, he returns enriched with gold.  How
many commentators and chroniclers vouch for this phenomenon? There are
Artemon, Antiphon, Strato, Philochorus, Epicharmus, Serapion, Cratippus,
and Dionysius of Rhodes, and Hermippus—the entire literature of the
age.  I shall only laugh at all, if indeed I ought to laugh at the man
who fancied that he was going to persuade us that Saturn dreamt before
anybody else; which we can only believe if Aristotle, (who would fain
help us to such an opinion,) lived prior to any other person.  Pray
forgive me for laughing.  Epicharmus, indeed, as well as Philochorus the
Athenian, assigned the very highest place among divinations to dreams. 
The whole world is full of oracles of this description: there are the
oracles of Amphiaraus at Oropus, of Amphilochus at Mallus, of Sarpedon
in the Troad, of Trophonius in Bœotia, of Mopsus in Cilicia, of Hermione
in Macedon, of Pasiphäe in Laconia. Then, again, there are others, which
with their original foundations, rites, and historians, together with
the entire literature of dreams, Hermippus of Berytus in five portly
volumes will give you all the account of, even to satiety.  But the
Stoics are very fond of saying that God, in His most watchful providence
over every institution, gave us dreams amongst other preservatives of
the arts and sciences of divination, as the especial support of the
natural oracle. So much for the dreams to which credit has to be
ascribed even by ourselves, although we must interpret them in another
sense. As for all other oracles, at which no one ever dreams, what else
must we declare concerning them, than that they are the diabolical
contrivance of those spirits who even at that time dwelt in the eminent
persons themselves, or aimed at reviving the memory of them as the mere
stage of their evil purposes, going so far as to counterfeit a divine
power under their shape and form, and, with equal persistence in evil,
deceiving men by their very boons of remedies, warnings, and
forecasts,—the only effect of which was to injure their victims the more
they helped them; while the means whereby they rendered the help
withdrew them from all search after the true God, by insinuating into
their minds ideas of the false one? And of course so pernicious an
influence as this is not shut up nor limited within the boundaries of
shrines and temples: it roams abroad, it flies through the air, and all
the while is free and unchecked. So that nobody can doubt that our very
homes lie open to these diabolical spirits, who beset their human prey
with their fantasies not only in their chapels but also in their
chambers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1769"></span>[224:1770](0030250.htm#fr_1769.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xlvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlvi-p3"></span> See the *Odyssey*, xix. 562, etc.
\[Also, *Æneid*, vi. 894.\]

<span id="fn_1770"></span>[224:1771](0030250.htm#fr_1770.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xlvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlvi-p4"></span> See i. 107, etc.

<span id="fn_1771"></span>[225:1772](0030250.htm#fr_1771.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xlvi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xlvi-p5"></span> See an account of her vision and its
interpretation in Herodot. iv. 124.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dreams Variously Classified. Some are God-Sent, as the Dreams of
Nebuchadnezzar; Others Simply Products of Nature.](0030251.md)
