[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030197)  [Next](0030199.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.x.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.x.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p2"></span>We give offence by proclaiming that there
is one God, to whom the name of God alone belongs, from whom all things
come, and who is Lord of the whole universe. <span
id="fr_1477"></span>[1478](#fn_1477.md) Bear thy testimony, if thou knowest
this to be the truth; for openly and with a perfect liberty, such as we
do not possess, we hear thee both in private and in public exclaim,
“Which may God grant,” and, “If God so will.” By expressions such as
these thou declarest that there is one who is distinctively God, and
thou confessest that all power belongs to him to whose will, as
Sovereign, thou dost look. At the same time, too, thou deniest any
others to be truly gods, in calling them by their own names of Saturn,
Jupiter, Mars, Minerva; for thou affirmest Him to be God alone to whom
thou givest no other name than God; and though thou sometimes callest
these others gods, thou plainly usest the designation as one which does
not really belong to them, but is, so to speak, a borrowed one. Nor is
the nature of the God we declare unknown to thee: “God is good, God does
good,” thou art wont to say; plainly suggesting further, “But man is
evil.” In asserting an antithetic proposition, thou, in a sort of
indirect and figurative way, reproachest man with his wickedness in
departing from a God so good. So, again, as among us, as belonging to
the God of benignity and goodness, “Blessing” is a most sacred act in
our religion and our life, thou too sayest as readily as a Christian
needs, “God bless thee;” and when thou turnest the blessing of God into
a curse, in like manner thy very words confess with us that His power
over us is absolute and entire. There are some who, though they do not
deny the existence of God, hold withal that He is neither Searcher, nor
Ruler, nor Judge; treating with especial disdain those of us who go over
to Christ out of fear of a coming judgment, as they think, honouring God
in freeing Him from the cares of keeping watch, and the trouble of
taking note,—not even regarding Him as capable of anger. For if God,
they say, gets angry, then He is susceptible of corruption and passion;
but that of which passion and corruption can be affirmed may also
perish, which God cannot do. But these very persons elsewhere,
confessing that the soul is divine, and bestowed on us by God, stumble
against a testimony of the soul itself, which affords an answer to these
views. For if either divine or God-given, it doubtless knows its giver;
and if it knows Him, it undoubtedly fears Him too, and especially as
having been by Him endowed so amply. Has it no fear of Him whose favour
it is so desirous to possess, and whose anger it is so anxious to avoid?
Whence, then, the soul’s natural fear of God, if God cannot be angry?
How is there any dread of Him whom nothing offends? What is feared but
anger? Whence comes anger, but from observing what is done? What leads
to watchful oversight, but judgment in prospect? Whence is judgment, but
from power? To whom does supreme authority and power belong, but to God
alone? So thou art always ready, O soul, from thine own knowledge,
nobody casting scorn upon thee, and no one preventing, to exclaim, “God
sees all,” and “I commend thee to God,” and “May God repay,” and “God
shall judge between us.” How happens this, since thou art not Christian?
How is it that, even with the garland of Ceres on the brow, wrapped in
the purple cloak of Saturn, wearing the white robe of the goddess Isis,
thou invokest God as judge? Standing under the statue of Æsculapius,
adorning the brazen image of Juno, arraying the helmet of Minerva with
dusky figures, thou never thinkest of appealing to any of these deities.
In thine own forum thou appealest to a God who is elsewhere; thou
permittest honour to be rendered in thy temples to a foreign god. Oh,
striking testimony to truth, which in the very midst of demons obtains a
witness for us Christians!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[176:1478](0030198.htm#fr_1477.md) <span
id="iv.x.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.x.ii-p3"></span> \[The student of Plato will recall such
evidence, readily. See *The Laws*, in Jowett’s Translation, vol. iv. p.
416. Also Elucidation I.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](0030199.md)
