[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030589)  [Next](0030591.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.viii"></span>

<span id="v.viii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Christianity, by Its
Provision for the Flesh, Has Put on It the Greatest Honour.  The
Privileges of Our Religion in Closest Connection with Our Flesh. Which
Also Bears a Large Share in the Duties and Sacrifices of
Religion.</span>

<span id="v.viii.viii-p2"></span>Now such remarks have I wished to
advance in defence of the flesh, from a general view of the condition of
our human nature. Let us now consider its special relation to
Christianity, and see how vast a privilege before God has been conferred
on this poor and worthless substance. It would suffice to say, indeed,
that there is not a soul that can at all procure salvation, except it
believe whilst it is in the flesh, so true is it that the flesh is the
very condition on which salvation hinges. And since the soul is, in
consequence of its salvation, chosen to the service of God, it is the
flesh which actually renders it capable of such service. The flesh,
indeed, is washed, in order that the soul may be cleansed; the flesh is
anointed, that the soul may be consecrated; the flesh is signed (with
the cross), that the soul too may be fortified; the flesh is shadowed
with the imposition of hands, that the soul also maybe illuminated by
the Spirit; the flesh feeds on the body and blood of Christ, that the
soul likewise may fatten on *its* God. They cannot then be separated in
their recompense, when they are united in their service. Those
sacrifices, moreover, which are acceptable to God—I mean conflicts of
the soul, fastings, and abstinences, and the humiliations which are
annexed to such duty—it is the flesh which performs again and
again <span id="fr_7340"></span>[7341](#fn_7340.md) to its own especial
suffering.  Virginity, likewise, and widowhood, and the modest restraint
in secret on the marriage-bed, and the one only adoption <span
id="fr_7341"></span>[7342](#fn_7341.md) of it, are fragrant offerings to
God paid out of the good services of the flesh. Come, tell me what is
your opinion of the flesh, when it has to contend for the name of
Christ, dragged out to public view, and exposed to the hatred of all
men; when it pines in prisons under the cruellest privation of light, in
banishment from the world, amidst squalor, filth, and noisome food,
without freedom even in sleep, for it is bound on its very pallet and
mangled in its bed of straw; when at length before the public view it is
racked by every kind of torture that can be devised, and when finally it
is spent beneath its agonies, struggling to render its last turn for
Christ by dying for Him—upon His own cross many times, not to say by
still more atrocious devices of torment.  Most blessed, truly, and most
glorious, must be the flesh which can repay its Master Christ so vast a
debt, and so completely, that the only obligation remaining due to Him
is, that it should cease *by death* to owe Him more—all the more bound
*even then in gratitude*, because (for ever) set free.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7340"></span>[551:7341](0030590.htm#fr_7340.md) <span
id="v.viii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.viii-p3"></span> Instaurat.

<span id="fn_7341"></span>[551:7342](0030590.htm#fr_7341.md) <span
id="v.viii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.viii-p4"></span> Una notitia ejus = monogamia.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: God's Love for the Flesh of Man, as Developed in the Grace of
Christ Towards It. The Flesh the Best Means of Displaying the Bounty and
Power of God.](0030591.md)
