[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030008)  [Next](0030010) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p2"></span>What are we to think of it, that most
people so blindly knock their heads against the hatred of the Christian
name; that when they bear favourable testimony to any one, they mingle
with it abuse of the name he bears?  “A good man,” says one, “is Gaius
Seius, only that he is a Christian.” So another, “I am astonished that a
wise man like Lucius should have suddenly become a Christian.” Nobody
thinks it needful to consider whether Gaius is not good and Lucius wise,
on this very account that he is a Christian; or a Christian, for the
reason that he is wise and good. They praise what they know, they abuse
what they are ignorant of, and they inspire their knowledge with their
ignorance; though in fairness you should rather judge of what is unknown
from what is known, than what is known from what is unknown.  Others, in
the case of persons whom, before they took the name of Christian, they
had known as loose, and vile, and wicked, put on them a brand from the
very thing which they praise.  In the blindness of their hatred, they
fall foul of their own approving judgment! “What a woman she was! how
wanton! how gay! What a youth he was! how profligate! how
libidinous!—they have become Christians!” So the hated name is given to
a reformation of character. Some even barter away their comforts for
that hatred, content to bear injury, if they are kept free at home from
the object of their bitter enmity.  The wife, now chaste, the husband,
now no longer jealous, casts out of his house; the son, now obedient,
the father, who used to be so patient, disinherits; the servant, now
faithful, the master, once so mild, commands away from his presence; it
is a high offence for any one to be reformed by the detested name.
Goodness is of less value than hatred of Christians. Well now, if there
is this dislike of the name, what blame can you attach to names? What
accusation can you bring against mere designations, save that something
in the word sounds either barbarous, or unlucky, or scurrilous, or
unchaste? But Christian, so far as the meaning of the word is concerned,
is derived from anointing. Yes, and even when it is wrongly pronounced
by you “Chrestianus” (for you do not even know accurately the name you
hate), it comes from sweetness and benignity. You hate, therefore, in
the guiltless, even a guiltless name. But the special ground of dislike
to the sect is, that it bears the name of its Founder. Is there anything
new in a religious sect getting for its followers a designation from its
master? Are not the philosophers called from the founders of *their*
systems—Platonists, Epicureans, Pythagoreans? Are not the Stoics and
Academics so called also from the places in which they assembled and
stationed themselves? and are not physicians named from Erasistratus,
grammarians from Aristarchus, cooks even from Apicius? And yet the
bearing of the name, transmitted from the original institutor with
whatever he has instituted, offends no one. No doubt, if it is proved
that the sect is a bad one, and so its founder bad as well, that will
prove that the name is bad and deserves our aversion, in respect of the
character both of the sect and its author. Before, therefore, taking up
a dislike to the name, it behoved you to consider the sect in the
author, or the author in the sect. But now, without any sifting and
knowledge of either, the mere name is made matter of accusation, the
mere name is assailed, and a sound alone brings condemnation on a sect
and its author both, while of both you are ignorant, because they have
such and such a designation, not because they are convicted of anything
wrong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](0030010)
