[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030004)  [Next](0030006.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span> <span id="page_3">p. 3</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Introductory Note.</span>

<span id="iv.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.ii-p3"></span>\[<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 145–220.\] <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p3.3"></span>When</span> our Lord repulsed the woman of Canaan
([Matt. xv. 22](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii-p3.4"></span>) with apparent harshness, he applied to her
people the epithet *dogs*, with which the children of Israel had thought
it piety to reproach them. When He accepted her faith and caused it to
be recorded for our learning, He did something more: He reversed the
curse of the Canaanite and showed that the Church was designed “for all
people;” Catholic alike for all time and for all sorts and conditions of
men.

<span id="iv.ii-p4"></span>Thus the North-African Church was loved
before it was born: the Good Shepherd was gently leading those “that
were with young.”  Here was the charter of those Christians to be a
Church, who then were Canaanites in the land of their father Ham.  It is
remarkable indeed that among these pilgrims and strangers to the West
the first elements of Latin Christianity come into view. Even at the
close of the Second Century the Church in Rome is an inconsiderable,
though prominent, member of the great confederation of Christian
Churches which has its chief seats in Alexandria and Antioch, and of
which the entire Literature is Greek. It is an African presbyter who
takes from Latin Christendom the reproach of theological and literary
barrenness and begins the great work in which, upon his foundations,
Cyprian and Augustine built up, with incomparable genius, that
Carthaginian School of Christian thought by which Latin Theology was
dominated for centuries. It is important to note (1.) that
providentially not one of these illustrious doctors died in Communion
with the Roman See, pure though it was and venerable at that time; and
(2.) that to the works of Augustine the Reformation in Germany and
Continental Europe was largely due; while (3.) the *specialties* of the
Anglican Reformation were, in like proportion, due to the writings of
Tertullian and Cyprian. The hinges of great and controlling destinies
for Western Europe and our own America are to be found in the period we
are now approaching.

<span id="iv.ii-p5"></span>The merest school-boy knows much of the
history of Carthage, and how the North Africans became Roman citizens.
How they became Christians is not so clear. A melancholy destiny has
enveloped Carthage from the outset, and its glory and greatness as a
Christian See were transient indeed. It blazed out all at once in
Tertullian, after about a century of missionary labours had been exerted
upon its creation: and having given a Minucius Felix, an Arnobius and a
Lactantius to adorn the earliest period of Western Ecclesiastical
learning, in addition to its nobler luminaries, it rapidly declined. At
the beginning of the Third Century, at a council presided over by
Agrippinus, Bishop of Carthage, there were present not less than seventy
bishops of the Province. A period of cruel persecutions followed, and
the African Church received a baptism of blood.

<span id="iv.ii-p6"></span>Tertullian was born a heathen, and seems to
have been educated at Rome, where he probably practiced as a
jurisconsult. We may, perhaps, adopt most of the ideas of Allix, as
conjecturally probable, and assign his birth to <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> 145. He became a Christian about
<span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span id="iv.ii-Page_4"></span>185, and a
presbyter about 190. The period of his strict orthodoxy very nearly
expires with the century. He lived to an extreme old age, and some
suppose even till <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p6.4"></span>a.d.</span> 240. More probably we must adopt the
date preferred by recent writers, <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p6.5"></span>a.d.</span> 220.

<span id="iv.ii-p7"></span>It seems to be the fashion to treat of
Tertullian as a Montanist, and only incidentally to celebrate his
services to the Catholic Orthodoxy of Western Christendom. Were I his
biographer I should reverse this course, as a mere act of justice, to
say nothing of gratitude to a man of splendid intellect, to whom the
filial spirit of Cyprian accorded the loving tribute of a disciple, and
whose genius stamped itself upon the very words of Latin theology, and
prepared the language for the labours of a Jerome. In creating the
Vulgate, and so lifting the Western Churches into a position of
intellectual equality with the East, the latter as well as St. Augustine
himself were debtors to Tertullian in a degree not to be estimated by
any other than the Providential Mind that inspired his brilliant career
as a Christian.

<span id="iv.ii-p8"></span>In speaking of Tatian I laid the base for
what I wished to say of Tertullian. Let God only be their judge; let us
gratefully recognize the debt we owe to them. Let us read them, as we
read the works of King Solomon. We must, indeed, approve of the
discipline of the Primitive Age, which allowed of no compromises. The
Church was struggling for existence, and could not permit any man to
become her master.  The more brilliant the intellect, the more dangerous
to the poor Church were its perversions of her Testimony.  Before the
heathen tribunals, and in the market-places, it would not answer to let
Christianity appear double-tongued. The orthodoxy of the Church, not
less than her children, was undergoing an ordeal of fire.  It seems a
miracle that her Testimony preserved its unity, and that heresy was
branded as such by the instinct of the Faithful. Poor Tertullian was cut
off by his own act. The weeping Church might bewail him as David mourned
for Absalom, but like David, she could not give the Ark of God into
other hands than those of the loyal and the true. I have set the
writings of Tertullian in a natural and logical order <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) , so as to aid the student, and to relieve
him from the distractions of such an arrangement as one finds in
Oehler’s edition.  Valuable as it is, the practical use of it is
irritating and confusing. The reader of that edition may turn to the
slightly differing schemes of Neander and Kaye, for a theoretical order
of the works; but here he will find a classification which will aid his
inquiries. He will find, first, those works which connect with the
Apologists of the former volumes of this series: which illustrate the
Church’s position toward the outside world, the Jews as well as the
Gentiles. Next come those works which contend with internal differences
and heresies. And then, those which reflect the morals and manners of
Christians. These are classed with some reference to their degrees of
freedom from the Montanistic taint, and are followed, last of all, by
the few tracts which belong to the melancholy period of his lapse, and
are directed against the Church’s orthodoxy.

<span id="iv.ii-p10"></span>Let it be borne in mind, that if this sad
close of Tertullian’s career cannot be extenuated, the later history of
Latin Christianity forbids us to condemn him, in the tones which
proceeded from the Virgin Church with authority, and which the law of
her testimony and the instinct of self-preservation forced her to utter.
Let us reflect that St. Bernard and after him the Schoolmen, whom we so
deservedly honour, separated themselves far more absolutely than ever
Tertullian did from the orthodoxy of Primitive Christendom. The schism
which withdrew the West from Communion with the original seats of
Christendom, and from Nicene Catholicity, was formidable beyond all
expression, in comparison with Tertullian’s entanglements with a
delusion which the See of Rome itself had momentarily patronized. Since
the Council of Trent, not a theologian of the Latins has been free from
organic heresies, compared with which the fanaticism of our author was a
trifling aberration. Since the late Council of the Vatican, essential
Montanism has become organized in the Latin <span id="page_5">p.
5</span> <span id="iv.ii-Page_5"></span>Churches: for what are the new
revelations and oracles of the pontiff but the *deliria* of another
claimant to the voice and inspiration of the Paraclete? Poor Tertullian!
The sad influences of his decline and folly have been fatally felt in
all the subsequent history of the West, but, surely subscribers to the
Modern Creed of the Vatican have reason to “speak gently of *their
father’s* fall.” To Döllinger, with the “Old Catholic” remnant only, is
left the right to name the Montanists heretics, or to upbraid Tertullian
as a lapser from Catholicity. <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p12"></span>From Dr. Holmes, I append the following
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p12.2"></span>Introductory
Notice</span>: <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p14"></span>(I.) <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p14.2"></span>Quintus Septimius Florens Tertullianus</span>,
as our author is called in the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p14.3"></span>mss.</span> of his works, is thus noticed by
Jerome in his *Catalogus Scriptorum Ecclesiasticorum:* <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) “Tertullian, a presbyter, the first Latin
writer after Victor and Apollonius, was a native of the province of
Africa and city of Carthage, the son of a proconsular centurion:  he was
a man of a sharp and vehement temper, flourished under Severus and
Antoninus Caracalla, and wrote numerous works, which (as they are
generally known) I think it unnecessary to particularize.  I saw at
Concordia, in Italy, an old man named Paulus. He said that when young he
had met at Rome with an aged amanuensis of the blessed Cyprian, who told
him that Cyprian never passed a day without reading some portion of
Tertullian’s works, and used frequently to say, *Give me my master*,
meaning Tertullian. After remaining a presbyter of the church until he
had attained the middle age of life, Tertullian was, by the envy and
contumelious treatment of the Roman clergy, driven to embrace the
opinions of Montanus, which he has mentioned in several of his works
under the title of the New Prophecy.…He is reported to have lived to a
very advanced age, and to have composed many other works which are not
extant.” We add Bishop Kaye’s notes on this extract, in an abridged
shape: “The correctness of some parts of this account has been
questioned. Doubts have been entertained whether Tertullian was a
presbyter, although these have solely arisen from Roman Catholic
objections to a married priesthood; for it is certain that he was
married, there being among his works two treatises addressed to his
wife.…Another question has been raised respecting the place where
Tertullian officiated as a presbyter—whether at Carthage or at Rome.
That he at one time resided at Carthage may be inferred from Jerome’s
statement, and is rendered certain by several passages of his own
writings. Allix supposes that the notion of his having been a presbyter
of the Roman Church owed its rise to what Jerome said of the envy and
abuse of the Roman clergy impelling him to espouse the party of
Montanus.  Optatus, <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) and the author of
the work *de Hæresibus*, which Sirmond edited under the title of
Prædestinatus, expressly call him a Carthaginian presbyter. Semler,
however, in a dissertation inserted in his edition of Tertullian’s
works, <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md) contends that he was a
presbyter of the Roman Church. Eusebius <span
id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md) tells us that he was accurately acquainted
with the Roman laws, and on other accounts a distinguished person at
Rome. <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) Tertullian displays, moreover, a
knowledge of the <span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_6"></span>proceedings of the Roman Church with respect to
Marcion and Valentinus, who were once members of it, which could
scarcely have been obtained by one who had not himself been numbered
amongst its presbyters. <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) Semler admits
that, after Tertullian seceded from the church, he left and returned to
Carthage. Jerome does not inform us whether Tertullian was born of
Christian parents, or was converted to Christianity. There are passages
in his writings <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) which seem to imply
that he had been a Gentile; yet he may perhaps mean to describe, not his
own condition, but that of Gentiles in general, before their conversion.
Allix and the majority of commentators understand them literally, as
well as some other passages in which he speaks of his own infirmities
and sinfulness. His writings show that he flourished at the period
specified by Jerome—that is, during the reigns of Severus and Antoninus
Caracalla, or between the years <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p21.1"></span>a.d.</span> 193 and 216; but they supply no
precise information respecting the date of his birth, or any of the
principal occurrences of his life. Allix places his birth about 145 or
150; his conversion to Christianity about <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p21.2"></span>a.d.</span> 185; his marriage about 186; his
admission to the priesthood <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) about
192; his adoption of the opinions of Montanus about 199; and his death
about <span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p22.1"></span>a.d.</span> 220.
But these dates, it must be understood, rest entirely on
conjecture.” <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p24"></span>(II.)  Tertullian’s work against Marcion, as
it happens, is, *as to its date*, the best authenticated—perhaps the
only well authenticated—particular connected with the author’s life. He
himself <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) mentions the fifteenth year
of the reign of Severus as the time when he was writing the work: “Ad
xv. jam Severi imperatoris.” This agrees with Jerome’s Chronicle, where
occurs this note: “Anno 2223 Severi xvº Tertullianus…celebratur.” <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) This year is assigned to the year of our
Lord 207; <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md) but notwithstanding the
certainty of this date, it is far from clear that it describes more than
the time of the publication of *the first book*. On the contrary, it is
nearly certain that the other books, although connected manifestly
enough in the author’s argument and purpose (compare the initial and the
final chapters of the several books), were yet issued at separate times.
Noesselt <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) shows that between the
Book i. and Books ii.–iv. Tertullian issued his *De Præscript. Hæret.*,
and previous to Book v. he published his tracts, *De Carne Christi* and
*De Resurrectione Carnis*. After giving the incontestable date of the
xv. of Severus for the first book, he says it is a mistake to suppose
that the other books were published with it. He adds: “Although we
cannot undertake to determine whether Tertullian issued his Books ii.,
iii., iv., against Marcion, together or separately, or in what year, we
yet venture to affirm that Book v. appeared apart from the rest. For the
tract *De Resurr. Carnis* appears from its second chapter to have been
published after the tract *De Carne Christi*, in which latter work
(chap. vii.) he quotes a passage from the fourth book against Marcion. 
But in his Book v. against Marcion (chap. x.), he refers to his work *De
Resurr. Carnis*; which circumstance makes it evident that Tertullian
published his Book v. at a different time from his Book iv. In his Book
i. he announces his intention (chap. i.) of some time or other
completing his tract *De Præscript. Hæret*., but in his book *De Carne
Christi* (chap. ii.), he mentions how he had completed it,—a conclusive
proof that his Book i. against Marcion preceded the other books.”

<span id="iv.ii-p29"></span><span id="page_7">p. 7</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_7"></span>(III.) Respecting Marcion himself, the most
formidable heretic who had as yet opposed revealed truth, enough will
turn up in this treatise, with the notes which we have added in
explanation, to satisfy the reader. It will, however, be convenient to
give here a few introductory particulars of him. Tertullian <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) mentions Marcion as being, with
Valentinus, in communion with the Church at Rome, “under the episcopate
of the blessed Eleutherus.” He goes on to charge them with
“ever-restless curiosity, with which they infected even the brethren;”
and informs us that they were more than once put out of
communion—“Marcion, indeed, with the 200 sesterces which he brought into
the church.” <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md) He goes on to say,
that “being at last condemned to the banishment of a perpetual
separation, they sowed abroad the poisons of their doctrines.
Afterwards, when Marcion, having professed penitence, agreed to the
terms offered to him, that he should receive reconciliation on condition
that he brought back to the church the rest also, whom he had trained up
for perdition, he was prevented by death.” He was a native of Sinope in
Pontus, of which city, according to an account preserved by
Epiphanius, <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md) which, however, is
somewhat doubtful, his father was bishop, and of high character both for
his orthodoxy and exemplary practice. He came to Rome soon after the
death of Hyginus, probably about <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p32.1"></span>a.d.</span> 141 or 142; and soon after his
arrival he adopted the heresy of Cerdon. <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p34"></span>(IV.) It is an interesting question as to
what edition of the Holy Scriptures Tertullian used in his very copious
quotations. It may at once be asserted that he did not cite from the
Hebrew, although some writers have claimed for him, among his varied
learning, a knowledge of the sacred language. Bp. Kaye observes, page
61, n. 1, that “he sometimes speaks as if he was acquainted with
Hebrew,” and refers to the *Anti-Marcion* iv. 39, the *Adv. Praxeam* v.,
and the *Adv. Judæos* ix. Be this as it may, it is manifest that
Tertullian’s Scripture passages never resemble the Hebrew, but in nearly
every instance the Septuagint, whenever, as is most frequently the case,
that version differs from the original. In the New Testament there is,
as might be expected, a tolerably close conformity to the Greek. There
is, however, it must be allowed, a sufficiently frequent variation from
the letter of both the Greek Testaments to justify Semler’s suspicion
that Tertullian always quoted from the old Latin version, <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) whatever that might have been, which was
current in the African church in the second and third centuries. The
most valuable part of Semler’s *Dissertatio de varia et incerta indole
Librorum Q. S. F. Tertulliani* is his investigation of this very point.
In section iv. he endeavours to prove this proposition: “Hic
scriptor <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) non in manibus habuit
Græcos libros sacros;” and he states his conclusion thus: “Certissimum
est nec Tertullianum nec Cyprianum nec ullum scriptorem e Latinis illis
ecclesiasticis provocare unquam ad Græcorum librorum auctoritatem si vel
maxime obscura aut contraria lectio occurreret;” and again: “Ex his
satis certum est, Latinos satis diu secutos fuisse auctoritatem suorum
librorum adversus Græcos, nec concessisse nisi serius, cum Augustini et
Hieronymi nova auctoritas juvare videretur.” It is not ignorance of
Greek which is imputed to Tertullian, for he is said to have well
understood that language, and even to have composed in it. He probably
followed the Latin, as writers now usually quote the authorized English,
as being current and best known among their readers. Independent
feeling, also, would have weight with such a temper as Tertullian’s, to
say nothing of the suspicion which largely prevailed in the African
branch of the Latin church, that the Greek copies of the Scriptures were
much corrupted by the heretics, who were chiefly, if not wholly, Greeks
or Greek-speaking persons.

<span id="iv.ii-p37"></span>(V.) Whatever perverting effect Tertullian’s
secession to the sect of Montanus <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md)
may have <span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_8"></span>had on his judgment in his latest writings, it
did not vitiate the work against Marcion. With a few trivial exceptions,
this treatise may be read by the strictest Catholic without any feeling
of annoyance. His lapse to Montanism is set down conjecturally as having
taken place <span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p38.2"></span>a.d.</span>
199. Jerome, we have seen, attributed the event to his quarrel with the
Roman clergy, but this is at least doubtful; nor must it be forgotten
that Tertullian’s mind seems to have been peculiarly suited by
nature <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md) to adopt the mystical
notions and ascetic principles of Montanus. It is satisfactory to find
that, on the whole, “the authority of Tertullian,” as the learned Dr.
Burton says, “upon great points of doctrine is considered to be little,
if at all, affected by his becoming a Montanist.” (*Lectures on Eccl.
Hist.* vol. ii. p. 234.) Besides the different works which are expressly
mentioned in the notes of this volume, recourse has been had by the
translator to Dupin’s *Hist. Eccl. Writers* (trans.), vol. i. pp. 69–86;
Tillemont’s *<span id="iv.ii-p39.3"></span>Mèmoires Hist. Eccl*. iii.
85–103; Dr. Smith’s *Greek and Roman Biography*, articles “Marcion” and
“Tertullian;” Schaff’s article, in Herzog’s *Cyclopædia*, on
“Tertullian;” Munter’s *Primordia Eccl. Africanæ*, pp. 118–150;
Robertson’s *Church Hist*. vol. i. pp. 70–77; Dr. P. Schaff’s *Hist. of
Christian Church* (New York, 1859, pp. 511–519), and Archdeacon Evans’
*Biography of the Early Church*, vol. i. (Lives of “Marcion,” pp.
93–122, and “Tertullian,” pp. 325–363).  This last work, though of a
popular cast, shows a good deal of research and learning, expressed in
the pleasant style of the once popular author of *The Rectory of Vale
Head*. The translator has mentioned these works, because they are all
quite accessible to the general reader, and will give him adequate
information concerning the subject treated in the present volume.

<span id="iv.ii-p40"></span>To this introduction of Dr. Holmes must be
added that of Mr. Thelwall, the translator of the Third volume in the
Edinburgh Series, as follows:

<span id="iv.ii-p41"></span>To arrange chronologically the works
(especially if numerous) of an author whose own date is known with
tolerable precision, is not always or necessarily easy: witness the
controversies as to the succession of St. Paul’s epistles. To do this in
the case of an author whose own date is itself a matter of controversy
may therefore be reasonably expected to be still less so; and such is
the predicament of him who attempts to perform this task for Tertullian.
I propose to give a specimen or two of the difficulties with which the
task is beset; and then to lay before the reader briefly a summary of
the results at which eminent scholars, who have devoted much time and
thought to the subject, have arrived. Such a course, I think, will at
once afford him means of judging of the absolute impossibility of
arriving at definite certainty in the matter; and induce him to excuse
me if I prefer furnishing him with materials from which to deduce his
own conclusions, rather than venturing on an *ex cathedra* decision on
so doubtful a subject.

<span id="iv.ii-p42"></span>I. The book, as Dr. Holmes has reminded
us, <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) of the date of which we seem to
have the <span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_9"></span>surest evidence, is *Adv. Marc*. i. This book
was in course of writing, as its author himself (c. 15) tells us, “in
the fifteenth year of the empire of Severus.” Now this date would be
clear if there were no doubt as to which year of our era corresponds to
Tertullian’s fifteenth of Severus. Pamelius, however, says Dr. Holmes,
makes it <span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p43.2"></span>a.d.</span> 208;
Clinton, (whose authority is more recent and better,) 207.

<span id="iv.ii-p44"></span>2. Another book which promises to give some
clue to its date is the *de Pallio*. <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md) The writer uses these phrases: “præsentis
imperii *triplex virtus*;” “Deo *tot Augustis in unum* favente;” which
show that there were at the time three persons unitedly bearing the
title *Augusti*—not *Cæsares* only, but the still higher
*Augusti*;—while the remainder of that context, as well as the opening
of c. 1, indicates a time of peace of some considerable duration; a time
of plenty; and a time during and previous to which great changes had
taken place in the general aspect of the Roman Empire, and some
particular traitor had been discovered and frustrated. Such a
combination of circumstances might seem to fix the date with some degree
of assurance. But unhappily, as Kaye reminds us, <span
id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md) commentators cannot agree as to who the
three Augusti are. Some say Severus, Caracalla, and *Albinus*; some say
Severus, Caracalla, and *Geta*.  Hence we have a difference of some
twelve years or thereabouts in the computations. For Albinus was
defeated by Severus in person, and fell by his own hand, in <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p46.1"></span>a.d.</span> 197; and Geta,
Severus’ second son, brother of Caracalla, was not associated by his
father with himself and his other son as *Augustus* until <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p46.2"></span>a.d.</span> 208, though he had
received the title of *Cæsar* ten years before, in the same year in
which *Caracalla* had received that of Augustus. <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) For my own part, I may perhaps be allowed
to say that I should incline to agree, like Salmasius, with those who
assign the later date. The limits of the present Introduction forbid my
entering at large into my reasons for so doing. I am, however, supported
in it by the authority of Neander. <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md)
In one point, though, I should hesitate to agree with Oehler, who
appears to follow Salmasius and others herein,—namely, in understanding
the expression “et cacto et rubo subdolæ familiaritatis convulso” of
*Albinus*. It seems to me the words might with more propriety be applied
to *Plautianus*; and that in the word “familiaritatis” we may see (after
Tertullian’s fashion) a play upon the meaning, with a reference not only
to the long-standing but mischievous *intimacy* which existed between
Severus and his countryman (perhaps fellow-townsman) Plautianus, who for
his harshness and cruelty is fitly compared to the prickly *cactus*.  He
alludes likewise to the alliance which this ambitious prætorian præfect
had contrived to contract with the *family* of the emperor, by the
marriage of his daughter Plautilla to Caracalla,—an event which, as it
turned out, led to his own death. Thus in the “*rubo*” there may be a
reference to the ambitious and conceited “bramble” of Jotham’s
parable, <span id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29.md) and perhaps, too, to the
“thistle” of Jehoash’s. <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30.md) If this be
so, the date would be at least approximately fixed, as Plautianus did
not marry his daughter to Caracalla till <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p50.2"></span>a.d.</span> 203, and was himself put to death in
the following year, 204, while Geta, as we have seen, was made Augustus
in 208.

<span id="iv.ii-p51"></span>3. The date of the *Apology*, however, is
perhaps at once the most contested, and the most strikingly illustrative
of the difficulties to which allusion has been made.  It is not
surprising that its date *should* have been more disputed than that of
other pieces, inasmuch as it is the best known, and (for some reasons)
the most interesting and famous, of all our author’s productions. In
fact, the dates assigned to it by different authorities vary from
Mosheim’s 198 to that suggested by the very learned Allix, who assigns
it to 217. <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p53"></span><span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_10"></span>4. Once more.  In the tract *de Monogamia* (c.
3) the author says that since the date of St. Paul’s first Epistle to
the Corinthians “about 160 years had elapsed.”  Here, again, did we only
know with certainty the precise date of that epistle, we could ascertain
“about” the date of the tract. But (a) the date of the epistle is itself
variously given, Burton giving it as early as <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p53.2"></span>a.d.</span> 52, Michaelis and Mill as late as
57; and (b) Tertullian only says, “Armis *circiter* <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p53.4"></span>clx</span>. exinde productis;”
while the way in which, in the *ad Natt.*, within the short space of
three chapters, he states first <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32.md)
that 250, and then (in c. 9) that 300, years had not elapsed since the
rise of the Christian name, leads us to think that here again <span
id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33.md) he only desires to speak in round
numbers, meaning perhaps *more* than 150, but *less* than 170.

<span id="iv.ii-p56"></span>These specimens must suffice, though it
might be easy to add to them. There is, however, another classification
of our author’s writings which has been attempted. Finding the
haplessness of strict chronological accuracy, commentators have seized
on the idea that peradventure there might be found at all events some
internal marks by which to determine which of them were written before,
which after, the writer’s secession to Montanism. It may be confessed
that this attempt has been somewhat more successful than the other. Yet
even here there are two formidable obstacles standing in our way. The
first and greatest is, that the natural temper of Tertullian was from
the first so akin to the spirit of Montanism, that, unless there occur
distinct allusions to the “New Prophecy,” or expressions specially
connected with Montanistic phraseology, the *general tone* of any
treatise is not a very safe guide. The second is, that the
subject-matter of some of the treatises is not such as to afford much
scope for the introduction of the peculiarities of a sect which
professed to differ in discipline only, not doctrine, from the church at
large.

<span id="iv.ii-p57"></span>Still the result of this classification
seems to show one important feature of agreement between commentators,
however they may differ upon details; and that is, that considerably the
larger part of our author’s rather voluminous productions <span
id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34.md) must have been subsequent to his lamented
secession. I think the best way to give the reader means for forming his
own judgment will be, as I have said, to lay before him in parallel
columns a tabular view of the disposition of the books by Dr. Neander
and Bishop Kaye. These two modern writers, having given particular care
to the subject, bringing to bear upon it all the advantages derived from
wide reading, eminent abilities, and a diligent study of the works of
preceding writers on the same questions, <span
id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35.md) have a special right to be heard upon the
matter in hand; and I think, if I may be allowed to say so, that, for
calm judgment, and minute acquaintance with his author, I shall not be
accused of undue partiality if I express my opinion that, as far as my
own observation goes, the palm must be awarded to the Bishop. In this
view I am supported by the fact that the accomplished Professor
Ramsay, <span id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) follows Dr. Kaye’s
arrangement. I premise that Dr. Neander adopts a threefold division,
into:

<span id="iv.ii-p61"></span>1. Writings which were occasioned by the
relation of the Christians to the heathen, and refer to their
vindication of Christianity against the heathen; attacks on heathenism;
the sufferings and conduct of Christians under persecution; and the
intercourse of Christians with heathens:

<span id="iv.ii-p62"></span>2. Writings which relate to Christian and
church life, and to ecclesiastical discipline:

<span id="iv.ii-p63"></span>3. The dogmatic and dogmatico-controversial
treatises.

<span id="iv.ii-p64"></span>And under each head he subdivides into:

<span id="iv.ii-p65"></span>a. Pre-Montanist writings; b. Post-Montanist
writings:

<span id="iv.ii-p66"></span><span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_11"></span>thus leaving no room for what Kaye calls
“works respecting which nothing certain can be pronounced.” For the sake
of clearness, this order has not been followed in the table. On the
other side, it will be seen that Dr. Kaye, while not assuming to speak
with more than a reasonable probability, is careful so to arrange the
treatises under each head as to show the order, so far as it is
discoverable, in which the books under that head were published; i.e.,
if one book is quoted in another book, the book so quoted, if distinctly
referred to as already before the world, is plainly anterior to that in
which it is quoted. Thus, then, have:

<span id="iv.ii-p67"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p67.1"></span>Neander.</span>

<span id="iv.ii-p68"></span>I. *Pre-Montanist.*

<span id="iv.ii-p69"></span>1. De Pœnitentia.

<span id="iv.ii-p70"></span>2. De Oratione.

<span id="iv.ii-p71"></span>3. De Baptismo.

<span id="iv.ii-p72"></span>4. Ad Uxorem i.

<span id="iv.ii-p73"></span>5. Ad Uxorem ii.

<span id="iv.ii-p74"></span>6. Ad Martyres.

<span id="iv.ii-p75"></span>7. De Patientia.

<span id="iv.ii-p76"></span>8. De Spectaculis.

<span id="iv.ii-p77"></span>9. De Idololatria.

<span id="iv.ii-p78"></span>10. 11. Ad Nationes i. ii.

<span id="iv.ii-p79"></span>12. Apologeticus.

<span id="iv.ii-p80"></span>13. De Testimonio Animæ.

<span id="iv.ii-p81"></span>14. De Præscr. Hæreticorum.

<span id="iv.ii-p82"></span>15. De Cult. Fem. i.

<span id="iv.ii-p83"></span>16. De Cult. Fem. ii.

<span id="iv.ii-p84"></span>II. *Montanist.*

<span id="iv.ii-p85"></span>17–21. Adv. Marc. i. ii. iii. iv. v.

<span id="iv.ii-p86"></span>22. De Anima.

<span id="iv.ii-p87"></span>23. De Carne Christi.

<span id="iv.ii-p88"></span>24. De Res. Carn.

<span id="iv.ii-p89"></span>25. De Cor. Mil.

<span id="iv.ii-p90"></span>26. De Virg. Vel.

<span id="iv.ii-p91"></span>27. De Ex. Cast.

<span id="iv.ii-p92"></span>28. De Monog.

<span id="iv.ii-p93"></span>29. De Jejuniis.

<span id="iv.ii-p94"></span>30. De Pudicitia.

<span id="iv.ii-p95"></span>31. De Pallio.

<span id="iv.ii-p96"></span>32. Scorpiace.

<span id="iv.ii-p97"></span>33. Ad Scapulam.

<span id="iv.ii-p98"></span>34. Adv. Valentinianos.

<span id="iv.ii-p99"></span>35. Adv. Hermogenem.

<span id="iv.ii-p100"></span>36. Adv. Praxeam.

<span id="iv.ii-p101"></span>37. Adv. Judæos.

<span id="iv.ii-p102"></span>38. De Fuga in Persecutione.

<span id="iv.ii-p103"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p103.1"></span>Kaye.</span>

<span id="iv.ii-p104"></span>I. *Pre-Montanist* (probably).

<span id="iv.ii-p105"></span>1. De Pœnitentia. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p107"></span>2. De Oratione.

<span id="iv.ii-p108"></span>3. De Baptismo.

<span id="iv.ii-p109"></span>4. Ad Uxorem i.

<span id="iv.ii-p110"></span>5. Ad Uxorem ii.

<span id="iv.ii-p111"></span>6. Ad Martyres.

<span id="iv.ii-p112"></span>7. De Patientia.

<span id="iv.ii-p113"></span>8. Adv. Judæos.

<span id="iv.ii-p114"></span>9. De Præscr. Hæreticorum. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p116"></span>II. *Montanist* (certainly).

<span id="iv.ii-p117"></span>10. Adv. Marc. i.

<span id="iv.ii-p118"></span>11. Adv. Marc. ii. <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p120"></span>12. De Anima. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p122"></span>13. Adv. Marc. iii.

<span id="iv.ii-p123"></span>14. Adv. Marc. iv. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p125"></span>15. De Carne Christi. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p127"></span>16. De Resurrectione Carnis. <span
id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p129"></span>17. Adv. Marc. v.

<span id="iv.ii-p130"></span>18. Adv. Praxeam.

<span id="iv.ii-p131"></span>19. Scorpiace. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p133"></span>20. De Corona Militis.

<span id="iv.ii-p134"></span>21. De Virginibus Velandis.

<span id="iv.ii-p135"></span>22. De Exhortatione Castitatis.

<span id="iv.ii-p136"></span>23. De Fuga in Persecutione.

<span id="iv.ii-p137"></span>24. De Monogamia. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[46](#fn_45.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p139"></span>25. De Jejuniis.

<span id="iv.ii-p140"></span>26. De Pudicitia.

<span id="iv.ii-p141"></span>III. *Montanist* (probably).

<span id="iv.ii-p142"></span>27. Adv. Valentinianos.

<span id="iv.ii-p143"></span>28. Ad Scapulam.

<span id="iv.ii-p144"></span>29. De Spectaculis. <span
id="fr_46"></span>[47](#fn_46.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p146"></span>30. De Idololatria.

<span id="iv.ii-p147"></span>31. De Cultu Feminarum i.

<span id="iv.ii-p148"></span>32. De Cultu Feminarum ii.

<span id="iv.ii-p149"></span>IV. *Works respecting which nothing certain
can be pronounced.*

<span id="iv.ii-p150"></span>33. The Apology. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[48](#fn_47.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p152"></span>34. Ad Nationes i.

<span id="iv.ii-p153"></span>35. Ad Nationes ii.

<span id="iv.ii-p154"></span>36. De Testimonio Animæ.

<span id="iv.ii-p155"></span>37. De Pallio.

<span id="iv.ii-p156"></span>38. Adv. Hermogenem.

<span id="iv.ii-p157"></span><span id="page_12">p. 12</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_12"></span>A comparison of these two lists will show that
the difference between the two great authorities is, as Kaye remarks,
“not great; and with respect to some of the tracts on which we differ,
the learned author expresses himself with great diffidence.” <span
id="fr_48"></span>[49](#fn_48.md) The main difference, in fact, is that
which affects two tracts upon kindred subjects, the *de Spectaculis*,
and *Idololatria*, the *de Cultu Feminarum* (a subject akin to the other
two), and the *adv. Judæos*. With reference to all these, except the
last, to which I believe the Archdeacon does not once refer, the
Bishop’s opinion appears to have the support of Archdeacon Evans, whose
learned and interesting essay, referred to in the note, appears in a
volume published in 1837. Dr. Kaye’s Lectures, on which his book is
founded, were delivered in 1825.  Of the date of his first edition I am
not aware. Dr. Neander’s *Antignostikus* also first appeared in 1825.
The preface to his second edition bears date July 1, 1849 <span
id="fr_49"></span>[50](#fn_49.md) . As to the *adv. Judæos*, I confess I
agree with Neander in thinking that, at all events from the beginning of
c. 9, it is spurious.  If it be urged that Jerome expressly quotes it as
Tertullian’s, I reply, Jerome so quotes it, I believe, when he is
expounding *Daniel*. Now all that the *adv. Jud.* has to say about
*Daniel* ends with the end of c. 8. It is therefore quite compatible
with the fact thus stated to recognize the earlier half of the book as
genuine, and to reject the rest, beginning, as it happens, just after
the eighth chapter, as spurious. Perhaps Dr. Neander’s Jewish birth and
training peculiarly fit him to be heard on this question. Nor do I think
Professor Ramsay (in the article above alluded to) has quite seen the
force of Kaye’s own remarks on Neander. <span
id="fr_50"></span>[51](#fn_50.md) What he does say is equally creditable to
his candour and his accuracy; namely: “The instances alleged by Dr.
Neander, in proof of this position, are undoubtedly very remarkable; but
if the concluding chapters of the tract are spurious, no ground seems to
be left for asserting that the genuine portion was posterior to the
third Book against Marcion, <span id="fr_51"></span>[52](#fn_51.md) —and
none, consequently, for asserting that it was written by a Montanist.”
With which remark I must draw these observations on the genuine extant
works of Tertullian to a close.

<span id="iv.ii-p162"></span>The next point to which a brief reference
must be made is the *lost works* of Tertullian, lists of these are given
both by Oehler and by Kaye, viz.:

<span id="iv.ii-p163"></span>1. A Book on Aaron’s Robes: mentioned by
Jerome, Epist. 128, *ad Fabiolam de Veste Sacerdotali* (tom. ii. p. 586,
Opp. ed. Bened.).

<span id="iv.ii-p164"></span>2. A Book on the Superstition of the
Age. <span id="fr_52"></span>[53](#fn_52.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p166"></span>3. A Book on the Submission of the Soul.

<span id="iv.ii-p167"></span>4. A Book on the Flesh and the Soul.

<span id="iv.ii-p168"></span>Nos. 2, 3, and 4 are known only by their
titles, which are found in the Index to Tertullian’s works given in the
*Codex Agobardi*; but the tracts themselves are not extant in the <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p168.2"></span>ms.</span>, which appears to
have once contained—

<span id="iv.ii-p169"></span>5. A Book on Paradise, named in the Index,
and referred to in *de Anima* 55, *adv. Marc*. iii. 12; and

<span id="iv.ii-p170"></span>6. A Book on the Hope of the Faithful: also
named in the Index, and referred to *adv.* <span id="page_13">p.
13</span> <span id="iv.ii-Page_13"></span>*Marc*. iii. 24; and by Jerome
in his account of Papias, <span id="fr_53"></span>[54](#fn_53.md) and on
[Ezek. xxxvi.](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#000.md)<span
id="iv.ii-p171.1"></span>; <span id="fr_54"></span>[55](#fn_54.md) and by
Gennadius of Marseilles. <span id="fr_55"></span>[56](#fn_55.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p174"></span>7. Six Books on Ecstasy, with a seventh in
reply to Apollonius: <span id="fr_56"></span>[57](#fn_56.md) see
Jerome. <span id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57.md) See, too, J. A. Fabricius
on the words of the unknown author whom the Jesuit Sirmond edited under
the name *Prædestinatus*; who gathers thence that “Soter, pope of the
City, <span id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) and Apollonius, bishop <span
id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) of the Ephesians, wrote a book against
the Montanists; *in reply to whom* Tertullian, a Carthaginian presbyter,
wrote.” J. Pamelius thinks these seven books were originally published
*in Greek*.

<span id="iv.ii-p179"></span>8. A Book in reply to the Apellesites (i.e.
the followers of Apelles <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60) .md):
referred to in *de Carne Christi*, c. 8.

<span id="iv.ii-p181"></span>9. A Book on the Origin <span
id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) of the Soul, in reply to Hermogenes: 
referred to in *de Anima*, cc. 1, 3, 22, 24.

<span id="iv.ii-p183"></span>10. A Book on Fate: referred to by
Fulgentius Planciades, p. 562, Merc.; also referred to as either
written, or intended to be written, by Tertullian himself, *de Anima*,
c. 20. Jerome <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) states that there was
extant, or had been extant, a book on Fate under the name of Minucius
Felix, written indeed by a perspicuous author, but not in the style of
Minucius Felix. This, Pamelius judged, should perhaps be rather ascribed
to Tertullian.

<span id="iv.ii-p185"></span>11. A Book on the Trinity. Jerome <span
id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) says: “Novatian wrote.…a large volume on
the Trinity, *as if making an epitome of a work of Tertullian’s, which
most men not knowing regard it as Cyprian’s*.” Novatian’s book stood in
Tertullian’s name in the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p186.1"></span>mss.</span> of J. Gangneius, who was the first
to edit it; in a Malmesbury <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p186.2"></span>ms.</span> which Sig. Gelenius used; and in
others.

<span id="iv.ii-p187"></span>12. A Book addressed to a Philosophic
Friend on the Straits of Matrimony. Both Kaye and Oehler <span
id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) are in doubt whether Jerome’s
words, <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) by which some have been led
to conclude that Tertullian wrote some book or books on this and kindred
subjects, really imply as much, or whether they may not refer merely to
those tracts and passages in his extant writings which touch upon such
matters. Kaye hesitates to think that the “Book to a Philosophic Friend”
is the same as the *de Exhortatione Castitatis*, because Jerome says
Tertullian wrote on the subject of celibacy “*in his youth*;” but as
Cave takes what Jerome elsewhere says of Tertullian’s leaving the Church
“*about the middle of his age*” to mean his *spiritual age*, the same
sense might attach to his words here too, and thus obviate the Bishop’s
difficulty.

<span id="iv.ii-p190"></span>There are some other works which have been
attributed to Tertullian—on Circumcision; on Animals Clean and Unclean;
on the truth that God is a Judge—which Oehler likewise rejects,
believing that the expressions of Jerome refer only to passages in the
*Anti-Marcion* and other extant works. To Novatian Jerome does ascribe a
distinct work on Circumcision, <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md) and
this may (comp. 11, just above) have given rise to the view that
Tertullian had written one also.

<span id="iv.ii-p192"></span>There were, moreover, three treatises at
least written by Tertullian *in Greek*. They are:

<span id="iv.ii-p193"></span>1. A Book on Public Shows. See *de Cor*. c.
6.

<span id="iv.ii-p194"></span>2. A Book on Baptism. See *de Bapt*. c. 15.

<span id="iv.ii-p195"></span>3. A Book on the Veiling of Virgins. See de
*V. V.* c. 1.

<span id="iv.ii-p196"></span><span id="page_14">p. 14</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_14"></span>Oehler adds that J. Pamelius, in his epistle
dedicatory to Philip II. of Spain, makes mention of a *Greek copy* of
Tertullian in the library of that king. This report, however, since
nothing has ever been seen or heard of the said copy from that time,
Oehler judges to be erroneous. <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md)

<span id="iv.ii-p198"></span>It remains briefly to notice the
confessedly spurious works which the editions of Tertullian generally
have appended to them. With these Kaye does not deal. The fragment,
*adv. omnes Hæreses*, Oehler attributes to Victorinus Petavionensis,
i.e., Victorinus bishop of Pettaw, on the Drave, in Austrian Styria. It
was once thought he ought to be called *Pictaviensis*, i.e. of
*Poictiers*; but John Launoy <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) has
shown this to be an error.  Victorinus is said by Jerome to have
“understood Greek better than Latin; hence his works are excellent for
the sense, but mean as to the style.” <span
id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) Cave believes him to have been a Greek by
birth. Cassiodorus <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) states him to
have been once a professor of rhetoric. Jerome’s statement agrees with
the style of the tract in question; and Jerome distinctly says
Victorinus did write *adversus omnes Hæreses*. Allix leaves the question
of its authorship quite uncertain. If Victorinus be the author, the book
falls clearly within the Ante-Nicene period; for Victorinus fell a
martyr in the Diocletian persecution, probably about <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p201.2"></span>a.d.</span> 303.

<span id="iv.ii-p202"></span>The next fragment—“Of the Execrable Gods of
the Heathens”—is of quite uncertain authorship.  Oehler would attribute
it “to some declaimer not quite ignorant of Tertullian’s writings,” but
certainly not to Tertullian himself.

<span id="iv.ii-p203"></span>Lastly we come to the metrical fragments.
Concerning these, it is perhaps impossible to assign them to their
rightful owners.  Oehler has not troubled himself much about them; but
he seems to regard the *Jonah* as worthy of more regard than the rest,
for he seems to have intended giving more labour to its editing at some
future time. Whether he has ever done so, or given us his German version
of Tertullian’s own works, which, “si Deus adjuverit,” he distinctly
promises in his preface, I do not know. Perhaps the best thing to be
done under the circumstances is to give the judgment of the learned
Peter Allix. It may be premised that by the celebrated George
Fabricius <span id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) —who published his great
work, *Poetarum Veterum Ecclesiasticorum Opera Christiana*, etc., in
1564—the *Five Books in Reply to Marcion*, and the *Judgment of the
Lord*, are ascribed to Tertullian, the *Genesis* and *Sodom* to Cyprian.
Pamelius likewise seems to have ascribed the *Five Books*, the *Jonah*,
and the *Sodom* <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) to Tertullian; and
according to Lardner, Bishop Bull likewise attributed the *Five Books*
to him. <span id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) They have been generally
ascribed to the Victorinus above mentioned. Tillemont, among others,
thinks they may well enough be his. <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md)
Rigaltius is content to demonstrate that they are not Tertullian’s, but
leaves the real authorship without attempting to decide it. Of the
others the same eminent critic says, “They seem to have been written at
Carthage, at an age not far removed from Tertullian’s.” <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) Allix, after observing that Pamelius is
inconsistent with himself in attributing the *Genesis* and *Sodom* at
one time to Tertullian, at another to Cyprian, rejects both views
equally, and assigns the Genesis with some confidence to Salvian, a
presbyter of Marseilles, whose “floruit” Cave gives *cir*. 440, a
contemporary of Gennadius, and a copious author. To this it is, Allix
thinks, that Gennadius alludes in his *Catalogue of Illustrious Men*, c.
77.

<span id="iv.ii-p209"></span><span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span
id="iv.ii-Page_15"></span>The *Judgment of the Lord* Allix ascribes to
one Verecundus, an African bishop, whose date he finds it difficult to
decide exactly. He refers to two of the name: one Bishop of Tunis, whom
Victor of Tunis in his chronicle mentions as having died in exile at
Chalcedon <span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p209.2"></span>a.d.</span>
552; the other Bishop of Noba, who visited Carthage with many others
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p209.3"></span>a.d.</span> 482, at the
summons of King Huneric, to answer there for their faith;—and would
ascribe the poem to the former, thinking that he finds an allusion to it
in the article upon that Verecundus in the *de Viris Illustribus* of
Isidore of Seville.  Oehler agrees with him. The *Five Books* Allix
seems to hint may be attributed to some imitator of the Victorinus of
Pettaw named above. Oehler attributes them rather to one Victorinus, or
Victor, of Marseilles, a rhetorician, who died <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p209.4"></span>a.d.</span> 450. He appears in G. Fabricius as
Claudius Marius Victorinus, writer of a *Commentary on Genesis*, and an
epistle *ad Salomonem Abbata*, both in verse, and of some considerable
length.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[4:1](0030005.htm#fr_0.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p9"></span> Elucidation I.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:2](0030005.htm#fr_1.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p11"></span> The notes of Dr. Holmes were bracketted,
and I have been forced to remove this feature, as brackets are tokens in
this edition of the contributions of American editors. The perpetual
recurrence of brackets in his translations has led me to improve the
page by parenthetical marks instead, which answer as well and rarely can
be mistaken for the author’s *parentheses*, while these disfigure the
printer’s work much less. I have sometimes substituted italics for
brackets, where an inconsiderable word, like *and* or *for*, was
bracketted by the translator. In every case that I have noted, an
intelligent reader will readily perceive such instances; but a critic
who may wish to praise, or condemn, should carefully compare the
Edinburgh pages with our own. I found them so painful to the eye and so
needlessly annoying to the reader, that I have taken the responsibility
of making what seems to me a very great typographical improvement.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:3](0030005.htm#fr_2.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p13"></span> (I.) Concerning Tertullian; (II.)
Concerning his Work against Marcion, its date, etc.; (III.) Concerning
Marcion; (IV.) Concerning Tertullian’s Bible; (V.) Influence of his
Montanism on his writings.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:4](0030005.htm#fr_3.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p14.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p15"></span> We quote Bishop Kaye’s translation of
Jerome’s article; see his *Account of the Writings of Tertullian*, pp.
5–8.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:5](0030005.htm#fr_4.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p16"></span> *Adv. Parmenianum*, i.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5:6](0030005.htm#fr_5.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p17"></span> Chap. ii.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[5:7](0030005.htm#fr_6.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p18"></span> *Eccl. Hist.*, ii. 2.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[5:8](0030005.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p19"></span> Valesius, however, supposes the historian’s
words <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ii-p19.1"></span>τῶν μάλιστα ἐπὶ
῾Ρώμης λαμπρῶν</span> to mean, that Tertullian had obtained distinction
among Latin writers.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[6:9](0030005.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p19.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p20"></span> See *De Præscript. Hæretic*. xxx.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[6:10](0030005.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p21"></span> *De Pœnitentia*, i. Hoc genus hominum, quod
et ipsi retro fuimus, cæci, sine Domini lumine, naturâ tenus norunt; *De
Fuga in Persecutione*, vi. Nobis autem et via nationum patet, in quâ et
inventi sumus; *Adv. Marcionem*, iii. 21. Et nationes, quod sumus nos;
*Apolog*. xviii. Hæc et nos risimus aliquando; de vestris fuimus; also
*De Spectac*. xix.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[6:11](0030005.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p21.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p22"></span> \[Kaye, p. 9. A fair view of this point.\]

<span id="fn_11"></span>[6:12](0030005.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p23"></span> These notes of Bishop Kaye may be found, in
their fuller form, in his work on Tertullian, pp. 8–12.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[6:13](0030005.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p25"></span> Book i., chap. xv.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[6:14](0030005.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p26"></span> Jerome probably took this date as the
central period, when Tertullian “flourished,” because of its being the
only clearly authenticated one, and because also (it may be) of the
importance and fame of the Treatise against Marcion.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[6:15](0030005.htm#fr_14.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p27"></span> So Clinton, *Fasti Romani*, i. 204; or 208,
Pamelius, *Vita Tertull*.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[6:16](0030005.htm#fr_15.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p28"></span> In his treatise, *De vera ætate ac doctrina
script. Tertulliani*, sections 28, 45.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[7:17](0030005.htm#fr_16.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p30"></span> *De Præscript. Hæret.* xxx.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[7:18](0030005.htm#fr_17.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p31"></span>Comp. *Adv. Marcionem*, iv. 4.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[7:19](0030005.htm#fr_18.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p32"></span> I., *Adv. Hæret*. xlii. 1.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[7:20](0030005.htm#fr_19.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p33"></span> Dr. Burton’s *Lectures on Eccl. Hist. of
First Three Centuries*, ii. 105–109.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[7:21](0030005.htm#fr_20.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p35"></span> Or versions.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[7:22](0030005.htm#fr_21.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p36"></span> Tertullianus.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[7:23](0030005.htm#fr_22.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p38"></span> Vincentius Lirinensis, in his celebrated
*Commonitorium*, expresses the opinion of Catholic churchmen concerning
Tertullian thus:  “Tertullian, among the Latins, without controversy, is
the chief of all our writers. For who was more learned than he? Who in
divinity or humanity more practised? For, by a certain wonderful
capacity of mind, he attained to and understood all philosophy, all the
sects of philosophers, all their founders and supporters, all their
systems, all sorts of histories and studies.  And for his wit, was he
not so excellent, so grave, so forcible, that he scarce ever undertook
the overthrow of any position, but either by quickness of wit he
undermined, or by weight of reason he crushed it? Further, who is able
to express the praises which his style of speech deserves, which is
fraught (I know none like it) with that cogency of reason, that such as
it cannot persuade, it compels to assent; whose so many words almost are
so many sentences; whose so many senses, so many victories? This know
Marcion and Apelles, Praxeas and Hermogenes, Jews, Gentiles, Gnostics,
and divers others, whose blasphemous opinions he hath overthrown with
his many and great volumes, as it had been thunderbolts. And yet this
man after all, this Tertullian, not retaining the Catholic doctrine—that
is, the old faith—hath discredited with his later error his worthy
writings,” etc.—Chap. xxiv. (Oxford trans. chap. xviii.)

<span id="fn_23"></span>[8:24](0030005.htm#fr_23.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p39"></span> Neander’s introduction to his *<span
class="c42"><span id="iv.ii-p39.1"></span>Antignostikus</span>* should
be read in connection with this topic. He powerfully delineates the
disposition of Tertullian and the character of Montanism, and attributes
his secession to that sect not to outward causes, but to “his internal
congeniality of mind.”  But, inasmuch as a man’s subjective development
is very much guided by circumstances, it is not necessary, in agreeing
with Neander, to disbelieve some such account as Jerome has given us of
Tertullian (Neander’s *<span class="c42"><span
id="iv.ii-p39.2"></span>Antignostikus</span>*, etc. Bohn’s trans., vol.
ii. pp. 200–207).

<span id="fn_24"></span>[8:25](0030005.htm#fr_24.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p43"></span> Introductory Notice to the *Anti-Marcion*,
pp. xiii., xiv.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[9:26](0030005.htm#fr_25.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p45"></span> In the end of Chapter Second.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[9:27](0030005.htm#fr_26.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p46"></span> *Eccl. Hist. illust. from Tertullian’s
Writings*, p. 36 sqq. (ed. 3, Lond. 1845).

<span id="fn_27"></span>[9:28](0030005.htm#fr_27.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p46.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p47"></span> See Kaye, as above.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[9:29](0030005.htm#fr_28.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p48"></span>*<span class="c42"><span
id="iv.ii-p48.1"></span>Antignostikus</span>*, p. 424 (Bohn’s tr., ed.
1851).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[9:30](0030005.htm#fr_29.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p49"></span> See [Judg. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ii-p49.1"></span> sqq.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[9:31](0030005.htm#fr_30.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p50"></span> See [2 Kings
14.9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[9:32](0030005.htm#fr_31.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p52"></span> Here, again, our limits forbid a
discussion; but the allusion to the Rhone having “scarcely yet lost the
stain of blood” which we find in the *ad. Natt*. i. 17, compared with
*Apol*. 35, seems to favour the idea of those who date the *ad. Natt*.
earlier than the *Apology*, and consider the latter as a kind of new
edition of the former: while it would fix the date of the *ad. Natt*. as
not certainly earlier than 197, in which year (as we have seen) Albinus
died. The fatal battle took place on the banks of the Rhone.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[10:33](0030005.htm#fr_32.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p53.6"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p54"></span> In c. 7.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[10:34](0030005.htm#fr_33.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p55"></span> Viz. in the *de Monog*.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[10:35](0030005.htm#fr_34.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p58"></span> It looks strange to see Tertullian’s works
referred to as consisting of “about thirty short treatises” in Murdock’s
note on Moshiem. See the ed. of the *Eccl. Hist*. by Dr. J. Seaton Reid,
p. 65, n. 2, Lond. and [Bel.
1852](../../../bib/apo/bel001.htm#1852.md)<span id="iv.ii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[10:36](0030005.htm#fr_35.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p59"></span> This last qualification is very specially
observable in Dr. Kaye.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[10:37](0030005.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p59.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p60"></span> In his article on Tertullian in *Smith’s
Dict. of Biog. and Myth*.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[11:38](0030005.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p105.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p106"></span> Referred to apparently in *de Pudic. ad
init*.–<span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p106.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[11:39](0030005.htm#fr_38.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p115"></span> The *de Præscr*. is ref. to in *adv.
Marc*. i.; *adv Prax*. 2; *de Carne Christi*, 2; *adv. Hermog*. 1.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[11:40](0030005.htm#fr_39.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p118.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p119"></span> Ref. to in *de Res. Carn*. 2, 14; *Scorp*.
5; *de Anima*, 21. The only mark, as the learned Bishop’s remarks imply,
for fixing the date of publication as Montanistic, is the fact that
Tertullian alludes, in the opening sentences, to B. i. Hence B. ii.
could not, in its present form, have appeared till after B. i.  Now B.
i. contains evident marks of Montanism: see the last chapter, for
instance. But the writer speaks (in the same passage) of B. ii. as being
*the* treatise, the ill fate of which *in its unfinished condition* he
there relates—at least such seems the legitimate sense of his words—*now
remodelled*. Hence, *when originally written*, it may not have been
Montanistic.—<span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p119.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[11:41](0030005.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p120.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p121"></span> Ref. to in *de Res. Carn*. 2, 17, 45;
comp. cc. 18, 21.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[11:42](0030005.htm#fr_41.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p123.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p124"></span> Ref. to in *de Carn. Chr*. 7.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[11:43](0030005.htm#fr_42.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p125.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p126"></span> Ref. to in *de Res. Carn*. 2.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[11:44](0030005.htm#fr_43.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p127.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p128"></span> See the beginning and end of the *de Carne
Christi*.—<span class="sc"><span id="iv.ii-p128.2"></span>Tr</span>. 
Ref. to in *adv. Marc*. v. 10.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[11:45](0030005.htm#fr_44.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p131.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p132"></span> In c. 4 Tertullian speaks as if he had
already refuted all the heretics.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[11:46](0030005.htm#fr_45.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p137.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p138"></span> Ref. to in *de Jej*. c. 1.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[11:47](0030005.htm#fr_46.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p144.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p145"></span> Ref. to in *de Idolol*. 13; in *de Cult.
Fem*. i. 8. In the *de Cor*. 6 is a reference to the Greek tract *de
Spectaculis* by our author.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[11:48](0030005.htm#fr_47.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p150.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p151"></span> Archdeacon Evans, in his *Biography of the
Early Church* (in the Theological Library), suggests that the success
which the *Apology* met with, or at least the fame it brought its
author, may have been the occasion of Tertullian’s visit to Rome. He
rejects entirely the supposition that Tertullian was a presbyter of the
Roman church; nor does he think Eusebius’ words, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ii-p151.1"></span>καὶ τῶν μάλιστα ἐπὶ ῾Ρώμης
λαμπρῶν</span> (*Eccl. Hist*. ii. 2. 47 *ad fin*., 48 *ad init*.),
sufficiently plain to be relied on. One thing does seem pretty plain,
that the rendering of them which Rufinus gives, and Valesius follows,
“inter nostros” (*sc*. Latinos) “Scriptores admodum clarus,” cannot be
correct.  That we find a famous Roman lawyer Tertullianus, or
Tertyllianus, among the writers fragments of whom are preserved in the
Pandects, Neander reminds us; but (as he says) it by no means follows,
even if it could be proved that the date of the said lawyer corresponded
with the supposed date of our Tertullian, that they were identical. 
Still it is worth bearing in mind, especially as a similarity of
language exists, or has been thought to exist, between the jurist and
the Christian author. And the juridical language and tone of our author
do seem to point to his having—though Mr. Evans regards that as
doubtful—been a trained lawyer.—<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ii-p151.3"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[12:49](0030005.htm#fr_48.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p157.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p158"></span> Kaye, as above. Pref. to 2d ed. pp. xxi.
xxii. incorporated in the 3d ed., which I always quote.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[12:50](0030005.htm#fr_49.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p158.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p159"></span> i.e., four years *after* Kaye’s *third*.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[12:51](0030005.htm#fr_50.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p159.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p160"></span> See Pref. 2d ed. p. xix. n. 9.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[12:52](0030005.htm#fr_51.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p160.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p161"></span> It being from that book that the
quotations are taken which make up the remainder of the tract, as
Semler, worthless as his theories are, has well shown.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[12:53](0030005.htm#fr_52.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p164.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p165"></span> “Sæculi” or “of the world,” or perhaps “of
heathenism.”

<span id="fn_53"></span>[13:54](0030005.htm#fr_53.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p170.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p171"></span> *Catal. Scrippt. Eccles*. c. 18.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[13:55](0030005.htm#fr_54.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p171.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p172"></span> P. 952, tom. iii. Opp. ed. Bened.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[13:56](0030005.htm#fr_55.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p172.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p173"></span> *De Ecclesiæ dogmatibus*, c. 55.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[13:57](0030005.htm#fr_56.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p174.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p175"></span> Referred to in *Adv. Marc*. iv. 22.  So
Kaye thinks; but perhaps the reference is doubtful. See, however, the
passage in Dr. Holmes’ translation in the present series, with his note
thereon.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[13:58](0030005.htm#fr_57.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p175.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p176"></span> *De Scriptt. Eccles*. 53, 24, 40.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[13:59](0030005.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p176.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p177"></span> i.e., Rome.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[13:60](0030005.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p177.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p178"></span> Antistes.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[13:61](0030005.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p179.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p180"></span> A Marcionite at one time: he subsequently
set up a sect of his own. He is mentioned in the *adv. omn. Hær*. c. 6.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[13:62](0030005.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p181.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p182"></span> Censu.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[13:63](0030005.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p183.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p184"></span> *Catal. Scrippt. Eccles*. c. 58.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[13:64](0030005.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p185.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p186"></span> *Catal. Scrippt. Eccles*. c. 70.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[13:65](0030005.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p187.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p188"></span> Oehler speaks more decidedly than Kaye.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[13:66](0030005.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p188.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p189"></span> *Epist. ad Eustochium de Custodia
Virginitatis*, p. 37, tom. iv. Opp. ed. Bened.; *adv. Jovin.* i. p. 157,
tom. iv. Opp. ed. Bened.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[13:67](0030005.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p190.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p191"></span> In the *Catal. Scrippt. Eccles*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[14:68](0030005.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p196.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p197"></span> “Mendacem” is his word. I know not whether
he intends to charge Pamelius with wilful fraud.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[14:69](0030005.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p198.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p199"></span> Doctor of the Sorbonne, said by Bossuet to
have proved himself “a semi-Pelagian and Jansenist!” born in 1603, in
Normandy, died in 1678.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[14:70](0030005.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p199.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p200"></span> Jer. *de Vir. Illust*. c. 74.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[14:71](0030005.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p200.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p201"></span> B. 470, d. 560.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[14:72](0030005.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p203.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p204"></span> He must not be confounded with the still
more famous John Albert Fabricius of the next century, referred to in p.
xv. above.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[14:73](0030005.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p204.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p205"></span> Whole of these metrical fragments.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[14:74](0030005.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p205.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p206"></span> Lardner, *Credibility*, vol. iii. p. 169,
under “Victorinus of Pettaw,” ed. Kippis, Lond. 1838.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[14:75](0030005.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p206.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p207"></span> See Lardner, as above.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[14:76](0030005.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="iv.ii-p207.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p208"></span> See Migne, who prefixes this judgment of
Rig. to the *de Judicio Domini*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Apology.](0030006.md)
