[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030208)  [Next](0030210.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.v"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—Probable View of the Stoics, that
the Soul Has a Corporeal Nature.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.v-p2"></span>Suppose one summons a Eubulus to his
assistance, and a Critolaus, and a Zenocrates, and on this occasion
Plato’s friend Aristotle. They may very possibly hold themselves ready
for stripping the soul of its corporeity, unless they happen to see
other philosophers opposed to them in their purpose—and this, too, in
greater numbers—asserting for the soul a corporeal nature. Now I am not
referring merely to those who mould the soul out of manifest bodily
substances, as Hipparchus and Heraclitus (do) out of fire; as Hippon and
Thales (do) out of water; as Empedocles and Critias (do) out of blood;
as Epicurus (does) out of atoms, since even atoms by their coherence
form corporeal masses; as Critolaus and his Peripatetics (do) out of a
certain indescribable *quintessence*, <span
id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524.md) if that may be called a body which
rather includes and embraces bodily substances;—but I call on the Stoics
also to help me, who, while declaring almost in our own terms that the
soul is a spiritual essence (inasmuch as breath and spirit are in their
nature very near akin to each other), will yet have no difficulty in
persuading (us) that the soul is a corporeal <span id="page_185">p.
185</span> <span id="iv.xi.v-Page_185"></span>substance. Indeed, Zeno,
defining the soul to be a spirit generated with (the body, <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525) .md) constructs his argument in this
way:  That substance which by its departure causes the living being to
die is a corporeal one. Now it is by the departure of the spirit, which
is generated with (the body,) that the living being dies; therefore the
spirit which is generated with (the body) is a corporeal substance. But
this spirit which is generated with (the body) is the soul:  it follows,
then, that the soul is a corporeal substance. Cleanthes, too, will have
it that family likeness passes from parents to their children not merely
in bodily features, but in characteristics of the soul; as if it were
out of a mirror of (a man’s) manners, and faculties, and affections,
that bodily likeness and unlikeness are caught and reflected by the soul
also.  It is therefore as being corporeal that it is susceptible of
likeness and unlikeness. Again, there is nothing in common between
things corporeal and things incorporeal as to their susceptibility. But
the soul certainly sympathizes with the body, and shares in its pain,
whenever it is injured by bruises, and wounds, and sores: the body, too,
suffers with the soul, and is united with it (whenever it is afflicted
with anxiety, distress, or love) in the loss of vigour which its
companion sustains, whose shame and fear it testifies by its own blushes
and paleness. The soul, therefore, is (proved to be) corporeal from this
inter-communion of susceptibility. Chrysippus also joins hands in
fellowship with Cleanthes when he lays it down that it is not at all
possible for things which are endued with body to be separated from
things which have not body; because they have no such relation as mutual
contact or coherence. Accordingly Lucretius says: <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526.md)

<span id="iv.xi.v-p6"></span>“Tangere enim et tangi nisi corpus nulla
potest res.”

<span id="iv.xi.v-p7"></span>“For nothing but body is capable of
touching or of being touched.”

<span id="iv.xi.v-p8"></span>(Such severance, however, is quite natural
between the soul and the body); for when the body is deserted by the
soul, it is overcome by death. The soul, therefore, is endued with a
body; for if it were not corporeal, it could not desert the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[184:1525](0030209.htm#fr_1524.md) <span
id="iv.xi.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.v-p3"></span> Ex quinta nescio qua substantia. Comp.
Cicero’s *Tuscul*. i. 10.

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[185:1526](0030209.htm#fr_1525.md) <span
id="iv.xi.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.v-p4"></span> Consitum.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[185:1527](0030209.htm#fr_1526.md) <span
id="iv.xi.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.v-p5"></span> *De Nat. Rer.* i. 305.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Arguments of the Platonists for the Soul's Incorporeality,
Opposed, Perhaps Frivolously.](0030210.md)
