[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030212)  [Next](0030214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Particulars of the Alleged
Communication to a Montanist Sister.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p2"></span>When we aver that the soul has a body of a
quality and kind peculiar to itself, in this special condition of it we
shall be already supplied with a decision respecting all the other
accidents of its corporeity; how that they belong to it, because we have
shown it to be a body, but that even they have a quality peculiar to
themselves, proportioned to the special nature of the body (to which
they belong); or else, if any accidents (of a body) are remarkable in
this instance for their absence, then this, too, results from the
peculiarity of the condition of the soul’s corporeity, from which are
absent sundry qualities which are present to all other corporeal beings.
And yet, notwithstanding all this, we shall not be at all inconsistent
if we declare that the more usual characteristics of a body, such as
invariably accrue to the corporeal condition, belong also to the
soul—such as form <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539) and
limitation; and that triad of dimensions <span
id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) —I mean length, and breadth and
height—by which philosophers gauge all bodies. What now remains but for
us to give the soul a figure? <span id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541)
Plato refuses to do this, as if it endangered the soul’s
immortality. <span id="fr_1542"></span>[1543](#fn_1542) For everything
which has figure is, according to him, compound, and composed of
parts; <span id="fr_1543"></span>[1544](#fn_1543) whereas the soul is
immortal; and being immortal, it is therefore indissoluble; and being
indissoluble, it is figureless:  for if, on the contrary, it had figure,
it would be of a composite and structural formation. He, however, in
some other manner frames for the soul an effigy of intellectual forms,
beautiful for its just symmetry and tuitions of philosophy, but
misshapen by some contrary qualities. As for ourselves, indeed, we
inscribe on the soul the lineaments of corporeity, not simply from the
assurance which reasoning has taught us of its corporeal nature, but
also from the firm conviction which divine grace impresses on us by
revelation. For, seeing that we acknowledge spiritual *charismata*, or
gifts, we too have merited the attainment of the prophetic gift,
although coming after John (the Baptist). We have now amongst us a
sister whose lot it has been to be favoured with sundry gifts of
revelation, which she experiences in the Spirit by ecstatic vision
amidst the sacred rites of the Lord’s day in the church: she converses
with angels, and sometimes even with the Lord; she both sees and hears
mysterious communications; <span id="fr_1544"></span>[1545](#fn_1544)
some men’s hearts she understands, and to them who are in need she
distributes remedies. Whether it be in the reading of Scriptures, or in
the chanting of psalms, or in the preaching of sermons, or in the
offering up of prayers, in all these religious services matter and
opportunity are afforded to her of seeing visions. It may possibly have
happened to us, whilst this sister of ours was rapt in the Spirit, that
we had discoursed in some ineffable way about the soul. After the people
are dismissed at the conclusion of the sacred services, she is in the
regular habit of reporting to us whatever things she may have seen in
vision (for all her communications are examined with the most scrupulous
care, in order that their truth may be probed).  “Amongst other things,”
says she, “there has been shown to me a soul in bodily shape, and a
spirit has been in the habit of appearing to me; not, however, a void
and empty illusion, but such as would offer itself to be even grasped by
the hand, soft and transparent and of an etherial colour, and in form
resembling that of a human being in every respect.” This was her vision,
and for her witness there was God; and the apostle most assuredly
foretold that there were to be “spiritual gifts” in the church. <span
id="fr_1545"></span>[1546](#fn_1545) Now, can you refuse to believe
this, even if indubitable evidence on every point is forthcoming for
your conviction? Since, then, the soul is a corporeal substance, no
doubt it possesses qualities such as those which we have just mentioned,
amongst them the property of *colour*, which is inherent in every bodily
substance.  Now what colour would you attribute to the soul but an
etherial transparent one? Not that its substance is actually the ether
or air (although this was the opinion of Ænesidemus and Anaximenes, and
I suppose of Heraclitus also, as some say of him), nor transparent light
(although Heraclides of Pontus held it to be so).
“Thunder-stones,” <span id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546) indeed, are
not of igneous substance, because they shine with ruddy redness; nor are
beryls composed of aqueous matter, because they are of a pure wavy
whiteness. How many things also besides these are there which their
colour would associate in the same class, but which nature keeps widely
apart! Since, however, everything which is very attenuated and
transparent <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="iv.xi.ix-Page_189"></span>bears a strong resemblance to the air,
such would be the case with the soul, since in its material nature <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) it is wind and breath, (or spirit);
whence it is that the belief of its corporeal quality is endangered, in
consequence of the extreme tenuity and subtilty of its essence.
Likewise, as regards the figure of the human soul from your own
conception, you can well imagine that it is none other than the human
form; indeed, none other than the shape of that body which each
individual soul animates and moves about. This we may at once be induced
to admit from contemplating man’s original formation.  For only
carefully consider, after God hath breathed upon the face of man the
breath of life, and man had consequently become a living soul, surely
that breath must have passed through the face at once into the interior
structure, and have spread itself throughout all the spaces of the body;
and as soon as by the divine inspiration it had become condensed, it
must have impressed itself on each internal feature, which the
condensation had filled in, and so have been, as it were, congealed in
shape, (or stereotyped). Hence, by this densifying process, there arose
a fixing of the soul’s corporeity; and by the impression its figure was
formed and moulded. This is the inner man, different from the outer, but
yet one in the twofold condition. <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) It, too, has eyes and ears of its
own, by means of which Paul must have heard and seen the Lord; <span
id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) it has, moreover all the other
members of the body by the help of which it effects all processes of
thinking and all activity in dreams. Thus it happens that the rich man
in hell has a tongue and poor (Lazarus) a finger and Abraham a
bosom. <span id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550) By these features also
the souls of the martyrs under the altar are distinguished and known.
The soul indeed which in the beginning was associated with Adam’s body,
which grew with its growth and was moulded after its form proved to be
the germ both of the entire substance (of the human soul) and of that
(part of) creation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[188:1540](0030213.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p3"></span> Habitum.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[188:1541](0030213.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p4"></span> Illud trifariam distantivum (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.xi.ix-p4.1"></span>Τριχῶς
διαστηματικόν</span>) Fr. Junius.

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[188:1542](0030213.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p5"></span> Effigiem.

<span id="fn_1542"></span>[188:1543](0030213.htm#fr_1542) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p6"></span> See his *Phædo*, pp. 105, 106.

<span id="fn_1543"></span>[188:1544](0030213.htm#fr_1543) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p7"></span> Structile.

<span id="fn_1544"></span>[188:1545](0030213.htm#fr_1544) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p8"></span> Sacramenta.

<span id="fn_1545"></span>[188:1546](0030213.htm#fr_1545) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p9"></span> [1 Cor. xii.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#001)<span id="iv.xi.ix-p9.1"></span>.
\[A key to our author’s

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[188:1547](0030213.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p10"></span> Cerauniis gemmis.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[189:1548](0030213.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p11"></span> Tradux.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[189:1549](0030213.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p12"></span> Dupliciter unus.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[189:1550](0030213.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p13"></span> [2 Cor. xii.
2-4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002)<span id="iv.xi.ix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[189:1551](0030213.htm#fr_1550) <span
id="iv.xi.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.ix-p14"></span> [Luke
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024)<span id="iv.xi.ix-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Simple Nature of the Soul is Asserted with Plato. The
Identity of Spirit and Soul.](0030214)
