[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030417)  [Next](0030419) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—The Rich Women of Piety Who
Followed Jesus Christ’s Teaching by Parables. The Marcionite Cavil
Derived from Christ’s Remark, When Told of His Mother and His Brethren.
Explanation of Christ’s Apparent Rejection Them.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p2"></span>The fact that certain rich women clave
to Christ, “which ministered unto Him of their substance,” amongst whom
was the wife of the king’s steward, is a subject of prophecy. By Isaiah
*the Lord* called these wealthy ladies—“Rise up, ye women that are at
ease, and hear my voice” <span id="fr_4183"></span>[4184](#fn_4183)
—that He might prove <span id="fr_4184"></span>[4185](#fn_4184) them
first as disciples, and then as assistants and helpers: “Daughters, hear
my words in hope; this day of the year cherish the memory of, in labour
with hope.” For it was “in labour” that they followed Him, and “with
hope” did they minister to Him.  On the subject of *parables*, let it
suffice that it has been once for all shown that this kind of
language <span id="fr_4185"></span>[4186](#fn_4185) was with equal
distinctness promised by the Creator. But there is that direct mode of
His speaking <span id="fr_4186"></span>[4187](#fn_4186) to the
people—“Ye shall hear with the ear, but ye shall not understand” <span
id="fr_4187"></span>[4188](#fn_4187) —which now claims notice as <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="v.iv.v.xix-Page_377"></span>having
furnished to Christ that frequent form of His earnest instruction: “He
that hath ears to hear, let him hear.” <span
id="fr_4188"></span>[4189](#fn_4188) Not as if Christ, actuated with a
diverse spirit, permitted a hearing which the Creator had refused; but
because the exhortation followed the threatening.  First came, “Ye shall
hear with the ear, but shall not understand;” then followed, “He that
hath ears to hear, let him hear.” For they wilfully refused to hear,
although they had ears. He, however, was teaching them that it was the
ears of the heart which were necessary; and with *these* the Creator had
said that they would not hear. Therefore it is that He adds by His
Christ, “Take heed how ye hear,” <span
id="fr_4189"></span>[4190](#fn_4189) and hear not,—meaning, of course,
with the hearing of the heart, not of the ear. If you only attach a
proper sense to the *Creator’s* admonition, <span
id="fr_4190"></span>[4191](#fn_4190) suitable to the meaning of Him who
was rousing the people to hear by the words, “Take heed how ye hear,” it
amounted to a menace to such as would not hear. In fact, <span
id="fr_4191"></span>[4192](#fn_4191) that most merciful god of yours,
who judges not, neither is angry, is minatory. This is proved even by
the sentence which immediately follows:  “Whosoever hath, to him shall
be given; and whosoever hath not, from him shall be taken even that
which he seemeth to have.” <span id="fr_4192"></span>[4193](#fn_4192)
What shall be given? The increase of faith, or understanding, or even
salvation. What shall be taken away? That, of course, which shall be
given. By whom shall the gift and the deprivation be made? If by the
Creator it be taken away, by Him also shall it be given. If by Marcion’s
god it be given, by Marcion’s god also will it be taken away. Now, for
whatever reason He threatens the “deprivation,” it will not be the work
of a god who knows not how to threaten, because incapable of anger. I
am, moreover, astonished when he says that “a candle is not usually
hidden,” <span id="fr_4193"></span>[4194](#fn_4193) who had hidden
himself—a greater and more needful light—during so long a time; and when
he promises that “everything shall be brought out of its secrecy and
made manifest,” <span id="fr_4194"></span>[4195](#fn_4194) who hitherto
has kept his god in obscurity, waiting (I suppose) until Marcion be
born. We now come to the most strenuously-plied argument of all those
who call in question the Lord’s nativity. They say that He testifies
Himself to His not having been born, when He asks, “Who is my mother,
and who are my brethren?” <span id="fr_4195"></span>[4196](#fn_4195) In
this manner heretics either wrest plain and simple words to any sense
they choose by their conjectures, or else they violently resolve by a
literal interpretation words which imply a conditional sense and are
incapable of a simple solution, <span
id="fr_4196"></span>[4197](#fn_4196) as in this passage. We, for our
part, say in reply, first, that it could not possibly have been told Him
that His mother and His brethren stood without, desiring to see Him, if
He had had no mother and no brethren. They must have been known to him
who announced them, either some time previously, or then at that very
time, when they desired to see Him, or sent Him their message. To this
our first position this answer is usually given by the other side. But
suppose they sent Him the message for the purpose of tempting Him? Well,
but the Scripture does not say so; and inasmuch as it is usual for it to
indicate what is done in the way of temptation (“Behold, a certain
lawyer stood up, and tempted Him;” <span
id="fr_4197"></span>[4198](#fn_4197) again, when inquiring about
tribute, the Pharisees came to Him, tempting Him <span
id="fr_4198"></span>[4199](#fn_4198) ), so, when it makes no mention of
temptation, it does not admit the interpretation of temptation. However,
*although I do not allow this sense*, I may as well ask, by way of a
superfluous refutation, for the reasons of the alleged temptation, To
what purpose could they have tempted Him by naming His mother and His
brethren? If it was to ascertain whether He had been born or not—when
was a question raised on this point, which they must resolve by tempting
Him in this way? Who could doubt His having been born, when they <span
id="fr_4199"></span>[4200](#fn_4199) saw Him before them a veritable
man?—whom they had heard call Himself “Son of man?”—of whom they doubted
whether He were God or Son of God, from seeing Him, as they did, in the
perfect garb of human quality?—supposing Him rather to be a prophet, a
great one indeed, <span id="fr_4200"></span>[4201](#fn_4200) but still
one who had been born as man?  Even if it had been necessary that He
should thus be tried in the investigation of His birth, surely any other
proof would have better answered the trial than that to be obtained from
mentioning those relatives which it was quite possible for Him, in spite
of His true nativity, not at that moment to have had. For tell me now,
does a mother live on contemporaneously <span
id="fr_4201"></span>[4202](#fn_4201) with her sons in every case? Have
all sons brothers born for them? <span
id="fr_4202"></span>[4203](#fn_4202) May a man rather not have fathers
and sisters (living), <span id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-Page_378"></span>or even no relatives at all? But there
is historical proof <span id="fr_4203"></span>[4204](#fn_4203) that at
this very time <span id="fr_4204"></span>[4205](#fn_4204) a *census* had
been taken in Judæa by Sentius Saturninus, <span
id="fr_4205"></span>[4206](#fn_4205) which might have satisfied their
inquiry respecting the family and descent of Christ. Such a method of
testing the point had therefore no consistency whatever in it and they
“who were standing without” were really “His mother and His brethren.”
It remains for us to examine His meaning when He resorts to
non-literal <span id="fr_4206"></span>[4207](#fn_4206) words, saying
“Who is my mother or my brethren?” It seems as if His language amounted
to a denial of His family and His birth; but it arose actually from the
absolute nature of the case, and the conditional sense in which His
words were to be explained. <span id="fr_4207"></span>[4208](#fn_4207)
He was justly indignant, that persons so very near to Him “stood
*without*,” while strangers were *within* hanging on His words,
especially as they wanted to call Him away from the solemn work He had
in hand. He did not so much deny as disavow <span
id="fr_4208"></span>[4209](#fn_4208) them. And therefore, when to the
previous question, “Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? <span
id="fr_4209"></span>[4210](#fn_4209) He added the answer “None but they
who hear my words and do them,” He transferred the names of
blood-relationship to others, whom He judged to be more closely related
to Him by reason of their faith. Now no one transfers a thing except
from him who possesses that which is transferred. If, therefore, He made
them “His mother and His brethren” who were not so, how could He deny
them these relationships who really had them? Surely only on the
condition of their deserts, and not by any disavowal of His near
relatives; teaching them by His own actual example, <span
id="fr_4210"></span>[4211](#fn_4210) that “whosoever preferred father or
mother or brethren to the Word of God, was not a disciple worthy of
Him.” <span id="fr_4211"></span>[4212](#fn_4211) Besides, <span
id="fr_4212"></span>[4213](#fn_4212) His admission of His mother and His
brethren was the more express, from the fact of His unwillingness to
acknowledge them.  That He adopted others only confirmed those in their
relationship to Him whom He refused because of their offence, and for
whom He substituted the others, not as being truer relatives, but
worthier ones. Finally, it was no great matter if He did prefer to
kindred (that) faith which it <span id="fr_4213"></span>[4214](#fn_4213)
did not possess. <span id="fr_4214"></span>[4215](#fn_4214)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4183"></span>[376:4184](0030418.htm#fr_4183) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p3"></span> [Isa.
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p3.1"></span>.
Quoted as usual, from the LXX.: <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p3.2"></span>Γυναῖκες πλούσιαι ἀνάστητε, καὶ ἀκούσατε τῆς
φωνῆς μου· θυγατέρες ἐν ἐλπίδι εἰσακούσατε λόγους μου. ῾Ημέρας ἐνιαυτοῦ
μνείαν ποιήσασθε ἐν ὀδύνῃ μετ᾽ ἐλπίδος.</span>

<span id="fn_4184"></span>[376:4185](0030418.htm#fr_4184) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p4"></span> Ostenderet.

<span id="fn_4185"></span>[376:4186](0030418.htm#fr_4185) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p5"></span> Eloquii.

<span id="fn_4186"></span>[376:4187](0030418.htm#fr_4186) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p6"></span> Pronunciatio.

<span id="fn_4187"></span>[376:4188](0030418.htm#fr_4187) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p7"></span> [Isa. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4188"></span>[377:4189](0030418.htm#fr_4188) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p8"></span> [Luke viii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4189"></span>[377:4190](0030418.htm#fr_4189) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p9"></span> [Luke viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4190"></span>[377:4191](0030418.htm#fr_4190) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p10"></span> Pronuntiationi.

<span id="fn_4191"></span>[377:4192](0030418.htm#fr_4191) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p11"></span> Sane: with a touch of irony.

<span id="fn_4192"></span>[377:4193](0030418.htm#fr_4192) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p12"></span> [Luke viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4193"></span>[377:4194](0030418.htm#fr_4193) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p13"></span> [Luke viii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4194"></span>[377:4195](0030418.htm#fr_4194) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p14"></span> [Luke viii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4195"></span>[377:4196](0030418.htm#fr_4195) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p15"></span> [Matt. xii.
48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4196"></span>[377:4197](0030418.htm#fr_4196) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p16"></span> Rationales. “Quæ voces adhibita
ratione sunt interpretandæ.”—<span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p16.2"></span>Oehler</span>.

<span id="fn_4197"></span>[377:4198](0030418.htm#fr_4197) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p17"></span> [Luke x.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4198"></span>[377:4199](0030418.htm#fr_4198) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p18"></span> [Luke xx.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4199"></span>[377:4200](0030418.htm#fr_4199) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p19"></span> Singular in the original, but (to
avoid confusion) here made plural.

<span id="fn_4200"></span>[377:4201](0030418.htm#fr_4200) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p20"></span> In allusion to [Luke vii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p20.1"></span>.
See above, chap. xviii.

<span id="fn_4201"></span>[377:4202](0030418.htm#fr_4201) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p21"></span> Advivit.

<span id="fn_4202"></span>[377:4203](0030418.htm#fr_4202) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p22"></span> Adgenerantur.

<span id="fn_4203"></span>[378:4204](0030418.htm#fr_4203) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p23"></span> Constat. \[Jarvis, *Introd*. p. 204
and p. 536.\]

<span id="fn_4204"></span>[378:4205](0030418.htm#fr_4204) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p24"></span> Nunc: i.e., when Christ was told of
His mother and brethren.

<span id="fn_4205"></span>[378:4206](0030418.htm#fr_4205) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p25"></span> “C. Sentius Saturninus, a consular,
held this census of the whole empire as principal augur, because
Augustus determined to impart the sanction of religion to his
institution. The agent through whom Saturninus carried out the census in
Judæa was the governor Cyrenius, according to Luke, chap. ii.”—<span
class="sc"><span id="v.iv.v.xix-p25.2"></span>Fr. Junius</span>.
Tertullian mentions Sentius Saturninus again in *De Pallio*, i.
Tertullian’s statement in the text has weighed with Sanclemente and
others, who suppose that Saturninus was governor of Judæa at the time of
our Lord’s birth, which they place in 747 <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p25.4"></span>a.u.c.</span>  “It is evident, however,”
says Wieseler, “that this argument is far from decisive; for the New
Testament itself supplies far better aids for determining this question
than the discordant ecclesiastical traditions—different fathers giving
different dates, which might be appealed to with equal justice; while
Tertullian is even inconsistent with himself, since in his treatise
*Adv. Jud.* viii., he gives 751 <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p25.6"></span>a.u.c.</span> as the year of our Lord’s
birth” (Wieseler’s *Chronological Synopsis* by Venables, p. 99, note 2).
This Sentius Saturninus filled the office of governor of Syria, 744–748.
For the elaborate argument of Aug. W. Zumpt, by which he defends St.
Luke’s chronology, and goes far to prove that Publius Sulpicius Quirinus
(or “Cyrenius”) was actually the governor of Syria at the time of the
Lord’s birth, the reader may be referred to a careful abridgment by the
translator of Wieseler’s work, pp. 129–135.

<span id="fn_4206"></span>[378:4207](0030418.htm#fr_4206) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p25.7"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p26"></span> Non simpliciter. St. Mark rather than
St. Luke is quoted in this interrogative sentence.

<span id="fn_4207"></span>[378:4208](0030418.htm#fr_4207) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p27"></span> Ex condicione rationali. See Oehler’s
note, just above, on the word “*rationales*.”

<span id="fn_4208"></span>[378:4209](0030418.htm#fr_4208) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p28"></span> Abdicavit: Rigalt thinks this is
*harsh*, and reminds us that at the cross the Lord had not cast away his
Mother. \[Elucidation VI.\]

<span id="fn_4209"></span>[378:4210](0030418.htm#fr_4209) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p29"></span> This is literally from [Matt.
12.48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4210"></span>[378:4211](0030418.htm#fr_4210) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p30"></span> In semetipso.

<span id="fn_4211"></span>[378:4212](0030418.htm#fr_4211) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p31"></span> [Matt. x.
37](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4212"></span>[378:4213](0030418.htm#fr_4212) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p32"></span> Ceterum.

<span id="fn_4213"></span>[378:4214](0030418.htm#fr_4213) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p33"></span> i.e., the kindred. \[N.B. He includes
the Mother!\]

<span id="fn_4214"></span>[378:4215](0030418.htm#fr_4214) <span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xix-p34"></span> We have translated Oehler’s text of
this passage: “Denique nihil magnum, si fidem sanguini, *quam* non
habebat.” For once we venture to differ from that admirable editor (and
that although he is supported in his view by Fr. Junius), and prefer the
reading of the <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.xix-p34.2"></span>mss.</span> and the other editions:
“Denique nihil magnum, si fidem sanguini, *quem* non habebat.” To which
we would give an ironical turn, usual to Tertullian, “After all, it is
not to be wondered at if He preferred faith to flesh and blood, which he
did not himself possess!”—in allusion to Marcion’s *Docetic* opinion of
Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Comparison of Christ's Power Over Winds and Waves with Moses'
Command of the Waters of the Red Sea and the Jordan. Christ's Power Over
Unclean Spirits. The Case of the Legion. The Cure of the Issue of Blood.
The Mosaic Uncleanness on This Point Explained.](0030419)
