[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030030)  [Next](0030032.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p2"></span>I think I have offered sufficient proof
upon the question of false and true divinity, having shown that the
proof rests not merely on debate and argument, but on the witness of the
very beings whom you believe are gods, so that the point needs no
further handling. However, having been led thus naturally to speak of
the Romans, I shall not avoid the controversy which is invited by the
groundless assertion of those who maintain that, as a reward of their
singular homage to religion, the Romans have been raised to such heights
of power as to have become masters of the world; and that so certainly
divine are the beings they worship, that those prosper beyond all
others, who beyond all others honour them. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) This, forsooth, is the wages the gods
have paid the Romans for their devotion. The progress of the empire is
to be ascribed to Sterculus, the Mutunus, and Larentina! For I can
hardly think that foreign gods would have been disposed to show more
favour to an alien race than to their own, and given their own
fatherland, in which they had their birth, grew up to manhood, became
illustrious, and at last were buried, over to invaders from another
shore! As for Cybele, if she set her affections on the city of Rome as
sprung of the Trojan stock saved from the arms of Greece, she herself
forsooth being of the same race,—if she foresaw her transference <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) to the avenging people by whom Greece
the conqueror of Phrygia was to be subdued, let her look to it (in
regard of her native country’s conquest by Greece). Why, too, even in
these days the *Mater Magna* has given a notable proof of her greatness
which she has conferred as a boon upon the city; when, after the loss to
the State of Marcus Aurelius at Sirmium, on the sixteenth before the
Kalends of April, that most sacred high priest of hers was offering, a
week after, impure libations of blood drawn from his own arms, and
issuing his commands that the ordinary prayers should be made for the
safety of the emperor already dead. O tardy messengers! O sleepy
despatches! through whose fault Cybele had not an earlier knowledge of
the imperial decease, that the Christians might have no occasion to
ridicule a goddess so unworthy. Jupiter, again, would surely never have
permitted his own Crete to fall at once before the Roman Fasces,
forgetful of that Idean cave and the Corybantian cymbals, and the sweet
odour of her who nursed him there. Would he not have exalted his own
tomb above the entire Capitol, that the land which covered the ashes of
Jove might rather be the mistress <span id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-Page_40"></span>of the world? Would Juno have desired the
destruction of the Punic city, beloved even to the neglect of Samos, and
that by a nation of Æneadæ? As to that I know, “Here were her arms, here
was her chariot, this kingdom, if the Fates permit, the goddess tends
and cherishes to be mistress of the nations.” <span
id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md) Jove’s hapless wife and sister had no
power to prevail against the Fates! “Jupiter himself is sustained by
fate.” And yet the Romans have never done such homage to the Fates,
which gave them Carthage against the purpose and the will of Juno, as to
the abandoned harlot Larentina. It is undoubted that not a few of your
gods have reigned on earth as kings. If, then, they now possess the
power of bestowing empire, when they were kings themselves, from whence
had they received their kingly honours? Whom did Jupiter and Saturn
worship? A Sterculus, I suppose. But did the Romans, along with the
native-born inhabitants, afterwards adore also some who were never
kings? In that case, however, they were under the reign of others, who
did not yet bow down to them, as not yet raised to godhead. It belongs
to others, then, to make gift of kingdoms, since there were kings before
these gods had their names on the roll of divinities. But how utterly
foolish it is to attribute the greatness of the Roman name to religious
merits, since it was after Rome became an empire, or call it still a
kingdom, that the religion she professes made its chief progress! Is it
the case now? Has its religion been the source of the prosperity of
Rome? Though Numa set agoing an eagerness after superstitious
observances, yet religion among the Romans was not yet a matter of
images or temples. It was frugal in its ways, its rites were simple, and
there were no capitols struggling to the heavens; but the altars were
offhand ones of turf, and the sacred vessels were yet of Samian
earthen-ware, and from these the odours rose, and no likeness of God was
to be seen. For at that time the skill of the Greeks and Tuscans in
image-making had not yet overrun the city with the products of their
art. The Romans, therefore, were not distinguished for their devotion to
the gods before they attained to greatness; and so their greatness was
not the result of their religion. Indeed, how could religion make a
people great who have owed their greatness to their irreligion? For, if
I am not mistaken, kingdoms and empires are acquired by wars, and are
extended by victories. More than that, you cannot have wars and
victories without the taking, and often the destruction, of cities. That
is a thing in which the gods have their share of calamity. Houses and
temples suffer alike; there is indiscriminate slaughter of priests and
citizens; the hand of rapine is laid equally upon sacred and on common
treasure. Thus the sacrileges of the Romans are as numerous as their
trophies. They boast as many triumphs over the gods as over the nations;
as many spoils of battle they have still, as there remain images of
captive deities. And the poor gods submit to be adored by their enemies,
and they ordain illimitable empire to those whose injuries rather than
their simulated homage should have had retribution at their hands. But
divinities unconscious are with impunity dishonoured, just as in vain
they are adored. You certainly never can believe that devotion to
religion has evidently advanced to greatness a people who, as we have
put it, have either grown by injuring religion, or have injured religion
by their growth. Those, too, whose kingdoms have become part of the one
great whole of the Roman empire, were not without religion when their
kingdoms were taken from them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_113"></span>[39:114](0030031.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p3"></span> \[See Augustine’s *City of God*, III.
xvii. p. 95, *Ed*. Migne.\]

<span id="fn_114"></span>[39:115](0030031.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p4"></span> Her image was taken from Pessinus to
Rome.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[40:116](0030031.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxv-p5"></span> \[Familiar reference to Virgil, Æneid,
I. 15.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI.](0030032.md)
