[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030033)  [Next](0030035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxviii-p2"></span>But as it was easily seen to be
unjust to compel freemen against their will to offer sacrifice (for even
in other acts of religious service a willing mind is required), it
should be counted quite absurd for one man to compel another to do
honour to the gods, when he ought ever voluntarily, and in the sense of
his own need, to seek their favour, lest in the liberty which is his
right he should be ready to say, “I want none of Jupiter’s favours; pray
who art thou? Let Janus meet me with angry looks, with whichever of his
faces he likes; what have you to do with me?” You have been led, no
doubt, by these same evil spirits to compel us to offer sacrifice for
the well-being of the emperor; and you are under a necessity of using
force, just as we are under an obligation to face the dangers of it. 
This brings us, then, to the second ground of accusation, that we are
guilty of treason against a majesty more august; for you do homage with
a greater dread and an intenser reverence to Cæsar, than Olympian Jove
himself. And if you knew it, upon sufficient grounds. For is not any
living man better than a dead one, whoever he be? But this is not done
by you on any other ground than regard to a power whose presence you
vividly realize; so that also in this you are convicted of impiety to
your gods, inasmuch as you show a greater reverence to a human
sovereignty than you do to them. Then, too, among you, people far more
readily swear a false oath in the name of all the gods, than in the name
of the single genius of Cæsar.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIX.](0030035)
