[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030006)  [Next](0030008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span> <span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="iv.iii.i-Page_17"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p2.1"></span>Apology.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p3.1"></span>\[Translated by the Rev. S. Thelwall, Late
Scholar of Christ’s College, Cantab.\]</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span><span class="c29"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p5.1"></span>The Apology. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) </span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p7.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p8.1"></span>Rulers</span> of the Roman Empire, if, seated
for the administration of justice on your lofty tribunal, under the gaze
of every eye, and occupying there all but the highest position in the
state, you may not openly inquire into and sift before the world the
real truth in regard to the charges made against the Christians; if in
this case alone you are afraid or ashamed to exercise your authority in
making public inquiry with the carefulness which becomes justice; if,
finally, the extreme severities inflicted on our people in recently
private judgments, stand in the way of our being permitted to defend
ourselves before you, you cannot surely forbid the Truth to reach your
ears by the secret pathway of a noiseless book. <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) She has no appeals to make to you in
regard of her condition, for that does not excite her wonder. She knows
that she is but a sojourner on the earth, and that among strangers she
naturally finds foes; and more than this, that her origin, her
dwelling-place, her hope, her recompense, her honours, are above. One
thing, meanwhile, she anxiously desires of earthly rulers—not to be
condemned unknown. What harm can it do to the laws, supreme in their
domain, to give her a hearing?  Nay, for that part of it, will not their
absolute supremacy be more conspicuous in their condemning her, even
after she has made her plea? But if, unheard, sentence is pronounced
against her, besides the odium of an unjust deed, you will incur the
merited suspicion of doing it with some idea that it is unjust, as not
wishing to hear what you may not be able to hear and condemn.  We lay
this before you as the first ground on which we urge that your hatred to
the name of Christian is unjust.  And the very reason which seems to
excuse this injustice (I mean ignorance) at once aggravates and convicts
it.  For what is there more unfair than to hate a thing of which you
know nothing, even though it deserve to be hated?  Hatred is only
merited when it is *known* to be merited. But without that knowledge,
whence is its justice to be vindicated? for that is to be proved, not
from the mere fact that an aversion exists, but from acquaintance with
the subject. When men, then, give way to a dislike simply because they
are entirely ignorant of the nature of the thing disliked, why may it
not be precisely the very sort of thing they should not dislike? So we
maintain that they are both ignorant while they hate us, and hate us
unrighteously while they continue in ignorance, the one thing being the
result of the other either way of it. The proof of their ignorance, at
once condemning and excusing their injustice, is this, that those who
once hated Christianity because they knew nothing about it, no sooner
come to know it than they all lay down at once their enmity.  From being
its haters they become its disciples. By simply getting acquainted with
it, they begin now to hate what they had formerly been, and to profess
what they had formerly hated; and their numbers are as great as are laid
to our charge. The outcry is that the State is filled with
Christians—that they are in the fields, in the citadels, in the islands:
they make lamentation, as for some calamity, that both sexes, every age
and condition, even high rank, are passing over to the profession of the
Christian faith; and yet for all, their minds are not awakened to the
thought of some good they have failed to notice in it. They must not
allow any truer suspicions to cross their minds; they have no <span
id="page_18">p. 18</span> <span id="iv.iii.i-Page_18"></span>desire to
make closer trial. Here alone the curiosity of human nature slumbers.
They like to be ignorant, though to others the knowledge has been
bliss.  Anacharsis reproved the rude venturing to criticise the
cultured; how much more this judging of those who know, by men who are
entirely ignorant, might he have denounced! Because they already
dislike, they want to know no more.  Thus they prejudge that of which
they are ignorant to be such, that, if they came to know it, it could no
longer be the object of their aversion; since, if inquiry finds nothing
worthy of dislike, it is certainly proper to cease from an unjust
dislike, while if its bad character comes plainly out, instead of the
detestation entertained for it being thus diminished, a stronger reason
for perseverance in that detestation is obtained, even under the
authority of justice itself. But, says one, a thing is not good merely
because multitudes go over to it; for how many have the bent of their
nature towards whatever is bad! how many go astray into ways of error!
It is undoubted. Yet a thing that is thoroughly evil, not even those
whom it carries away venture to defend as good. Nature throws a veil
either of fear or shame over all evil. For instance, you find that
criminals are eager to conceal themselves, avoid appearing in public,
are in trepidation when they are caught, deny their guilt, when they are
accused; even when they are put to the rack, they do not easily or
always confess; when there is no doubt about their condemnation, they
grieve for what they have done. In their self-communings they admit
their being impelled by sinful dispositions, but they lay the blame
either on fate or on the stars. They are unwilling to acknowledge that
the thing is theirs, because they own that it is wicked. But what is
there like this in the Christian’s case? The only shame or regret he
feels, is at not having been a Christian earlier. If he is pointed out,
he glories in it; if he is accused, he offers no defence; interrogated,
he makes voluntary confession; condemned he renders thanks. What sort of
evil thing is this, which wants all the ordinary peculiarities of
evil—fear, shame, subterfuge, penitence, lamenting?  What! is that a
crime in which the criminal rejoices? to be accused of which is his
ardent wish, to be punished for which is his felicity? You cannot call
it madness, you who stand convicted of knowing nothing of the matter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_76"></span>[17:77](0030007.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span> \[Great diversity exists among the
critics as to the date of this Apology; see Kaye, pp. xvi. 48, 65.
Mosheim says, <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> 198, Kaye <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.i-p6.3"></span>a.d.</span> 204.\]

<span id="fn_77"></span>[17:78](0030007.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span> Elucidation II.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](0030008.md)
