[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030121)  [Next](0030123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.vii-p2"></span>Let these dealers in crowns then
recognize in the meantime the authority of Nature, on the ground of a
common sense as human beings, and the certifications of their peculiar
religion, as, according to the last chapter, worshippers of the God of
nature; and, as it were, thus over and above what is required, let them
consider those other reasons too which forbid us wearing crowns,
especially on the head, and indeed crowns of every sort. For we are
obliged to turn from the rule of Nature, which we share with mankind in
general, that we may maintain the whole peculiarity of our Christian
discipline, in relation also to other kinds of crowns which seem to have
been provided for different uses, as being composed of different
substances, lest, because they do not consist of flowers, the use of
which nature has indicated (as it does in the case of this military
laurel one itself), they may be thought not to come under the
prohibition of our sect, since they have escaped any objections of
nature. I see, then, that we must go into the matter both with more
research, and more fully, from its beginnings on through its successive
stages of growth to its more erratic developments. For this we need to
turn to heathen literature, for things belonging to the heathen must be
proved from their own <span id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span
id="iv.vi.vii-Page_97"></span>documents. The little of this I have
acquired, will, I believe, be enough.  If there really was a Pandora,
whom Hesiod mentions as the first of women, hers was the first head the
graces crowned, for she received gifts from all *the gods* whence she
got *her name* Pandora. But Moses, a prophet, not a poet-shepherd, shows
us the first woman Eve having her loins more naturally girt about with
leaves than her temples with flowers.  Pandora, then, is a myth. And so
we have to blush for the origin of the crown, even on the ground of the
falsehood connected with it; and, as will soon appear, on the ground no
less of its realities. For it is an undoubted fact that certain persons
either originated the thing, or shed lustre on it. Pherecydes relates
that Saturn was the first who wore a crown; Diodorus, that Jupiter,
after conquering the Titans, was honoured with this gift by the rest of
the gods. To Priapus also the same author assigns fillets; and to
Ariadne a garland of gold and of Indian gems, the gift of Vulcan,
afterwards of Bacchus, and subsequently turned into a constellation.
Callimachus has put a vine crown upon Juno. So too at Argos, her statue,
vine-wreathed, with a lion’s skin placed beneath her feet, exhibits the
stepmother exulting over the spoils of her two step-sons. Hercules
displays upon his head sometimes poplar, sometimes wild-olive, sometimes
parsley. You have the tragedy of Cerberus; you have Pindar; and besides
Callimachus, who mentions that Apollo, too when he had killed the
Delphic serpent, as a suppliant, put on a laurel garland; for among the
ancients suppliants were wont to be crowned. Harpocration argues that
Bacchus the same as Osiris among the Egyptians, was designedly crowned
with ivy, because it is the nature of ivy to protect the brain against
drowsiness. But that in another way also Bacchus was the originator of
the laurel crown (the crown) in which he celebrated his triumph over the
Indians, even the rabble acknowledge, when they call the days dedicated
to him the “great crown.” If you open, again, the writings of the
Egyptian Leo, you learn that Isis was the first who discovered and wore
ears of corn upon her head—a thing more suited to the belly. Those who
want additional information will find an ample exposition of the subject
in Claudius Saturninus, a writer of distinguished talent who treats this
question also, for he has a book on crowns, so explaining their
beginnings as well as causes, and kinds, and rites, that you find all
that is charming in the flower, all that is beautiful in the leafy
branch, and every sod or vine-shoot has been dedicated to some head or
other; making it abundantly clear how foreign to us we should judge the
custom of the crowned head, introduced as it was by, and thereafter
constantly managed for the honour of, those whom the world has believed
to be gods. If the devil, a liar from the beginning, is even in this
matter working for his false system of godhead (idolatry), he had
himself also without doubt provided for his god-lie being carried out.
What sort of thing, then, must that be counted among the people of the
true God, which was brought in by the nations in honour of the devil’s
candidates, and was set apart from the beginning to no other than these;
and which even then received its consecration to idolatry by idols and
in idols yet alive?  Not as if an idol were anything, but since the
things which others offer up to idols belong to demons. But if the
things which *others* offer to them belong to demons how much more what
idols offered to themselves, when they were in life! The demons
themselves, doubtless, had made provision for themselves by means of
those whom they had possessed, while in a state of desire and craving,
before provision had been actually made.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](0030123)
