[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030236)  [Next](0030238.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII.—The Judicial Retribution
of These Migrations Refuted with Raillery.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p2"></span>Forasmuch as this doctrine is
vindicated even on the principle of judicial retribution, on the
pretence that the souls of men obtain as their partners the kind of
animals which are suited to their life and deserts,—as if they ought to
be, according to their several characters, either slain in criminals
destined to execution, or reduced to hard work in menials, or fatigued
and wearied in labourers, or foully disgraced in the unclean; or, again,
on the same principle, reserved for honour, and love, and care, and
attentive regard in characters most eminent in rank and virtue,
usefulness, and tender sensibility,—I must here also remark, that if
souls undergo a transformation, they will actually not be able to
accomplish and experience the destinies which they shall deserve; and
the aim and purpose of judicial recompense will be brought to nought, as
there will be wanting the sense and consciousness of merit and
retribution. And there must be this want of consciousness, if souls lose
their condition; and there must ensue this loss, if they do not continue
in one stay. But even if they should have permanency enough to remain
unchanged until the judgment,—a point which Mercurius Ægyptius
recognised, when he said that the soul, after its separation from the
body, was not dissipated back into the soul of the universe, but
retained permanently its distinct individuality, “in order that it might
render,” to use his own words, “an account to the Father of those things
which it has done in the body;” <span id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-Page_214"></span>—(even supposing all this, I say,) I
still want to examine the justice, the solemnity, the majesty, and the
dignity of this reputed judgment of God, and see whether human judgment
has not too elevated a throne in it—exaggerated in both directions, in
its office both of punishments and rewards, too severe in dealing out
its vengeance, and too lavish in bestowing its favour. What do you
suppose will become of the soul of the murderer? (It will animate), I
suppose, some cattle destined for the slaughter-house and the shambles,
that it may itself be killed, even as it has killed; and be itself
flayed, since it has fleeced others; and be itself used for food, since
it has cast to the wild beasts the ill-fated victims whom it once slew
in woods and lonely roads. Now, if such be the judicial retribution
which it is to receive, is not such a soul likely to find more of
consolation than of punishment, in the fact that it receives its *<span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>coup de grâce* from the hands of most
expert practitioners—is buried with condiments served in the most
piquant styles of an Apicius or a Lurco, is introduced to the tables of
your exquisite Ciceros, is brought up on the most splendid dishes of a
Sylla, finds its obsequies in a banquet, is devoured by respectable
(mouths) on a par with itself, rather than by kites and wolves, so that
all may see how it has got a man’s body for its tomb, and has risen
again after returning to its own kindred race—exulting in the face of
human judgments, if it has experienced them? For these barbarous
sentences of death consign to various wild beasts, which are selected
and trained even against their nature for their horrible office the
criminal who has committed murder, even while yet alive; nay, hindered
from too easily dying, by a contrivance which retards his last moment in
order to aggravate his punishment. But even if his soul should have
anticipated by its departure the sword’s last stroke, his body at all
events must not escape the weapon: retribution for his own crime is yet
exacted by stabbing his throat and stomach, and piercing his side. After
that he is flung into the fire, that his very grave may be
cheated. <span id="fr_1721"></span>[1722](#fn_1721.md) In no other way,
indeed, is a sepulture allowed him. Not that any great care, after all,
is bestowed on his pyre, so that other animals light upon his remains.
At any rate, no mercy is shown to his bones, no indulgence to his ashes,
which must be punished with exposure and nakedness. The vengeance which
is inflicted among men upon the homicide is really as great as that
which is imposed by nature. Who would not prefer the justice of the
world, which, as the apostle himself testifies, “beareth not the sword
in vain,” <span id="fr_1722"></span>[1723](#fn_1722.md) and which is an
institute of religion when it severely avenges in defence of human life?
When we contemplate, too, the penalties awarded to other crimes—gibbets,
and holocausts, and sacks, and harpoons, and precipices—who would not
think it better to receive his sentence in the courts of Pythagoras and
Empedocles?  For even the wretches whom they will send into the bodies
of asses and mules to be punished by drudgery and slavery, how will they
congratulate themselves on the mild labour of the mill and the
water-wheel, when they recollect the mines, and the convict-gangs, and
the public works, and even the prisons and black-holes, terrible in
their idle, do-nothing routine? Then, again, in the case of those who,
after a course of integrity, have surrendered their life to the Judge, I
likewise look for rewards, but I rather discover punishments. To be
sure, it must be a handsome gain for good men to be restored to life in
any animals whatsoever! Homer, so dreamt Ennius, remembered that he was
once a peacock; however, I cannot for my part believe poets, even when
wide awake. A peacock, no doubt, is a very pretty bird, pluming itself,
at will, on its splendid feathers; but then its wings do not make amends
for its voice, which is harsh and unpleasant; and there is nothing that
poets like better than a good song. His transformation, therefore, into
a peacock was to Homer a penalty, not an honour.  The world’s
remuneration will bring him a much greater joy, when it lauds him as the
father of the liberal sciences; and he will prefer the ornaments of his
fame to the graces of his tail! But never mind! let poets migrate into
peacocks, or into swans, if you like, especially as swans have a
respectable voice: in what animal will you invest that righteous hero
Æacus? In what beast will you clothe the chaste and excellent Dido? 
What bird shall fall to the lot of Patience? what animal to the lot of
Holiness? what fish to that of Innocence?  Now all creatures are the
servants of man; all are his subjects, all his dependants. If by and by
he is to become one of these creatures, he is by such a change debased
and degraded, he to whom, for his virtues, images, statues, and titles
are freely awarded as public honours and distinguished privileges, he to
whom the senate and the people vote even sacrifices! Oh, what judicial
sentences for gods to pronounce, as men’s recompense after death! They
are more mendacious than any human judgments; they are contemptible as
punishments, dis<span id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-Page_215"></span>gusting as rewards; such as the worst
of men could never fear, nor the best desire; such indeed, as criminals
will aspire to, rather than saints,—the former, that they may escape
more speedily the world’s stern sentence,—the latter that they may more
tardily incur it. How well, (forsooth), O ye philosophers do you teach
us, and how usefully do you advise us, that after death rewards and
punishments fall with lighter weight! whereas, if any judgment awaits
souls at all, it ought rather to be supposed that it will be heavier at
the conclusion of life than in the conduct <span
id="fr_1723"></span>[1724](#fn_1723.md) thereof, since nothing is more
complete than that which comes at the very last—nothing, moreover, is
more complete than that which is especially divine. Accordingly, God’s
judgment will be more full and complete, because it will be pronounced
at the very last, in an eternal irrevocable sentence, both of punishment
and of consolation, (on men whose) souls are not to transmigrate into
beasts, but are to return into their own proper bodies. And all this
once for all, and on “that day, too, of which the Father only
knoweth;” <span id="fr_1724"></span>[1725](#fn_1724) (only knoweth,.md) in
order that by her trembling expectation faith may make full trial of her
anxious sincerity, keeping her gaze ever fixed on that day, in her
perpetual ignorance of it, daily fearing that for which she yet daily
hopes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1721"></span>[214:1722](0030237.htm#fr_1721.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p2.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p3"></span> Or, “that he may be punished even in
his sepulture.”

<span id="fn_1722"></span>[214:1723](0030237.htm#fr_1722.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p4"></span> [Rom. xiii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1723"></span>[215:1724](0030237.htm#fr_1723.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p5"></span> In administratione.

<span id="fn_1724"></span>[215:1725](0030237.htm#fr_1724.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p6"></span> [Mark xiii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032.md)<span
id="iv.xi.xxxiii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: These Vagaries Stimulated Some Profane Corruptions of
Christianity. The Profanity of Simon Magus Condemned.](0030238.md)
