[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030190)  [Next](0030192) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.x"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ix.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.—Concerning the Passion of Christ,
and Its Old Testament Predictions and Adumbrations.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p2"></span>Concerning the last step, plainly, of His
passion you raise a doubt; affirming that the passion of the cross was
not predicted with reference to Christ, and urging, besides, that it is
not credible that God should have exposed His own Son to that kind of
death; because Himself said, “Cursed *is* every one who shall have hung
on a tree.” <span id="fr_1312"></span>[1313](#fn_1312) But the *reason*
of the case antecedently explains the sense of this malediction; for He
says in Deuteronomy: “If, moreover, (a man) shall have been (involved)
in some sin incurring the judgment of death, and shall die, and ye shall
suspend him on a tree, his body shall not remain on the tree, but with
burial ye shall bury him on the very day; because cursed by God is every
one who shall have been suspended on a tree; and ye shall not defile the
land which the Lord thy God shall give thee for (thy) lot.” <span
id="fr_1313"></span>[1314](#fn_1313) Therefore He did not maledictively
adjudge Christ to this passion, but drew a distinction, that whoever,
*in any sin*, had incurred the judgment of death, and died suspended on
a <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> <span
id="iv.ix.x-Page_165"></span>tree, *he* should be “cursed by God,”
because his own sins were the cause of his suspension on the tree. On
the other hand, Christ, who spoke not guile from His mouth, <span
id="fr_1314"></span>[1315](#fn_1314) and who exhibited all righteousness
and humility, not only (as we have above recorded it predicted of Him)
was not exposed to that kind of death *for his own deserts*, but (was so
exposed) in order that what was predicted by the prophets as destined to
come upon Him through your means <span
id="fr_1315"></span>[1316](#fn_1315) might be fulfilled; just as, in the
Psalms, the Spirit Himself of Christ was already singing, saying, “They
were repaying me evil for good;” <span
id="fr_1316"></span>[1317](#fn_1316) and, “What I had not seized I was
then paying in full;” <span id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317) “They
exterminated my hands and feet;” <span
id="fr_1318"></span>[1319](#fn_1318) and, “They put into my drink gall,
and in my thirst they slaked me with vinegar;” <span
id="fr_1319"></span>[1320](#fn_1319) “Upon my vesture they did cast
(the) lot;” <span id="fr_1320"></span>[1321](#fn_1320) just as the other
(outrages) which you were to commit on Him were foretold,—all which He,
actually and thoroughly suffering, suffered not for any evil action of
His own, but “that the Scriptures from the mouth of the prophets might
be fulfilled.” <span id="fr_1321"></span>[1322](#fn_1321)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p13"></span>And, of course, it had been meet that the
mystery <span id="fr_1322"></span>[1323](#fn_1322) of the passion itself
should be figuratively set forth in predictions; and the more incredible
(that mystery), the more likely to be “a stumbling-stone,” <span
id="fr_1323"></span>[1324](#fn_1323) if it had been nakedly predicted;
and the more magnificent, the more to be *adumbrated*, that the
difficulty of its intelligence might seek (help from) the grace of God.

<span id="iv.ix.x-p16"></span>Accordingly, to begin with, Isaac, when
led by his father as a victim, and himself bearing his own “wood,” <span
id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324) was even at that early period
pointing to Christ’s death; conceded, as He was, as a victim by the
Father; carrying, as He did, the “wood” of His own passion. <span
id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p19"></span>Joseph, again, himself was made a figure
of Christ <span id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326) in this point alone
(to name no more, not to delay my own course), that he suffered
persecution at the hands of his brethren, and was sold into Egypt, on
account of the favour of God; <span id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327)
just as Christ was sold by Israel—(and therefore,) “according to the
flesh,” by His “brethren” <span id="fr_1328"></span>[1329](#fn_1328)
—when He is betrayed by Judas. <span
id="fr_1329"></span>[1330](#fn_1329) For Joseph is withal blest by his
father <span id="fr_1330"></span>[1331](#fn_1330) after this form: “His
glory (is that) of a bull; his horns, the horns of an unicorn; on them
shall he toss nations alike unto the very extremity of the earth.”  Of
course no one-horned rhinoceros was there pointed to, nor any two-horned
minotaur. But Christ was therein signified: “bull,” by reason of each of
His two characters,—to some fierce, as Judge; to others gentle, as
Saviour; whose “horns” were to be the extremities of the *cross*. For
even in a ship’s yard—which is part of a *cross*—this is the name by
which the extremities are called; while the central pole of the mast is
a “unicorn.” By this power, in fact, of the cross, and in this manner
horned, He does now, on the one hand, “toss” universal nations through
*faith*, wafting them away from earth to heaven; and will one day, on
the other, “toss” them through *judgment*, casting them down from heaven
to earth.

<span id="iv.ix.x-p25"></span>He, again, will be the “bull” elsewhere
too in the same scripture. <span id="fr_1331"></span>[1332](#fn_1331)
When Jacob pronounced a blessing on Simeon and Levi, he prophesies of
the scribes and Pharisees; for from them <span
id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332) is derived their <span
id="fr_1333"></span>[1334](#fn_1333) origin. For (his blessing)
interprets spiritually thus: “Simeon and Levi perfected iniquity out of
their sect,” <span id="fr_1334"></span>[1335](#fn_1334) —whereby, to
wit, they persecuted Christ: “into their counsel come not my soul! and
upon their station rest not my heart! because in their indignation they
slew men”—that is, prophets—“and in their concupiscence they hamstrung a
bull!” <span id="fr_1335"></span>[1336](#fn_1335) —that is, Christ,
whom—after the slaughter of prophets—they slew, and exhausted their
savagery by transfixing His sinews with nails.  Else it is idle if,
after the murder already committed by them, he upbraids others, and not
them, with butchery. <span id="fr_1336"></span>[1337](#fn_1336)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p32"></span>But, to come now to Moses, why, I wonder,
did he merely at the time when Joshua was battling against Amalek, pray
*sitting* with hands expanded, when, in circumstances so critical, he
ought rather, surely, to have com<span id="page_166">p. 166</span> <span
id="iv.ix.x-Page_166"></span>mended his prayer by knees bended, and
hands beating his breast, and a face prostrate on the ground; except it
was that there, where the name of the Lord Jesus was the theme of
speech—destined as He was to enter the lists one day singly against the
devil—the figure of the *cross* was also necessary, (that figure)
through which Jesus was to win the victory? <span
id="fr_1337"></span>[1338](#fn_1337) Why, again, did the same Moses,
after the prohibition of any “likeness of anything,” <span
id="fr_1338"></span>[1339](#fn_1338) set forth a brazen serpent, placed
on a “tree,” in a hanging posture, for a spectacle of healing to Israel,
at the time when, after their idolatry, <span
id="fr_1339"></span>[1340](#fn_1339) they were suffering extermination
by serpents, except that in this case he was exhibiting the Lord’s
*cross* on which the “serpent” the devil was “made a show of,” <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340) and, for every one hurt by such
snakes—that is, his angels <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341)
—on turning intently from the peccancy of sins to the sacraments of
Christ’s *cross*, salvation was outwrought? For he who then gazed upon
*that* (*cross*) was freed from the bite of the serpents. <span
id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342)

<span id="iv.ix.x-p39"></span>Come, now, if you have read in the
utterance of the prophet in the Psalms, “God hath reigned *from the
tree*,” <span id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343) I wait to hear what
you understand thereby; for fear you may perhaps think some
carpenter-king <span id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344) is signified,
and not Christ, who has reigned from that time onward when he overcame
the death which ensued from His passion of “the tree.”

<span id="iv.ix.x-p42"></span>Similarly, again, Isaiah says: “For a
child is born to us, and to us is given a son.” <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345) What novelty is that, unless he is
speaking of the “Son” of God?—and one is born to us the beginning of
whose government has been made “on His shoulder.” What king in the world
wears the ensign of his power *on his shoulder*, and does not bear
either diadem on his head, or else sceptre in his hand, or else some
mark of distinctive vesture? But the *novel* “King of ages,” Christ
Jesus, alone reared “on His shoulder” His own *novel* glory, and power,
and sublimity,—the *cross*, to wit; that, according to the former
prophecy, the Lord thenceforth “might reign *from the tree*.” For of
this tree likewise it is that God hints, through Jeremiah, that you
would say, “Come, let us put *wood* <span
id="fr_1346"></span>[1347](#fn_1346) *into his bread*, and let us wear
him away out of the land of the living; and his name shall no more be
remembered.” <span id="fr_1347"></span>[1348](#fn_1347) Of course on His
*body* that “wood” was put; <span id="fr_1348"></span>[1349](#fn_1348)
for so Christ has revealed, calling His body “bread,” <span
id="fr_1349"></span>[1350](#fn_1349) whose body the prophet in bygone
days announced under the term “bread.” If you shall still seek for
predictions of the Lord’s cross, the twenty-first Psalm will at length
be able to satisfy you, containing as it does the whole passion of
Christ; singing, as He does, even at so early a date, His own
glory. <span id="fr_1350"></span>[1351](#fn_1350) “They dug,” He says,
“my hands and feet” <span id="fr_1351"></span>[1352](#fn_1351) —which is
the peculiar atrocity of the cross; and again when He implores the aid
of the Father, “Save me,” He says, “out of the mouth of the lion”—of
course, of death—“and from the horn of the unicorns my humility,” <span
id="fr_1352"></span>[1353](#fn_1352) —from the ends, to wit, of the
cross, as we have above shown; which cross neither David himself
suffered, nor any of the kings of the Jews: that you may not think the
passion of some other particular man is here prophesied than His who
alone was so signally crucified by the People.

<span id="iv.ix.x-p51"></span>Now, if the hardness of your heart shall
persist in rejecting and deriding all these interpretations, we will
prove that it may suffice that the *death* of the Christ had been
prophesied, in order that, from the fact that the *nature* of the death
had not been specified, it may be understood to have been affected by
means of the *cross* <span id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353) and that
the passion of the *cross* is not to be ascribed to any but Him whose
*death* was constantly being predicted. For I desire to show, in one
utterance of Isaiah, His *death*, and *passion*, and *sepulture*. “By
the crimes,” he says, “of my people was He led unto death; and I will
give the evil for His sepulture, and the rich for His death, because He
did not wickedness, nor was guile found in his mouth; and God willed to
redeem His soul from death,” <span id="fr_1354"></span>[1355](#fn_1354)
and so forth. He says again, moreover: “His sepulture hath been taken
away from the midst.” <span id="fr_1355"></span>[1356](#fn_1355) For
neither was He buried except He were dead, nor was His sepulture removed
from the midst except through His resurrection. Finally, he subjoins:
“Therefore He shall have many for an heritage, and of many shall He
divide spoils:” <span id="fr_1356"></span>[1357](#fn_1356) who else
(shall so do) but He who <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span
id="iv.ix.x-Page_167"></span>“was born,” as we have above shown?—“in
return for the fact that His soul was delivered unto death?” For, the
*cause* of the favour accorded Him being shown,—in return, to wit, for
the injury of *a death* which had to be recompensed,—it is likewise
shown that He, destined to attain these rewards *because of* death, was
to attain them *after* death—of course after *resurrection*. For that
which happened at His passion, that mid-day grew dark, the prophet Amos
announces, saying, “And it shall be,” he says, “in that day, saith the
Lord, the sun shall set at mid-day, and the day of light shall grow dark
over the land:  and I will convert your festive days into grief, and all
your canticles into lamentation; and I will lay upon your loins
sackcloth, and upon every head baldness; and I will make the grief like
that for a beloved (son), and them that are with him like a day of
mourning.” <span id="fr_1357"></span>[1358](#fn_1357) For that you would
do thus at the beginning of the first month of your new (years) even
Moses prophesied, when he was foretelling that all the community of the
sons of Israel was <span id="fr_1358"></span>[1359](#fn_1358) to
immolate at eventide a lamb, and were to eat <span
id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359) this solemn sacrifice of this day
(that is, of the passover of unleavened bread) with bitterness;” and
added that “it was the *passover of the Lord*,” <span
id="fr_1360"></span>[1361](#fn_1360) that is, the *passion of Christ*.
Which prediction was thus also fulfilled, that “on the first day of
unleavened bread” <span id="fr_1361"></span>[1362](#fn_1361) you slew
Christ; <span id="fr_1362"></span>[1363](#fn_1362) and (that the
prophecies might be fulfilled) the day hasted to make an
“eventide,”—that is, to cause darkness, which was made at mid-day; and
thus “your festive days God converted into grief, and your canticles
into lamentation.” For after the passion of Christ there overtook you
even captivity and dispersion, predicted before through the Holy Spirit.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1312"></span>[164:1313](0030191.htm#fr_1312) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p3"></span> Comp. [Deut. xxi.
23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span id="iv.ix.x-p3.1"></span> with
[Gal. iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p3.2"></span>, with Prof. Lightfoot on the latter passage.

<span id="fn_1313"></span>[164:1314](0030191.htm#fr_1313) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p4"></span> [Deut.
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022),
[23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023)<span id="iv.ix.x-p4.1"></span>
(especially in the LXX.).

<span id="fn_1314"></span>[165:1315](0030191.htm#fr_1314) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p4.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p5"></span> See [1 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix.x-p5.1"></span> with
[Isa. liii. 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p5.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1315"></span>[165:1316](0030191.htm#fr_1315) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p6"></span> Oehler’s pointing is disregarded.

<span id="fn_1316"></span>[165:1317](0030191.htm#fr_1316) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p7"></span> [Psa.
35.12](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[165:1318](0030191.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p8"></span> [Ps. lxix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.x-p8.1"></span>
(lxviii. 5 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1318"></span>[165:1319](0030191.htm#fr_1318) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p9"></span> [Ps. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)<span id="iv.ix.x-p9.1"></span>
(xxi. 17 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1319"></span>[165:1320](0030191.htm#fr_1319) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p10"></span> [Ps. lxix.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021)<span id="iv.ix.x-p10.1"></span>
(lxviii. 5 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1320"></span>[165:1321](0030191.htm#fr_1320) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p11"></span> [Ps. xxii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)<span id="iv.ix.x-p11.1"></span>
(xxi. 19 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1321"></span>[165:1322](0030191.htm#fr_1321) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p12"></span> See [Matt.
26:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056), [Matt.
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035), [John
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023),
[24](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#024),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#032)<span id="iv.ix.x-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1322"></span>[165:1323](0030191.htm#fr_1322) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p14"></span> Sacramentum.

<span id="fn_1323"></span>[165:1324](0030191.htm#fr_1323) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p15"></span> See [Rom.
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033)<span id="iv.ix.x-p15.1"></span>,
with [Isa. 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016), [1 Cor.
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023), [Gal.
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.x-p15.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[165:1325](0030191.htm#fr_1324) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p17"></span> Lignum = <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.x-p17.1"></span>ξύλον</span>; constantly used for “tree.”

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[165:1326](0030191.htm#fr_1325) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p18"></span> Comp. [Gen. xxii.
1-10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.x-p18.1"></span>
with [John xix. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p18.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[165:1327](0030191.htm#fr_1326) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p20"></span> “Chris*tum* figur*atus*” is Oehler’s
reading, after the two <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ix.x-p20.2"></span>mss.</span> and the Pamelian ed. of 1579; the
rest read “figu*rans*” or “figur*avit.*”

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[165:1328](0030191.htm#fr_1327) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p20.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p21"></span> Manifested *e.g.*, in his *two dreams*.
See [Gen. xxxvii](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1328"></span>[165:1329](0030191.htm#fr_1328) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p22"></span> Comp. [Rom. ix.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.x-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1329"></span>[165:1330](0030191.htm#fr_1329) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p23"></span> Or, “Judah.”

<span id="fn_1330"></span>[165:1331](0030191.htm#fr_1330) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p24"></span> This is an error. It is not “his father,”
Jacob, but Moses, who thus blesses him. See [Deut. xxxiii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.x-p24.1"></span>.
The same error occurs in *adv. Marc*. 1. iii. c. xxiii.

<span id="fn_1331"></span>[165:1332](0030191.htm#fr_1331) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p26"></span> Not strictly “the same;” for here the
reference *is* to [Gen. xlix. 5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[165:1333](0030191.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p26.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p27"></span> i.e., Simeon and Levi.

<span id="fn_1333"></span>[165:1334](0030191.htm#fr_1333) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p28"></span> i.e., the scribes and Pharisees.

<span id="fn_1334"></span>[165:1335](0030191.htm#fr_1334) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p29"></span> Perfecerunt iniquitatem ex sua secta.
There seems to be a play on the word “secta” in connection with the
outrage committed by Simeon and Levi, as recorded in [Gen. xxxiv.
25-31](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025)<span id="iv.ix.x-p29.1"></span>;
and for <span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.x-p29.2"></span>συνετέλεσαν
ἀδικίαν ἐξαιρέσεως αὐτῶν</span> (which is the reading of the LXX., ed.
Tisch. 3, Lips. 1860), Tertullian’s Latin seems to have read, <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.x-p29.3"></span>συνετέλεσαν ἀδικίαν ἐξ
αἱρέσεως αὐτῶν</span>.

<span id="fn_1335"></span>[165:1336](0030191.htm#fr_1335) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p29.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p30"></span> See [Gen. xlix.
5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.x-p30.1"></span> in
LXX.; and comp. the margin of Eng. ver. on ver. 7, and Wordsworth *in
loc*., who incorrectly renders <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.x-p30.2"></span>ταῦρον</span> an “ox” here.

<span id="fn_1336"></span>[165:1337](0030191.htm#fr_1336) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p31"></span> What the sense of this is it is not easy
to see. It appears to have puzzled Pam. and Rig. so effectually that
they both, conjecturally and without authority, adopted the reading
found in *adv. Marc*. l. iii. c. xviii. (from which book, as usual, the
present passage is borrowed), only altering *illis* to *ipsis*.

<span id="fn_1337"></span>[166:1338](0030191.htm#fr_1337) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p32.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p33"></span> See [Ex. xvii.
8-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.x-p33.1"></span>;
and comp. [Col. 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.x-p33.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1338"></span>[166:1339](0030191.htm#fr_1338) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p33.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p34"></span> [Ex. xx.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.x-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1339"></span>[166:1340](0030191.htm#fr_1339) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p35"></span> Their sin was “speaking against God and
against Moses” ([Num. xxi. 4-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p35.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[166:1341](0030191.htm#fr_1340) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p36"></span> Comp. [Col.
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.x-p36.1"></span>,
as before; also [Gen. iii. 1](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#001)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p36.2"></span>, etc.; [2 Cor.
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#003), [Rev.
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.x-p36.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[166:1342](0030191.htm#fr_1341) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p36.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p37"></span> Comp. [2 Cor.
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#015), [Matt.
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041), [Rev.
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009)<span id="iv.ix.x-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[166:1343](0030191.htm#fr_1342) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p38"></span> Comp. *de Idol*. c. v.; *adv. Marc*. l.
iii. c. xviii.

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[166:1344](0030191.htm#fr_1343) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p40"></span> A ligno. Oehler refers us to [Ps. xcvi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.x-p40.1"></span>
(xcv. 10 in LXX.); but the special words “a ligno” are wanting there,
though the text is often quoted by the Fathers.

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[166:1345](0030191.htm#fr_1344) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p41"></span> Lignarium aliquem regem. It is
remarkable, in connection herewith, that our Lord is not only called by
the Jews “*the carpenter’s son*” ([Matt.
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055), [Luke
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#022)<span id="iv.ix.x-p41.1"></span>),
but “*the carpenter*” ([Mark vi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.x-p41.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[166:1346](0030191.htm#fr_1345) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p43"></span> See [Isa. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.x-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1346"></span>[166:1347](0030191.htm#fr_1346) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p44"></span> Lignum.

<span id="fn_1347"></span>[166:1348](0030191.htm#fr_1347) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p45"></span> See [Jer. xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)<span id="iv.ix.x-p45.1"></span> (in
LXX.).

<span id="fn_1348"></span>[166:1349](0030191.htm#fr_1348) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p46"></span> i.e., when they laid on Him the crossbeam
to carry. See [John xix. 17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.x-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1349"></span>[166:1350](0030191.htm#fr_1349) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p47"></span> See [John
vi](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#000)<span id="iv.ix.x-p47.1"></span>.
*passim*, and the various accounts of the institution of the Holy
Supper.

<span id="fn_1350"></span>[166:1351](0030191.htm#fr_1350) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p48"></span> It is [Ps.
xxii](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#000)<span id="iv.ix.x-p48.1"></span>.
in our Bibles, xxi. in LXX.

<span id="fn_1351"></span>[166:1352](0030191.htm#fr_1351) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p48.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p49"></span> [Psa.
22.16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)<span id="iv.ix.x-p49.1"></span>
(17 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1352"></span>[166:1353](0030191.htm#fr_1352) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p50"></span> [Ps. xxii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021)<span id="iv.ix.x-p50.1"></span>
(xxi. 22 in LXX., who render it as Tertullian does).

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[166:1354](0030191.htm#fr_1353) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p52"></span> i.e., perhaps, because of the extreme
ignominy attaching to that death, which prevented its being expressly
named.

<span id="fn_1354"></span>[166:1355](0030191.htm#fr_1354) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p52.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p53"></span> [Isa.
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.x-p53.1"></span>,
(in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1355"></span>[166:1356](0030191.htm#fr_1355) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p54"></span> [Isa. lvii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.x-p54.1"></span> (in
LXX.).

<span id="fn_1356"></span>[166:1357](0030191.htm#fr_1356) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p55"></span> [Isa. liii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.x-p55.1"></span> (in
LXX.). Comp., too, Bp. Lowth. Oehler’s pointing again appears to be
faulty.

<span id="fn_1357"></span>[167:1358](0030191.htm#fr_1357) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p56"></span> See [Amos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.x-p56.1"></span>
(especially in the LXX.).

<span id="fn_1358"></span>[167:1359](0030191.htm#fr_1358) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p57"></span> Oehler’s “esset” appears to be a mistake
for “esse.”

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[167:1360](0030191.htm#fr_1359) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p58"></span> The change from singular to plural is due
to the Latin, not to the translator.

<span id="fn_1360"></span>[167:1361](0030191.htm#fr_1360) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p59"></span> See [Ex. xii.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.x-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1361"></span>[167:1362](0030191.htm#fr_1361) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p60"></span> See [Matt.
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017), [Mark
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012), [Luke
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007), [John
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)<span id="iv.ix.x-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1362"></span>[167:1363](0030191.htm#fr_1362) <span
id="iv.ix.x-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.x-p61"></span> Comp. [1 Cor. v.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.x-p61.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Further Proofs, from Ezekiel. Summary of the Prophetic Argument
Thus Far.](0030192)
