[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030642)  [Next](0030644.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.lxi"></span>

<span id="v.viii.lxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.lxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter LXI.—The Details of Our Bodily Sex,
and of the Functions of Our Various Members. Apology for the Necessity
Which Heresy Imposes of Hunting Up All Its Unblushing Cavils.</span>

<span id="v.viii.lxi-p2"></span>Now you have received your mouth, O man,
for the purpose of devouring your food and imbibing your drink: why not,
however, for the higher purpose of uttering speech, so as to distinguish
yourself from all other animals? Why not rather for preaching *the
gospel of* God, that so you may become even His priest and advocate
before men?  Adam indeed gave their several names to the animals, before
he plucked the fruit of the tree; before he ate, he prophesied. Then,
again, you received your teeth for the consumption of your meal: why not
rather for wreathing your mouth with suitable defence on every opening
thereof, small or wide? Why not, too, for moderating the impulses of
your tongue, and guarding your articulate speech from failure and
violence? Let me tell you, (if you do not know), that there are
toothless persons in the world. Look at them, and ask whether even a
cage of teeth be not an honour to the mouth.  There are apertures in the
lower regions of man and woman, by means of which they gratify no doubt
their animal passions; but why are they not rather regarded as outlets
for the cleanly <span id="page_593">p. 593</span> <span
id="v.viii.lxi-Page_593"></span>discharge of natural fluids? Women,
moreover, have within them receptacles where human seed may collect; but
are they not designed for the secretion of those sanguineous issues,
which their tardier and weaker sex is inadequate to disperse? For even
details like these require to be mentioned, seeing that *heretics*
single out what parts of our bodies may suit them, handle them without
delicacy, and, as their whim suggests, pour torrents of scorn and
contempt upon the natural functions of our members, for the purpose of
upsetting the resurrection, and making us blush over their cavils; not
reflecting that before the functions cease, the very causes of them will
have passed away. There will be no more meat, because no more hunger; no
more drink, because no more thirst; no more concubinage, because no more
child-bearing; no more eating and drinking, because no more labour and
toil. Death, too, will cease; so there will be no more need of the
nutriment of food for the defence of life, nor will *mothers’* limbs any
longer have to be laden for the replenishment of our race. But even in
the present life there may be cessations of their office for our
stomachs and our generative organs. For forty days Moses <span
id="fr_7748"></span>[7749](#fn_7748.md) and Elias <span
id="fr_7749"></span>[7750](#fn_7749.md) fasted, and lived upon God alone.
For even so early was the principle consecrated:  “Man shall not live by
bread alone, but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God.” <span id="fr_7750"></span>[7751](#fn_7750.md) See here faint outlines
of our future strength! We even, as we may be able, excuse our mouths
from food, and withdraw our sexes from union. How many voluntary eunuchs
are there! How many virgins espoused to Christ! How many, both of men
and women, whom nature has made sterile, with a structure which cannot
procreate! Now, if even here on earth both the functions and the
pleasures of our members may be suspended, with an intermission which,
like the dispensation itself, can only be a temporary one, and yet man’s
safety is nevertheless unimpaired, how much more, when his salvation is
secure, and especially in an eternal dispensation, shall we not cease to
desire those things, for which, even here below, we are not unaccustomed
to check our longings!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7748"></span>[593:7749](0030643.htm#fr_7748.md) <span
id="v.viii.lxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.lxi-p3"></span> [Ex. xxiv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008.md)<span id="v.viii.lxi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7749"></span>[593:7750](0030643.htm#fr_7749.md) <span
id="v.viii.lxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.lxi-p4"></span> [1 Kings xix.
8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008.md)<span id="v.viii.lxi-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7750"></span>[593:7751](0030643.htm#fr_7750.md) <span
id="v.viii.lxi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.lxi-p5"></span> [Deut.
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003.md), [Matt.
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004.md)<span id="v.viii.lxi-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Our Destined Likeness to the Angels in the Glorious Life of the
Resurrection.](0030644.md)
