[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030641)  [Next](0030643) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.lx"></span>

<span id="v.viii.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.lx-p1.1"></span>Chapter LX.—All the Characteristics of Our
Bodies—Sex, Various Limbs, Etc.—Will Be Retained, Whatever Change of
Functions These May Have, of Which Point, However, We are No Judges.
Analogy of the Repaired Ship.</span>

<span id="v.viii.lx-p2"></span>But behold how persistently they still
accumulate their cavils against the flesh, especially against its
identity, deriving their argu<span id="page_592">p. 592</span> <span
id="v.viii.lx-Page_592"></span>ments even from the functions of our
limbs; on the one hand saying that these ought to continue permanently
pursuing their labours and enjoyments, as appendages to the same
corporeal frame; and on the other hand contending that, inasmuch as the
functions of the limbs shall one day come to an end, the bodily frame
itself must be destroyed, its permanence without its limbs being deemed
to be as inconceivable, as that of the limbs themselves without their
functions!  What, they ask, will then be the use of the cavity of our
mouth, and its rows of teeth, and the passage of the throat, and the
branch-way of the stomach, and the gulf of the belly, and the entangled
tissue of the bowels, when there shall no longer be room for eating and
drinking? What more will there be for these members to take in,
masticate, swallow, secrete, digest, eject? Of what avail will be our
very hands, and feet, and all our labouring limbs, when even all care
about food shall cease? What purpose can be served by loins, conscious
of seminal secretions, and all the other organs of generation, in the
two sexes, and the laboratories of embryos, and the fountains of the
breast, when concubinage, and pregnancy, and infant nurture shall cease?
In short, what will be the use of the entire body, when the entire body
shall become useless? In reply to all this, we have then already settled
the principle that the dispensation of the future state ought not to be
compared with that of the present world, and that in the interval
between them a change will take place; and we now add the remark, that
these functions of our bodily limbs will continue to supply the needs of
this life up to the moment when life itself shall pass away from time to
eternity, as the natural body gives place to the spiritual, until “this
mortal puts on immorality, and this corruptible puts on
incorruption:” <span id="fr_7746"></span>[7747](#fn_7746) so that when
life shall itself become freed from all wants, our limbs shall then be
freed also from their services, and therefore will be no longer wanted. 
Still, although liberated from their offices, they will be yet preserved
for judgment, “that every one may receive the things done in his
body.” <span id="fr_7747"></span>[7748](#fn_7747) For the judgment-seat
of God requires that man be kept entire. Entire, however, he cannot be
without his limbs, of the substance of which, not the functions, he
consists; unless, forsooth, you will be bold enough to maintain that a
ship is perfect without her keel, or her bow, or her stern, and without
the solidity of her entire frame. And yet how often have we seen the
same ship, after being shattered with the storm and broken by decay,
with all her timbers repaired and restored, gallantly riding on the wave
in all the beauty of a renewed fabric!  Do we then disquiet ourselves
with doubt about God’s skill, and will, and rights? Besides, if a
wealthy shipowner, who does not grudge money merely for his amusement or
show, thoroughly repairs his ship, and then chooses that she should make
no further voyages, will you contend that the old form and finish is
still not necessary to the vessel, although she is no longer meant for
actual service, when the mere safety of a ship requires such
completeness irrespective of service? The sole question, therefore,
which is enough for us to consider here, is whether the Lord, when He
ordains salvation for man, intends it for his flesh; whether it is His
will that the selfsame flesh shall be renewed. *If so*, it will be
improper for you to rule, from the inutility of its limbs in the future
state, that the flesh will be incapable of renovation. For a thing may
be renewed, and yet be useless *from having nothing to do*; but it
cannot be said to be useless if it has no existence. If, indeed, it has
existence, it will be quite possible for it also not to be useless; *it
may possibly have something to do*; for in the presence of God there
will be no idleness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7746"></span>[592:7747](0030642.htm#fr_7746) <span
id="v.viii.lx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.lx-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span id="v.viii.lx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7747"></span>[592:7748](0030642.htm#fr_7747) <span
id="v.viii.lx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.lx-p4"></span> [2 Cor. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="v.viii.lx-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Details of Our Bodily Sex, and of the Functions of Our
Various Members. Apology for the Necessity Which Heresy Imposes of
Hunting Up All Its Unblushing Cavils.](0030643)
