[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030467)  [Next](0030469) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Elucidations.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p3.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p4"></span>(Soul and Spirit, cap. xv. and notes 1
and 2, p. 463.*)*

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p5"></span>Dr. Holmes, in the learned note which
follows, affords me a valuable addition to my scanty remarks on this
subject in former volumes. See (Vol. I. pp. 387, 532,) references to the
great work of Professor Delitzsch, in notes on Irenæus. In Vol. II. p.
102, I have also mentioned M. Heard’s work, on the *Tripartite Nature of
Man*. With reference to the disagreement of the learned on this great
matter, let me ask is it not less real than apparent? The *dichotomy* to
which Tertullian objected, and the *trichotomy* which Dr. Holmes makes a
name of “*the triple nature*,” are terms which rather suggest a process
of “dividing asunder of soul and spirit,” and which involve an ambiguity
that confuses the inquiry. Now, while the gravest objections may be
imagined, or even demonstrated, against a process which seems to destroy
the unity and individuality of a Man, does not every theologian accept
the analytical formula of the apostle and recognize the *bodily*, the
*animal* and the *spiritual* in the life of man? If so is there not
fundamental agreement as to [1 Thess. v.
23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p5.1"></span>, and difference only, relatively, as to
functions and processes, or as to the way in which truth on these three
points ought to be stated?  On this subject there are good remarks in
the *Speaker’s Commentary* on the text aforesaid, but the exhaustive
work of Delitzsch deserves study.

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p6"></span>Man’s whole nature in Christ, seems to
be sanctified by the Holy Spirit’s suffusion of man’s *spirit*; this
rules and governs the *psychic* nature and through it the *body*.

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p7"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p7.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p8"></span>(The entire work, cap. xxi. p. 474.)

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p9"></span>He who has followed Tertullian through
the mazes in which Marcion, in spite of shifts and turnings innumerable,
has been hunted down, and defeated, must recognize the great work
performed by this author in behalf of Christian Orthodoxy. It seems to
have been the plan of Christ’s watchful care over His Church, that, in
the earliest stages of its existence the enemy should be allowed to
display his utmost malice and to bring out all his forces against Truth.
Thus, before the meeting of Church-councils the language of faith had
grown up, and clear views and precise statements of doctrine had been
committed to the idioms of human thought. But, the labours of Tertullian
are not confined to these diverse purposes. With all the faults of his
acute and forensic mind, how powerfully he illuminates the Scriptures
and glorifies them as containing the whole system of the Faith.  How
rich are his quotations, and how penetrating his conceptions of their
uses. Besides all this, what an introduction he gives us to the modes of
thought which were becoming familiar in the West, <span id="page_475">p.
475</span> <span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-Page_475"></span>and which were
convening the Latin tongue to new uses, and making it capable of
expressing Augustine’s mind and so of creating new domains of Learning
among the nations of Europe.

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p10"></span>If I have treated tenderly the
reputation of this great Master, in my notes upon his Marcion, it is
with a twofold purpose. (1.) It seems to me due to truth that his name
should be less associated with his deplorable lapse than with his long
and faithful services to the Church, and (2.) that the student should
thus follow his career with a pleasure and with a confidence the lack of
which perpetually annoys us when we give the first place to the
Montanist and not to the Catholic. Let this be our spirit in
accompanying him into his fresh campaigns against “the grievous wolves”
foreseen by St. Paul with tears. [Acts
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p11"></span>But as our Author invokes a careful
examination of his “entire work,” let the student recur to Irenæus (Vol.
I. p. 352, etc.) and observe how formidable, from the beginning, was the
irreligion of Marcion. His doctrines did truly “eat like a canker,”
assailing the Scriptures by mutilations and corruptions of the text
itself. No marvel that Tertullian shows him no quarter, though we must
often regret the forensic violence of his retort. As to the *Dualism*
which, through Marcion, thus threatened the first article of the Creed,
consult the valuable remarks of the *Encyc. Britannica*, (“Mithras”). 
Mithras became known to the Romans *circa* <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xxii-p11.2"></span>b.c.</span> 70, and his worship
flourished under Trajan and his successors.  An able writer remarks that
it was natural “Dualism should develop itself out of primitive
Zoroastrianism.  The human mind has ever been struck with a certain
antagonism of which it has sought to discover the cause.  Evil seems
most easily accounted for by the supposition of an evil Person; and the
continuance of an equal struggle, without advantage to either side,
seems to imply the equality of that evil Person with the author of all
good. Thus Dualism had its birth. Many came to believe in the existence
of two co-eternal and co-equal Persons, one good and the other evil,
between whom there has been from all eternity a perpetual conflict, and
between whom the same conflict must continue to rage through all coming
time.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Against Hermogenes.](0030469)
