[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030443)  [Next](0030445) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p1.1"></span>Elucidations.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p3.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p4"></span>(Deadly Sins, cap. ix., p. 356.*)*

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p5.1"></span>To</span> maintain a modern and wholly
uncatholic system of Penitence, the schoolmen invented a technical
scheme of sins *mortal* and sins *venial*, which must not be read into
the Fathers, who had no such technicalities in mind. By “deadly sins”
they meant all such as St. John recognizes ([1 John v.
16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p5.2"></span>) and none other; that is to say sins of
surprise and infirmity, sins having in them no malice or wilful
disobedience, such as an impatient word, or a momentary neglect of duty.
Should a dying man commit a deliberate sin and then expire, even after a
life of love and obedience, who could fail to recognize the fearful
nature of such an end?  But, should his last word be one of infirmity
and weakness, censurable but not involving wilful disobedience, surely
we may consider it as provided for by the comfortable words—“there is a
sin not unto death.” Yet “all unrighteousness is sin,” and the Fathers
held that all sin should be repented of and confessed before God;
because all sin when it *is finished* bringeth forth death.”

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p6"></span>In St. Augustine’s time, when moral
theology became systematized in the West, by his mighty genius and
influence, the following were recognized degrees of guilt: (1.) Sins
deserving excommunication. (2.) Sins requiring to be confessed to the
brother offended in order to God’s forgiveness, and (3.) sins covered by
God’s gracious covenant, when daily confessed in the Lord’s Prayer, in
public, or in private. And this classification was professedly based on
Holy Scripture. Thus: (1.) on the text—“To deliver such an one unto
Satan, etc.” ([1 Cor. v. 4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p6.1"></span>). (2.) On the text—([Matt. xviii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p6.2"></span>),
“Confess your sins one to another, brethren” ([James v.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p6.3"></span>),
and (3.) on the text—([Matt. vi.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#012)<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p6.4"></span>)
“Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against
us.”  This last St. Augustine <span id="fr_5189"></span>[5190](#fn_5189)
regards as the “daily medication” of our ordinary life, habitual
penitence and faith and the baptismal covenant being presupposed.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p8"></span>The modern Trent theology has vastly
amplified the scholastic teachings and refinements, and the elevation of
Liguori to the rank of a church-doctor has virtually made the whole
system *de fide* with the Latins.  The Easterns know nothing of this
modern and uncatholic teaching, and it is important that the student of
the Ante-Nicene *Patrologia* should be on his guard against the novel
meanings which the Trent theology imposes upon orthodox (Nicene)
language. The long ages during which Eastern orthodoxy has been obscured
by <span id="page_426">p. 426</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-Page_426"></span>the sufferings and consequent ignorance
of the Greeks, have indeed tainted their doctrinal and practical system,
but it still subsists in amazing contrast with Latin impurity. See, on
the “indulgences,” of the latter, the “Orthodox Theology of Macarius,
Bishop of Vinnitza,” Tom. II. p. 541, Paris, 1860.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p9"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p9.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p10"></span>(Reservation of Baptism, cap. xi.,
note, p. 361.)

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p11"></span>It is important, here, to observe the
heretical origin of a sinful superstition which becomes conspicuous in
the history of Constantine. If the church tolerated it in his case, it
was doubtless in view of this extraordinary instance of one, who was a
heathen still, at heart, becoming a guardian and protector of the
persecuted Faithful. It is probable that he was regarded as a Cyrus or a
Nebuchadnezzar whom God had raised up to protect and to deliver His
people; who was to be honoured and obeyed as “God’s minister” ([Rom.
xiii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p11.1"></span>.) in so far, and for this purpose. The
church was scrupulous and he was superstitious; it would have been
difficult to discipline him and worse not to discipline him. Tacitly,
therefore, he was treated as a *catechumen*, but was not formally
admitted even to that class. He permitted Heathenism, and while he did
so, how could he be received as a Christian? The Christian church never
became responsible for his life and character, but strove to reform him
and to prepare him for a true confession of Christ at some “convenient
season.” In this, there seems to have been a great fault somewhere,
chargeable perhaps to Eusebius or to some other Christian counsellor;
but, when could any one say—“the emperor is sincere and humble and
penitent and ought now to be received into the church.” It was a
*political* conversion, and as such was accepted, and Constantine was a
heathen till near his death. As to his final penitence and
acceptance—“Forbear to judge.” [2 Kings x.
29-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#029)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p11.2"></span>. Concerning his baptism, see Eusebius, *de
Vita Const.* iv. 61, see also, Mosheim’s elaborate and candid views of
the whole subject: *First Three Centuries*, Vol. II. 460–471.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p12"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p12.1"></span>III.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p13"></span>(Peter, cap. xiii. p. 365.)

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p14"></span>The great Gallican, Launoy, doctor of
the Sorbonne, has proved that the Fathers understand the Rock to be
Christ, while, only rarely, and that *rhetorically*, not dogmatically,
St. Peter is called a stone or a rock; a usage to which neither Luther
nor Calvin could object.  Tertullian himself, when he speaks
dogmatically, is in accord with other Fathers, and gives no countenance
to the modern doctrine of Rome. See *<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p14.1"></span>La Papauté*, of the <span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p14.2"></span>Abbé Guettée, pp. 42–61. It is important,
also, to note that the primacy of St. Peter, more or less, whatever it
may have been in the mind of the Fathers, was wholly *personal*, in
their view. Of the fables which make it hereditary and a purtenance of
Rome they knew nothing.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p15"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p15.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p16"></span>(Loans, cap. xvii. p. 372.)

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p17"></span>The whole subject of *usury*, in what
it consists, *etc.*, deserves to receive more attention than it does in
our times, when *nominal* Christians are *steeped* in the sin of
money-traffic to the injury of neighbours, on a scale truly gigantic.
God’s word clearly rebukes this sin. So does the Council of Nice. <span
id="fr_5190"></span>[5191](#fn_5190) Now by what is the sin defined?
Certainly by the *spirit* of the Gospel; but, is it also, by the letter?
A sophistical casuistry which maintains the letter, and then
sophisticates and refines so as to explain it all away, is the product
of school divinity and of modern Jesuitry; but even the great Bossuet is
its apologist. (See his *<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p18.1"></span>Traité de
l’Usure*. opp. ix. p. 49, etc., ed. Paris, 1846.) But for an exhaustive
review of the whole matter, I ask attention to Huet, *<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p18.2"></span>Le Règne Social*, etc. (Paris, 1853) pp.
334–345.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p19"></span><span id="page_427">p. 427</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-Page_427"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p19.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p20"></span>(The Baptist, cap. xviii. p. 375.)

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p21"></span>The interpretation of Tertullian,
however, has the all-important merit (which Bacon and Hooker recognize
as cardinal) of flowing from the Scripture without squeezing. (1.) Our
Lord sent the message to John as a personal and tender assurance to
*him*. (2.) The story illustrates the *decrease* of which the Baptist
had spoken prophetically ([John iii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#030)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p21.1"></span>.); and (3.) it sustains the great
principle that Christ alone is without sin, this being the one fault
recorded of the Baptist, otherwise a singular instance of sinlessness.
The B. Virgin’s fault (gently reproved by the Lord, [John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p21.2"></span>.), seems in like manner introduced on this
principle of exhibiting the only sinless One, in His Divine perfections
as without spot. So even Joseph and Moses ([Psalm cvi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#033)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p21.3"></span>., and [Gen. xlvii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p21.4"></span>.) are shewn “to be but men.” The policy of
Joseph has indeed been extravagantly censured.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p22"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p22.1"></span>VI.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p23"></span>(Harshness, cap. xix., note 6., p. 378.
Also, cap. xxvi. p. 393.)

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24"></span>Tertullian seems with reflect the early
view of the church as to our Lord’s total abnegation of all filial
relations with the Virgin, when He gave to her St. John, instead of
Himself, on the Cross. For this purpose He had made him the beloved
disciple and doubtless charged him with all the duties with which he was
to be clothed.  Thus He fulfilled the figurative law of His priesthood,
as given by Moses, ([Deut. xxxiii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.1"></span>.)
and crucified himself, from the beginning, according to his own Law
([Luke xiv. 26-27](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#026)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.2"></span>.) which he identifies with the Cross, here
and also in [Matt. x. 37-38](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#037)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.3"></span>. These then are the steps of His own holy
example, illustrating His own precept, for doubtless, as “the Son of
man,” His filial love was superlative and made the sacrifice the
sharper: (1.) He taught Joseph that He had no earthly father, when he
said—“Wist ye not that I must be in *my Father’s house*,” ([Luke iii.
49](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#049)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.4"></span>., Revised); but, having established this
fact, he then became “subject” to both his parents, till His public
ministry began. (2.) At this time, He seems to have admonished His
mother, that He could not recognize her authority any longer, ([John ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.5"></span>.)
having now entered upon His work as the Son of God. (3.) Accordingly, He
refused, thenceforth, to know her save only as one of His redeemed,
excepting her in nothing from this common work for all the Human Race,
([Matt. xii. 48](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#048)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.6"></span>) in the passage which Tertullian so
forcibly expounds. (4.) Finally, when St. Mary draws near to the cross,
apparently to claim the final recognition of the previous understanding
([John ii. 4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.7"></span>.) to which the Lord had referred her at
Cana—He fulfils His last duty to her in giving her a son instead of
Himself, and thereafter (5) recognizes her no more; not even in His
messages after the Resurrection, nor when He met her with other
disciples. He rewards her, instead, with the infinite love He bears to
all His saints, and with the brightest rewards which are bestowed upon
Faith. In this consists her superlative excellence and her conspicuous
glory among the Redeemed ([Luke i.
47-48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#047)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p24.8"></span>.) in Christ’s account.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p25"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p25.1"></span>VII.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p26"></span>(Children, cap. xxiii. p. 386.)

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p27"></span>In this beautiful testimony of our
author to the sanctity of marriage, and the blessedness of its fruits, I
see his austere spirit reflecting the spirit of Christ so tenderly and
so faithfully, in the love of children, that I am warmly drawn to him. I
cannot give him up to Montanism at this period of his life and labours.
Surely, he was as yet merely persuaded that the prophetic *<span
class="c42"><span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p27.1"></span>charismata</span>* were
not extinct, and that they had been received by his <span
id="page_428">p. 428</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-Page_428"></span>Phrygian friends, although he may still
have regarded them as *prophesying* subject to all the infirmities which
St. Paul attributes even to persons elevated by spiritual gifts. ([1
Cor. xiv](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p27.2"></span>.) Why not recognize him in all his merits,
until his open and senile lapse is complete?

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p28"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p28.1"></span>VIII.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p29"></span>(Hades, cap. xxxiv. p. 406.)

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p30"></span>Here again our author shews his
unsettled view as to *Sheol* or *Hades*, on which see Kaye, pp. 247–250.
Here he distinguishes between the *Inferi* and Abraham’s bosom; but (in
B. iii. cap. 24.) he has already, more aptly, regarded the *Inferi*, or
*Hades*, as the common receptacle of departed spirits, where a “great
gulf” indeed, separates between the two classes.

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p31"></span>A *caricature* may sometimes illustrate
characteristic features more powerfully than a true portrait. The French
call the highest gallery in theatres, *<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p31.1"></span>paradis*; and I have sometimes explained it
by the fact that the modern drama originated in the monkish *Mysteries*,
revived so profanely in our own day. To reconcile the poor to a bad
place they gave it the name of *Paradise*, thus illustrating their
Mediæval conceptions; for trickling down from Tertullian his vivid
notions seem to have suffused all Western theology on this subject.
Thus, then, one vast receptacle receives all the dead. The *pit*, as we
very appropriately call it in English, answers to the place of lost
spirits, where the rich man was in torments.  Above, are ranged the
family of Abraham reclining, as it were, in their father’s bosom, by
turns. Far above, under skylights, (for the old Mysteries were
celebrated in the day-time) is *the Paradise*, where the Martyrs see
God, and are represented as “under the altar” of heaven itself. Now,
abandoning our grotesque illustration, but using it for its
*topography*, let us conceive of our own globe, as having a world-wide
concavity such as they imagined, from literalizing the *under-world* of
Sheol. In its depths is the *Phylace* ([1 Peter iii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p31.2"></span>.) of “spirits in prison.” In a higher
region repose the blessed spirits in “Abraham’s bosom.”  Yet nearer to
the ethereal vaults, are the martyrs in Paradise, looking out into
heavenly worlds. The immensity of the scale does not interfere with the
vision of spirits, nor with such communications as Abraham holds with
his lost son in the history of Dives and Lazarus. Here indeed Science
comes to our aid, for if the *telephone* permits such conversations
while we are in the flesh, we may at least imagine that the subtile
spirit can act in like manner, apart from such contrivances. Now, so far
as Tertullian is consistent with himself, I think these explanations may
clarify his words and references. The Eastern Theology is less
inconsistent and bears the marks alike of Plato and of Origen.  But of
this hereafter. Of *a place*, such as the Mediæval *Purgatory*, affirmed
as *de fide* by the Trent creed, the Fathers knew nothing at all. See
Vol. II. p. 490, also 522, this Series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5189"></span>[425:5190](0030444.htm#fr_5189) <span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p6.6"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p7"></span> Opp. Tom. vi. p. 228. Ed. Migne.

<span id="fn_5190"></span>[426:5191](0030444.htm#fr_5190) <span
id="v.iv.v.xlv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xlv-p18"></span> Calmet. Opp. i. 483 and Tom. x., p.
525.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additional Note.](0030445)
