[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030222)  [Next](0030224.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—The Intellect Coeval with the
Soul in the Human Being. An Example from Aristotle Converted into
Evidence Favourable to These Views.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p2"></span>Nor must we fail to notice those writers
who deprive the soul of the intellect even for a short period of time.
*They do this* in order to prepare the way of introducing the
intellect—and the mind also—at a subsequent time of life, even at the
time when intelligence appears in a man. They maintain that the stage of
infancy is supported by the soul alone, simply to promote vitality,
without any intention of acquiring knowledge also, because not all
things have knowledge which possess life. Trees, for instance, to quote
Aristotle’s example, <span id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634.md) have
vitality, but have not knowledge; and *with him agrees* every one who
gives a share to all animated beings of the animal substance, which,
according to our view, exists in man alone as his special property,—not
because it is the work of God, which all other creatures are likewise,
but because it is the breath of God, which this (human soul) alone is,
which we say is born with the full equipment of its proper faculties.
Well, let them meet us with the example of the trees: we will accept
their challenge, (nor shall we find in it any detriment to our own
argument;) for it is an undoubted fact, that whilst trees are yet but
twigs and sprouts, and before they even reach the sapling stage, there
is in them their own proper faculty of life, as soon as they spring out
of their native beds. But then, as time goes on, the vigour of the tree
slowly advances, as it grows and hardens into its woody trunk, until its
mature age completes the condition which nature destines for it. Else
what resources would trees possess in due course for the inoculation of
grafts, and the formation of leaves, and the swelling of their buds, and
the graceful shedding of their blossom, and the softening of their sap,
were there not in them the quiet growth of the full provision of their
nature, and the distribution of this life over all their branches for
the accomplishment of their maturity? <span id="page_200">p. 200</span>
<span id="iv.xi.xix-Page_200"></span>Trees, therefore, have ability or
knowledge; and they derive it from whence they also derive vitality—that
is, from the one source of vitality and knowledge which is peculiar to
their nature, and *that* from the infancy which they, too, begin with. 
For I observe that even the vine, although yet tender and immature,
still understands its own natural business, and strives to cling to some
support, that, leaning on it, and lacing through it, <span
id="fr_1635"></span>[1636](#fn_1635.md) it may so attain its growth.
Indeed, without waiting for the husbandman’s training, without an
espalier, without a prop, whatever its tendrils catch, it will fondly
cling to, <span id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636.md) and embrace with
really greater tenacity and force by its own inclination than by your
volition. It longs and hastens to be secure. Take also ivy-plants, never
mind how young: I observe their attempts from the very first to grasp
objects above them, and outrunning everything else, to hang on to the
highest thing, preferring as they do to spread over walls with their
leafy web and woof rather than creep on the ground and be trodden under
by every foot that likes to crush them. On the other hand, in the case
of such trees as receive injury from contact with a building, how do
they hang off as they grow and avoid what injures them! You can see that
their branches were naturally meant to take the opposite direction, and
can very well understand the vital instincts <span
id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637.md) of such a tree from its avoidance
of the wall.  It is contented (if it be only a little shrub) with its
own insignificant destiny, which it has in its foreseeing instinct
thoroughly been aware of from its infancy, only it still fears even a
ruined building. On my side, then, why should I not contend for these
wise and sagacious natures of trees?  Let them have vitality, as the
philosophers permit it; but let them have knowledge too, although the
philosophers disavow it. Even the infancy of a log, then, may have an
intellect (suitable to it): how much more may that of a human being,
whose soul (which may be compared with the nascent sprout of a tree) has
been derived from Adam as its root, and has been propagated amongst his
posterity by means of woman, to whom it has been entrusted for
transmission, and thus has sprouted into life with all its natural
apparatus, both of intellect and of sense! I am much mistaken if the
human person, even from his infancy, when he saluted life with his
infant cries, does not testify to his actual possession of the faculties
of sensation and intellect by the fact of his birth, vindicating at one
and the same time the use of all his senses—that of seeing by the light,
that of hearing by sounds, that of taste by liquids, that of smell by
the air, that of touch by the ground. This earliest voice of infancy,
then, is the first effort of the senses, and the initial impulse of
mental perceptions. <span id="fr_1638"></span>[1639](#fn_1638.md) There is
also the further fact, that some persons understand this plaintive cry
of the infant to be an augury of affliction in the prospect of our
tearful life, whereby from the very moment of birth (the soul) has to be
regarded as endued with prescience, much more with intelligence.
Accordingly by this intuition <span id="fr_1639"></span>[1640](#fn_1639.md)
the babe knows his mother, discerns the nurse, and even recognises the
waiting-maid; refusing the breast of another woman, and the cradle that
is not his own, and longing only for the arms to which he is accustomed.
Now from what source does he acquire this discernment of novelty and
custom, if not from instinctive knowledge? How does it happen that he is
irritated and quieted, if not by help of his initial intellect? It would
be very strange indeed that infancy were naturally so lively, if it had
not mental power; and naturally so capable of impression and affection,
if it had no intellect. But (we hold the contrary): for Christ, by
“accepting praise out of the mouth of babes and sucklings,” <span
id="fr_1640"></span>[1641](#fn_1640.md) has declared that neither childhood
nor infancy is without sensibility, <span
id="fr_1641"></span>[1642](#fn_1641.md) —the former of which states, when
meeting Him with approving shouts, proved its ability to offer Him
testimony; <span id="fr_1642"></span>[1643](#fn_1642.md) while the other,
by being slaughtered, for His sake of course, knew what violence
meant. <span id="fr_1643"></span>[1644](#fn_1643.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[199:1635](0030223.htm#fr_1634.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p3"></span> His *De Anima*, ii. 2, 3.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[200:1636](0030223.htm#fr_1635.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p4"></span> Innixa et innexa.

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[200:1637](0030223.htm#fr_1636.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p5"></span> Amabit.

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[200:1638](0030223.htm#fr_1637.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p6"></span> Animationem. The possession and use of
an “anima.”

<span id="fn_1638"></span>[200:1639](0030223.htm#fr_1638.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p7"></span> Intellectuam.

<span id="fn_1639"></span>[200:1640](0030223.htm#fr_1639.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p8"></span> Spiritu. The mental instinct, just
mentioned.

<span id="fn_1640"></span>[200:1641](0030223.htm#fr_1640.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p9"></span> [Ps.
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#002.md), [Matt.
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.xi.xix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1641"></span>[200:1642](0030223.htm#fr_1641.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p10"></span> Hebetes.

<span id="fn_1642"></span>[200:1643](0030223.htm#fr_1642.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p11"></span> [Matt. xxi.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#015.md)<span id="iv.xi.xix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1643"></span>[200:1644](0030223.htm#fr_1643.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xix-p12"></span> [Matt. ii.
16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016.md)<span
id="iv.xi.xix-p12.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Soul, as to Its Nature Uniform, But Its Faculties Variously
Developed. Varieties Only Accidental.](0030224.md)
