[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030611)  [Next](0030613.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xxx"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX.—This Vision Interpreted by
Tertullian of the Resurrection of the Bodies of the Dead.  A
Chronological Error of Our Author, Who Supposes that Ezekiel in
His</span> [Ezek. 31](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#000.md)<span
id="v.viii.xxx-p1.2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xxx-p1.4"></span>. Prophesied Before the Captivity.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xxx-p2"></span>I am well aware how they torture even
this prophecy into a proof of the allegorical sense, on the ground that
by saying, “These bones are the whole house of Israel,” He made them a
figure of Israel, and removed them from their proper literal condition;
and therefore (they contend) that there is here a figurative, not a true
prediction of the resurrection, for (they say) the state of the Jews is
one of humiliation, in a certain sense dead, and very dry, and dispersed
over the plain of the world. Therefore the image of a resurrection is
allegorically applied to their state, since it has to be gathered
together, and recompacted bone to bone (in other words, tribe to tribe,
and people to people), and to be reincorporated by the sinews of power
and the nerves of royalty, and to be brought out as it were from
sepulchres, that is to say, from the most miserable and degraded abodes
of captivity, and to breathe afresh in the way of a restoration, and to
live thenceforward in their own land of Judæa. And what is to happen
after all this? They will die, no doubt. And what will there be after
death? No resurrection from the dead, of course, since there is nothing
of the sort here revealed to Ezekiel. Well, but the resurrection is
elsewhere foretold: so that there will be one even in this case, and
they are rash in applying this *passage* to the state of Jewish affairs;
or even if it do indicate a different recovery from the resurrection
which we are maintaining, what matters it to me, provided there be also
a resurrection of the body, just as there is a restoration of the Jewish
state? In fact, by the very circumstance that the recovery of the Jewish
state is prefigured by the reincorporation and reunion of bones, proof
is offered that this event will also happen to the bones *themselves*;
for the metaphor could not have been formed from bones, if the same
thing exactly were not to be realized in them also.  Now, although there
is a sketch of the true thing in its image, the image itself still
possesses a truth of its own: it must needs be, therefore, that must
have a prior existence for itself, which is used figuratively to express
some other thing. Vacuity is not a consistent basis for a similitude,
nor does nonentity form a suitable foundation for a parable. It will
therefore be right to believe that the bones are destined to have a
rehabiliment of flesh and breath, such as it is *here* said they will
have, by reason indeed of which their renewed state could alone express
the reformed condition of Jewish affairs, which is pretended to be the
meaning of this passage. It is, however, more characteristic of a
religious spirit to maintain the truth on the authority of a literal
interpretation, such as is required <span id="page_567">p. 567</span>
<span id="v.viii.xxx-Page_567"></span>by the sense of the inspired
passage. Now, if this vision had reference to the condition of the Jews,
as soon as He had revealed to him the position of the bones, He would at
once have added, “These bones are the whole house of Israel,” and so
forth. But immediately on showing the bones, He interrupts the scene by
saying somewhat of the prospect which is most suited to bones; without
yet naming Israel, He tries the prophet’s own faith: “Son of man, can
these bones ever live?” so that he makes answer: “O Lord, Thou knowest.”
Now God would not, you may be sure, have tried the prophet’s faith on a
point which was never to be a real one, of which Israel should never
hear, *and* in which it was not proper to repose belief.  Since,
however, the resurrection of the dead was indeed foretold, but Israel,
in the distrust of his great unbelief, was offended at it; and, whilst
gazing on the condition of the crumbling grave, despaired of a
resurrection; or rather, did not direct his mind mainly to it, but to
his own harassing circumstances,—therefore God first instructed the
prophet (since he, too, was not free from doubt), by revealing to him
the process of the resurrection, with a view to his earnest setting
forth of the same. He then charged the people to believe what He had
revealed to the prophet, telling them that they were themselves, though
refusing to believe their resurrection, the very bones which were
destined to rise again. Then in the concluding sentence He says, “And ye
shall know how that I the Lord have spoken and done these things,”
intending of course to do that of which He had spoken; but certainly not
meaning to do that which He had spoken of, if His design had been to do
something different from what He had said.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Other Passages Out of the Prophets Applied to the Resurrection of
the Flesh.](0030613.md)
