[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030085)  [Next](0030087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.</span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p2"></span>Then, again, every one is ready with the
argument <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) that all things, as we
teach, were created by God, and given to man for his use, and that they
must be good, as coming all from so good a source; but that among them
are found the various constituent elements of the public shows, such as
the horse, the lion, bodily strength, and musical voice. It cannot,
then, be thought that what exists by God’s own creative will is either
foreign or hostile to Him; and if it is not opposed to Him, it cannot be
regarded as injurious to His worshippers, as certainly it is not foreign
to them.  Beyond all doubt, too, the very buildings connected with the
places of public amusement, composed as they are of rocks, stones,
marbles, pillars, are things of God, who has given these various things
for the earth’s embellishment; nay, the very scenes are enacted under
God’s own heaven. How skilful a pleader seems human wisdom to her<span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="iv.v.ii-Page_80"></span>self,
especially if she has the fear of losing any of her delights—any of the
sweet enjoyments of worldly existence!  In fact, you will find not a few
whom the imperilling of their pleasures rather than their life holds
back from us.  For even the weakling has no strong dread of death *as a
debt* he knows is due by him; while the wise man does not look with
contempt on pleasure, regarding it as a precious gift—in fact, the one
blessedness of life, whether to philosopher or fool. Now nobody denies
what nobody is ignorant of—for Nature herself is teacher of it—that God
is the Maker of the universe, and that it is good, and that it is man’s
by free gift of its Maker. But having no intimate acquaintance with the
Highest, knowing Him only by natural revelation, and not as His
“friends”—afar off, and not as those who have been brought nigh to
Him—men cannot but be in ignorance alike of what He enjoins and what He
forbids in regard to the administration of His world. They must be
ignorant, too, of the hostile power which works against Him, and
perverts to wrong uses the things His hand has formed; for you cannot
know either the will or the adversary of a God you do not know. We must
not, then, consider merely by whom all things were made, but by whom
they have been perverted. We shall find out for what use they were made
at first, when we find for what they were not. There is a vast
difference between the corrupted state and that of primal purity, just
because there is a vast difference between the Creator and the
corrupter. Why, all sorts of evils, which as indubitably evils even the
heathens prohibit, and against which they guard themselves, come from
the works of God. Take, for instance, murder, whether committed by iron,
by poison, or by magical enchantments. Iron and herbs and demons are all
equally creatures of God. Has the Creator, withal, provided these things
for man’s destruction? Nay, He puts His interdict on every sort of
man-killing by that one summary precept, “Thou shalt not kill.”
Moreover, who but God, the Maker of the world, put in its gold, brass,
silver, ivory, wood, and all the other materials used in the manufacture
of idols? Yet has He done this that men may set up a worship in
opposition to Himself? On the contrary idolatry in His eyes is the
crowning sin. What is there offensive to God which is not God’s? But in
offending Him, it ceases to be His; and in ceasing to be His, it is in
His eyes an offending thing. Man himself, guilty as he is of every
iniquity, is not only a work of God—he is His image, and yet both in
soul and body he has severed himself from his Maker. For we did not get
eyes to minister to lust, and the tongue for speaking evil with, and
ears to be the receptacle of evil speech, and the throat to serve the
vice of gluttony, and the belly to be gluttony’s ally, and the genitals
for unchaste excesses, and hands for deeds of violence, and the feet for
an erring life; or was the soul placed in the body that it might become
a thought-manufactory of snares, and fraud, and injustice? I think not;
for if God, as the righteous ex-actor of innocence, hates everything
like malignity—if He hates utterly such plotting of evil, it is clear
beyond a doubt, that, of all things that have come from His hand, He has
made none to lead to works which He condemns, even though these same
works may be carried on by things of His making; for, in fact, it is the
one ground of condemnation, that the creature misuses the creation. We,
therefore, who in our knowledge of the Lord have obtained some knowledge
also of His foe—who, in our discovery of the Creator, have at the same
time laid hands upon the great corrupter, ought neither to wonder nor to
doubt that, as the prowess of the corrupting and God-opposing angel
overthrew in the beginning the virtue of man, the work and image of God,
the possessor of the world, so he has entirely changed man’s
nature—created, like his own, for perfect sinlessness—into his own state
of wicked enmity against his Maker, that in the very thing whose gift to
man, but not to him, had grieved him, he might make man guilty in God’s
eyes, and set up his own supremacy. <span
id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_349"></span>[79:350](0030086.htm#fr_349) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p3"></span> \[Kaye (p. 366), declares that all the
arguments urged in this tract are comprised in two sentences of the
Apology, cap. 38.\]

<span id="fn_350"></span>[80:351](0030086.htm#fr_350) <span
id="iv.v.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.ii-p4"></span> \[For the demonology of this treatise,
compare capp. 10, 12, 13, 23, and see Kaye’s full but condensed
statement (pp. 201–204), in his account of the writings, etc.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III.](0030087)
