[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030426)  [Next](0030428) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII.—Examples from the Old
Testament, Balaam, Moses, and Hezekiah, to Show How Completely the
Instruction and Conduct of Christ <span
id="fr_4619"></span>[4620](#fn_4619) Are in Keeping with the Will and
Purpose of the Creator.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p3"></span>Justly, therefore, was the hypocrisy
of the Pharisees displeasing to Him, loving God as they did with their
lips, but not with their heart.  “Beware,” He says to the disciples, “of
the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy,” not the proclamation
of the Creator. The Son hates those who refused obedience <span
id="fr_4620"></span>[4621](#fn_4620) to the Father; nor does He wish His
disciples to show such a disposition towards *Him*—not (let it be
observed) towards another god, against whom such hypocrisy indeed might
have been admissible, as that which He wished to guard His disciples
against. It is the example of the Pharisees which He forbids. It was in
respect of Him against whom the Pharisees were sinning that (Christ) now
forbade His disciples to offend. Since, then, He had censured their
hypocrisy, which covered the secrets of the heart, and obscured with
superficial offices the mysteries of unbelief, because (while holding
the key of knowledge) it would neither enter in itself, nor permit
others to enter in, He therefore adds, “There is nothing covered that
shall not be revealed; neither hid, which shall not be known,” <span
id="fr_4621"></span>[4622](#fn_4621) in order that no one should suppose
that He was attempting the revelation and the recognition of an hitherto
unknown and hidden god. When He remarks also on their murmurs and
taunts, in saying of Him, “This man casteth out devils only through
Beelzebub,” *He means* that all these imputations would come forth to
the light of day, and be in the mouths of men in consequence of the
promulgation of the Gospel.  He then turns to His disciples with these
words, “I say unto you, my friends, Be not afraid of them which can only
kill the body, and after that have no more power over you.” <span
id="fr_4622"></span>[4623](#fn_4622) They will, however, find Isaiah had
already said, “See how the just man is taken away, and no man layeth it
to heart.” <span id="fr_4623"></span>[4624](#fn_4623) “But I will show
you whom ye shall fear: fear Him who, after <span id="page_396">p.
396</span> <span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-Page_396"></span>He hath killed, hath
power to cast into hell” (meaning, of course, the Creator); “yea, I say
unto you, fear Him.” <span id="fr_4624"></span>[4625](#fn_4624) Now, it
would here be enough for my purpose that He forbids offence being given
to Him whom He orders to be feared; and that He orders Him to be
respected <span id="fr_4625"></span>[4626](#fn_4625) whom He forbids to
be offended; and that He who gives these commands belongs to that very
*God* for whom He procures this fear, this absence of offence, and this
respect. But this conclusion I can draw also from the following words:
“For I say unto you, Whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I
also confess before God.” <span id="fr_4626"></span>[4627](#fn_4626) Now
they who shall confess Christ will have to be slain <span
id="fr_4627"></span>[4628](#fn_4627) before men, but they will have
nothing more to suffer after they have been put to death by them. These
therefore will be they whom He forewarns above not to be afraid of being
only killed; and this forewarning He offers, in order that He might
subjoin a clause on the necessity of confessing Him: “Every one that
denieth me before men shall be denied before God” <span
id="fr_4628"></span>[4629](#fn_4628) —by Him, of course, who would have
confessed him, if he had only confessed *God*.  Now, He who will confess
the confessor is the very same God who will also deny the denier of
Himself. Again, if it is the confessor who will have nothing to fear
after his violent death, <span id="fr_4629"></span>[4630](#fn_4629) it
is the denier to whom everything will become fearful after his natural
death. Since, therefore, that which will have to be feared after death,
even the punishment of hell, belongs to the Creator, the denier, too,
belongs to the Creator. As with the denier, however, so with the
confessor: if he should deny God, he will plainly have to suffer from
God, although from men he had nothing more to suffer after they had put
him to death.  And so Christ is the Creator’s, because He shows that all
those who deny Him ought to fear the Creator’s hell.  After deterring
*His disciples* from denial of Himself, He adds an admonition to fear
blasphemy: “Whosoever shall speak against the Son of man, it shall be
forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgiven him.” <span id="fr_4630"></span>[4631](#fn_4630) Now, if
both the remission and the retention of sin savour of a judicial God,
the Holy Ghost, who is not to be blasphemed, will belong to Him, who
will not forgive the blasphemy; just as He who, in the preceding
passage, was not to be denied, belonged to, Him who would, after He had
killed, also cast into hell. Now, since it is Christ who averts
blasphemy from the Creator, I am at a loss to know in what manner His
adversary <span id="fr_4631"></span>[4632](#fn_4631) could have come.
Else, if by these sayings He throws a black cloud of censure <span
id="fr_4632"></span>[4633](#fn_4632) over the severity of Him who will
not forgive blasphemy and will kill even to hell, it follows that the
very spirit of that rival god may be blasphemed with impunity, and his
Christ denied; and that there is no difference, in fact, between
worshipping and despising him; but that, as there is no punishment for
the contempt, so there is no reward for the worship, which men need
expect. When “brought before magistrates,” and examined, He forbids them
“to take thought how they shall answer;” “for,” says He, “the Holy Ghost
shall teach you in that very hour what ye ought to say.” <span
id="fr_4633"></span>[4634](#fn_4633) If such an injunction <span
id="fr_4634"></span>[4635](#fn_4634) as this comes from the Creator, the
precept will only be His by whom an example was previously given. The
prophet Balaam, in Numbers, when sent forth by king Balak to curse
Israel, with whom he was commencing war, was at the same moment <span
id="fr_4635"></span>[4636](#fn_4635) filled with the Spirit. Instead of
the curse which he was come to pronounce, he uttered the blessing which
the Spirit at that very hour inspired him with; having previously
declared to the king’s messengers, and then to the king himself, that he
could only speak forth that which God should put into his mouth. <span
id="fr_4636"></span>[4637](#fn_4636) The novel doctrines of the new
Christ are such as the Creator’s servants initiated long before! But see
how clear a difference there is between the example of Moses and of
Christ. <span id="fr_4637"></span>[4638](#fn_4637) Moses voluntarily
interferes with brothers <span id="fr_4638"></span>[4639](#fn_4638) who
were quarrelling, and chides the offender:  “Wherefore smitest thou thy
fellow?”  He is, however, rejected by him:  “Who made thee a prince or a
judge over us?” <span id="fr_4639"></span>[4640](#fn_4639) Christ, on
the contrary, when requested by a certain man to compose a strife
between him and his brother about dividing an inheritance, refused His
assistance, although in so honest a cause. Well, then, my Moses is
better than your Christ, aiming as he did at the peace of brethren,
*and* obviating their wrong.  But *of course the case must be different
with Christ*, for he is the Christ of the simply good and non-judicial
god. “Who,” says he, “made me a judge over you?” <span
id="fr_4640"></span>[4641](#fn_4640) No other word of excuse was he able
to find, <span id="page_397">p. 397</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-Page_397"></span>without using <span
id="fr_4641"></span>[4642](#fn_4641) that with which the wicked, man and
impious brother had rejected <span id="fr_4642"></span>[4643](#fn_4642)
the defender of probity and piety! In short, he approved of the excuse,
although a bad one, by his use of it; and of the act, although a bad
one, by his refusal to make peace between brothers. Or rather, would He
not show His resentment <span id="fr_4643"></span>[4644](#fn_4643) at
the rejection of Moses with such a word?  And therefore did He not wish
in a similar case of contentious brothers, to confound them with the
recollection of so harsh a word? Clearly so.  For He had Himself been
present in Moses, who heard such a rejection—even He, the Spirit of the
Creator. <span id="fr_4644"></span>[4645](#fn_4644) I think that we have
already, in another passage, <span id="fr_4645"></span>[4646](#fn_4645)
sufficiently shown that the glory of riches is condemned by our God,
“who putteth down the mighty from their throne, and exalts the poor from
the dunghill.” <span id="fr_4646"></span>[4647](#fn_4646) From Him,
therefore, will proceed the parable of the rich man, who flattered
himself about the increase of his fields, and to Whom God said: “Thou
fool, this night shall they require thy soul of thee; then whose shall
those things be which thou hast provided?” <span
id="fr_4647"></span>[4648](#fn_4647) It was just in the like manner that
the king *Hezekiah* heard from Isaiah the sad doom of his kingdom, when
he gloried, before the envoys of Babylon, <span
id="fr_4648"></span>[4649](#fn_4648) in his treasures and the deposits
of his precious things. <span id="fr_4649"></span>[4650](#fn_4649)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4619"></span>[395:4620](0030427.htm#fr_4619) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p2"></span> As narrated by St. [Luke xii.
1-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p2.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4620"></span>[395:4621](0030427.htm#fr_4620) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p4"></span> Contumaces.

<span id="fn_4621"></span>[395:4622](0030427.htm#fr_4621) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p5"></span> [Luke xii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#002)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4622"></span>[395:4623](0030427.htm#fr_4622) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p6"></span> [Luke xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4623"></span>[395:4624](0030427.htm#fr_4623) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p7"></span> [Isa. lvii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4624"></span>[396:4625](0030427.htm#fr_4624) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p8"></span> [Luke xii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4625"></span>[396:4626](0030427.htm#fr_4625) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p9"></span> Demereri.

<span id="fn_4626"></span>[396:4627](0030427.htm#fr_4626) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p10"></span> [Luke xii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4627"></span>[396:4628](0030427.htm#fr_4627) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p11"></span> Occidi habebunt.

<span id="fn_4628"></span>[396:4629](0030427.htm#fr_4628) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p12"></span> [Luke xii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#009)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4629"></span>[396:4630](0030427.htm#fr_4629) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p13"></span> Post occisionem.

<span id="fn_4630"></span>[396:4631](0030427.htm#fr_4630) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p14"></span> [Luke xii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4631"></span>[396:4632](0030427.htm#fr_4631) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p15"></span> So full of blasphemy, as he is,
against the Creator.

<span id="fn_4632"></span>[396:4633](0030427.htm#fr_4632) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p16"></span> Infuscat.

<span id="fn_4633"></span>[396:4634](0030427.htm#fr_4633) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p17"></span> [Luke
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4634"></span>[396:4635](0030427.htm#fr_4634) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p18"></span> Documentum.

<span id="fn_4635"></span>[396:4636](0030427.htm#fr_4635) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p19"></span> Simul.

<span id="fn_4636"></span>[396:4637](0030427.htm#fr_4636) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p20"></span> [Num.
xxii.-xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4637"></span>[396:4638](0030427.htm#fr_4637) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p21"></span> A Marcionite objection.

<span id="fn_4638"></span>[396:4639](0030427.htm#fr_4638) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p22"></span> “Two men of the Hebrews.”—A.V.

<span id="fn_4639"></span>[396:4640](0030427.htm#fr_4639) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p23"></span> [Exod.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4640"></span>[396:4641](0030427.htm#fr_4640) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p24"></span> [Luke
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4641"></span>[397:4642](0030427.htm#fr_4641) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p24.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p25"></span> Ne uteretur.

<span id="fn_4642"></span>[397:4643](0030427.htm#fr_4642) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p26"></span> Excusserat. Oehler interprets the
word by *temptaverat*.

<span id="fn_4643"></span>[397:4644](0030427.htm#fr_4643) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p27"></span> Nunquid indigne tulerit.

<span id="fn_4644"></span>[397:4645](0030427.htm#fr_4644) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p28"></span> This is an instance of the title
“*Spirit*” being applied to the divine nature of the Son. See Bp. Bull’s
*Def. Nic. Fid*. (by the translator). \[See note 13, p. 375, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_4645"></span>[397:4646](0030427.htm#fr_4645) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p29"></span> Above, chap. xv. of this book, p.
369, *supra*.

<span id="fn_4646"></span>[397:4647](0030427.htm#fr_4646) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p30"></span> Comp. [1 Sam.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008), [Ps.
113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007), [Luke
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#052)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4647"></span>[397:4648](0030427.htm#fr_4647) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p31"></span> [Luke xii.
16-20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4648"></span>[397:4649](0030427.htm#fr_4648) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p32"></span> Apud Persas.

<span id="fn_4649"></span>[397:4650](0030427.htm#fr_4649) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p33"></span> [Isa.
xxxix](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxviii-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Parallels from the Prophets to Illustrate Christ's Teaching in
the Rest of This Chapter of St. Luke. The Sterner Attributes of Christ,
in His Judicial Capacity, Show Him to Have Come from the Creator.
Incidental Rebukes of Marcion's Doctrine of Celibacy, and of His
Altering of the Text of the Gospel.](0030428)
