[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030787)  [Next](0030789.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—Argument. Secundulus Dies in the
Prison. Felicitas is Pregnant, But with Many Prayers She Brings Forth in
the Eighth Month Without Suffering, the Courage of Perpetua and of
Saturus Unbroken.</span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p2"></span>1. The above were the more eminent
visions of the blessed martyrs Saturus and Perpetua themselves, which
they themselves committed to writing. <span
id="fr_9001"></span>[9002](#fn_9001.md) But God called Secundulus, while he
has yet in the prison, by an earlier exit from the world, not without
favour, so as to give a respite to the beasts.  Nevertheless, even if
his soul did not acknowledge cause for thankfulness, assuredly his flesh
did.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p4"></span>2. But respecting Felicitas (for to her
also the Lord’s favour approached in the same way), when she had already
gone eight months with child (for she had been pregnant when she was
apprehended), as the day of the exhibition was drawing near, she was in
great grief lest on account of her pregnancy she should be
delayed,—because pregnant women are not allowed to be publicly
punished,—and lest she should shed her sacred and guiltless blood among
some who had been wicked subsequently. Moreover, also, her
fellow-martyrs were painfully saddened lest they should leave so
excellent a friend, and as it were companion, alone in the path of the
same hope. Therefore, joining together their <span id="page_704">p.
704</span> <span id="vi.vi.vii-Page_704"></span>united cry, they poured
forth their prayer to the Lord three days before the exhibition.
Immediately after their prayer her pains came upon her, and when, with
the difficulty natural to an eight months’ delivery, in the labour of
bringing forth she was sorrowing, some one of the servants of the
*Cataractarii* <span id="fr_9002"></span>[9003](#fn_9002.md) said to her,
“You who are in such suffering now, what will you do when you are thrown
to the beasts, which you despised when you refused to sacrifice?”  And
she replied, “Now it is I that suffer what I suffer; but then there will
be another in me, who will suffer for me, because I also am about to
suffer for Him.” Thus she brought forth a little girl, which a certain
sister brought up as her daughter.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p6"></span>3. Since then the Holy Spirit permitted,
and by permitting willed, that the proceedings of that exhibition should
be committed to writing, although we are unworthy to complete the
description of so great a glory; yet we obey as it were the command of
the most blessed Perpetua, nay her sacred trust, and add one more
testimony concerning her constancy and her loftiness of mind. While they
were treated with more severity by the tribune, because, from the
intimations of certain deceitful men, he feared lest they should be
withdrawn from the prison by some sort of magic incantations, Perpetua
answered to his face, and said, “Why do you not at least permit us to be
refreshed, being as we are objectionable to the most noble Cæsar, and
having to fight on his birth-day? <span
id="fr_9003"></span>[9004](#fn_9003.md) Or is it not your glory if we are
brought forward fatter on that occasion?” The tribune shuddered and
blushed, and commanded that they should be kept with more humanity, so
that permission was given to their brethren and others to go in and be
refreshed with them; even the keeper of the prison trusting them now
himself.

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p8"></span>4. Moreover, on the day before, when in
that last meal, which they call the free meal, they were partaking as
far as they could, not of a free supper, but of an *agape*; with the
same firmness they were uttering such words as these to the people,
denouncing *against them* the judgment of the Lord, bearing witness to
the felicity of their passion, laughing at the curiosity of the people
who came together; while Saturus said, “To-morrow is not enough for you,
for you to behold with pleasure that which you hate.  Friends today,
enemies to-morrow.  Yet note our faces diligently, that you may
recognise them on that day of judgment.” Thus all departed thence
astonished, and from these things many believed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9001"></span>[703:9002](0030788.htm#fr_9001.md) <span
id="vi.vi.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p3"></span> \[To be regarded like *the Shepherd* of
Hermas, merely as visions, or allegorical romances.\]

<span id="fn_9002"></span>[704:9003](0030788.htm#fr_9002.md) <span
id="vi.vi.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p5"></span> “The gaolers,” so called from the
“cataracta,” or prison-gate, which they guarded.

<span id="fn_9003"></span>[704:9004](0030788.htm#fr_9003.md) <span
id="vi.vi.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.vii-p7"></span> \[A gentle banter, like that of St.
Lawrence on the gridiron.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument. From the Prison They are Led Forth with Joy into the
Amphitheatre, Especially Perpetua and Felicitas. All Refuse to Put on
Profane Garments. They are Scourged, They are Thrown to the Wild
Beasts.  Saturus Twice is Unhurt. Perpetua and Felicitas are Thrown
Down; They are Called Back to the Sanavivarian Gate. Saturus Wounded by
a Leopard, Exhorts the Soldier. They Kiss One Another, and are Slain
with the Sword.](0030789.md)
