[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030105)  [Next](0030107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xxii-p2"></span>What wonder is there in it? Such
inconsistencies as these are just such as we might expect from men, who
confuse and change the nature of good and evil in their inconstancy of
feeling and fickleness in judgment. Why, the authors and managers of the
spectacles, in that very respect with reference to which they highly
laud the charioteers, and actors, and wrestlers, and those most loving
gladiators, to whom men prostitute their souls, women too their bodies,
slight and trample on them, though for their sakes they are guilty of
the deeds they reprobate; nay, they doom them to ignominy and the loss
of their rights as citizens, excluding them from the Curia, and the
rostra, from senatorial and equestrian rank, and from all other honours
as well as certain distinctions. What perversity! They have pleasure in
those whom yet they punish; they put all slights on those to whom, at
the same time, they award their approbation; they magnify the art and
brand the artist. What an outrageous thing it is, to blacken a man on
account of the very things which make him meritorious in their eyes!
Nay, what a confession that the things are evil, when their authors,
even in highest favour, are not without a mark of disgrace upon them!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII.](0030107)
