[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030056)  [Next](0030058) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.li"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p1"></span> <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="iv.iii.li-Page_56"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p1.1"></span>Elucidations.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.iii.li-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p3.1"></span>I.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p4"></span>(Arrangement, p. 4, *supra.)*

<span id="iv.iii.li-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p5.1"></span>The</span> arrangement I have adopted in
editing these Edinburgh Translations of Tertullian is a practical one.
It will be found logical and helpful to the student, who is referred to
the Prefatory pages of this volume for an Elucidation of the
difficulties, with which any arrangement of these treatises is
encumbered. For, *first*, an attempt to place them in chronological
order is out of the question; <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)
and, *second*, all efforts to separate precisely the Orthodox from the
Montanistic or Montanist works of our author have hitherto defied the
acumen of critics.  It would be mere empiricism for me to attempt an
original classification in the face of questions which even experts have
been unable to determine.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p7"></span>If we bear in mind, however, a few
guiding facts, we shall see that difficulties are less than might
appear, assuming our object to be a practical one. (1.) Only *four* of
these essays were written against Orthodoxy; (2.) *five* more are
reckoned as wholly uncertain, which amounts to saying that they are not
positively heretical. (3.) Again, *five* are colourless, as to
Montanism, and hence should be reputed Orthodox.  (4.) Of others,
written after the influences of Montanism had, more or less, tainted his
doctrine, the whole are yet valuable and some are noble defences of the
Catholic Faith. (5.) Finally eight or ten of his treatises were written
while he was a Catholic, and are precious contributions to the testimony
of the Primitive Church.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p8"></span>From these facts, we may readily conclude
that the mass of Tertullian’s writings is Orthodox.  Some of them are to
be read with caution; others, again, must be rejected for their heresy;
but yet all are most instructive historically, and as defining even by
errors “the faith once delivered to the Saints.” I propose to note those
which require caution as we pass them in review. Those written against
the Church are classed by themselves, at the end of the list, and all
the rest may be read with confidence. A most interesting inquiry arises
in connection with the quotations from Scripture to be found in our
author. Did a Latin version exist in his day, or does he translate from
the Greek of the New Testament and the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p8.2"></span>LXX</span>? A paradoxical writer (Semler)
contends that Tertullian “never used a Greek <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p8.3"></span>ms.</span>” (see Kaye, p. 106.) But
Tertullian’s rugged Latin betrays everywhere his familiarity with Greek
idioms and forms of thought. He wrote, also, in Greek, and there is no
reason to doubt that he knew the Greek Scriptures primarily, if he knew
any Greek whatever. Possibly we owe to Tertullian the *primordia* of the
Old African Latin Versions, some of which seem to have contained the
disputed text [1 John v. 7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007)<span
id="iv.iii.li-p8.4"></span>; of which more when we come to the Praxeas.
For the present in the absence of definite evidence we must infer that
Tertullian usually translated from the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p8.6"></span>LXX</span>, and from the originals of the New
Testament. But Mosheim thinks the progress of the Gospel in the West was
now facilitated by the existence of Latin Versions.  Observe, also,
Kaye’s important note, p. 293, and his reference to Lardner, *Cred.*
xxvii. 19.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p9"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p9.1"></span>II.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p10"></span>(Address to Magistrates, cap. i., p.
17.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p11"></span>The Apology comes first in order, on
logical grounds. It is classed with our author’s orthodox works by
Neander, and pronounced colourless by Kaye. It is the noblest of his
<span id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span
id="iv.iii.li-Page_57"></span>productions in its purpose and spirit, and
it falls in with the Primitive System of Apologetics. I have placed next
in order to it several treatises, mostly unblemished, which are of the
same character; which defend the cause of Christians against Paganism,
against Gentile Philosophy, and against Judaism; closing this portion by
the two books *Ad Nationes*, which may be regarded as a recapitulation
of the author’s arguments, especially those to be found in the Apology.
In these successive works, as compared with those of Justin Martyr, we
obtain a fair view of the progressive relations of the Church with the
Roman Empire and with divers antagonistic systems in the East and West.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p12"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p12.1"></span>III.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p13"></span>(History of Christians, cap. ii., p.
18.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p14"></span>The following Chronological outline
borrowed from the Benedictines and from Bishop Kaye, will prove
serviceable here. <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p16"></span>Tertullian born (*circa*) <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iii.li-p16.2"></span>a.d.</span> 150.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p17"></span>Tertullian converted (*surmise*) 185.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p18"></span>Tertullian married (*say*) 186.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p19"></span>Tertullian ordained presbyter (*circa*)
192.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p20"></span>Tertullian lapsed (*circa*) 200.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p21"></span>Tertullian deceased (extreme surmise)
240.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p22"></span>The Imperial history of his period may
be thus arranged:

<span id="iv.iii.li-p23"></span>Birth of Caracalla <span
class="sc"><span id="iv.iii.li-p23.2"></span>a.d.</span> 188.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p24"></span>Birth of Geta 189.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p25"></span>Reign of Severus 193.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p26"></span>Defeat of Niger 195.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p27"></span>Caracalla made a *Cæsar* 196.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p28"></span>Capture of Byzantium 196.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p29"></span>Defeat of Albinus 197.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p30"></span>Geta made a *Cæsar* 198.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p31"></span>Caracalla called *Augustus* 198.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p32"></span>Caracalla associated in the Empire 198.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p33"></span>War against the Parthians 198.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p34"></span>Severus returns from the war 203.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p35"></span>Celebration of the Secular Games 204.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p36"></span>Plautianus put to death (*circa*) 205.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p37"></span>Geta called *Augustus* 208.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p38"></span>War in Britain 208.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p39"></span>Wall of Severus 210.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p40"></span>Death of Severus 211.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p41"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p41.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p42"></span>(Tiberius, capp. v. and xxiv., pp. 22
and 35.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p43"></span>A fair examination of what has been said
on this subject, *pro* and *con*, may be found in Kaye’s
*Tertullian*, <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) pp. 102–105. In
his abundant candour this author leans to the doubters, but in stating
the case he seems to me to fortify the position of Lardner and Mosheim. 
What the brutal Tiberius may have thought or done with respect to
Pilate’s report concerning the holy victim of his judicial injustice is
of little importance to the believer.  Nevertheless, as matter of
history it deserves attention. Great stress is to be placed on the fact
that Tertullian was probably a jurisconsult, familiar with the Roman
archives, and influenced by <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="iv.iii.li-Page_58"></span>them in his own acceptance of Divine
Truth. It is not supposable that such a man would have hazarded his bold
appeal to the records, in remonstrating with the Senate and in the very
faces of the Emperor and his colleagues, had he not known that the
evidence was irrefragable.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p45"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p45.1"></span>V.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p46"></span>(The darkness at the Crucifixion, cap.
xxi., p. 35.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p47"></span>Kaye disappoints us (p. 150) in his
slight notice of this most interesting subject. Without attempting to
discuss the story of Phlegon and other points which afford Gibbon an
opportunity for misplaced sneering, such as even a Pilate would have
rebuked, while it may be well to recall the exposition of Milman, <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) at the close of Gibbon’s fifteenth
chapter, I must express my own preference for another view. This will be
found candidly summed up and stated, in the Speaker’s Commentary, in the
concise note on St. [Matt. xxvii.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045)<span id="iv.iii.li-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p49"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p49.1"></span>VI.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p50"></span>(Numbers of the Faithful, cap. xxxvii.,
p. 45.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p51"></span>Kaye, as usual, gives this vexed
question a candid survey. <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) Making
all allowances, however, I accept the conjecture of some reputable
authorities, that there were 2,000,000 of Christians, in the bounds of
the Roman Empire at the close of the Second Century. So mightily grew
the testimony of Jesus and prevailed. When we reflect that only a
century intervened between the times of Tertullian and the conversion of
the Roman Emperor, it is not easy to regard our author’s language as
merely that of fervid genius and of rhetorical hyperbole. He could not
have ventured upon exaggeration without courting scorn as well as
defeat.  What he affirms is probable in the nature of the case. Were it
otherwise, then the conditions, which, in a single century rendered it
possible for Constantine to effect the greatest revolution in mind and
manners that has ever been known among men, would be a miracle compared
with which that of his alleged Vision of the Cross sinks into
insignificance. To this subject it will be necessary to recur hereafter.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p53"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p53.1"></span>VII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p54"></span>(Christian usages, cap. xxxix., p. 46.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p55"></span>A candid review of the matters discussed
in this chapter will be found in Kaye (pp. 146, 209.) The important fact
is there clearly stated that “the primitive Christians scrupulously
complied with the decree pronounced by the Apostles at Jerusalem in
abstaining from things strangled and from blood” ([Acts xv.
20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)<span id="iv.iii.li-p55.1"></span>).
On this subject consult the references given in the Speaker’s
Commentary, *ad locum*. The Greeks, to their honour, still maintain this
prohibition, but St. Augustine’s great authority relaxed the Western
scruples on this matter, for he regarded it as a decree of temporary
obligation, while the Hebrew and Gentile Christians were in peril of
misunderstanding and estrangement. <span
id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p57"></span>On the important question as to the
cessation of miracles Kaye takes a somewhat original position. But see
his interesting discussion and that of the late Professor Hey, in Kaye’s
*Tertullian*, pp. 80–102, 151–161. I do not think writers on these
subjects have sufficiently distinguished between *miracles* properly so
called, and *providences* vouchsafed in answer to prayer. There was no
*miracle* in the case of the Thundering Legion, assuming the story to be
true; and I dare to affirm that marked answers to prayer, by
*providential interpositions*, <span id="page_59">p. 59</span> <span
id="iv.iii.li-Page_59"></span>but wholly distinct from miraculous
agencies, have never ceased among those who “ask in the Son’s Name.”
Such interpositions are often *preternatural* only; that is, they
economize certain powers which, though natural in themselves, lie
outside of the System of Nature with which we happen to be familiar.
This distinction has been overlooked.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p58"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p58.1"></span>VIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p59"></span>(Multitudes, cap. xl., p. 47.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p60"></span>Note the words—“*multitudes* to a single
beast.” Can it be possible that Tertullian would use such language to
the magistrates, if he knew that such sentences were of rare occurrence?
The disposition of our times to *minimize* the persecutions of our
Christian forefathers calls upon us to note such references, all the
more important because occurring *obiter* and mentioned as notorious.
Note also, the closing chapter of this Apology, and reference to the
outcries of the populace, in Cap. xxxv. <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) See admirable remarks on the benefits
derived by the Church from the sufferings of Christian martyrs, with
direct reference to Tertullian, Wordsworth, *Church Hist. to Council of
Nicæa*, cap. xxiv., p. 374.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p62"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p62.1"></span>IX.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p63"></span>(Christian manners, cap. xlii., p. 49.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p64"></span>A study of the manners of Christians, in
the Ante-Nicene Age, as sketched by the unsparing hand of Tertullian,
will convince any unprejudiced mind of the mighty power of the Holy
Ghost, in framing such characters out of heathen originals. When, under
Montanistic influences our severely ascetic author complains of the
Church’s corruptions, and turns inside-out the whole estate of the
faithful, we see all that can be pressed on the other side; but, this
very important chapter must be borne in mind, together with the closing
sentence of chap. xliv., as evidence that whatever might be said by a
rigid disciplinarian, the Church, *as compared with* our day, was still
a living embodiment of [Philippians iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.li-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p65"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p65.1"></span>X.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p66"></span>(Paradise, cap. xlvii., p. 52.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p67"></span>See Kaye, p. 248. Our author seems not
always consistent with himself in his references to the Places of
departed spirits. Kaye thinks he identifies Paradise with the Heaven of
the Most High, in one place (the *De Exhort. Cast.*, xiii.) where he
probably confuses the Apostle’s ideas, in [Galatians v.
12](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.li-p67.1"></span>,
and [Ephesians v. 5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.li-p67.2"></span>. *Commonly*, however, though he is not
consistent with himself, this would be his scheme:—

<span id="iv.iii.li-p68"></span>1. The *Inferi*, or *Hades*, where the
soul of Dives was in one continent and that of Lazarus in another, with
a gulf between. Our author places “Abraham’s bosom” in Hades.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p69"></span>2. *Paradise*. In Hades, but in a
superior and more glorious region. This more blessed abode was opened to
the souls of the martyrs and other greater saints, at our Lord’s descent
into the place of the dead.  After the General Resurrection and
Judgment, there remain:

<span id="iv.iii.li-p70"></span>1. *Gehenna*, for the lost, prepared for
the devil and his angels.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p71"></span>2. The *Heaven of Heavens*, the eternal
abode of the righteous, in the vision of the Lord and His Eternal Joy.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p72"></span>Tertullian’s variations on this subject
will force us to recur to it hereafter; but, here it may be noted that
the confusions of Latin Christianity received their character in this
particular, from the genius of our author. Augustine caught from him a
certain indecision <span id="page_60">p. 60</span> <span
id="iv.iii.li-Page_60"></span>about the terms and places connected with
the state of the departed which has continued, to this day, to perplex
theologians in the West. Taking advantage of such confusions, the
stupendous Roman system of “Purgatory” was fabricated in the middle
ages; but the Greeks never accepted it, and it differs fundamentally
from what the earlier Latin Fathers, including Tertullian, have given us
as speculations.

<span id="iv.iii.li-p73"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p73.1"></span>XI.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p74"></span>(The Leo and the Leno, cap. l., p. 55.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p75"></span>Here we find the alliterative and
epigrammatic genius of Tertullian anticipating a similar poetic charm in
Augustine. The Christian maid or matron preferred the *Leo* to the
*leno*; to be devoured rather than to be debauched. Our author wrests a
tribute to the chastity of Christian women from the cruelty of their
judges, who recognizing this fact, were accustomed as a refinement of
their injustice to give sentence against them, refusing the mercy of a
horrible death, by committing them to the ravisher: “damnando
Christianam *ad lenonem* potius quam *ad leonem*.”

<span id="iv.iii.li-p76"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="iv.iii.li-p76.1"></span>XII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p77"></span>(The Seed of the Church, cap. l., p.
55.)

<span id="iv.iii.li-p78"></span>Kaye has devoted a number of his
pages <span id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) to the elucidation of this
subject, not only showing the constancy of the martyrs, but illustrating
the fact that Christians, like St. Paul, were forced to “die daily,”
even when they were not subjected to the fiery trial. He who confessed
himself a Christian made himself a social outcast. All manner of
outrages and wrongs could be committed against him with impunity. Rich
men, who had joined themselves to Christ, <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) were forced to accept “the spoiling of
their goods.” Brothers denounced brothers, and husbands their wives; “a
man’s foes were they of his own household.” But the Church triumphed
through suffering, and “out of weakness was made strong.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_153"></span>[56:154](0030057.htm#fr_153) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p5.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p6"></span> Kaye, p. 36. Also, p. 8, *supra*.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[57:155](0030057.htm#fr_154) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p15"></span> Kaye (following *<span
id="iv.iii.li-p15.1"></span>L’Art de verifier les Dates*) pp. 11 and
456.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[57:156](0030057.htm#fr_155) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p44"></span> My references are to the Third Edition,
London, Rivingtons, 1845.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[58:157](0030057.htm#fr_156) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p48"></span> In his edition of The Decline and Fall,
Vol. I., p. 589, American reprint.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[58:158](0030057.htm#fr_157) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p52"></span> pp. 85–88.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[58:159](0030057.htm#fr_158) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p56"></span> Ep. *ad Faust*. xxxii. 13. and see
Conybeare and Howson.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[59:160](0030057.htm#fr_159) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p60.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p61"></span> Compare Kaye on Mosheim, p. 107.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[60:161](0030057.htm#fr_160) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p79"></span> pp. 129–140.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[60:162](0030057.htm#fr_161) <span
id="iv.iii.li-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.li-p80"></span> Even under Commodus, vol. ii. p. 598,
this series.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Idolatry.](0030058)
