[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030405)  [Next](0030407) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.vii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.—Marcion Rejected the Preceding
Portion of St. Luke’s Gospel. Therefore This Review Opens with an
Examination of the Case of the Evil Spirit in the Synagogue of
Capernaum. He Whom the Demon Acknowledged Was the Creator’s
Christ.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p2"></span>In the fifteenth year of the reign of
Tiberius <span id="fr_3633"></span>[3634](#fn_3633) (for such is
Marcion’s proposition) he “came down to the Galilean city of Capernaum,”
of course meaning <span id="fr_3634"></span>[3635](#fn_3634) from the
heaven of the Creator, to which he had previously descended from his
own. What then had been his course, <span
id="fr_3635"></span>[3636](#fn_3635) for him to be described as first
descending from his own heaven to the Creator’s? For why should I
abstain from censuring those parts of the statement which do not satisfy
the requirement of an ordinary narrative, but always end in a falsehood?
To be sure, our censure has been once for all expressed in the question,
which we have already <span id="fr_3636"></span>[3637](#fn_3636)
suggested: Whether, when descending through the Creator’s domain, and
indeed in hostility to him, he could possibly have been admitted by him,
and by him been transmitted to the earth, which was equally his
territory? Now, however, I want also to know the remainder of his course
down, as<span id="page_352">p. 352</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-Page_352"></span>suming that he came down. For we must
not be too nice in inquiring <span id="fr_3637"></span>[3638](#fn_3637)
whether it is supposed that he was *seen* in any place. To come into
view <span id="fr_3638"></span>[3639](#fn_3638) indicates <span
id="fr_3639"></span>[3640](#fn_3639) a sudden unexpected glance, which
for a moment fixed <span id="fr_3640"></span>[3641](#fn_3640) the eye
upon the object that passed before the view, without staying. But when
it happens that a descent has been effected, it is apparent, and comes
under the notice of the eyes. <span id="fr_3641"></span>[3642](#fn_3641)
Moreover, it takes account of *fact*, and thus obliges one to examine in
what condition with what preparation, <span
id="fr_3642"></span>[3643](#fn_3642) with how much violence or
moderation, and further, at what time of the day or night, the descent
was made; who, again, saw the descent, who reported it, who seriously
avouched the fact, which certainly was not easy to be believed, even
after the asseveration. It is, in short, too bad <span
id="fr_3643"></span>[3644](#fn_3643) that Romulus should have had in
Proculus an avoucher of his ascent to heaven, when the Christ of (this)
god could not find any one to announce his descent from heaven; just as
if the ascent of the one and the descent of the other were not effected
on one and the same ladder of falsehood! Then, what had he to do with
Galilee, if he did not belong to the Creator by whom <span
id="fr_3644"></span>[3645](#fn_3644) that region was destined (for His
Christ) when about to enter on His ministry? <span
id="fr_3645"></span>[3646](#fn_3645) As Isaiah says: “Drink in this
first, and be prompt, O region of Zabulon and land of Nephthalim, and ye
others who (inhabit) the sea-coast, and that of Jordan, Galilee of the
nations, ye people who sit in darkness, behold a great light; upon you,
who inhabit (that) land, sitting in the shadow of death, the light hath
arisen.” <span id="fr_3646"></span>[3647](#fn_3646) It is, however, well
that Marcion’s god does claim to be the enlightener of the nations, that
so he might have the better reason for coming down from heaven; only, if
it must needs be, <span id="fr_3647"></span>[3648](#fn_3647) he should
rather have made Pontus his place of descent than Galilee. But since
both the place and the work of illumination according to the prophecy
are compatible with Christ, we begin to discern <span
id="fr_3648"></span>[3649](#fn_3648) that He is the subject of the
prophecy, which shows that at the very outset *of His ministry*, He came
not to destroy the law and the prophets, but rather to fulfil
them; <span id="fr_3649"></span>[3650](#fn_3649) for Marcion has erased
the passage as an interpolation. <span
id="fr_3650"></span>[3651](#fn_3650) It will, however, be vain for him
to deny that Christ uttered in word what He forthwith did partially
indeed. For the prophecy about place He at once fulfilled. From heaven
straight to the synagogue. As the adage runs: “The business on which we
are come, do at once.” Marcion must even expunge from the Gospel, “I am
not sent but unto the lost sheep of the house of Israel;” <span
id="fr_3651"></span>[3652](#fn_3651) and, “It is not meet to take the
children’s bread, and to cast it to dogs,” <span
id="fr_3652"></span>[3653](#fn_3652) —in order, forsooth, that Christ
may not appear to be an Israelite. But facts will satisfy me instead of
words. Withdraw all the sayings of my Christ, His acts shall speak. Lo,
He enters the synagogue; surely (this is going) to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel. Behold, it is to Israelites first that He offers the
“bread” of His doctrine; surely it is because they are “children” that
He shows them this priority. <span id="fr_3653"></span>[3654](#fn_3653)
Observe, He does not yet impart it to others; surely He passes them by
as “dogs.” For to whom else could He better have imparted it, than to
such as were strangers to the Creator, if He especially belonged not to
the Creator? And yet how could He have been admitted into the
synagogue—one so abruptly appearing, <span
id="fr_3654"></span>[3655](#fn_3654) so unknown; one, of whom no one had
as yet been apprised of His tribe, His nation, His family, and lastly,
His enrolment in the census of Augustus—that most faithful witness of
the Lord’s nativity, kept in the archives of Rome? They certainly would
have remembered, if they did not know Him to be circumcised, that He
must not be admitted into their most holy places.  And even if He had
the general right of entering <span id="fr_3655"></span>[3656](#fn_3655)
the synagogue (like other Jews), yet the function of giving instruction
was allowed only to a man who was extremely well known, and examined and
tried, and for some time invested with the privilege after experience
duly attested elsewhere. But “they were all astonished at His doctrine.”
Of course they were; “for, says (St. Luke), “His word was with
power <span id="fr_3656"></span>[3657](#fn_3656) —not because He taught
in opposition to the law and the proph<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>
<span id="v.iv.v.vii-Page_353"></span>ets. No doubt, His divine
discourse <span id="fr_3657"></span>[3658](#fn_3657) gave forth both
power and grace, building up rather than pulling down the substance of
the law and the prophets.  Otherwise, instead of “astonishment, they
would feel horror. It would not be admiration, but aversion, prompt and
sure, which they would bestow on one who was the destroyer of law and
prophets, and the especial propounder as a natural consequence of a
rival god; for he would have been unable to teach anything to the
disparagement of the law and the prophets, and so far of the Creator
also, without premising the doctrine of a different and rival divinity. 
Inasmuch, then, as the Scripture makes no other statement on the matter
than that the simple force and power of His word produced astonishment,
it more naturally <span id="fr_3658"></span>[3659](#fn_3658) shows that
His teaching was in accordance with the Creator by not denying (that it
was so), than that it was in opposition to the Creator, by not asserting
(such a fact). And thus He will either have to be acknowledged as
belonging to Him, <span id="fr_3659"></span>[3660](#fn_3659) in
accordance with whom He taught; or else will have to be adjudged a
deceiver since He taught in accordance with One whom He had come to
oppose. In the same passage, “the spirit of an unclean devil” exclaims:
“What have we to do with Thee, Thou Jesus? Art Thou come to destroy us?
I know Thee who Thou art, the Holy One of God.” <span
id="fr_3660"></span>[3661](#fn_3660) I do not here raise the question
whether this appellation was suitable to one who ought not to be called
Christ, unless he were sent by the Creator. <span
id="fr_3661"></span>[3662](#fn_3661) Elsewhere <span
id="fr_3662"></span>[3663](#fn_3662) there has been already given a full
consideration of His titles.

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p33"></span>My present discussion is, how the evil
spirit could have known that He was called by such a name, when there
had never at any time been uttered about Him a single prophecy by a god
who was unknown, and up to that time silent, of whom it was not possible
for Him to be attested as “the Holy One,” as (of a god) unknown even to
his own Creator. What similar *event* could he then have published <span
id="fr_3663"></span>[3664](#fn_3663) of a *new* deity, whereby he might
betoken for “the holy one” of the rival god?  Simply that he went into
the synagogue, and did nothing even in word against the Creator? As
therefore he could not by any means acknowledge him, whom he was
ignorant of, to be Jesus and the Holy One of God; so did he acknowledge
Him whom he knew (to be both). For he remembered how that the prophet
had prophesied <span id="fr_3664"></span>[3665](#fn_3664) of “the Holy
One” of God, and how that God’s name of “Jesus” was in the son of
Nun. <span id="fr_3665"></span>[3666](#fn_3665) These facts he had also
received <span id="fr_3666"></span>[3667](#fn_3666) from the angel,
according to our Gospel:  “Wherefore that which shall be born of thee
shall be called *the Holy One*, the Son of God;” <span
id="fr_3667"></span>[3668](#fn_3667) and, “Thou shalt call his name
*Jesus*.” <span id="fr_3668"></span>[3669](#fn_3668) Thus he actually
had (although only an evil spirit) some idea of the Lord’s dispensation,
rather than of any strange and heretofore imperfectly understood one. 
Because he also premised this question:  “What have we to do with
Thee?”—not as if referring to a strange Jesus, to whom pertain the
*evil* spirits of the Creator. Nor did he say, What hast Thou to do with
us? but, “What have we to do with Thee?” as if deploring himself, and
deprecating his own calamity; at the prospect of which he adds: “Art
Thou come to destroy us?” So completely did he acknowledge in Jesus the
Son of that God who was judicial and avenging, and (so to speak)
severe, <span id="fr_3669"></span>[3670](#fn_3669) and not of him who
was simply good, <span id="fr_3670"></span>[3671](#fn_3670) and knew not
how to destroy or how to punish!  Now for what purpose have we adduced
his passage first? <span id="fr_3671"></span>[3672](#fn_3671) In order
to show that Jesus was neither acknowledged by the evil spirit, nor
affirmed by Himself, to be any other than the Creator’s. Well, but Jesus
rebuked him, you say. To be sure he did, as being an envious (spirit),
and in his very confession only petulant, and evil in adulation—just as
if it had been Christ’s highest glory to have come for the destruction
of demons, and not for the salvation of mankind; whereas His wish really
was that His disciples should not glory in the subjection of evil
spirits but in the fair beauty of salvation. <span
id="fr_3672"></span>[3673](#fn_3672) Why else <span
id="fr_3673"></span>[3674](#fn_3673) did He rebuke him? If it was
because he was entirely wrong (in his invocation), then He was neither
Jesus nor the Holy One of God; if it was because he was partially
wrong—for having supposed him to be, rightly enough, <span
id="fr_3674"></span>[3675](#fn_3674) Jesus and the Holy One of God, but
also as belonging to the Creator—most unjustly would He have rebuked him
for thinking what he knew he ought to think (about Him), and for not
supposing that of Him which he knew not that he ought to suppose—that he
was another Jesus, and the holy one of the other god. If, <span
id="page_354">p. 354</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-Page_354"></span>however, the rebuke has not a more
probable meaning <span id="fr_3675"></span>[3676](#fn_3675) than that
which we ascribe to it, it follows that the evil spirit made no mistake,
and was not rebuked for lying; for it was Jesus Himself, besides whom it
was impossible for the evil spirit to have acknowledged any other,
whilst Jesus affirmed that He was He whom the evil spirit had
acknowledged, by not rebuking him for uttering a lie.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3633"></span>[351:3634](0030406.htm#fr_3633) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p3"></span> [Luke
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001), [Luke
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#031)<span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3634"></span>[351:3635](0030406.htm#fr_3634) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p4"></span> Utique.

<span id="fn_3635"></span>[351:3636](0030406.htm#fr_3635) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p5"></span> Ecquid ordinis.

<span id="fn_3636"></span>[351:3637](0030406.htm#fr_3636) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p6"></span> See above, book i. chap. xxiii. \[Comp.
i. cap. xix.\]

<span id="fn_3637"></span>[352:3638](0030406.htm#fr_3637) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p7"></span> This is here the force of *viderit*,
our author’s very favourite idiom.

<span id="fn_3638"></span>[352:3639](0030406.htm#fr_3638) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p8"></span> Apparere.

<span id="fn_3639"></span>[352:3640](0030406.htm#fr_3639) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p9"></span> Sapit.

<span id="fn_3640"></span>[352:3641](0030406.htm#fr_3640) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p10"></span> Impegerit.

<span id="fn_3641"></span>[352:3642](0030406.htm#fr_3641) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p11"></span> Descendisse autem, dum fit, videtur et
subit oculos. Probably this bit of characteristic Latinity had better be
rendered thus: “The accomplishment of a descent, however, is, whilst
happening, a visible process, and one that meets the eye.” Of the
various readings, “dum sit,” “dum it,” “dum fit,” we take the last with
Oehler, only understanding the clause as a parenthesis.

<span id="fn_3642"></span>[352:3643](0030406.htm#fr_3642) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p12"></span> Suggestu.

<span id="fn_3643"></span>[352:3644](0030406.htm#fr_3643) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p13"></span> Indignum.

<span id="fn_3644"></span>[352:3645](0030406.htm#fr_3644) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p14"></span> Cui.

<span id="fn_3645"></span>[352:3646](0030406.htm#fr_3645) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p15"></span> Ingressuro prædicationem.

<span id="fn_3646"></span>[352:3647](0030406.htm#fr_3646) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p16"></span> This is the literal rendering of
Tertullian’s version of the prophet’s words, which occur chap. ix. 1, 2.
The first clause closely follows the LXX. (ed. Tisch.): <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.1"></span>Τοῦτο πρῶτον πίε, ταχύ
ποίει</span>. This curious passage is explained by Grotius (on [Matt.
iv. 14](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.2"></span>) as a mistake of ancient copyists; as if
what the Seventy had originally rendered <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.3"></span>ταχὺ ποίει</span>, from the *hiphil* of
<span class="Hebrew"><span id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.4"></span>ללק</span>, had
been faultily written <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.5"></span>ταχὺ πίε</span>, and the latter had crept
into the text with the marginal note <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.6"></span>πρῶτον</span>, instead of a repetition of
<span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.7"></span>ταχὺ</span>.
However this be, Tertullian’s old Latin Bible had the passage thus: “Hoc
primum bibito, cito facito, regio Zabulon,” etc.

<span id="fn_3647"></span>[352:3648](0030406.htm#fr_3647) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p16.8"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p17"></span> Si utique.

<span id="fn_3648"></span>[352:3649](0030406.htm#fr_3648) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p18"></span> Agnoscere.

<span id="fn_3649"></span>[352:3650](0030406.htm#fr_3649) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p19"></span> [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3650"></span>[352:3651](0030406.htm#fr_3650) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p20"></span> Additum.

<span id="fn_3651"></span>[352:3652](0030406.htm#fr_3651) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p21"></span> [Matt. xv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#024)<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3652"></span>[352:3653](0030406.htm#fr_3652) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p22"></span> [Matt. xv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026)<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3653"></span>[352:3654](0030406.htm#fr_3653) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p23"></span> Præfert.

<span id="fn_3654"></span>[352:3655](0030406.htm#fr_3654) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p24"></span> Tam repentinus.

<span id="fn_3655"></span>[352:3656](0030406.htm#fr_3655) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p25"></span> Etsi passim adiretur.

<span id="fn_3656"></span>[352:3657](0030406.htm#fr_3656) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p26"></span> [Luke iv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#032)<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3657"></span>[353:3658](0030406.htm#fr_3657) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p26.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p27"></span> Eloquium.

<span id="fn_3658"></span>[353:3659](0030406.htm#fr_3658) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p28"></span> Facilius.

<span id="fn_3659"></span>[353:3660](0030406.htm#fr_3659) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p29"></span> That is, the Creator.

<span id="fn_3660"></span>[353:3661](0030406.htm#fr_3660) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p30"></span> [Luke
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#033),
[34](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#034)<span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3661"></span>[353:3662](0030406.htm#fr_3661) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p31"></span> Si non Creatoris.

<span id="fn_3662"></span>[353:3663](0030406.htm#fr_3662) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p32"></span> See above, in book iii. chap. xii., on
the name *Emmanuel*; in chap. xv., on the name *Christ*; and in chap.
xvi., on the name *Jesus*.

<span id="fn_3663"></span>[353:3664](0030406.htm#fr_3663) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p34"></span> Quid tale ediderit.

<span id="fn_3664"></span>[353:3665](0030406.htm#fr_3664) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p35"></span> [Ps.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010), [Dan.
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)<span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3665"></span>[353:3666](0030406.htm#fr_3665) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p36"></span> Compare what was said above in book
iii., chap. xvi. p. 335.

<span id="fn_3666"></span>[353:3667](0030406.htm#fr_3666) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p37"></span> Exceperat.

<span id="fn_3667"></span>[353:3668](0030406.htm#fr_3667) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p38"></span> Such is our author’s reading of [Luke
i. 35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3668"></span>[353:3669](0030406.htm#fr_3668) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p39"></span> [Matt. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3669"></span>[353:3670](0030406.htm#fr_3669) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p40"></span> Sævi.

<span id="fn_3670"></span>[353:3671](0030406.htm#fr_3670) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p41"></span> Optimi.

<span id="fn_3671"></span>[353:3672](0030406.htm#fr_3671) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p42"></span> Præmisimus.

<span id="fn_3672"></span>[353:3673](0030406.htm#fr_3672) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p43"></span> De candida salutis: see [Luke x.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3673"></span>[353:3674](0030406.htm#fr_3673) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p44"></span> Aut cur.

<span id="fn_3674"></span>[353:3675](0030406.htm#fr_3674) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p45"></span> Quidem.

<span id="fn_3675"></span>[354:3676](0030406.htm#fr_3675) <span
id="v.iv.v.vii-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.vii-p46"></span> Verisimiliorem statum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Other Proofs from the Same Chapter, that Jesus, Who Preached at
Nazareth, and Was Acknowledged by Certain Demons as Christ the Son of
God, Was the Creator's Christ. As Occasion Offers, the Docetic Errors of
Marcion are Exposed.](0030407)
