[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030410)  [Next](0030412.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xii"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.—Christ’s Authority Over the
Sabbath. As Its Lord He Recalled It from Pharisaic Neglect to the
Original Purpose of Its Institution by the Creator the Case of the
Disciples Who Plucked the Ears of Corn on the Sabbath. The Withered Hand
Healed on the Sabbath.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p2"></span>Concerning the Sabbath also I have this
to premise, that this question could not have arisen, if Christ did not
publicly proclaim <span id="fr_3852"></span>[3853](#fn_3852.md) the Lord of
the Sabbath. Nor could there be any discussion about His annulling <span
id="fr_3853"></span>[3854](#fn_3853.md) the Sabbath, if He had a
right <span id="fr_3854"></span>[3855](#fn_3854.md) to annul it. Moreover,
He would have the right, if He belonged to the rival god; nor would it
cause surprise to any one that He did what it was right for Him to do. 
Men’s astonishment therefore arose from their opinion that it was
improper for Him to proclaim the Creator to be God and yet to impugn His
Sabbath. Now, that we may decide these several points first, lest we
should be renewing them at every turn to meet each argument of our
adversary which rests on some novel institution <span
id="fr_3855"></span>[3856](#fn_3855.md) of Christ, let this stand as a
settled point, that discussion concerning the novel character of each
institution ensued on this account, because as nothing was as yet
advanced *by Christ* touching any new deity, so discussion thereon was
inadmissible; nor could it be retorted, that from the very novelty of
each several institution another deity was clearly enough demonstrated
by Christ, inasmuch as it was plain that novelty was not in itself a
characteristic to be wondered at in Christ, because it had been foretold
by the Creator. And it would have been, of course, but right that a
new <span id="fr_3856"></span>[3857](#fn_3856.md) god should first be
expounded, and his discipline be introduced afterwards; because it would
be the god that would impart authority to the discipline, and not the
discipline to the god; except that (to be sure) it has happened that
Marcion acquired his very perverse opinions not from a master, but his
master from his opinion! All other points respecting the Sabbath I thus
rule. If Christ interfered with <span
id="fr_3857"></span>[3858](#fn_3857.md) the Sabbath, He simply acted after
the Creator’s example; inasmuch as in the siege of the city of Jericho
the carrying around the walls of the ark of the covenant for eight days
running, and therefore on a Sabbath-day, actually <span
id="fr_3858"></span>[3859](#fn_3858.md) annulled the Sabbath, by the
Creator’s command—according to the opinion of those who think this of
Christ *in this passage of St. Luke*, in their ignorance that neither
Christ nor the Creator violated the Sabbath, as we shall by and by show.
And yet the Sabbath was actually then broken <span
id="fr_3859"></span>[3860](#fn_3859.md) by Joshua, <span
id="fr_3860"></span>[3861](#fn_3860.md) so that the present charge might be
alleged also against Christ. But even if, as being not the Christ of the
Jews, He displayed a hatred against the Jews’ most solemn day, He was
only professedly following <span id="fr_3861"></span>[3862](#fn_3861.md)
the Creator, as being His Christ, in this very hatred of the Sabbath;
for He exclaims by the mouth of Isaiah: “Your new moons and your
Sabbaths my soul hateth.” <span id="fr_3862"></span>[3863](#fn_3862.md)
Now, in whatever sense these words were spoken, we know that an abrupt
defence must, in a subject of this sort, be used in answer to an abrupt
challenge. I shall now transfer the discussion to the very matter in
which the teaching of Christ seemed to annul the Sabbath. The disciples
had been hungry; on that *the Sabbath* day they had plucked some ears
and rubbed them in their hands; by thus preparing their food, they had
violated the holy day. Christ excuses them, and became their accomplice
in breaking the Sabbath. The Pharisees bring the charge against Him. 
Marcion sophistically interprets the stages of the controversy (if I may
call in the aid of the truth of my Lord to ridicule his arts), both in
the scriptural record and in *Christ’s* purpose. <span
id="fr_3863"></span>[3864](#fn_3863.md) For from the Creator’s Scripture,
and from the purpose of Christ, there is derived a colourable
precedent <span id="fr_3864"></span>[3865](#fn_3864.md) —as from the
example of David, when he went into the temple on the Sabbath, and
provided food by boldly breaking up the shew-bread. <span
id="fr_3865"></span>[3866](#fn_3865.md) Even he remembered that this
privilege (I mean the dispensation from fasting) was allowed to the
Sabbath from the very beginning, when the Sabbath-day itself was
instituted. For although the Creator had forbidden that the manna should
be gathered for two days, He yet permitted it on the one occasion only
of the day before the Sabbath, <span id="page_363">p. 363</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-Page_363"></span>in order that the yesterday’s provision
of food might free from fasting the feast of the following Sabbath-day.
Good reason, therefore, had the Lord for pursuing the same principle in
the annulling of the Sabbath (since that is the word which men will
use); good reason, too, for expressing the Creator’s will, <span
id="fr_3866"></span>[3867](#fn_3866.md) when He bestowed the privilege of
not fasting on the Sabbath-day. In short, He would have then and
there <span id="fr_3867"></span>[3868](#fn_3867.md) put an end to the
Sabbath, nay, to the Creator Himself, if He had commanded His disciples
to fast on the Sabbath-day, contrary to the intention <span
id="fr_3868"></span>[3869](#fn_3868.md) of the Scripture and of the
Creator’s will.  But because He did not directly defend <span
id="fr_3869"></span>[3870](#fn_3869.md) His disciples, but excuses them;
because He interposes human want, as if deprecating censure; because He
maintains the honour of the Sabbath as a day which is to be free from
gloom rather than from work; <span id="fr_3870"></span>[3871](#fn_3870.md)
because he puts David and his companions on a level with His own
disciples in their fault and their extenuation; because He is pleased to
endorse <span id="fr_3871"></span>[3872](#fn_3871.md) the Creator’s
indulgence: <span id="fr_3872"></span>[3873](#fn_3872.md) because He is
Himself good according to *His* example—is He therefore alien from the
Creator? Then the Pharisees watch whether He would heal on the
Sabbath-day, <span id="fr_3873"></span>[3874](#fn_3873.md) that they might
accuse Him—surely as a violator of the Sabbath, not as the propounder of
a new god; for perhaps I might be content with insisting on all
occasions on this one point, that another Christ <span
id="fr_3874"></span>[3875](#fn_3874.md) is nowhere proclaimed. The
Pharisees, however, were in utter error concerning the law of the
Sabbath, not observing that its terms were conditional, when it enjoined
rest from labour, making certain distinctions of labour. For when it
says of the Sabbath-day, “In it thou shalt not do any work of
thine,” <span id="fr_3875"></span>[3876](#fn_3875.md) by the word
*thine* <span id="fr_3876"></span>[3877](#fn_3876.md) it restricts the
prohibition to human work—which every one performs in his own employment
or business—and not to divine work.  Now the work of healing or
preserving is not proper to man, but to God. So again, in the law it
says, “Thou shalt not do any manner of work in it,” <span
id="fr_3877"></span>[3878](#fn_3877.md) except what is to be done for any
soul, <span id="fr_3878"></span>[3879](#fn_3878.md) that is to say, in the
matter of delivering the soul; <span
id="fr_3879"></span>[3880](#fn_3879.md) because what is God’s work may be
done by human agency for the salvation of the soul. By God, however,
would that be done which the man Christ was to do, for He was likewise
God. <span id="fr_3880"></span>[3881](#fn_3880.md) Wishing, therefore, to
initiate them into this meaning of the law by the restoration of the
withered hand, He requires, “Is it lawful on the Sabbath-days to do
good, or not? to save life, or to destroy it?” <span
id="fr_3881"></span>[3882](#fn_3881.md) In order that He might, whilst
allowing that amount of work which He was about to perform for a
soul, <span id="fr_3882"></span>[3883](#fn_3882.md) remind them what works
the law of the Sabbath forbade—even human works; and what it
enjoined—even divine works, which might be done for the benefit of any
soul, <span id="fr_3883"></span>[3884](#fn_3883.md) He was called “Lord of
the Sabbath,” <span id="fr_3884"></span>[3885](#fn_3884.md) because He
maintained <span id="fr_3885"></span>[3886](#fn_3885.md) the Sabbath as His
own institution. Now, even if He had annulled the Sabbath, He would have
had the right to do so, <span id="fr_3886"></span>[3887](#fn_3886.md) as
being its Lord, (and) still more as He who instituted it. But He did not
utterly destroy it, although its Lord, in order that it might henceforth
be plain that the Sabbath was not broken <span
id="fr_3887"></span>[3888](#fn_3887.md) by the Creator, even at the time
when the ark was carried around Jericho. For that was really <span
id="fr_3888"></span>[3889](#fn_3888.md) God’s work, which He commanded
Himself, and which He had ordered for the sake of the lives of His
servants when exposed to the perils of war. Now, although He has in a
certain place expressed an aversion of Sabbaths, by calling them *your
Sabbaths*, <span id="fr_3889"></span>[3890](#fn_3889.md) reckoning them as
men’s Sabbaths, not His own, because they were celebrated without the
fear of God by a people full of iniquities, and loving God “with the
lip, not the heart,” <span id="fr_3890"></span>[3891](#fn_3890.md) He has
yet put His own Sabbaths (those, that is, which were kept according to
His prescription) in a different position; for by the same prophet, in a
later passage, <span id="fr_3891"></span>[3892](#fn_3891.md) He declared
them to be “true, and delightful, and inviolable.” Thus Christ did not
at all rescind the Sabbath: He kept the law thereof, and both in the
former case did a work which was beneficial to the life of His
disciples, for He indulged them with the relief of food when they were
hungry, and in the present instance cured the withered hand; in each
case in<span id="page_364">p. 364</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-Page_364"></span>timating by facts, “I came not to
destroy, the law, but to fulfil it,” <span
id="fr_3892"></span>[3893](#fn_3892.md) although Marcion has gagged <span
id="fr_3893"></span>[3894](#fn_3893.md) His mouth by this word. <span
id="fr_3894"></span>[3895](#fn_3894.md) For even in the case before us He
fulfilled the law, while interpreting its condition; *moreover*, He
exhibits in a clear light the different kinds of work, while doing what
the law excepts from the sacredness of the Sabbath <span
id="fr_3895"></span>[3896](#fn_3895.md) *and* while imparting to the
Sabbath-day itself, which from the beginning had been consecrated by the
benediction of the Father, an additional sanctity by His own beneficent
action. For He furnished to this day divine safeguards, <span
id="fr_3896"></span>[3897](#fn_3896.md) —a course which <span
id="fr_3897"></span>[3898](#fn_3897.md) His adversary would have pursued
for some other days, to avoid honouring the Creator’s Sabbath, and
restoring to the Sabbath the works which were proper for it. Since, in
like manner, the prophet Elisha on this day restored to life the dead
son of the Shunammite woman, <span id="fr_3898"></span>[3899](#fn_3898.md)
you see, O Pharisee, and you too, O Marcion, how that it was *proper
employment* for the Creator’s Sabbaths of old <span
id="fr_3899"></span>[3900](#fn_3899.md) to do good, to save life, not to
destroy it; how that Christ introduced nothing new, which was not after
the example, <span id="fr_3900"></span>[3901](#fn_3900.md) the gentleness,
the mercy, and the prediction also of the Creator. For in this very
example He fulfils <span id="fr_3901"></span>[3902](#fn_3901.md) the
prophetic announcement of a specific healing: “The weak hands are
strengthened,” as were also “the feeble knees” <span
id="fr_3902"></span>[3903](#fn_3902.md) in the sick of the palsy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3852"></span>[362:3853](0030411.htm#fr_3852.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p3"></span> Circumferret.

<span id="fn_3853"></span>[362:3854](0030411.htm#fr_3853.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p4"></span> Cur destrueret.

<span id="fn_3854"></span>[362:3855](0030411.htm#fr_3854.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p5"></span> Deberet.

<span id="fn_3855"></span>[362:3856](0030411.htm#fr_3855.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p6"></span> Institutione: or, *teaching*, perhaps.

<span id="fn_3856"></span>[362:3857](0030411.htm#fr_3856.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p7"></span> Alium.

<span id="fn_3857"></span>[362:3858](0030411.htm#fr_3857.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p8"></span> Intervertit.

<span id="fn_3858"></span>[362:3859](0030411.htm#fr_3858.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p9"></span> Operatione.

<span id="fn_3859"></span>[362:3860](0030411.htm#fr_3859.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p10"></span> Concussum est sabbatum.

<span id="fn_3860"></span>[362:3861](0030411.htm#fr_3860.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p11"></span> Per Jesum.

<span id="fn_3861"></span>[362:3862](0030411.htm#fr_3861.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p12"></span> Professus…sequebatur.

<span id="fn_3862"></span>[362:3863](0030411.htm#fr_3862.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p13"></span> [Isa. i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3863"></span>[362:3864](0030411.htm#fr_3863.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p14"></span> This obscure passage runs thus in the
original: “Marcion captat status controversiæ (ut aliquid ludam cum mei
Domini veritate), scripti et voluntatis.” *Status* is a technical word
in rhetoric. “Est quæstio quæ ex prima causarum conflictione nascitur.”
See Cicero, *Topic*. c. 25, *Part*. c. 29; and Quinctilian, *Instit.
Rhetor*. iii. 6. (Oehler).

<span id="fn_3864"></span>[362:3865](0030411.htm#fr_3864.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p15"></span> Sumitur color.

<span id="fn_3865"></span>[362:3866](0030411.htm#fr_3865.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p16"></span> [Luke
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#001.md), [1 Sam.
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3866"></span>[363:3867](0030411.htm#fr_3866.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p16.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p17"></span> Affectum.

<span id="fn_3867"></span>[363:3868](0030411.htm#fr_3867.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p18"></span> Tunc demum.

<span id="fn_3868"></span>[363:3869](0030411.htm#fr_3868.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p19"></span> Statum.

<span id="fn_3869"></span>[363:3870](0030411.htm#fr_3869.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p20"></span> Non constanter tuebatur.

<span id="fn_3870"></span>[363:3871](0030411.htm#fr_3870.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p21"></span> Non contristandi quam vacandi.

<span id="fn_3871"></span>[363:3872](0030411.htm#fr_3871.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p22"></span> \[This adoption of an *Americanism* is
worthy of passing notice.\]

<span id="fn_3872"></span>[363:3873](0030411.htm#fr_3872.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p23"></span> Placet illi quia Creator indulsit.

<span id="fn_3873"></span>[363:3874](0030411.htm#fr_3873.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p24"></span> [Luke vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#007.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3874"></span>[363:3875](0030411.htm#fr_3874.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p25"></span> That is, the Christ of another God.

<span id="fn_3875"></span>[363:3876](0030411.htm#fr_3875.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p26"></span> [Ex. xx.
16](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#016.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3876"></span>[363:3877](0030411.htm#fr_3876.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p27"></span> It is impossible to say where
Tertullian got this reading.  Perhaps his LXX. copy might have had (in
[Ex. xx. 10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p27.1"></span>): <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p27.2"></span>Οὐ ποιήσεις ἐν αὐτῇ πᾶν ἔργον σου</span>,
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p27.3"></span>συ</span>; every clause ending in <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xii-p27.4"></span>σου</span>, which
follows in that verse.  No critical authority, however, now known
warrants such a reading. \[It is probably based inferentially on [Ex.
20.9](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#009.md)<span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p27.5"></span>, “all *thy* work.”\]

<span id="fn_3877"></span>[363:3878](0030411.htm#fr_3877.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p27.6"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p28"></span> [Ex. xii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3878"></span>[363:3879](0030411.htm#fr_3878.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p29"></span> The LXX. of the latter clause of [Ex.
xii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016.md)<span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p29.1"></span> thus runs: <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p29.2"></span>πλὴν ὅσα ποιηθήσεται πάσῃ ψυχῇ</span>.
Tertullian probably got this reading from this clause, although the
Hebrew is to this effect:  “Save that which every man (or, *every soul*)
must eat,” which the Vulgate renders:  “Exceptis his, quæ ad vescendum
pertinent.”

<span id="fn_3879"></span>[363:3880](0030411.htm#fr_3879.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p29.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p30"></span> Liberandæ animæ: perhaps *saving
life*.

<span id="fn_3880"></span>[363:3881](0030411.htm#fr_3880.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p31"></span> In salutem animæ: or, for saving life.

<span id="fn_3881"></span>[363:3882](0030411.htm#fr_3881.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p32"></span> [Luke vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#009.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3882"></span>[363:3883](0030411.htm#fr_3882.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p33"></span> Pro anima: or, for a life.

<span id="fn_3883"></span>[363:3884](0030411.htm#fr_3883.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p34"></span> Animæ omni: or, any life.

<span id="fn_3884"></span>[363:3885](0030411.htm#fr_3884.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p35"></span> [Luke vi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#005.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3885"></span>[363:3886](0030411.htm#fr_3885.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p36"></span> Tuebatur.

<span id="fn_3886"></span>[363:3887](0030411.htm#fr_3886.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p37"></span> Merito.

<span id="fn_3887"></span>[363:3888](0030411.htm#fr_3887.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p38"></span> Destructum. We have, as has been most
convenient, rendered this word by *annul, destroy, break*.

<span id="fn_3888"></span>[363:3889](0030411.htm#fr_3888.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p39"></span> Et.

<span id="fn_3889"></span>[363:3890](0030411.htm#fr_3889.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p40"></span> [Isa.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013.md),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#014.md)<span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3890"></span>[363:3891](0030411.htm#fr_3890.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p41"></span> [Isa. xxix.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3891"></span>[363:3892](0030411.htm#fr_3891.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p42"></span> [Isa.
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013.md), [Isa.
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#002.md)<span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3892"></span>[364:3893](0030411.htm#fr_3892.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p42.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p43"></span> [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3893"></span>[364:3894](0030411.htm#fr_3893.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p44"></span> Obstruxit.

<span id="fn_3894"></span>[364:3895](0030411.htm#fr_3894.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p45"></span> “Destroy”…It was hardly necessary for
Oehler to paraphrase our author’s characteristically strong sentence by,
“since Marcion *thought that he had* gagged,” etc.

<span id="fn_3895"></span>[364:3896](0030411.htm#fr_3895.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p46"></span> In other words, “permits to be done on
the Sabbath.”

<span id="fn_3896"></span>[364:3897](0030411.htm#fr_3896.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p47"></span> Præsidia.

<span id="fn_3897"></span>[364:3898](0030411.htm#fr_3897.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p48"></span> Quod, not *quæ*, as if in apposition
with *præsidia*.

<span id="fn_3898"></span>[364:3899](0030411.htm#fr_3898.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p49"></span> See [2 Kings iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3899"></span>[364:3900](0030411.htm#fr_3899.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p50"></span> Olim.

<span id="fn_3900"></span>[364:3901](0030411.htm#fr_3900.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p51"></span> Forma.

<span id="fn_3901"></span>[364:3902](0030411.htm#fr_3901.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p52"></span> Repræsentat.

<span id="fn_3902"></span>[364:3903](0030411.htm#fr_3902.md) <span
id="v.iv.v.xii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p53"></span> [Isa. xxxv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003.md)<span id="v.iv.v.xii-p53.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Christ's Connection with the Creator Shown. Many Quotations Out
of the Old Testament Prophetically Bear on Certain Events of the Life of
Jesus--Such as His Ascent to Praying on the Mountain; His Selection of
Twelve Apostles; His Changing Simon's Name to Peter, and Gentiles from
Tyre and Sidon Resorting to Him.](0030412.md)
