[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030784)  [Next](0030786.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="vi.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—Argument. Perpetua, When Besieged
by Her Father, Comforts Him. When Led with Others to the Tribunal, She
Avows Herself a Christian, and is Condemned with the Rest to the Wild
Beasts. She Prays for Her Brother Dinocrates, Who Was Dead.</span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p2"></span>1. “After a few days there prevailed a
report that we should be heard. And then my father came to me from the
city, worn out with anxiety. He came up to me, that he might cast me
down, saying, ‘Have pity my daughter, on my grey hairs. Have pity on
your father, if I am worthy to be called a father by you. If with these
hands I have brought you up to this flower of your age, if I have
preferred you to all your brothers, do not deliver me up to the scorn of
men. Have regard to your brothers, have regard to your mother and your
aunt, have regard to your son, who will not be able to live after you.
<span id="page_701">p. 701</span> <span
id="vi.vi.iv-Page_701"></span>Lay aside your courage, and do not bring
us all to destruction; for none of us will speak in freedom if you
should suffer anything.’ These things said my father in his affection,
kissing my hands, and throwing himself at my feet; and with tears he
called me not Daughter, but Lady. And I grieved over the grey hairs of
my father, that he alone of all my family would not rejoice over my
passion. And I comforted him, saying, ‘On that scaffold <span
id="fr_8983"></span>[8984](#fn_8983.md) whatever God wills shall happen.
For know that we are not placed in our own power, but in that of God.’
And he departed from me in sorrow.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p4"></span>2. “Another day, while we were at dinner,
we were suddenly taken away to be heard, and we arrived at the
town-hall. At once the rumour spread through the neighbourhood of the
public place, and an immense number of people were gathered together. 
We mount the platform. The rest were interrogated, and confessed. Then
they came to me, and my father immediately appeared with my boy, and
withdrew me from the step, and said in a supplicating tone, ‘Have pity
on your babe.’ And Hilarianus the procurator, who had just received the
power of life and death in the place of the proconsul Minucius
Timinianus, who was deceased, said, ‘Spare the grey hairs of your
father, spare the infancy of your boy, offer sacrifice for the
well-being of the emperors.’ And I replied, ‘I will not do so.’
Hilarianus said, ‘Are you a Christian?’ And I replied, ‘I am a
Christian.’ And as my father stood there to cast me down *from the
faith*, he was ordered by Hilarianus to be thrown down, and was beaten
with rods. And my father’s misfortune grieved me as if I myself had been
beaten, I so grieved for his wretched old age. <span
id="fr_8984"></span>[8985](#fn_8984.md) The procurator then delivers
judgment on all of us, and condemns us to the wild beasts, and we went
down cheerfully to the dungeon. Then, because my child had been used to
receive suck from me, and to stay with me in the prison, I send
Pomponius the deacon to my father to ask for the infant, but my father
would not give it him. And even as God willed it, the child no long
desired the breast, nor did my breast cause me uneasiness, lest I should
be tormented by care for my babe and by the pain of my breasts at once.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p6"></span>3. “After a few days, whilst we were all
praying, on a sudden, in the middle of our prayer, there came to me a
word, and I named Dinocrates; and I was amazed that that name had never
come into my mind until then, and I was grieved as I remembered his
misfortune. And I felt myself immediately to be worthy, and to be called
on to ask on his behalf. <span id="fr_8985"></span>[8986](#fn_8985.md) And
for him I began earnestly to make supplication, and to cry with groaning
to the Lord. Without delay, on that very night, this was shown to me in
a vision. <span id="fr_8986"></span>[8987](#fn_8986.md) I saw Dinocrates
going out from a gloomy place, where also there were several others, and
he was parched and very thirsty, with a filthy countenance and pallid
colour, and the wound on his face which he had when he died. This
Dinocrates had been my brother after the flesh, seven years of age <span
id="fr_8987"></span>[8988](#fn_8987.md) who died miserably with disease—his
face being so eaten out with cancer, that his death caused repugnance to
all men.  For him I had made my prayer, and between him and me there was
a large interval, <span id="fr_8988"></span>[8989](#fn_8988.md) so that
neither of us could approach to the other. And moreover, in the same
place where Dinocrates was, there was a pool full of water, having its
brink higher than was the stature of the boy; and Dinocrates raised
himself up as if to drink. And I was grieved that, although that pool
held water, still, on account of the height to its brink, he could not
drink. And I was aroused, and knew that my brother was in suffering. But
I trusted that my prayer would bring help to his suffering; and I prayed
for him every day until we passed over into the prison of the camp, for
we were to fight in the camp-show. Then was the birth-day of Geta Cæsar,
and I made my prayer for my brother day and night, groaning and weeping
that he might be granted to me.

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p11"></span>4. “Then, on the day on which we remained
in fetters, <span id="fr_8989"></span>[8990](#fn_8989.md) this was shown to
me. I saw that that place which I had formerly observed to be in gloom
was now bright; and Dinocrates, with a clean body well clad, was finding
refreshment. And where there had been a <span id="page_702">p.
702</span> <span id="vi.vi.iv-Page_702"></span>wound, I saw a scar; and
that pool which I had before seen, *I saw now* with its margin lowered
even to the boy’s navel. And one drew water from the pool incessantly,
and upon its brink was a goblet filled with water; and Dinocrates drew
near and began to drink from it, and the goblet did not fail. And when
he was satisfied, he went away from the water to play joyously, after
the manner of children, and I awoke. Then I understood that he was
translated from the place of punishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8983"></span>[701:8984](0030785.htm#fr_8983.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p3"></span> “Catasta,” a raised platform on which the
martyrs were placed either for trial or torture.

<span id="fn_8984"></span>[701:8985](0030785.htm#fr_8984.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p5"></span> \[St. August. opp. iv. 541.\]

<span id="fn_8985"></span>[701:8986](0030785.htm#fr_8985.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p7"></span> \[The story in [2 Maccab. xii.
40-45](../../../bib/apo/ma2012.htm#040.md)<span id="vi.vi.iv-p7.1"></span>,
is there narrated as a thought suggested to the soldiers under Judas,
and not discouraged by him, though it concerned men guilty of idolatry
and dying in mortal sin, by the vengeance of God. It may have occurred
to early Christians that their heathen kindred might, therefore, not be
beyond the visitations of the Divine compassion.  But, obviously, even
were it not an Apocryphal text, it can have no bearing whatever on the
case of Christians.  The doctrine of Purgatory is that nobody dying in
mortal sin can have the benefit of its discipline, or any share in the
prayers and oblations of the Faithful, whatever.\]

<span id="fn_8986"></span>[701:8987](0030785.htm#fr_8986.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p8"></span> “Oromate.” \[This vision, it must be
observed, has nothing to do with prayers for the *Christian* dead, for
this brother of Perpetua was a heathen child whom she supposed to be in
the *Inferi*. It illustrates the anxieties Christians felt for those of
their kindred who had not died in the Lord; even for children of seven
years of age. Could the gulf be bridged and they received into Abraham’s
bosom?  This dream of Perpetua comforted her with a trust that so it
should be. Of course this story has been used fraudulently, to help a
system of which these times knew nothing. Cyprian says expressly: “Apud
Inferos confessio, non est, nec exomologesis *illic fieri* potest.”
*Epistola* *lii.* p. 98. Opp. Paris, 1574. In the Edinburgh series
(translation) this epistle is numbered 51, and elsewhere 54.\]

<span id="fn_8987"></span>[701:8988](0030785.htm#fr_8987.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p9"></span> \[There is not the slightest reason to
suppose that this child had been baptized: the father a heathen and
Perpetua herself a recent catechumen. Elucidation.\]

<span id="fn_8988"></span>[701:8989](0030785.htm#fr_8988.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p10"></span> “Diadema,” or rather “diastema.”
\[Borrowed from [Luke xvi. 26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026.md)<span
id="vi.vi.iv-p10.1"></span>. But that gulf could not be passed according
to the evangelist.\]

<span id="fn_8989"></span>[701:8990](0030785.htm#fr_8989.md) <span
id="vi.vi.iv-p11.2"></span>

<span id="vi.vi.iv-p12"></span> “Nervo.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Argument. Perpetua is Again Tempted by Her Father. Her Third
Vision, Wherein She is Led Away to Struggle Against an Egyptian. She
Fights, Conquers, and Receives the Reward.](0030786.md)
