[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030246)  [Next](0030248) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xliii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIII.—Sleep a Natural Function as
Shown by Other Considerations, and by the Testimony of Scripture.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p2"></span>Let us therefore first discuss the
question of sleep, and afterwards in what way the soul encounters <span
id="fr_1760"></span>[1761](#fn_1760) death. Now sleep is certainly not a
supernatural thing, as some philosophers will have it be, when they
suppose it to be the result of causes which appear to be above nature.
The Stoics affirm sleep to be “a temporary suspension of the activity of
the senses;” <span id="fr_1761"></span>[1762](#fn_1761) the Epicureans
define it as an intermission of the animal spirit; Anaxagoras and
Xenophanes as a weariness of the same; Empedocles and Parmenides as a
cooling down thereof; Strato as a separation of the (soul’s) connatural
spirit; Democritus as the soul’s indigence; Aristotle as the
interruption <span id="fr_1762"></span>[1763](#fn_1762) of the heat
around the heart. As for myself, I can safely say that I have never
slept in such a way as to discover even a single one of these
conditions.  Indeed, we cannot possibly believe that sleep is a
weariness; it is rather the opposite, for it undoubtedly removes
weariness, and a person is refreshed by sleep instead of being
fatigued.  Besides, sleep is not always the result of fatigue; and even
when it is, the fatigue continues no longer. Nor can I allow that sleep
is a cooling or decaying of the animal heat, for our bodies derive
warmth from sleep in such a way that the regular dispersion of the food
by means of sleep could not so easily go on if there were too much heat
to accelerate it unduly, or cold to retard it, if sleep had the alleged
refrigerating influence. There is also the further fact that
perspiration indicates an over-heated digestion; and digestion is
predicated of us as a process of concoction, which is an operation
concerned with heat and not with cold.  In like manner, the immortality
of the soul precludes belief in the theory that sleep is an intermission
of the animal spirit, or an indigence of the spirit, or a separation of
the (soul’s) connatural spirit. The soul perishes if it undergoes
diminution or intermis<span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xliii-Page_222"></span>sion. Our only resource, indeed, is to
agree with the Stoics, by determining the soul to be a temporary
suspension of the activity of the senses, procuring rest for the body
only, not for the soul also. For the soul, as being always in motion,
and always active, never succumbs to rest,—a condition which is alien to
immortality: for nothing immortal admits any end to its operation; but
sleep is an end of operation. It is indeed on the body, which is subject
to mortality, and on the body alone, that sleep graciously bestows <span
id="fr_1763"></span>[1764](#fn_1763) a cessation from work. He,
therefore, who shall doubt whether sleep is a natural function, has the
dialectical experts calling in question the whole difference between
things natural and supernatural—so that what things he supposed to be
beyond nature he may, (if he likes,) be safe in assigning to nature,
which indeed has made such a disposition of things, that they may
seemingly be accounted as beyond it; and so, of course, all things are
natural or none are natural, (as occasion requires.) With us
(Christians), however, only that can receive a hearing which is
suggested by contemplating God, the Author of all the things which we
are now discussing. For we believe that nature, if it is anything, is a
reasonable work of God.  Now reason presides over sleep; for sleep is so
fit for man, so useful, so necessary, that were it not for it, not a
soul could provide agency for recruiting the body, for restoring its
energies, for ensuring its health, for supplying suspension from work
and remedy against labour, and for the legitimate enjoyment of which day
departs, and night provides an ordinance by taking from all objects
their very colour.  Since, then, sleep is indispensable to our life, and
health, and succour, there can be nothing pertaining to it which is not
reasonable, and which is not natural. Hence it is that physicians banish
beyond the gateway of nature everything which is contrary to what is
vital, healthful, and helpful to nature; for those maladies which are
inimical to sleep—maladies of the mind and of the stomach—they have
decided to be contrariant to nature, and by such decision have
determined as its corollary that sleep is perfectly natural.  Moreover,
when they declare that sleep is not natural in the lethargic state, they
derive their conclusion from the fact that it is natural when it is in
its due and regular exercise. For every natural state is impaired either
by defect or by excess, whilst it is maintained by its proper measure
and amount.  That, therefore, will be natural in its condition which may
be rendered non-natural by defect or by excess.  Well, now, what if you
were to remove eating and drinking from the conditions of nature? if in
them lies the chief incentive to sleep. It is certain that, from the
very beginning of his nature, man was impressed with these instincts (of
sleep). <span id="fr_1764"></span>[1765](#fn_1764) If you receive your
instruction from God, (you will find) that the fountain of the human
race, Adam, had a taste of drowsiness before having a draught of repose;
slept before he laboured, or even before he ate, nay, even before he
spoke; in order that men may see that sleep is a natural feature and
function, and one which has actually precedence over all the natural
faculties. From this primary instance also we are led to trace even then
the image of death in sleep. For as Adam was a figure of Christ, Adam’s
sleep shadowed out the death of Christ, who was to sleep a mortal
slumber, that from the wound inflicted on His side might, in like manner
(as Eve was formed), be typified the church, the true mother of the
living. This is why sleep is so salutary, so rational, and is actually
formed into the model of that death which is general and common to the
race of man.  God, indeed, has willed (and it may be said in passing
that He has, generally, in His dispensations brought nothing to pass
without such types and shadows) to set before us, in a manner more fully
and completely than Plato’s example, by daily recurrence the outlines of
man’s state, especially concerning the beginning and the termination
thereof; thus stretching out the hand to help our faith more readily by
types and parables, not in words only, but also in things. He
accordingly sets before your view the human body stricken by the
friendly power of slumber, prostrated by the kindly necessity of repose
immoveable in position, just as it lay previous to life, and just as it
will lie after life is past: there it lies as an attestation of its form
when first moulded, and of its condition when at last buried—awaiting
the soul in both stages, in the former previous to its bestowal, in the
latter after its recent withdrawal. Meanwhile the soul is circumstanced
in such a manner as to seem to be elsewhere active, learning to bear
future absence by a dissembling of its presence for the moment. We shall
soon know the case of Hermotimus. But yet it dreams in the interval.
Whence then its dreams? The fact is, it cannot rest or be idle
altogether, nor does it confine to the still hours of sleep the nature
of its immortality. It proves itself to possess a constant motion; it
travels over land <span id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xliii-Page_223"></span>and sea, it trades, it is excited, it
labours, it plays, it grieves, it rejoices, it follows pursuits lawful
and unlawful; it shows what very great power it has even without the
body, how well equipped it is with members of its own, although
betraying at the same time the need it has of impressing on some body
its activity again. Accordingly, when the body shakes off its slumber,
it asserts before your eye the resurrection of the dead by its own
resumption of its natural functions.  Such, therefore, must be both the
natural reason and the reasonable nature of sleep. If you only regard it
as the image of death, you initiate faith, you nourish hope, you learn
both how to die and how to live, you learn watchfulness, even while you
sleep.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1760"></span>[221:1761](0030247.htm#fr_1760) <span
id="iv.xi.xliii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p3"></span> Decurrat.

<span id="fn_1761"></span>[221:1762](0030247.htm#fr_1761) <span
id="iv.xi.xliii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p4"></span> So Bp. Kaye, p. 195.

<span id="fn_1762"></span>[221:1763](0030247.htm#fr_1762) <span
id="iv.xi.xliii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p5"></span> Marcorem, “the decay.”

<span id="fn_1763"></span>[222:1764](0030247.htm#fr_1763) <span
id="iv.xi.xliii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p6"></span> Adulatur.

<span id="fn_1764"></span>[222:1765](0030247.htm#fr_1764) <span
id="iv.xi.xliii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p7"></span> [Gen. ii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#021)<span id="iv.xi.xliii-p7.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Story of Hermotimus, and the Sleeplessness of the Emperor
Nero. No Separation of the Soul from the Body Until Death.](0030248)
