[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030595)  [Next](0030597) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—A Sufficient Cause for the
Resurrection of the Flesh Occurs in the Future Judgment of Man. It Will
Take Cognisance of the Works of the Body No Less Than of the
Soul.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xiv-p2"></span>Such, then, being the outlines of the
divine energies which God has displayed as much in the parables *of
nature* as in His spoken word, let us now approach His very edicts and
decrees, since this is the division which we mainly adopt in our
subject-matter.  We began with the dignity of the flesh, whether it were
of such a nature that when once destroyed it was capable of being
restored. Then we pursued an inquiry touching the power of God, whether
it was sufficiently great to be habitually able to confer this
restoration on a thing which had been destroyed. Now, if we have proved
these two points, I should like you to inquire into the (*question of*)
cause, whether it be one of sufficient weight to claim the resurrection
of the flesh as necessary and as conformable in every way to reason;
because there underlies this demurrer: the flesh may be quite capable of
being restored, and the Deity be perfectly able to effect the
restoration, but a cause for such recovery must needs pre-exist. Admit
then a sufficient one, you who learn of a God who is both supremely good
as well as just <span id="fr_7368"></span>[7369](#fn_7368) —supremely
good from His own (character), just in consequence of ours. For if man
had never sinned, he would simply and solely have known God in His
superlative goodness, from the attribute of His nature. But now he
experiences Him to be a just God also, from the necessity of a cause;
still, however, retaining under this very circumstance His excellent
goodness, at the same time that He is also just. For, by both succouring
the good and punishing the evil, He displays His justice, and at the
same time makes both processes contribute proofs of His goodness, whilst
on the one hand He deals vengeance, and on the other dispenses reward.
But with Marcion <span id="fr_7369"></span>[7370](#fn_7369) you will
have the opportunity of more fully learning whether this be the whole
character of God. Meanwhile, so perfect is our (God), that He is rightly
Judge, because He is the Lord; rightly the Lord, because the Creator;
rightly the Creator, because He is God. Whence it happens that that
heretic, whose name I know not, holds that He properly is not a Judge,
since He is not Lord; properly not Lord, since He is not the Creator. 
And so I am at a loss to know how He is God, who is neither the Creator,
which God is; nor the Lord, which the Creator is. Inasmuch, then, as it
is most suitable for *the great Being who is* God, and Lord, and Creator
to summon man to a judgment on this very question, whether he has taken
care or not to acknowledge and honour his Lord and Creator, this is just
such a judgment as the resurrection shall achieve. The entire cause,
then, or rather necessity of the resurrection, will be this, namely,
that arrangement of the final judgment which shall be most suitable to
God.  Now, in effecting this arrangement, you must consider whether the
divine censure superintends a judicial ex<span id="page_555">p.
555</span> <span id="v.viii.xiv-Page_555"></span>amination of the two
natures of man—both his soul and his flesh. For that which is a suitable
object to be judged, is also a competent one to be raised. Our position
is, that the judgment of God must be believed first of all to be
plenary, and then absolute, so as to be final, and therefore
irrevocable; to be also righteous, not bearing less heavily on any
particular part; to be moreover worthy of God, being complete and
definite, in keeping with His great patience. Thus it follows that the
fulness and perfection of the judgment consists simply in representing
the interests of the entire human being. Now, since the entire man
consists of the union of the two natures, he must therefore appear in
both, as it is right that he should be judged in his entirety; nor, of
course, did he pass through life except in his entire state.  As
therefore he lived, so also must he be judged, because he has to be
judged concerning the way in which he lived.  For life is the cause of
judgment, and it must undergo investigation in as many natures as it
possessed when it discharged its vital functions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7368"></span>[554:7369](0030596.htm#fr_7368) <span
id="v.viii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xiv-p3"></span> He refers to Marcion.

<span id="fn_7369"></span>[554:7370](0030596.htm#fr_7369) <span
id="v.viii.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xiv-p4"></span> He here refers his reader to what he
has written against Marcion, especially in his books i. and ii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: As the Flesh is a Partaker with the Soul in All Human Conduct, So
Will It Be in the Recompense of Eternity.](0030597)
