[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030690)  [Next](0030692.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.x.x"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.x.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X.</span>

<span id="v.x.x-p2"></span>But as to those who think that not here, that
is, not within this environment of earth, nor during this period of
existence, nor before men possessing this nature shared by us all, has
confession been appointed to be made, what a supposition is theirs,
being at variance with the whole order of things of which we have
experience in these lands, and in this life, and under human
authorities! Doubtless, when the souls have departed from their bodies,
and begun to be put upon trial in the several stories of the heavens,
with reference to the engagement (under which they have come to Jesus),
and to be questioned about those hidden mysteries of the heretics, they
must then confess before the real powers and the real men,—the
Teleti, <span id="fr_8273"></span>[8274](#fn_8273.md) to wit, and the
Abascanti, <span id="fr_8274"></span>[8275](#fn_8274.md) and the
Acineti <span id="fr_8275"></span>[8276](#fn_8275.md) of Valentinus! <span
id="page_643">p. 643</span> <span id="v.x.x-Page_643"></span>For, say
*they*, even the Demiurge himself did not uniformly approve of the men
of our world, whom he counted as a drop of a bucket, <span
id="fr_8276"></span>[8277](#fn_8276.md) and the dust of the
threshing-floor, and spittle and locusts, *and* put on a level even with
brute beasts. Clearly, it is so written. Yet not therefore must we
understand that there is, besides us, another kind of man, which—for it
is evidently *thus* (in the case proposed)—has been able to assume
without invalidating a comparison *between the two kinds*, both the
characteristics of the race and a unique property. For even if the life
was tainted, so that condemned to contempt it might be likened to
objects held in contempt, the nature was not forthwith taken away, so
that there might be supposed to be another under its name.  Rather is
the nature preserved, though the life blushes; nor does Christ know
other men than those with reference to whom He says, “Whom do men say
that I am?” <span id="fr_8277"></span>[8278](#fn_8277.md) And, “As ye would
that men should do to you, do ye likewise so to, them.” <span
id="fr_8278"></span>[8279](#fn_8278.md) Consider whether He may not have
preserved a race such that He is looking for a testimony to Himself from
them, as well as consisting of those on whom He enjoins the interchange
of righteous dealing. But if I should urgently demand that those
heavenly men be described to me, Aratus will sketch more easily Perseus
and Cepheus, and Erigone, and Ariadne, among the constellations. But who
prevented the Lord from clearly prescribing that confession by men
likewise has to be made where He plainly announced that His own would
be; so that the statement might have run thus: ”Whosoever shall confess
in me before men in heaven, I also will confess in him before my Father
who is in heaven?” He ought to have saved me from this mistake about
confession on earth, which He would not have wished me to take part in,
if He had commanded one in heaven; for I knew no other men but the
inhabitants of the earth, man himself even not having up to that time
been observed in heaven. Besides, what is the credibility of the things
(alleged), that, being after death raised to heavenly places, I should
be put to the test there, whither I would not be translated without
being already tested, that I should there be tried in reference to a
command where I could not come, but to find admittance? Heaven lies open
to the Christian before the way to it does; because there is no way to
heaven, but to him to whom heaven lies open; and he who reaches it will
enter.  What powers, keeping guard at the gate, do I hear you affirm to
exist in accordance with Roman superstition, with a certain Carnus,
Forculus, and Limentinus? What powers do you set in order at the
railings? If you have ever read in David, “Lift up your gates, ye
princes, and let the everlasting gates be lifted up; and the King of
glory shall enter in;” <span id="fr_8279"></span>[8280](#fn_8279.md) if you
have also heard from Amos, “Who buildeth up to the heavens his way of
ascent, and is such as to pour forth his abundance (of waters) over the
earth;” <span id="fr_8280"></span>[8281](#fn_8280.md) know that both that
way of ascent was thereafter levelled with the ground, by the footsteps
of the Lord, and an entrance thereafter opened up by the might of
Christ, and that no delay or inquest will meet Christians on the
threshold, since they have there to be not discriminated from one
another, but owned, and not put to the question, but received in.  For
though you think heaven still shut, remember that the Lord left here to
Peter and through him to the Church, the keys of it, which every one who
has been here put to the question, and also made confession, will carry
with him. But the devil stoutly affirms that we must confess there, to
persuade us that we must deny here. I shall send before me fine
documents, to be sure, <span id="fr_8281"></span>[8282](#fn_8281.md) I
shall carry with me excellent keys, the fear of them who kill the body
only, but do nought against the soul: I shall be graced by the neglect
of this command:  I shall stand with credit in heavenly places, who
could not stand in earthly: I shall hold out against the greater powers,
who yielded to the lesser:  I shall deserve to be at length let in,
though now shut out. It readily occurs to one to remark further, “If it
is in heaven that men must confess, it is here too that they must deny.”
For where the one is, there both are. For contraries always go together.
There will need to be carried on in heaven persecution even, which is
the occasion of confession or denial. Why, then, do you refrain, O most
presumptuous heretic, from transporting to the world above the whole
series of means proper to the intimidation of Christians, and especially
to put there the very hatred for the name, where Christ rules at the
right hand of the Father? Will you plant there both synagogues of the
Jews—fountains of persecution—before which the apostles endured the
scourge, and heathen assemblages with their own circus, forsooth, where
they readily join in the cry, Death to the third race? <span
id="fr_8282"></span>[8283](#fn_8282.md) But ye are bound to pro<span
id="page_644">p. 644</span> <span id="v.x.x-Page_644"></span>duce in the
same place both our brothers, fathers, children, mothers-in-law,
daughters-in-law and those of our household, through whose agency the
betrayal has been appointed; likewise kings, governors, and armed
authorities, before whom the matter at issue must be contested.
Assuredly there will be in heaven a prison also, destitute of the sun’s
rays or full of light unthankfully, and fetters of the zones perhaps,
and, for a rack-horse, the axis itself which whirls *the heavens round*.
Then, if a Christian is to be stoned, hail-storms will be near; if
burned, thunderbolts are at hand; if butchered, the armed Orion will
exercise his function; if put an end to by beasts, the north will send
forth the bears, the Zodiac the bulls and the lions. He who will endure
these assaults to the end, the same shall be saved. Will there be then,
in heaven, both an end, and suffering, a killing, and the first
confession? And where will be the flesh requisite for all this? Where
the body which alone has to be killed by men?  Unerring reason has
commanded us to set forth these things in even a playful manner; nor
will any one thrust out the bar consisting in this objection (we have
offered), so as not to be compelled to transfer the whole array of means
proper to persecution, all the powerful instrumentality which has been
provided for dealing with this matter, to the place where he has put the
court before which confession should be made. Since confession is
elicited by persecution, and persecution ended in confession, there
cannot but be at the same time, in attendance upon these, the
instrumentality which determines both the entrance and the exit, that
is, the beginning and the end.  But both hatred for the name will be
here, persecution breaks out here, betrayal brings men forth here,
examination uses force here, torture rages here, and confession or
denial completes this whole course of procedure on the earth. Therefore,
if the other things are here, confession also is not elsewhere; if
confession is elsewhere, the other things also are not here.  Certainly
the other things are not elsewhere; therefore neither is confession in
heaven. Or, if they will have it that the manner in which the heavenly
examination and confession take place is different, it will certainly be
also incumbent on them to devise a mode of procedure of their own of a
very different kind, and opposed to that method which is indicated in
the Scriptures.  And we may be able to say, Let them consider (whether
what they imagine to exist does so), if so be that this course of
procedure, proper to examination and confession on earth—a course which
has persecution as the source in which it originates, and which pleads
dissension in the state—is preserved to its own faith, if so be that we
must believe just as is also written, and understand just as is spoken. 
Here I endure the entire course (in question), the Lord Himself not
appointing a different quarter of the world *for my doing so*. For what
does He add after finishing with confession and denial?  “Think not that
I am come to send peace on earth, but a sword,”—undoubtedly on the
earth. “For I am come to set a man at variance against his father, and
the daughter against her mother, and the mother-in-law against her
daughter-in-law. And a man’s foes shall be they of his own
household.” <span id="fr_8283"></span>[8284](#fn_8283.md) For so is it
brought to pass, that the brother delivers up the brother to death, and
the father the son: and the children rise up against the parents, and
cause them to die. And he who endureth to the end let that man be
saved. <span id="fr_8284"></span>[8285](#fn_8284.md) So that this whole
course of procedure characteristic of the Lord’s sword, which has been
sent not to heaven, but to earth, makes confession also to be there,
which by enduring to the end is to issue in the suffering of death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8273"></span>[642:8274](0030691.htm#fr_8273.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p3"></span> The perfect.

<span id="fn_8274"></span>[642:8275](0030691.htm#fr_8274.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p4"></span> The spell-resisting.

<span id="fn_8275"></span>[642:8276](0030691.htm#fr_8275.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p5"></span> The steadfast.

<span id="fn_8276"></span>[643:8277](0030691.htm#fr_8276.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p6"></span> [Isa. xl.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015.md)<span id="v.x.x-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8277"></span>[643:8278](0030691.htm#fr_8277.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p7"></span> [Matt. xvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013.md)<span id="v.x.x-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8278"></span>[643:8279](0030691.htm#fr_8278.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p8"></span> [Matt.
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012.md), [Luke
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#031.md)<span id="v.x.x-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8279"></span>[643:8280](0030691.htm#fr_8279.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p9"></span> [Ps. xxiv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#007.md)<span id="v.x.x-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8280"></span>[643:8281](0030691.htm#fr_8280.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p10"></span> [Amos ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#006.md)<span id="v.x.x-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8281"></span>[643:8282](0030691.htm#fr_8281.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p11"></span> In support of my cause.

<span id="fn_8282"></span>[643:8283](0030691.htm#fr_8282.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p12"></span> More literally, “How long shall we suffer
the third race!”  The Christians are meant; the first race being the
heathen, and the second the Jews.—<span class="sc"><span
id="v.x.x-p12.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_8283"></span>[644:8284](0030691.htm#fr_8283.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p12.4"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p13"></span> [Matt. x.
34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034.md)<span id="v.x.x-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8284"></span>[644:8285](0030691.htm#fr_8284.md) <span
id="v.x.x-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.x-p14"></span> [Matt. x.
21](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#021.md)<span id="v.x.x-p14.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI.](0030692.md)
