[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030247)  [Next](0030249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xliv"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xliv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIV.—The Story of Hermotimus, and
the Sleeplessness of the Emperor Nero. No Separation of the Soul from
the Body Until Death.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xliv-p2"></span>With regard to the case of Hermotimus,
they say that he used to be deprived of his soul in his sleep, as if it
wandered away from his body like a person on a holiday trip. His wife
betrayed the strange peculiarity. His enemies, finding him asleep, burnt
his body, as if it were a corpse: when his soul returned too late, it
appropriated (I suppose) to itself the guilt of the murder. However the
good citizens of Clazomenæ consoled poor Hermotimus with a temple, into
which no woman ever enters, because of the infamy of this wife.  Now why
this story? In order that, since the vulgar belief so readily holds
sleep to be the separation of the soul from the body, credulity should
not be encouraged by this case of Hermotimus. It must certainly have
been a much heavier sort of slumber: one would presume it was the
nightmare, or perhaps that diseased languor which Soranus suggests in
opposition to the nightmare, or else some such malady as that which the
fable has fastened upon Epimenides, who slept on some fifty years or so.
Suetonius, however, informs us that Nero never dreamt, and Theopompus
says the same thing about Thrasymedes; but Nero at the close of his life
did with some difficulty dream after some excessive alarm. What indeed
would be said, if the case of Hermotimus were believed to be such that
the repose of his soul was a state of actual idleness during sleep, and
a positive separation from his body? You may conjecture it to be
anything but such a licence of the soul as admits of flights away from
the body without death, and that by continual recurrence, as if habitual
to its state and constitution.  If indeed such a thing were told me to
have happened at any time to the soul—resembling a total eclipse of the
sun or the moon—I should verily suppose that the occurrence had been
caused by God’s own interposition, for it would not be unreasonable for
a man to receive admonition from the Divine Being either in the way of
warning or of alarm, as by a flash of lightning, or by a sudden stroke
of death; only it would be much the more natural conclusion to believe
that this process should be by a dream, because if it must be supposed
to be, (as the hypothesis we are resisting assumes it to be,) not a
dream, the occurrence ought rather to happen to a man whilst he is wide
awake.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dreams, an Incidental Effect of the Soul's Activity.
Ecstasy.](0030249)
