[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030225)  [Next](0030227.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII.—Recapitulation. Definition of
the Soul.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxii-p2"></span>Hermogenes has already heard from us
what are the other natural faculties of the soul, as well as their
vindication and proof; whence it may be seen that the soul is rather the
offspring of God than of matter. The names of these faculties shall here
be simply repeated, that they may not seem to be forgotten and passed
out of sight.  We have assigned, then, to the soul both that freedom of
the will which we just now mentioned, and its dominion over the works of
nature, and its occasional gift of divination, independently of that
endowment of prophecy which accrues to it expressly from the grace of
God. We shall therefore now quit this subject of the soul’s disposition,
in order to set out fully in order its various qualities. <span
id="fr_1663"></span>[1664](#fn_1663.md) The soul, then, we define to be
sprung from the breath of God, immortal, possessing body, having form,
simple in its substance, intelligent in its own nature, developing its
power in various ways, free in its determinations, subject to be changes
of accident, in its faculties mutable, rational, supreme, endued with an
instinct of presentiment, evolved out of one (archetypal soul). It
remains for us now to consider how it is developed out of this one
original source; in other words, whence, and when, and how it is
produced.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1663"></span>[202:1664](0030226.htm#fr_1663.md) <span
id="iv.xi.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxii-p3"></span> Tertullian had shown that “the soul is
the breath or *afflatus* of God,” in ch. iv. and xi. above. He
demonstrated its “*immortality*” in ch. ii.–iv., vi., ix., xiv.; and he
will repeat his proof hereafter, in ch. xxiv., xxxviii., xlv., li.,
liii., liv. Moreover, he illustrates the soul’s “*corporeity*” in ch.
v.–viii.; its “endowment with *form or figure*,” in ch. ix.; its
“*simplicity* in substance” in ch. x. and xi.; its “inherent
*intelligence*,” in ch. xii.; its varied development, in ch. xiii.–xv.
The soul’s “*rationality*,” “*supremacy*,” and “instinctive
*divination*,” Tertullian treated of in his treatise *De Censu Animæ*
against Hermogenes (as he has said in the text); but he has treated
somewhat of the soul’s “rational nature” in the sixteenth chapter above;
in the fourteenth and fifteenth chapters he referred to the soul’s
“supremacy or *hegemony*;” whilst we have had a hint about its
“*divining* faculty,” even in infants, in ch. xix. The propagation of
souls from the one archetypal soul is the subject of the chapter before
us, as well as of the five succeeding ones (La Cerda).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Opinions of Sundry Heretics Which Originate Ultimately with
Plato.](0030227.md)
