[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030234)  [Next](0030236) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxxi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI.—Further Exposure of
Transmigration, Its Inextricable Embarrassment.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxi-p2"></span>Again, if this recovery of life from the
dead take place at all, individuals must of course resume their own
individuality. Therefore the souls which animated each several body must
needs have returned separately to their several bodies. Now, whenever
two, or three, or five souls are re-enclosed (as they constantly are) in
one womb, it will not amount in such cases to life from the dead,
because there is not the separate restitution which individuals ought to
have; although at this rate, (no doubt,) the law of the primeval
creation is signally kept, <span id="fr_1714"></span>[1715](#fn_1714) by
the production still of several souls out of only one! Then, again, if
souls depart at different ages of human life, how is it that they come
back again at one uniform age? For all men are imbued with an *infant*
soul at their birth. But how happens it that a man who dies in old age
returns to life as an infant? If the soul, whilst disembodied, decreases
thus by retrogression of its age, how much more reasonable would it be,
that it should resume its life with a richer progress in all attainments
of life after the lapse of a thousand years! At all events, it should
return with the age it had attained at its death, that it might resume
the precise life which it had relinquished. But even if, at this rate,
they should reappear the same evermore in their revolving cycles, it
would be proper for them to bring back with them, if not the selfsame
forms of body, at least their original peculiarities of character,
taste, and disposition, because it would be hardly possible <span
id="fr_1715"></span>[1716](#fn_1715) for them to be regarded as the
same, if they were deficient in those characteristics by means of which
their identity should be proved. (You, however, meet me with this
question): How can you possibly know, you ask, whether all is not a
secret process? may not the work of a thousand years take from you the
power of recognition, since they return unknown to you? But I am quite
certain that such is not the case, for you yourself present Pythagoras
to me as (the restored) Euphorbus. Now look at Euphorbus: he was
evidently possessed of a military and warlike soul, as is proved by the
very renown of the sacred shields. As for Pythagoras, however, he was
such a recluse, and so unwarlike, that he shrank from the military
exploits of which Greece was then so full, and preferred to devote
himself, in the quiet retreat of Italy, to the study of geometry, and
astrology, and music—the very opposite to Euphorbus in taste and
disposition.  Then, again, the Pyrrhus (whom he represented) spent his
time in catching fish; but Pythagoras, on the contrary, would never
touch fish, abstaining from even the taste of them as from animal food.
Moreover, Æthalides and Hermotimus had included the bean amongst the
common esculents at meals, while Pythagoras taught his disciples not
even to pass through a plot which was cultivated with beans. I ask,
then, how the same souls are resumed, which can offer no proof of their
identity, either by their disposition, or habits, or living? And now,
after all, (we find that) only four souls are mentioned as recovering
life <span id="fr_1716"></span>[1717](#fn_1716) out of all the
multitudes of Greece. But limiting ourselves merely to Greece, as if no
transmigrations of souls and resumptions of bodies occurred, and *that*
every day, in every nation, and amongst all ages, ranks, and sexes, how
is it that Pythagoras alone experiences these changes into one
personality and another? Why should not I too undergo them? Or if it be
a privilege monopolized by philosophers—and Greek philosophers only, as
if Scythians and Indians had no philosophers—how is it that Epicurus had
no recollection that he had been once another man, nor Chrysippus, nor
Zeno, nor indeed Plato himself, whom we might perhaps have supposed to
have been Nestor, from his honeyed eloquence?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1714"></span>[211:1715](0030235.htm#fr_1714) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxi-p3"></span> Signatur. Rigaltius reads “singulatur,”
after the *Codex Agobard.*, as meaning, “The *single* origin of the
human race is in principle maintained,” etc.

<span id="fn_1715"></span>[211:1716](0030235.htm#fr_1715) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxi-p4"></span> Temere.

<span id="fn_1716"></span>[211:1717](0030235.htm#fr_1716) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxi-p5"></span> Recensentur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Empedocles Increased the Absurdity of Pythagoras by Developing
the Posthumous Change of Men into Various Animals.](0030236)
