[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030412)  [Next](0030414) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—Christ’s Sermon on the Mount.
In Manner and Contents It So Resembles the Creator’s Dispensational
Words and Deeds. It Suggests Therefore the Conclusion that Jesus is the
Creator’s Christ. The Beatitudes.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p2"></span>I now come to those ordinary precepts of
His, by means of which He adapts the peculiarity <span
id="fr_3934"></span>[3935](#fn_3934) of His doctrine to what I may call
His official proclamation as the Christ. <span
id="fr_3935"></span>[3936](#fn_3935) “Blessed are the needy” (for no
less than this is required for interpreting the word in the Greek, <span
id="fr_3936"></span>[3937](#fn_3936) “because theirs is the kingdom of
heaven.” <span id="fr_3937"></span>[3938](#fn_3937) Now this very fact,
that He begins with beatitudes, is characteristic of the Creator, who
used no other voice than that of blessing either in the first fiat or
the final dedication of the universe: for “my heart,” says He, “hath
indited a very good word.” <span id="fr_3938"></span>[3939](#fn_3938)
This will be that “very good word” of blessing which is admitted to be
the initiating principle of the New Testament, after the example of the
Old. What is there, then, to wonder at, if He entered *on His ministry*
with the very attributes <span id="fr_3939"></span>[3940](#fn_3939) of
the Creator, who ever in language of the same sort loved, consoled,
protected, *and* avenged the beggar, and the poor, and the humble, and
the widow, and the orphan? So that you may believe this private bounty
as it were of Christ to be a rivulet streaming from the springs of
salvation. Indeed, I hardly know which way to turn amidst so vast a
wealth of *good* words like these; as if I were in a forest, or a
meadow, or an orchard of apples. I must therefore look out for such
matter as chance may present to me. <span
id="fr_3940"></span>[3941](#fn_3940)

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p10"></span>In the psalm he exclaims: “Defend the
fatherless and the needy; do justice to the humble and the poor; deliver
the poor, and rid the needy out of the hand of the wicked.” <span
id="fr_3941"></span>[3942](#fn_3941) <span id="page_366">p. 366</span>
<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-Page_366"></span>Similarly in the seventy-first
Psalm: “In righteousness shall He judge the needy amongst the people,
and shall save the children of the poor.” <span
id="fr_3942"></span>[3943](#fn_3942) And in the following words he says
of Christ: “All nations shall serve Him.” <span
id="fr_3943"></span>[3944](#fn_3943) Now David only reigned over the
Jewish nation, so that nobody can suppose that this was spoken of David;
whereas *He* had taken upon Himself the condition of the poor, and such
as were oppressed with want, “Because He should deliver the needy out of
the hand of the mighty man; He shall spare the needy and the poor, and
shall deliver the souls of the poor.  From usury and injustice shall He
redeem their souls, and in His sight shall their name be
honoured.” <span id="fr_3944"></span>[3945](#fn_3944) Again:  “The
wicked shall be turned into hell, even all the nations that forget God;
because the needy shall not alway be forgotten; the endurance of the
poor shall not perish for ever.” <span
id="fr_3945"></span>[3946](#fn_3945) Again:  “Who is like unto the Lord
our God, who dwelleth on high, and yet looketh on the humble things that
are in heaven and on earth!—who raiseth up the needy from off the
ground, and out of the dunghill exalteth the poor; that He may set him
with the princes of His people,” <span
id="fr_3946"></span>[3947](#fn_3946) that is, in His own kingdom. And
likewise earlier, in the book of Kings, <span
id="fr_3947"></span>[3948](#fn_3947) Hannah the mother of Samuel gives
glory to God in these words: “He raiseth the poor man from the ground,
and the beggar, that He may set him amongst the princes of His people
(that is, in His own kingdom), and on thrones of glory” (even royal
ones). <span id="fr_3948"></span>[3949](#fn_3948) And by Isaiah how He
inveighs against the oppressors of the needy! “What mean ye that ye set
fire to my vineyard, and that the spoil of the poor is in your houses?
Wherefore do ye beat my people to pieces, and grind the face of the
needy?” <span id="fr_3949"></span>[3950](#fn_3949) And again:  “Woe unto
them that decree unrighteous decrees; for in their decrees they decree
wickedness, turning aside the needy from judgment, and taking away their
rights from the poor of my people.” <span
id="fr_3950"></span>[3951](#fn_3950) These righteous judgments He
requires for the fatherless also, and the widows, as well as for
consolation <span id="fr_3951"></span>[3952](#fn_3951) to the very needy
themselves. “Do justice to the fatherless, and deal justly with the
widow; and come, let us be reconciled, <span
id="fr_3952"></span>[3953](#fn_3952) saith the Lord.” <span
id="fr_3953"></span>[3954](#fn_3953) To him, for whom in every stage of
lowliness there is provided so much of the Creator’s compassionate
regard, shall be given that kingdom also which is promised by Christ, to
whose merciful compassion belong, and for a great while have
belonged, <span id="fr_3954"></span>[3955](#fn_3954) those to whom the
promise is made. For even if you suppose that the promises of the
Creator were earthly, but that Christ’s are heavenly, it is quite clear
that heaven has been as yet the property of no other God whatever, than
Him who owns the earth also; quite clear that the Creator has given even
the lesser promises (of earthly blessing), in order that I may more
readily believe Him concerning His greater promises (of heavenly
blessings) also, than (Marcion’s god), who has never given proof of his
liberality by any preceding bestowal of minor blessings. “Blessed are
they that hunger, for they shall be filled.” <span
id="fr_3955"></span>[3956](#fn_3955) I might connect this clause with
the former one, because none but the poor and needy suffer hunger, if
the Creator had not specially designed that the promise of a similar
blessing should serve as a preparation for the gospel, that so men might
know it to be His. <span id="fr_3956"></span>[3957](#fn_3956) For thus
does He say, by Isaiah, concerning those whom He was about to call from
the ends of the earth—that is, the Gentiles: “Behold, they shall come
swiftly with speed:” <span id="fr_3957"></span>[3958](#fn_3957)
*swiftly*, because hastening towards the fulness of the times; *with
speed*, because unclogged by the weights of the ancient law. They shall
neither hunger nor thirst. Therefore *they shall be filled*,—a promise
which is made to none but those who hunger and thirst. And again He
says: “Behold, my servants shall be filled, but ye shall be hungry;
behold, my servants shall drink, but ye shall be thirsty.” <span
id="fr_3958"></span>[3959](#fn_3958) As for these oppositions, we shall
see whether they are not premonitors of Christ. <span
id="fr_3959"></span>[3960](#fn_3959) Meanwhile the promise of fulness to
the hungry is a provision of God the Creator.  “Blessed are they that
weep, for they shall laugh.” <span id="fr_3960"></span>[3961](#fn_3960)
Turn again to the passage of Isaiah: “Behold, my servants shall exult
with joy, but ye shall be ashamed; behold, my servants shall be glad,
but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart.” <span
id="fr_3961"></span>[3962](#fn_3961) And recognise these oppositions
also in the dispensation of Christ. Surely gladness and joyous
exultation is promised to those who are in an opposite condition—to the
sorrowful, and sad, and anxious.  Just as it is said in the 125th
Psalm:  “They who sow in tears shall reap in joy.” <span
id="fr_3962"></span>[3963](#fn_3962) Moreover, laughter is as much an
<span id="page_367">p. 367</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-Page_367"></span>accessory to the exulting and glad, as
weeping is to the sorrowful and grieving. Therefore the Creator, in
foretelling matters for laughter and tears, was the first who said that
those who mourned should laugh. Accordingly, He who began (His course)
with consolation for the poor, and the humble, and the hungry, and the
weeping, was at once eager <span id="fr_3963"></span>[3964](#fn_3963) to
represent Himself as Him whom He had pointed out by the mouth of Isaiah:
“The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because He hath anointed me to
preach good tidings unto the poor.” <span
id="fr_3964"></span>[3965](#fn_3964) “Blessed are the needy, because
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” <span
id="fr_3965"></span>[3966](#fn_3965) “He hath sent me to bind up the
broken-hearted.” <span id="fr_3966"></span>[3967](#fn_3966) “Blessed are
they that hunger, for they shall be filled.” <span
id="fr_3967"></span>[3968](#fn_3967) “To comfort all that mourn.” <span
id="fr_3968"></span>[3969](#fn_3968) “Blessed are they that weep, for
they shall laugh.” <span id="fr_3969"></span>[3970](#fn_3969) “To give
unto them that mourn in Sion, beauty (or glory) for ashes, and the oil
of joy for mourning, and the garment of praise for the spirit of
heaviness.” <span id="fr_3970"></span>[3971](#fn_3970) Now since Christ,
as soon as He entered on His course, <span
id="fr_3971"></span>[3972](#fn_3971) fulfilled such a ministration as
this, He is either, Himself, He who predicted His own coming to do all
this; or else if he is not yet come who predicted this, the charge to
Marcion’s Christ must be a ridiculous one (although I should perhaps add
a necessary <span id="fr_3972"></span>[3973](#fn_3972) one), which bade
him say, “Blessed shall ye be, when men shall hate you, and shall
reproach you, and shall cast out your name as evil, for the Son of man’s
sake.” <span id="fr_3973"></span>[3974](#fn_3973) In this declaration
there is, no doubt, an exhortation to patience. Well, what did the
Creator say otherwise by Isaiah?  “Fear ye not the reproach of men, nor
be diminished by their contempt.” <span
id="fr_3974"></span>[3975](#fn_3974) What reproach? what contempt? That
which was to be incurred for the sake of the Son of man. What Son of
man? He who (is come) according to the Creator’s will. Whence shall we
get our proof? From the very cutting off, which was predicted against
Him; as when He says by Isaiah to the Jews, who were the instigators of
hatred against Him:  “Because of you, my name is blasphemed amongst the
Gentiles;” <span id="fr_3975"></span>[3976](#fn_3975) and in another
passage: “Lay the penalty on <span id="fr_3976"></span>[3977](#fn_3976)
Him who surrenders <span id="fr_3977"></span>[3978](#fn_3977) His own
life, who is held in contempt by the Gentiles, whether servants or
magistrates.” <span id="fr_3978"></span>[3979](#fn_3978) Now, since
hatred was predicted against that Son of man who has His mission from
the Creator, whilst the Gospel testifies that the name of Christians, as
derived from Christ, was to be hated for the Son of man’s sake, because
He is Christ, it determines the point that that was the Son of man in
the matter of hatred who came according to the Creator’s purpose, and
against whom the hatred was predicted. And even if He had not yet come,
the hatred of His name which exists at the present day could not in any
case have possibly preceded Him who was to bear the name. <span
id="fr_3979"></span>[3980](#fn_3979) But He has both suffered the
penalty <span id="fr_3980"></span>[3981](#fn_3980) in our presence, and
surrendered His life, laying it down for our sakes, and is held in
contempt by the Gentiles. And He who was born (into the world) will be
that very Son of man on whose account our name also is rejected.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3934"></span>[365:3935](0030413.htm#fr_3934) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p3"></span> Proprietatem.

<span id="fn_3935"></span>[365:3936](0030413.htm#fr_3935) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p4"></span> The original runs thus: “Venio nunc ad
ordinarias sententias ejus, per quas proprietatem doctrinæ suæ inducit
ad edictum, ut ita dixerim, Christi.” There is here an allusion to the
*edict* of the Roman prætor, that is, his *public announcement*, in
which he states (when entering on his office) the rules by which he will
be guided in the administration of the same (see White and Riddle,
*Latin Dict. s. v.* Edictum).

<span id="fn_3936"></span>[365:3937](0030413.htm#fr_3936) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p5"></span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p5.1"></span>οί πτωχοι</span>, not <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p5.2"></span>πένητες</span>

<span id="fn_3937"></span>[365:3938](0030413.htm#fr_3937) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p6"></span> [Luke vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3938"></span>[365:3939](0030413.htm#fr_3938) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p7"></span> [Ps. xlv.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p7.1"></span>.
\[And see Vol. I. p. 213, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3939"></span>[365:3940](0030413.htm#fr_3939) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p8"></span> Affectibus.

<span id="fn_3940"></span>[365:3941](0030413.htm#fr_3940) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p9"></span> Prout incidit.

<span id="fn_3941"></span>[365:3942](0030413.htm#fr_3941) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p11"></span> [Ps.
82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3942"></span>[366:3943](0030413.htm#fr_3942) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p11.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p12"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3943"></span>[366:3944](0030413.htm#fr_3943) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p13"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3944"></span>[366:3945](0030413.htm#fr_3944) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p14"></span> [Ps.
72:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3945"></span>[366:3946](0030413.htm#fr_3945) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p15"></span> [Ps.
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3946"></span>[366:3947](0030413.htm#fr_3946) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p16"></span> [Ps. cxiii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3947"></span>[366:3948](0030413.htm#fr_3947) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p17"></span> The books of “Samuel” were also called
the books of “Kings.”

<span id="fn_3948"></span>[366:3949](0030413.htm#fr_3948) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p18"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3949"></span>[366:3950](0030413.htm#fr_3949) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p19"></span> [Isa.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#015)<span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3950"></span>[366:3951](0030413.htm#fr_3950) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p20"></span> [Isa.
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3951"></span>[366:3952](0030413.htm#fr_3951) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p21"></span> Solatii.

<span id="fn_3952"></span>[366:3953](0030413.htm#fr_3952) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p22"></span> Tertullian seems to have read <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p22.1"></span>διαλλαχθῶμεν</span>
instead of <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p22.2"></span>διαλεχθῶμεν</span>, *let us reason
together*, in his LXX.

<span id="fn_3953"></span>[366:3954](0030413.htm#fr_3953) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p22.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p23"></span> [Isa.
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3954"></span>[366:3955](0030413.htm#fr_3954) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p24"></span> Jamdudum pertinent.

<span id="fn_3955"></span>[366:3956](0030413.htm#fr_3955) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p25"></span> [Luke vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3956"></span>[366:3957](0030413.htm#fr_3956) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p26"></span> In evangelii scilicet sui
præstructionem.

<span id="fn_3957"></span>[366:3958](0030413.htm#fr_3957) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p27"></span> [Isa. v.
26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3958"></span>[366:3959](0030413.htm#fr_3958) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p28"></span> [Isa. lxv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3959"></span>[366:3960](0030413.htm#fr_3959) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p29"></span> An Christo præministrentur.

<span id="fn_3960"></span>[366:3961](0030413.htm#fr_3960) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p30"></span> [Luke vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3961"></span>[366:3962](0030413.htm#fr_3961) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p31"></span> [Isa.
65:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3962"></span>[366:3963](0030413.htm#fr_3962) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p32"></span> [Ps. cxxvi.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3963"></span>[367:3964](0030413.htm#fr_3963) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p32.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p33"></span> Gestivit.

<span id="fn_3964"></span>[367:3965](0030413.htm#fr_3964) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p34"></span> [Isa. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3965"></span>[367:3966](0030413.htm#fr_3965) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p35"></span> [Luke vi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3966"></span>[367:3967](0030413.htm#fr_3966) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p36"></span> [Isa. lxi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3967"></span>[367:3968](0030413.htm#fr_3967) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p37"></span> [Luke vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3968"></span>[367:3969](0030413.htm#fr_3968) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p38"></span> [Isa. lxi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3969"></span>[367:3970](0030413.htm#fr_3969) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p39"></span> [Luke vi.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3970"></span>[367:3971](0030413.htm#fr_3970) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p40"></span> [Isa. lxi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3971"></span>[367:3972](0030413.htm#fr_3971) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p41"></span> Statim admissus.

<span id="fn_3972"></span>[367:3973](0030413.htm#fr_3972) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p42"></span> Said in irony, as if Marcion’s Christ
deserved the rejection.

<span id="fn_3973"></span>[367:3974](0030413.htm#fr_3973) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p43"></span> [Luke vi.
22](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#022)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3974"></span>[367:3975](0030413.htm#fr_3974) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p44"></span> His reading of [Isa. li.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3975"></span>[367:3976](0030413.htm#fr_3975) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p45"></span> [Isa. lii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005)<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3976"></span>[367:3977](0030413.htm#fr_3976) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p46"></span> Sancite.

<span id="fn_3977"></span>[367:3978](0030413.htm#fr_3977) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p47"></span> Circumscribit.

<span id="fn_3978"></span>[367:3979](0030413.htm#fr_3978) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p48"></span> Famulis et magistratibus. It is
uncertain what passage this quotation represents. It sounds like some of
the clauses of [Isa. liii](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3979"></span>[367:3980](0030413.htm#fr_3979) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p49"></span> Personam nominis.

<span id="fn_3980"></span>[367:3981](0030413.htm#fr_3980) <span
id="v.iv.v.xiv-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xiv-p50"></span> Sancitur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sermon on the Mount Continued. Its Woes in Strict Agreement with
the Creator's Disposition. Many Quotations Out of the Old Testament in
Proof of This.](0030414)
