[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030226)  [Next](0030228.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxiii-p1"></span> <span id="page_203">p. 203</span>
<span id="iv.xi.xxiii-Page_203"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII.—The Opinions of Sundry
Heretics Which Originate Ultimately with Plato.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxiii-p2"></span>Some suppose that they came down from
heaven, with as firm a belief as they are apt to entertain, when they
indulge in the prospect of an undoubted return thither. Saturninus, the
disciple of Menander, who belonged to Simon’s sect, introduced this
opinion: he affirmed that man was made by angels. A futile, imperfect
creation at first, weak and unable to stand, he crawled upon the ground
like a worm, because he wanted the strength to maintain an erect
posture; but afterwards having, by the compassion of the Supreme Power
(in whose image, which had not been fully understood, he was clumsily
formed), obtained a slender spark of life, this roused and righted his
imperfect form, and animated it with a higher vitality, and provided for
its return, on its relinquishment of life, to its original principle.
Carpocrates, indeed, claims for himself so extreme an amount of the
supernal qualities, that his disciples set their own souls at once on an
equality with Christ (not to mention the apostles); and sometimes, when
it suits their fancy, even give them the superiority—deeming them,
forsooth, to have partaken of that sublime virtue which looks down upon
the principalities that govern this world. Apelles tells us that our
souls were enticed by earthly baits down from their super-celestial
abodes by a fiery angel, Israel’s God and ours, who then enclosed them
firmly within our sinful flesh. The hive of Valentinus fortifies the
soul with the germ of *Sophia*, or Wisdom; by means of which germ they
recognise, in the images of visible objects, the stories and Milesian
fables of their own Æons. I am sorry from my heart that Plato has been
the caterer to all these heretics. For in the *Phædo* he imagines that
souls wander from this world to that, and thence back again hither;
whilst in the *Timæus* he supposes that the children of God, to whom had
been assigned the production of mortal creatures, having taken for the
soul the germ of immortality, congealed around it a mortal body,—thereby
indicating that this world is the figure of some other. Now, to procure
belief in all this—that the soul had formerly lived with God in the
heavens above, sharing His *ideas* with Him, and afterwards came down to
live with us on earth, and whilst here recollects the eternal patterns
of things which it had learnt before—he elaborated his new formula,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.xi.xxiii-p2.1"></span>μαθήσεις
ἀναμνήσεις</span>, which means that “learning is reminiscence;” implying
that the souls which come to us from thence forget the things amongst
which they formerly lived, but that they afterwards recall them,
instructed by the objects they see around them. Forasmuch, therefore, as
the doctrines which the heretics borrow from Plato are cunningly
defended by this kind of argument, I shall sufficiently refute the
heretics if I overthrow the argument of Plato.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Plato's Inconsistency.  He Supposes the Soul Self-Existent, Yet
Capable of Forgetting What Passed in a Previous State.](0030228.md)
