[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030244)  [Next](0030246) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xli"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xli-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLI.—Notwithstanding the Depravity of
Man’s Soul by Original Sin, There is Yet Left a Basis Whereon Divine
Grace Can Work for Its Recovery by Spiritual Regeneration.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xli-p2"></span>There is, then, besides the evil which
supervenes on the soul from the intervention of the evil spirit, an
antecedent, and in a certain sense natural, evil which arises from its
corrupt origin. For, as we have said before, the corruption of our
nature is another nature having a god and father of its own, namely the
author of (that) corruption.  Still there is a portion of good in the
soul, of that original, divine, and genuine good, which is its proper
nature.  For that which is derived from God is rather obscured than
extinguished. It can be obscured, indeed, because it is not God;
extinguished, however, it cannot be, because it comes from God. As
therefore light, when intercepted by an opaque body, still remains,
although it is not apparent, by reason of the interposition of so dense
a body; so likewise the good in the soul, being weighed down by the
evil, is, owing to the obscuring character thereof, either not seen at
all, its light being wholly hidden, or else only a stray beam is there
visible where it struggles through by an accidental outlet. Thus some
men are very bad, and some very good; but yet the souls of all form but
one genus: even in the worst there is something good, and in the best
<span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xli-Page_221"></span>there is something bad. For God alone is
without sin; and the only man without sin is Christ, since Christ is
also God. Thus the divinity of the soul bursts forth in prophetic
forecasts in consequence of its primeval good; and being conscious of
its origin, it bears testimony to God (its author) in exclamations such
as: *Good God! God knows!* and *Good-bye!* <span
id="fr_1759"></span>[1760](#fn_1759) Just as no soul is without sin, so
neither is any soul without seeds of good.  Therefore, when the soul
embraces the faith, being renewed in its second birth by water and the
power from above, then the veil of its former corruption being taken
away, it beholds the light in all its brightness. It is also taken up
(in its second birth) by the Holy Spirit, just as in its first birth it
is embraced by the unholy spirit. The flesh follows the soul now wedded
to the Spirit, as a part of the bridal portion—no longer the servant of
the soul, but of the Spirit. O happy marriage, if in it there is
committed no violation of the nuptial vow!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1759"></span>[221:1760](0030245.htm#fr_1759) <span
id="iv.xi.xli-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xli-p3"></span> Deo commendo = *God be wi’ ye.* *De
Test.* c. ii. p. 176, *supra*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sleep, the Mirror of Death, as Introductory to the Consideration
of Death.](0030246)
