[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030012)  [Next](0030014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p2"></span>Monsters of wickedness, we are accused
of observing a holy rite in which we kill a little child and then eat
it; in which, after the feast, we practise incest, the dogs—our pimps,
forsooth, overturning the lights and getting us the shamelessness of
darkness for our impious lusts. This is what is constantly laid to our
charge, and yet you take no pains to elicit the truth of what we have
been so long accused.  Either bring, then, the matter to the light of
day if you believe it, or give it no credit as having never inquired
into it. On the ground of your double dealing, we are entitled to lay it
down to you that there is no reality in the thing which you dare not
expiscate. You impose on the executioner, in the case of Christians, a
duty the very opposite of expiscation: he is not to make them confess
what they do, but to make them deny what they are. We date the origin of
our religion, as we have mentioned before, from the reign of Tiberius.
Truth and the hatred of truth come into our world together. As soon as
truth appears, it is regarded as an enemy. It has as many foes as there
are strangers to it:  the Jews, as was to be looked for, from a spirit
of rivalry; the soldiers, out of a desire to extort money; our very
domestics, by their nature. We are daily beset by foes, we are daily
betrayed; we are oftentimes surprised in our meetings and congregations.
Whoever happened withal upon an infant wailing, according to the common
story? Whoever kept for the judge, just as he had found them, the gory
mouths of Cyclops and Sirens? Whoever found any traces of uncleanness in
their wives? Where is the man who, when he had discovered such
atrocities, concealed them; or, in the act of dragging the culprits
before the judge, was bribed into silence? If we always keep our
secrets, when were our proceedings made known to the world?  Nay, by
whom could they be made known?  Not, surely, by the guilty parties
themselves; even from the very idea of the thing, the fealty of silence
being ever due to mysteries. The Samothracian and Eleusinian make no
disclosures—how much more will silence be kept in regard to such as are
sure, in their unveiling, to call forth punishment from man at once,
while wrath divine is kept in store for the future?  If, then,
Christians are not themselves the publishers of their crime, it follows
of course it must be strangers.  And whence have they their knowledge,
when it is also a universal custom in religious initiations to keep the
profane aloof, and to beware of witnesses, unless it be that those who
are so wicked have less fear than their neighbors? Every one knows what
sort of thing rumour is. It is one of your own sayings, that “among all
evils, none flies so fast as rumour.” Why is rumour such an evil thing?
Is it because it is fleet? Is it because it carries information? Or is
it because it is in the highest degree mendacious?—a thing, not even
when it brings some truth to us, without a taint of falsehood, either
detracting, or adding, or changing from the simple fact? Nay <span
id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span id="iv.iii.vii-Page_24"></span>more, it
is the very law of its being to continue only while it lies, and to live
but so long as there is no proof; for when the proof is given, it ceases
to exist; and, as having done its work of merely spreading a report, it
delivers up a fact, and is henceforth held to be a fact, and called a
fact.  And then no one says, for instance, “They say that it took place
at Rome,” or, “There is a rumour that he has obtained a province,” but,
“He has got a province,” and, “It took place at Rome.”  Rumour, the very
designation of uncertainty, has no place when a thing is certain. Does
any but a fool put his trust in it? For a wise man never believes the
dubious. Everybody knows, however zealously it is spread abroad, on
whatever strength of asseveration it rests, that some time or other from
some one fountain it has its origin. Thence it must creep into
propagating tongues and ears; and a small seminal blemish so darkens all
the rest of the story, that no one can determine whether the lips, from
which it first came forth, planted the seed of falsehood, as often
happens, from a spirit of opposition, or from a suspicious judgment, or
from a confirmed, nay, in the case of some, an inborn, delight in lying.
It is well that time brings all to light, as your proverbs and sayings
testify, by a provision of Nature, which has so appointed things that
nothing long is hidden, even though rumour has not disseminated it.  It
is just then as it should be, that fame for so long a period has been
alone aware of the crimes of Christians.  This is the witness you bring
against us—one that has never been able to prove the accusation it some
time or other sent abroad, and at last by mere continuance made into a
settled opinion in the world; so that I confidently appeal to Nature
herself, ever true, against those who groundlessly hold that such things
are to be credited.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](0030014.md)
