[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030189)  [Next](0030191) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ix.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Of the Prophecies of the Birth and
Achievements of Christ.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p2"></span>Begin we, therefore, to prove that the
<span class="sc"><span id="iv.ix.ix-p2.2"></span>Birth</span> <span
id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span id="iv.ix.ix-Page_161"></span>of
Christ was announced by prophets; as Isaiah (*e.g.*,) foretells, “Hear
ye, house of David; no petty contest have ye with men, since God is
proposing a struggle. Therefore God Himself will give you a sign;
Behold, the virgin <span id="fr_1249"></span>[1250](#fn_1249) shall
conceive, and bear a son, and ye shall call his name Emmanuel” <span
id="fr_1250"></span>[1251](#fn_1250) (which is, interpreted, “God with
us” <span id="fr_1251"></span>[1252](#fn_1251) ): “butter and honey
shall he eat;” <span id="fr_1252"></span>[1253](#fn_1252) : “since, ere
the child learn to call father or mother, he shall receive the power of
Damascus and the spoils of Samaria, in opposition to the king of the
Assyrians.” <span id="fr_1253"></span>[1254](#fn_1253)

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p8"></span>Accordingly the Jews say: Let us challenge
that prediction of Isaiah, and let us institute a comparison whether, in
the case of the Christ who is already come, there be applicable to Him,
firstly, the name which Isaiah foretold, and (secondly) the signs of
it <span id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254) which he announced of Him.

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p10"></span>Well, then, Isaiah foretells that it
behoves Him to be called Emmanuel; and that subsequently He is to take
the power of Damascus and the spoils of Samaria, in opposition to the
king of the Assyrians. “Now,” say they, “that (Christ) of yours, who is
come, neither was called by that name, nor engaged in warfare.” But we,
on the contrary, have thought they ought to be admonished to recall to
mind *the context* of this passage as well. For subjoined is withal the
interpretation of Emmanuel—“God with us” <span
id="fr_1255"></span>[1256](#fn_1255) —in order that you may regard not
the sound only of the name, but the sense too. For the Hebrew sound,
which is Emmanuel, has an interpretation, which is, God with us.
Inquire, then, whether this speech, “God with us” (which is Emmanuel),
be commonly applied to Christ ever since Christ’s light has dawned, and
I think you will not deny it. For they who out of Judaism believe in
Christ, ever since their believing on Him, do, whenever they shall wish
to say <span id="fr_1256"></span>[1257](#fn_1256) Emmanuel, signify that
God is with us:  and thus it is agreed that He who was ever predicted as
Emmanuel is already come, because that which Emmanuel signifies is
come—that is, “God with us.” Equally are they led by the sound of the
name when they so understand “the power of Damascus,” and “the spoils of
Samaria,” and “the kingdom of the Assyrians,” as if they portended
Christ as a warrior; not observing that Scripture premises, “since, ere
the child learn to call father or mother, he shall receive the power of
Damascus and the spoils of Samaria, in opposition to the king of the
Assyrians.” For the first step is to look at the demonstration of His
*age*, to see whether the age there indicated can possibly exhibit the
Christ as already a *man*, not to say a *general*. Forsooth, by His
babyish cry the infant would summon men to arms, and would give the
signal of war not with clarion, but with rattle, and point out the foe,
not from His charger’s back or from a rampart, but from the back or neck
of His suckler and nurse, and thus subdue Damascus and Samaria in place
of the breast. (It is another matter if, among you, infants rush out
into battle,—oiled first, I suppose, to dry in the sun, and then armed
with satchels and rationed on butter,—who are to know how to lance
sooner than how to lacerate the bosom!) <span
id="fr_1257"></span>[1258](#fn_1257) Certainly, if nature nowhere allows
this,—(namely,) to serve as a soldier before developing into manhood, to
take “the power of Damascus” before knowing your father,—it follows that
the pronouncement is visibly figurative.  “But again,” say they, “nature
suffers not a ‘virgin’ to be a parent; and yet the prophet must be
believed.”  And deservedly so; for he bespoke credit for a thing
incredible, by saying that it was to be *a sign*. “Therefore,” he says,
“shall <span class="sc"><span id="iv.ix.ix-p13.1"></span>a sign</span>
be given you. Behold, a virgin shall conceive in womb, and bear a son.”
But a sign from God, unless it had consisted in some portentous novelty,
would not have appeared a sign. In a word, if, when you are anxious to
cast any down from (a belief in) this divine prediction, or to convert
whoever are simple, you have the audacity to lie, as if the Scripture
contained (the announcement), that not “a virgin,” but “a young female,”
was to conceive and bring forth; you are refuted even by this fact, that
a daily occurrence—the pregnancy and parturition of a young female,
namely—cannot possibly seem anything of *a sign*. And the setting before
us, then, of a virgin-mother is deservedly believed to be *a sign*; but
not equally so a warrior-infant.  For there would not in this case again
be involved the question of a *sign*; but, the *sign* of a novel birth
having been awarded, the next step after the *sign* is, that there is
enunciated a different ensuing ordering <span
id="fr_1258"></span>[1259](#fn_1258) of the infant, who is to eat “honey
and butter.” Nor is this, of course, for a *sign*.  It is natural to
infancy. But that he <span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="iv.ix.ix-Page_162"></span>is to receive <span
id="fr_1259"></span>[1260](#fn_1259) “the power of Damascus and the
spoils of Samaria in opposition to the king of the Assyrians,” this is a
wondrous *sign*. Keep to the limit of (the infant’s) *age*, and inquire
into the sense of the prediction; nay, rather, repay to truth what you
are unwilling to credit her with, and the prophecy becomes intelligible
by the relation of its fulfilment. Let those Eastern magi be believed,
dowering with gold and incense the infancy of Christ as a king; <span
id="fr_1260"></span>[1261](#fn_1260) and the infant has received “the
power of Damascus” without battle and arms. For, besides the fact that
it is known to all that the “power”—for that is the “strength”—of the
East is wont to abound in gold and odours, certain it is that the divine
Scriptures regard “gold” as constituting the “power” also of all other
nations; as it says <span id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) through
Zechariah: “And Judah keepeth guard at Jerusalem, and shall amass all
the vigour of the surrounding peoples, gold and silver.” <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) For of this gift of “gold” David
likewise says, “And to Him shall be given of the gold of Arabia;” <span
id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) and again, “The kings of the Arabs
and Saba shall bring Him gifts.” <span
id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) For the East, on the one hand,
generally held the magi (to be) kings; and Damascus, on the other hand,
used formerly to be reckoned to Arabia before it was transferred into
Syrophœnicia on the division of the Syrias: the “power” whereof Christ
then “received” in receiving its ensigns,—gold, to wit, and odours. “The
spoils,” moreover, “of Samaria” (He received in receiving) the magi
themselves, who, on recognising Him, and honouring Him with gifts, and
adoring Him on bended knee as Lord and King, on the evidence of the
guiding and indicating star, became “the spoils of Samaria,” that is, of
idolatry—by believing, namely, on Christ.  For (Scripture) denoted
idolatry by the name of “Samaria,” Samaria being ignominious on the
score of idolatry; for she had at that time revolted from God under King
Jeroboam. For this, again, is no novelty to the Divine Scriptures,
figuratively to use a transference of *name* grounded on parallelism of
*crimes*. For it <span id="fr_1265"></span>[1266](#fn_1265) calls your
rulers “rulers of Sodom,” and your people the “people of
Gomorrha,” <span id="fr_1266"></span>[1267](#fn_1266) when those cities
had already long been extinct. <span
id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267) And elsewhere it says, through a
prophet, to the people of Israel, “Thy father (was) an Amorite, and thy
mother an Hittite;” <span id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268) of whose
race they were not begotten, but (were called their sons) by reason of
their consimilarity in impiety, whom of old (God) had called *His own
sons* through Isaiah the prophet: “I have generated and exalted
sons.” <span id="fr_1269"></span>[1270](#fn_1269) So, too, Egypt is
sometimes understood to mean the whole world <span
id="fr_1270"></span>[1271](#fn_1270) in that prophet, on the count of
superstition and malediction. <span id="fr_1271"></span>[1272](#fn_1271)
So, again, Babylon, in our own John, is a figure of the city Rome, as
being equally great and proud of her sway, and triumphant over the
saints. <span id="fr_1272"></span>[1273](#fn_1272) On this wise,
accordingly, (Scripture) <span id="fr_1273"></span>[1274](#fn_1273)
entitled the magi also with the appellation of “Samaritans,”—“despoiled”
(of that) which they had had in common with the Samaritans, as we have
said—idolatry in opposition to the Lord.  (It <span
id="fr_1274"></span>[1275](#fn_1274) adds), “in opposition,” moreover,
“to the king of the Assyrians,”—in opposition to the devil, who to this
hour thinks himself to be reigning, if he detrudes the saints from the
religion of God.

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p31"></span>Moreover, this our interpretation will be
supported while (we find that) elsewhere as well the Scriptures
designate Christ a warrior, as we gather from the names of certain
weapons, and words of that kind. But by a comparison of the remaining
senses the Jews shall be convicted.  “Gird thee,” says David, “the sword
upon the thigh.” <span id="fr_1275"></span>[1276](#fn_1275) But what do
you read above concerning the Christ? “Blooming in beauty above the sons
of men; grace is outpoured in thy lips.” <span
id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) But very absurd it is if he was
complimenting on the bloom of his beauty and the grace of his lips, one
whom he was girding for war with a sword; of whom he proceeds
subjunctively to say, “Outstretch and prosper, advance and reign!” And
he has added, “because of thy lenity and justice.” <span
id="fr_1277"></span>[1278](#fn_1277) Who will ply the sword without
practising the contraries to lenity and justice; that is, guile, and
asperity, and injustice, proper (of course) to the business of battles? 
See we, then, whether that which has another action be not another
sword,—that is, the Divine word of God, doubly sharpened <span
id="fr_1278"></span>[1279](#fn_1278) with the two Testaments of the
ancient law and the new law; sharpened by the equity of its own wisdom;
rendering to each one according to his own action. <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[1280](#fn_1279) Law<span id="page_163">p.
163</span> <span id="iv.ix.ix-Page_163"></span>ful , then, it was for
the Christ of God to be precinct, in the Psalms, without warlike
achievements, with the figurative sword of the word of God; to which
sword is congruous the predicated “bloom,” together with the “grace of
the lips;” with which sword He was then “girt upon the thigh,” in the
eye of David, when He was announced as about to come to earth in
obedience to God the Father’s decree. “The greatness of thy right hand,”
he says, “shall conduct thee” <span id="fr_1280"></span>[1281](#fn_1280)
—the virtue to wit, of the spiritual grace from which the recognition of
Christ is deduced. “Thine arrows,” he says, “are sharp,” <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[1282](#fn_1281) —God’s everywhere-flying precepts
(arrows) threatening the exposure <span
id="fr_1282"></span>[1283](#fn_1282) of every heart, and carrying
compunction and transfixion to each conscience: “peoples shall fall
beneath thee,” <span id="fr_1283"></span>[1284](#fn_1283) —of course, in
adoration. Thus mighty in war and weapon-bearing is Christ; thus will He
“receive the spoils,” not of “Samaria” alone, but of all nations as
well.  Acknowledge that His “spoils” are figurative whose weapons you
have learnt to be allegorical. And thus, so far, the Christ who is come
was not a warrior, because He was not predicted as such by Isaiah.

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p41"></span>“But if the Christ,” say they, “who is
believed to be coming is not called Jesus, why is he who is come called
Jesus Christ?” Well, each name will meet in the Christ of God, in whom
is found likewise the appellation <span
id="fr_1284"></span>[1285](#fn_1284) Jesus. Learn the habitual character
of your error. In the course of the appointing of a successor to Moses,
Oshea <span id="fr_1285"></span>[1286](#fn_1285) the son of Nun <span
id="fr_1286"></span>[1287](#fn_1286) is certainly transferred from his
pristine name, and begins to be called Jesus. <span
id="fr_1287"></span>[1288](#fn_1287) Certainly, you say. This we first
assert to have been a figure of the future. For, because Jesus Christ
was to introduce the second people (which is composed of us nations,
lingering deserted in the world <span
id="fr_1288"></span>[1289](#fn_1288) aforetime) into the land of
promise, “flowing with milk and honey” <span
id="fr_1289"></span>[1290](#fn_1289) (that is, into the possession of
eternal life, than which nought is sweeter); and this had to come about,
not through Moses (that is, not through the Law’s discipline), but
through Joshua (that is, through the new law’s grace), after our
circumcision with “a knife of rock” <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290) (that is, with Christ’s precepts,
for Christ is in many ways and figures predicted as a rock <span
id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291) ); therefore the man who was being
prepared to act as images of this sacrament was inaugurated under the
figure of the Lord’s name, even so as to be named Jesus. <span
id="fr_1292"></span>[1293](#fn_1292) For He who ever spake to Moses was
the Son of God Himself; who, too, was always *seen*. <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[1294](#fn_1293) For God the Father none ever saw,
and lived. <span id="fr_1294"></span>[1295](#fn_1294) And accordingly it
is agreed that the Son of God Himself spake to Moses, and said to the
people, “Behold, I send mine angel before thy”—that is, the
people’s—“face, to guard thee on the march, and to introduce thee into
the land which I have prepared thee: attend to him, and be not
disobedient to him; for he hath not escaped <span
id="fr_1295"></span>[1296](#fn_1295) thy notice, since my name is upon
him.” <span id="fr_1296"></span>[1297](#fn_1296) For Joshua was to
introduce the people into the land of promise, not Moses. Now He called
him an “angel,” on account of the magnitude of the mighty deeds which he
was to achieve (which mighty deeds Joshua the son of Nun did, and you
yourselves read), and on account of his office of prophet announcing (to
wit) the divine will; just as withal the Spirit, speaking in the person
of the Father, calls the forerunner of Christ, John, a future “angel,”
through the prophet: “Behold, I send mine angel before Thy”—that is,
Christ’s—“face, who shall prepare Thy way before Thee.” <span
id="fr_1297"></span>[1298](#fn_1297) Nor is it a novel practice to the
Holy Spirit to call those “angels” whom God has appointed as ministers
of His power. For the same John is called not merely an “angel” of
Christ, but withal a “lamp” shining before Christ: for David predicts,
“I have prepared the lamp for my Christ;” <span
id="fr_1298"></span>[1299](#fn_1298) and him Christ Himself, coming “to
fulfil the prophets,” <span id="fr_1299"></span>[1300](#fn_1299) called
so to the Jews. “He was,” He says, “the burning and shining lamp;” <span
id="fr_1300"></span>[1301](#fn_1300) as being he who not merely
“prepared His ways in the desert,” <span
id="fr_1301"></span>[1302](#fn_1301) but withal, by pointing out “the
Lamb of God,” <span id="fr_1302"></span>[1303](#fn_1302) illumined the
minds of men by his heralding, so that they understood Him <span
id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span id="iv.ix.ix-Page_164"></span>to be
that Lamb whom Moses was wont to announce as destined to suffer.  Thus,
too, (was the son of Nun called) <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ix.ix-p60.3"></span>Joshua</span>, on account of the future
mystery <span id="fr_1303"></span>[1304](#fn_1303) of his name: for that
name (He who spake with Moses) confirmed as His own which Himself had
conferred on him, because He had bidden him thenceforth be called, not
“angel” nor “Oshea,” but “Joshua.” Thus, therefore, each name is
appropriate to the Christ of God—that He should be called Jesus as well
(as Christ).

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p62"></span>And that the virgin of whom it behoved
Christ to be born (as we have above mentioned) must derive her lineage
of the seed of David, the prophet in subsequent passages evidently
asserts. “And there shall be born,” he says, “a rod from the root of
Jesse”—which rod is Mary—“and a flower shall ascend from his root: and
there shall rest upon him the Spirit of God, the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of discernment and piety, the spirit of
counsel and truth; the spirit of God’s fear shall fill Him.” <span
id="fr_1304"></span>[1305](#fn_1304) For to none of men was the
universal aggregation of spiritual credentials appropriate, except to
Christ; paralleled as He is to a “flower” by reason of glory, by reason
of grace; but accounted “of the root of Jesse,” whence His origin is to
be deduced,—to wit, through Mary. <span
id="fr_1305"></span>[1306](#fn_1305) For He was from the native soil of
Bethlehem, and from the house of David; as, among the Romans, Mary is
described in the census, of whom is born Christ. <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1307](#fn_1306)

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p66"></span>I demand, again—granting that He who was
ever predicted by prophets as destined to come out of Jesse’s race, was
withal to exhibit all humility, patience, and tranquillity—whether He be
come? Equally so (in this case as in the former), the man who is shown
to bear that character will be the very Christ who is come. For of Him
the prophet says, “A man set in a plague, and knowing how to bear
infirmity;” who “was led as a sheep for a victim; and, as a lamb before
him who sheareth him, opened not His mouth.” <span
id="fr_1307"></span>[1308](#fn_1307) If He “neither did contend nor
shout, nor was His voice heard abroad,” who “crushed not the bruised
reed”—Israel’s faith, who “quenched not the burning flax” <span
id="fr_1308"></span>[1309](#fn_1308) —that is, the momentary glow of the
Gentiles—but made it shine more by the rising of His own light,—He can
be none other than He who was predicted. The action, therefore, of the
Christ who is come must be examined by being placed side by side with
the rule of the Scriptures. For, if I mistake not, we find Him
distinguished by a twofold operation,—that of *preaching* and that of
*power*. Now, let each count be disposed of summarily. Accordingly, let
us work out the order we have set down, teaching that Christ was
announced as a *preacher*; as, through Isaiah: “Cry out,” he says, “in
vigour, and spare not; lift up, as with a trumpet, thy voice, and
announce to my commonalty their crimes, and to the house of Jacob their
sins.  Me from day to day they seek, and to learn my ways they covet, as
a people which hath done righteousness, and hath not forsaken the
judgment of God,” and so forth: <span
id="fr_1309"></span>[1310](#fn_1309) that, moreover, He was to do acts
of *power* from the Father: “Behold, our God will deal retributive
judgment; Himself will come and save us:  then shall the infirm be
healed, and the eyes of the blind shall see, and the ears of the deaf
shall hear, and the mutes’ tongues shall be loosed, and the lame shall
leap as an hart,” <span id="fr_1310"></span>[1311](#fn_1310) and so on;
which works not even you deny that Christ did, inasmuch as you were wont
to say that, “on account of the works ye stoned Him not, but because He
did them on the Sabbaths.” <span id="fr_1311"></span>[1312](#fn_1311)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1249"></span>[161:1250](0030190.htm#fr_1249) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p3"></span> “*A* virgin,” Eng. ver.; <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ix-p3.1"></span>ἡ παρθένος</span>, LXX.;
“*the* virgin,” Lowth.

<span id="fn_1250"></span>[161:1251](0030190.htm#fr_1250) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p4"></span> See [Isa.
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1251"></span>[161:1252](0030190.htm#fr_1251) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p5"></span> See [Matt. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1252"></span>[161:1253](0030190.htm#fr_1252) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p6"></span> See [Isa vii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1253"></span>[161:1254](0030190.htm#fr_1253) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p7"></span> See [Isa. viii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p7.1"></span>.
(All these passages should be read in the LXX.)

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[161:1255](0030190.htm#fr_1254) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p9"></span> i.e., of the predicted name. \[Here
compare *Against Marcion*, Book III. (vol. vii. Edin. series) Cap. xii.
p. 142. See my note (1) on Chapter First; and also Kaye, p. xix.\]

<span id="fn_1255"></span>[161:1256](0030190.htm#fr_1255) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p11"></span> In [Isa.
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p11.1"></span>,
compared with vii. 14 in the Eng. ver. and the LXX., and also Lowth,
introductory remarks on ch. viii.

<span id="fn_1256"></span>[161:1257](0030190.htm#fr_1256) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p12"></span> Or, “to call him.”

<span id="fn_1257"></span>[161:1258](0030190.htm#fr_1257) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p13"></span> See *adv. Marc*. l. iii. c. xiii.,
which, with the preceding chapter, should be compared throughout with
the chapter before us.

<span id="fn_1258"></span>[161:1259](0030190.htm#fr_1258) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p14"></span> Comp. [Judg. xiii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p14.1"></span>;
Eng. ver. “How shall we *order* the child?”

<span id="fn_1259"></span>[162:1260](0030190.htm#fr_1259) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p14.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p15"></span> Or, “accept.”

<span id="fn_1260"></span>[162:1261](0030190.htm#fr_1260) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p16"></span> See [Matt. ii.
1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[162:1262](0030190.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p17"></span> Of course he ought to have said, “*they
say*.”

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[162:1263](0030190.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p18"></span> [Zech. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#014)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p18.1"></span>,
omitting the last clause.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[162:1264](0030190.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p19"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#015)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p19.1"></span>
(lxxi. 15 in LXX.): “Sheba” in Eng. ver.; “Arabia” in the “Great Bible”
of 1539; and so the LXX.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[162:1265](0030190.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p20"></span> [Ps. lxxii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p20.1"></span>,
in LXX, and “Great Bible;” “Sheba and Seba,” Eng. ver.

<span id="fn_1265"></span>[162:1266](0030190.htm#fr_1265) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p21"></span> Strictly, Tertullian ought to have said
“they call,” having above said “Divine scriptures;” as above on the
preceding page.

<span id="fn_1266"></span>[162:1267](0030190.htm#fr_1266) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p22"></span> [Isa. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[162:1268](0030190.htm#fr_1267) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p23"></span> See [Gen. xix.
23-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.ix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[162:1269](0030190.htm#fr_1268) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p24"></span> [Ezek.
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#003),
[45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1269"></span>[162:1270](0030190.htm#fr_1269) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p25"></span> [Isa. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p25.1"></span>, as
before.

<span id="fn_1270"></span>[162:1271](0030190.htm#fr_1270) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p26"></span> Orbis.

<span id="fn_1271"></span>[162:1272](0030190.htm#fr_1271) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p27"></span> Oehler refers to [Isa. xix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p27.1"></span>.
See, too, [Isa. 30:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#000), [Isa.
31:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#000)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p27.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1272"></span>[162:1273](0030190.htm#fr_1272) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p28"></span> See [Rev.
xvii](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#000)<span
id="iv.ix.ix-p28.1"></span>., etc.

<span id="fn_1273"></span>[162:1274](0030190.htm#fr_1273) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p29"></span> Or we may supply here \[“Isaiah”\].

<span id="fn_1274"></span>[162:1275](0030190.htm#fr_1274) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p30"></span> Or, “he.”

<span id="fn_1275"></span>[162:1276](0030190.htm#fr_1275) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p32"></span> [Ps. xlv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p32.1"></span>,
clause 1 (in LXX. [Ps. xliv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004)<span
id="iv.ix.ix-p32.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[162:1277](0030190.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p32.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p33"></span> See [Ps. xlv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p33.1"></span>
(xliv. 3 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1277"></span>[162:1278](0030190.htm#fr_1277) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p34"></span> [Ps. xlv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p34.1"></span>
(xliv. 5 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[162:1279](0030190.htm#fr_1278) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p35"></span> Comp. [Heb.
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012), [Rev.
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016), [Rev.
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012), [Rev.
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p35.1"></span>;
also [Eph. vi. 17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span
id="iv.ix.ix-p35.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[162:1280](0030190.htm#fr_1279) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p35.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p36"></span> Comp. [Ps. lxii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p36.1"></span>
(lxi. 13 in LXX.); [Rom. ii. 6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006)<span
id="iv.ix.ix-p36.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[163:1281](0030190.htm#fr_1280) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p36.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p37"></span> See [Ps. xlv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p37.1"></span>
(xliv. in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[163:1282](0030190.htm#fr_1281) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p38"></span> [Ps. xlv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p38.1"></span>
(xliv. 6 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[163:1283](0030190.htm#fr_1282) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p39"></span> Traductionem (comp. [Heb. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p39.1"></span>).

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[163:1284](0030190.htm#fr_1283) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p40"></span> [Ps. xlv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1284"></span>[163:1285](0030190.htm#fr_1284) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p42"></span> I can find no authority for “appellatus”
as a substantive, but such forms are familiar with Tertullian. Or
perhaps we may render: “in that He is found to have been likewise called
Jesus.”

<span id="fn_1285"></span>[163:1286](0030190.htm#fr_1285) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p43"></span> Auses; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ix-p43.1"></span>Αὐσή</span> in LXX.

<span id="fn_1286"></span>[163:1287](0030190.htm#fr_1286) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p44"></span> Nave; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.ix-p44.1"></span>Ναυή</span> in LXX.

<span id="fn_1287"></span>[163:1288](0030190.htm#fr_1287) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p45"></span> Jehoshua, Joshua, Jeshua, Jesus, are all
forms of the same name.  But the change from Oshea or Hoshea to Jehoshua
appears to have been made when he was sent to spy the land.  See [Num.
xiii. 16](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.ix-p45.1"></span> (17 in LXX., who call it a *sur*naming).

<span id="fn_1288"></span>[163:1289](0030190.htm#fr_1288) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p45.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p46"></span> If Oehler’s “in sæculo desertæ” is to be
retained, this appears to be the construction. But this passage, like
others above noted, is but a reproduction of parts of the third book in
answer to Marcion; and there the reading is “in sæculi desertis”="in the
desert places of the world,” or “of heathendom.”

<span id="fn_1289"></span>[163:1290](0030190.htm#fr_1289) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p47"></span> See [Ex. iii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p47.1"></span>,
and the references there.

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[163:1291](0030190.htm#fr_1290) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p48"></span> See [Josh. v.
2-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p48.1"></span>,
especially in LXX. Comp. the margin in the Eng. ver. in ver. 2, “flint
knives,” and Wordsworth *in loc*., who refers to [Ex. iv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p48.2"></span>,
for which see ch. iii. above.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[163:1292](0030190.htm#fr_1291) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p48.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p49"></span> See especially [1 Cor. x.
4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[163:1293](0030190.htm#fr_1292) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p50"></span> Or, “Joshua.”

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[163:1294](0030190.htm#fr_1293) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p51"></span> Comp. [Num. xii.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#005)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1294"></span>[163:1295](0030190.htm#fr_1294) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p52"></span> Comp. [Exod.
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020), [John
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018), [John
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#009), [Col.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015), [Heb.
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1295"></span>[163:1296](0030190.htm#fr_1295) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p53"></span> Oehler and others read “cela*vit*”; but
the correction of Fr. Junius and Rig., “cela*bit*,” is certainly more
agreeable to the LXX. and the Eng. ver.

<span id="fn_1296"></span>[163:1297](0030190.htm#fr_1296) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p53.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p54"></span> [Exod.
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#021)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1297"></span>[163:1298](0030190.htm#fr_1297) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p54.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p55"></span> [Mal. iii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p55.1"></span>:
comp. [Matt. 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010), [Mark
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002), [Luke
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#027)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p55.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1298"></span>[163:1299](0030190.htm#fr_1298) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p55.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p56"></span> See [Ps. cxxxii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p56.1"></span>
(cxxi. 17 in LXX.).

<span id="fn_1299"></span>[163:1300](0030190.htm#fr_1299) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p57"></span> [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p57.1"></span>,
briefly; a very favourite reference with Tertullian.

<span id="fn_1300"></span>[163:1301](0030190.htm#fr_1300) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p58"></span> [John v.
35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p58.1"></span>,
<span class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.ix-p58.2"></span>ὁ λύχνος ὁ
καιόμενος καὶ φαίνων</span>.

<span id="fn_1301"></span>[163:1302](0030190.htm#fr_1301) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p58.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p59"></span> Comp. reference 8, p. 232; and [Isa.
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003), [John
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1302"></span>[163:1303](0030190.htm#fr_1302) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p60"></span> See [John
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1303"></span>[164:1304](0030190.htm#fr_1303) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p60.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p61"></span> Sacramentum.

<span id="fn_1304"></span>[164:1305](0030190.htm#fr_1304) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p63"></span> See [Isa.
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p63.1"></span>,
especially in LXX.

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[164:1306](0030190.htm#fr_1305) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p64"></span> See [Luke i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#027)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[164:1307](0030190.htm#fr_1306) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p65"></span> See [Luke ii.
1-7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1307"></span>[164:1308](0030190.htm#fr_1307) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p67"></span> See [Isa.
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p67.1"></span>,
in LXX.; and comp. [Ps. xxxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p67.2"></span>
(xxxvii. 18 in LXX.) in the “Great Bible” of 1539.

<span id="fn_1308"></span>[164:1309](0030190.htm#fr_1308) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p67.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p68"></span> See [Isa.
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p68.1"></span>,
and [Matt. 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#020)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p68.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_1309"></span>[164:1310](0030190.htm#fr_1309) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p68.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p69"></span> See [Isa.
58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p69.1"></span>,
especially in LXX.

<span id="fn_1310"></span>[164:1311](0030190.htm#fr_1310) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p69.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p70"></span> See [Isa.
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006)<span id="iv.ix.ix-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1311"></span>[164:1312](0030190.htm#fr_1311) <span
id="iv.ix.ix-p70.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.ix-p71"></span> See [John
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#018), [John
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#031)<span
id="iv.ix.ix-p71.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Passion of Christ, and Its Old Testament
Predictions and Adumbrations.](0030191)
