[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030217)  [Next](0030219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV.—The Soul Variously Divided by
the Philosophers; This Division is Not a Material Dissection.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xiv-p2"></span>Being thus single, simple, and entire in
itself, it is as incapable of being composed and put together from
external constituents, as it is of being divided in and of itself,
inasmuch as it is indissoluble. For if it had been possible to construct
it and to destroy it, it would no longer be immortal. Since, however, it
is not mortal, it is also incapable of dissolution and division. Now, to
be divided means to be dissolved, and to be dissolved means to die. Yet
(philosophers) have divided the soul into parts: Plato, for instance,
into two; Zeno into three; Panætius, into five or six; Soranus, into
seven; Chrysippus, into as many as eight; and Apollophanes, into as many
as nine; whilst certain of the Stoics have found as many as twelve parts
in the soul. Posidonius makes even two more than these: he starts with
two leading faculties of the soul,—the *directing* faculty, which they
designate <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi.xiv-p2.1"></span>ἡγεμονικόν</span>; and the *rational*
faculty, which they call <span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.xi.xiv-p2.2"></span>λογικόν</span>,—and ultimately subdivided
these into seventeen <span id="fr_1580"></span>[1581](#fn_1580) parts.
Thus variously is the soul dissected by the different schools. Such
divisions, however, ought not to be regarded so much as parts of the
soul, as powers, or faculties, or operations thereof, even as Aristotle
himself has regarded some of them as being. For they are not portions or
organic parts of the soul’s substance, but functions of the soul—such as
those of motion, of action, of thought, and whatsoever others they
divide in this manner; such, likewise, as the five senses themselves, so
well known to all—seeing, hearing, tasting, touching, smelling. Now,
although they have allotted to the whole of these respectively certain
parts of the body as their special domiciles, it does not from that
circumstance follow that a like distribution will be suitable to the
sections of the soul; for even the body itself would not admit of such a
partition as they would have the soul undergo. But of the whole number
of the limbs one body is made up, so that the arrangement is rather a
concretion than a division. Look at that very wonderful piece of organic
mechanism by Archimedes,—I mean his hydraulic organ, with its many
limbs, parts, bands, passages for the notes, outlets for their sounds,
combinations for their harmony, and the array of its pipes; but yet the
whole of these details constitute only one instrument. In like manner
the wind, which breathes throughout this organ at the impulse of the
hydraulic engine, is not divided into separate portions from the fact of
its dispersion through the instrument to make it play: it is whole and
entire in its substance, although divided in its operation. This example
is not remote from (the illustration) of Strato, and Ænesidemus, and
Heraclitus: for these philosophers maintain the unity of the soul, as
diffused over the entire body, and yet in every part the same. <span
id="fr_1581"></span>[1582](#fn_1581) Precisely like the wind blown in
the pipes throughout the organ, the soul displays its energies in
various ways by means of the senses, being not indeed divided, but
rather distributed in natural order. Now, under what designations these
energies are to be known, and by what divisions of themselves they are
to be classified, and to what special offices and functions in the body
they are to be severally confined, the physicians and the philosophers
must consider and decide: for ourselves, a few remarks only will be
proper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[193:1581](0030218.htm#fr_1580) <span
id="iv.xi.xiv-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xiv-p3"></span> This is Oehler’s text; another reading
has *twelve*, which one would suppose to be the right one.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[193:1582](0030218.htm#fr_1581) <span
id="iv.xi.xiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xiv-p4"></span> Ubique ipsa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Soul's Vitality and Intelligence. Its Character and Seat in
Man.](0030219)
