[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030113)  [Next](0030115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xxx"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xxx-p2"></span>But what a spectacle is that
fast-approaching advent <span id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376.md) of our
Lord, now owned by all, now highly exalted, now a triumphant One! What
that exultation of the angelic hosts! What the glory of the rising
saints! What the kingdom of the just thereafter! What the city New
Jerusalem! <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377.md) Yes, and there are
other sights: that last day of judgment, with its everlasting issues;
that day unlooked for by the nations, the theme of their derision, when
the world hoary with age, and all its many products, shall be consumed
in one great flame! How vast a spectacle then bursts upon the eye! What
there excites my admiration? what my derision?  Which sight gives me
joy? which rouses me to exultation?—as I see so many illustrious
monarchs, whose reception into the heavens was publicly announced,
groaning now in the lowest darkness with great Jove himself, and those,
too, who bore witness of their exultation; governors of provinces, too,
who persecuted the Christian name, in fires more fierce than those with
which in the days of their pride they raged against the followers of
Christ. What world’s wise men besides, the very philosophers, in fact,
who taught their followers that God had no concern in ought that is
sublunary, and were wont to assure them that either they had no souls,
or that they would never return to the bodies which at death they had
left, now covered with shame before the poor deluded ones, as one fire
consumes them! Poets also, trembling not before the judgment-seat of
Rhadamanthus or Minos, but of the unexpected Christ! I shall have a
better opportunity then of hearing the tragedians, louder-voiced in
their own calamity; of viewing the play-actors, much more “dissolute” in
the dissolving flame; of looking upon the charioteer, all glowing in his
chariot of fire; of beholding the wrestlers, not in their gymnasia, but
tossing in the fiery billows; unless even then I shall not care to
attend to such ministers of sin, in my eager wish rather to fix a gaze
insatiable on those whose fury vented itself against the Lord. “This,” I
shall say, “this is that carpenter’s or hireling’s son, that
Sabbath-breaker, that Samaritan and devil-possessed! This is He whom you
purchased from Judas! This is He whom you struck with reed and fist,
whom you contemptuously spat upon, to whom you gave gall and vinegar to
drink! This is He whom His disciples secretly stole away, that it might
be said He had risen again, or the gardener abstracted, that his
lettuces might come to no harm from the crowds of visitants!” What
quæstor or priest in his munificence will bestow on you the favour of
seeing and exulting in such things as these? And yet even now we in a
measure have them by faith in the picturings of imagination. But what
are the things which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and which have
not so much as dimly dawned upon the human heart? Whatever they are,
they are nobler, I believe, than circus, and both theatres, <span
id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378.md) and every race-course.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_376"></span>[91:377](0030114.htm#fr_376.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxx-p3"></span> \[Kaye, p. 20. He doubtless looked for a
speedy appearance of the Lord: and note the apparent expectation of a
New Jerusalem, on earth, before the Consummation and Judgment.\]

<span id="fn_377"></span>[91:378](0030114.htm#fr_377.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxx-p4"></span> \[This *New Jerusalem* gives Bp. Kaye (p.
55) “decisive proof” of Montanism, especially as compared with the Third
Book against Marcion. I cannot see it, here.\]

<span id="fn_378"></span>[91:379](0030114.htm#fr_378.md) <span
id="iv.v.xxx-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxx-p5"></span> Viz., the theatre and amphitheatre.
\[This concluding chapter, which Gibbon delights to censure, because its
fervid rhetoric so fearfully depicts the punishments of Christ’s
enemies, “appears to Dr. Neander to contain a beautiful specimen of
lively faith and Christian confidence.” See Kaye, p. xxix.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Chaplet, or De Corona.](0030115.md)
