[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030100)  [Next](0030102.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p2"></span>Are we not, in like manner, enjoined to
put away from us all immodesty?  On this ground, again, we are excluded
from the theatre, which is immodesty’s own peculiar abode, where nothing
is in repute but what elsewhere is disreputable. So the best path to the
highest favour of its god is the vileness <span id="page_87">p.
87</span> <span id="iv.v.xvii-Page_87"></span>which the Atellan <span
id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363.md) gesticulates, which the buffoon in
woman’s clothes exhibits, destroying all natural modesty, so that they
blush more readily at home than at the play, which finally is done from
his childhood on the person of the pantomime, that he may become an
actor. The very harlots, too, victims of the public lust, are brought
upon the stage, their misery increased as being there in the presence of
their own sex, from whom alone they are wont to hide themselves:  they
are paraded publicly before every age and every rank—their abode, their
gains, their praises, are set forth, and that even in the hearing of
those who should not hear such things. I say nothing about other
matters, which it were good to hide away in their own darkness and their
own gloomy caves, lest they should stain the light of day. Let the
Senate, let all ranks, blush for very shame! Why, even these miserable
women, who by their own gestures destroy their modesty, dreading the
light of day, and the people’s gaze, know something of shame at least
once a year. But if we ought to abominate all that is immodest, on what
ground is it right to hear what we must not speak? For all
licentiousness of speech, nay, every idle word, is condemned by God. 
Why, in the same way, is it right to look on what it is disgraceful to
do? How is it that the things which defile a man in going out of his
mouth, are not regarded as doing so when they go in at his eyes and
ears—when eyes and ears are the immediate attendants on the spirit—and
that can never be pure whose servants-in-waiting are impure? You have
the theatre forbidden, then, in the forbidding of immodesty.  If, again,
we despise the teaching of secular literature as being foolishness in
God’s eyes, our duty is plain enough in regard to those spectacles,
which from this source derive the tragic or comic play. If tragedies and
comedies are the bloody and wanton, the impious and licentious inventors
of crimes and lusts, it is not good even that there should be any
calling to remembrance the atrocious or the vile. What you reject in
deed, you are not to bid welcome to in word.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_363"></span>[87:364](0030101.htm#fr_363.md) <span
id="iv.v.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvii-p3"></span> \[The *ludi Atellani* were so called
from Atella, in Campania, where a vast amphitheatre delighted the
inhabitants. Juvenal, Sat. vi. 71. The like disgrace our times.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII.](0030102.md)
