[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030240)  [Next](0030242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII.—On the Formation and State
of the Embryo. Its Relation with the Subject of This Treatise.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p2"></span>Now the entire process of sowing,
forming, and completing the human embryo in the womb is no doubt
regulated by some power, which ministers herein to the will of God,
whatever may be the method which it is appointed to employ. Even the
superstition of Rome, by carefully attending to these points, imagined
the goddess *Alemona* to nourish the fœtus in the womb; as well as (the
goddesses) *Nona* and *Decima*, called after the most critical months of
gestation; and *Partula*, to manage and direct parturition; and
*Lucina*, to bring the child to the birth and light of day. We, on our
part, believe the angels to officiate herein for God. The embryo
therefore becomes a human being in the womb from the moment that its
form is completed. The law of Moses, indeed, punishes with due penalties
the man who shall cause abortion, inasmuch as there exists already the
rudiment of a human being, <span id="fr_1743"></span>[1744](#fn_1743)
which has imputed to it even <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="iv.xi.xxxvii-Page_218"></span>now the condition of life and death,
since it is already liable to the issues of both, although, by living
still in the mother, it for the most part shares its own state with the
mother. I must also say something about the period of the soul’s birth,
that I may omit nothing incidental in the whole process. A mature and
regular birth takes place, as a general rule, at the commencement of the
tenth month. They who theorize respecting numbers, honour the number ten
as the parent of all the others, and as imparting perfection to the
human nativity. For my own part, I prefer viewing this measure of time
in reference to God, as if implying that the ten months rather initiated
man into the ten commandments; so that the numerical estimate of the
time needed to consummate our natural birth should correspond to the
numerical classification of the rules of our regenerate life. But
inasmuch as birth is also completed with the seventh month, I more
readily recognize in this number than in the eighth the honour of a
numerical agreement with the sabbatical period; so that the month in
which God’s image is sometimes produced in a human birth, shall in its
number tally with the day on which God’s creation was completed and
hallowed. Human nativity has sometimes been allowed to be premature, and
yet to occur in fit and perfect accordance with an *<span
class="c42"><span id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>hebdomad</span>* or
sevenfold number, as an auspice of our resurrection, and rest, and
kingdom. The *<span class="c42"><span
id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p3.2"></span>ogdoad</span>*, or eightfold number,
therefore, is not concerned in our formation; <span
id="fr_1744"></span>[1745](#fn_1744) for in the time it represents there
will be no more marriage. <span id="fr_1745"></span>[1746](#fn_1745) We
have already demonstrated the conjunction of the body and the soul, from
the concretion of their very seminations to the complete formation of
the *fœtus*. We now maintain their conjunction likewise from the birth
onwards; in the first place, because they both grow together, only each
in a different manner suited to the diversity of their nature—the flesh
in magnitude, the soul in intelligence—the flesh in material condition,
the soul in sensibility. We are, however, forbidden to suppose that the
soul increases in substance, lest it should be said also to be capable
of diminution in substance, and so its extinction even should be
believed to be possible; but its inherent power, in which are contained
all its natural peculiarities, as originally implanted in its being, is
gradually developed along with the flesh, without impairing the germinal
basis of the substance, which it received when breathed at first into
man. Take a certain quantity of gold or of silver—a rough mass as yet:
it has indeed a compact condition, and one that is more compressed at
the moment than it will be; yet it contains within its contour what is
throughout a mass of gold or of silver. When this mass is afterwards
extended by beating it into leaf, it becomes larger than it was before
by the elongation of the original mass, but not by any addition thereto,
because it is extended in space, not increased in bulk; although in a
way it is even increased when it is extended: for it may be increased in
form, but not in state.  Then, again, the sheen of the gold or the
silver, which when the metal was any in block was inherent in it no
doubt really, but yet only obscurely, shines out in developed lustre. 
Afterwards various modifications of shape accrue, according to the
feasibility in the material which makes it yield to the manipulation of
the artisan, who yet adds nothing to the condition of the mass but its
configuration. In like manner, the growth and developments of the soul
are to be estimated, not as enlarging its substance, but as calling
forth its powers.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1743"></span>[217:1744](0030241.htm#fr_1743) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p3"></span> Causa hominis.

<span id="fn_1744"></span>[218:1745](0030241.htm#fr_1744) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p4"></span> The *ogdoad*, or number *eight*,
mystically representing “*heaven*,” where they do not marry.

<span id="fn_1745"></span>[218:1746](0030241.htm#fr_1745) <span
id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p5"></span> Beyond the *hebdomad* comes the
resurrection, on which see [Matt. xxii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#030)<span
id="iv.xi.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Growth of the Soul. Its Maturity Coincident with the
Maturity of the Flesh in Man.](0030242)
