[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030098)  [Next](0030100.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xv-p2"></span>Having done enough, then, as we have said,
in regard to that principal argument, that there is in them all the
taint of idolatry—having sufficiently dealt with that, let us now
contrast the other characteristics of the show with the things of God.
God has enjoined us to deal calmly, gently, quietly, and peacefully with
the Holy Spirit, because these things are alone in keeping with the
goodness of His nature, with His tenderness and sensitiveness, and not
to vex Him with rage, ill-nature, anger, or grief. Well, how shall this
be made to accord with the shows? For the show always leads to spiritual
agitation, since where there is pleasure, there is keenness of feeling
giving pleasure its zest; and where there is keenness of feeling, there
is rivalry giving in turn its zest to that.  Then, too, where you have
rivalry, you have rage, bitterness, wrath and grief, with all bad things
which flow from them—the whole entirely out of keeping with the religion
of Christ. For even suppose one should enjoy the shows in a moderate
way, as befits his rank, age or nature, still he is not undisturbed in
mind, without some unuttered movings of the inner man. No one partakes
of pleasures such as these without their strong excitements; no one
comes under their excitements without their natural lapses. These
lapses, again, create passionate desire. If there is no desire, there is
no pleasure, and he is chargeable with trifling who goes where nothing
is gotten; in my view, even that is foreign to us.  Moreover, a man
pronounces his own condemnation in the very act of taking his place
among those with whom, by his disinclination to be like them, he
confesses he has no sympathy. It is not enough that we do no such things
ourselves, unless we break all connection also with those who do. “If
thou sawest a thief,” says the Scripture, “thou consentedst with
him.” <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362.md) Would that we did not even
inhabit the same world with these wicked men! But though that wish
cannot be realized, yet even now we are separate from them in what is of
the world; for the world is God’s, but the worldly is the devil’s.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_362"></span>[86:363](0030099.htm#fr_362.md) <span
id="iv.v.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xv-p3"></span> [Ps. xlix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.v.xv-p3.1"></span>.
\[This chapter bears on modern theatres.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI.](0030100.md)
