[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030090)  [Next](0030092.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII.</span>

<span id="iv.v.vii-p2"></span>The two kinds of public games, then, have
one origin; and they have common names, as owning the same parentage.
So, too, as they are equally tainted with the sin of idolatry, their
foundress, they must needs be like each other in their pomp. But the
more ambitious preliminary display of the circus games to which the name
procession specially belongs, is in itself the proof to whom the whole
thing appertains, in the many images the long line of statues, the
chariots of all sorts, the thrones, the crowns, the dresses. What high
religious rites besides, what sacrifices precede, come between, and
follow. How many guilds, how many priesthoods, how many offices are set
astir, is known to the inhabitants of the great city in which the demon
convention has its headquarters. If these things are done in humbler
style in the provinces, in accordance with their inferior means, still
all circus games must be counted as belonging to that from which they
are derived; the fountain from which they spring defiles them. The tiny
streamlet from its very spring-head, the little twig from its very
budding, contains in it the essential nature of its origin. It may be
grand or mean, no matter, any circus procession whatever is offensive to
God.  Though there be few images to grace it, there is idolatry in one;
though there be no more than a single sacred car, it is a chariot of
Jupiter: anything of idolatry whatever, whether meanly arrayed or
modestly rich and gorgeous, taints it in its origin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII.](0030092.md)
