[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030047)  [Next](0030049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xlii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xlii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlii-p2"></span>But we are called to account as
harm-doers on another <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137.md) ground,
and are accused of being useless in the affairs of life. How in all the
world can that be the case with people who are living among you, eating
the same food, wearing the same attire, having the same habits, under
the same necessities of existence? We are not Indian Brahmins or
Gymnosophists, who dwell in woods and exile themselves from ordinary
human life. We do not forget the debt of gratitude we owe to God, our
Lord and Creator; we reject no creature of His hands, though certainly
we exercise restraint upon ourselves, lest of any gift of His we make an
immoderate or sinful use. So we sojourn with you in the world, abjuring
neither forum, nor shambles, nor bath, nor booth, nor workshop, nor inn,
nor weekly market, nor any other places of commerce. We sail with you,
and fight with you, <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138.md) and till the
ground with you; and in like manner we unite with you in your
traffickings—even in the various arts we make public property of our
works for your benefit. How it is we seem useless in your ordinary
business, living with you and by you as we do, I am not able to
understand. But if I do not frequent your religious ceremonies, I am
still on the sacred day a man. I do not at the Saturnalia bathe myself
at dawn, that I may not lose both day and night; yet I bathe at a decent
and healthful hour, which preserves me both in heat and blood. I can be
rigid and pallid like you after ablution when I am dead. I do not
recline in public at the feast of Bacchus, after the manner of the
beast-fighters at their final banquet.  Yet of your resources I partake,
*wherever* I may chance to eat. I do not buy a crown for my head. What
matters it to you how I use them, if nevertheless the flowers are
purchased? I think it more agreeable to have them free and loose, waving
all about. Even if they are woven into a crown, we smell the crown with
our nostrils: let those look to it who scent the perfume with their
hair. We do not go to your spectacles; yet the articles that are sold
there, if I need them, I will obtain more readily at their proper
places. We certainly buy no frankincense. If the Arabias complain of
this, let the Sabæans be well assured that their more precious and
costly merchandise is expended as largely in the burying of
Christians <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139.md) as in the fumigating
of the gods. At any rate, you say, the temple revenues are every day
falling off: <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140.md) how few now throw
in a contribution! In truth, we are not able to give alms both to your
human and your heavenly mendicants; nor do we think that we are required
to give any but to those who ask for it. Let Jupiter then hold out his
hand and get, for our compassion spends more in the streets than yours
does in the temples. But your other taxes will acknowledge a debt of
gratitude to Christians; for in the faithfulness which keeps us from
fraud upon a brother, we make conscience of paying all their dues: so
that, by ascertaining how much is lost by fraud and falsehood in the
census declarations—the calculation may easily be made—it would be seen
that the ground of complaint in one department of revenue is compensated
by the advantage which others derive.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[49:138](0030048.htm#fr_137.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xlii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlii-p3"></span> \[Elucidation IX. See Kaye, p. 361.\]

<span id="fn_138"></span>[49:139](0030048.htm#fr_138.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xlii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlii-p4"></span> \[The occupation of a soldier was
regarded as lawful therefore. But see, afterwards, the *De Corona* cap.
xi.\]

<span id="fn_139"></span>[49:140](0030048.htm#fr_139.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xlii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlii-p5"></span> \[An interesting fact as to the
burial-rites of Early Christians. As to incense, see cap. xxx. *supra*.
p. 42.\]

<span id="fn_140"></span>[49:141](0030048.htm#fr_140.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xlii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlii-p6"></span> An index of the growth of
Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLIII.](0030049.md)
