[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030399)  [Next](0030401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.i"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_345">p. 345</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.i-Page_345"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="v.iv.v.i-p1.1"></span>Book IV. <span
id="fr_3479"></span>[3480](#fn_3479) </span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p3"></span><span class="c6"><span
id="v.iv.v.i-p3.1"></span>In Which Tertullian Pursues His Argument.
Jesus is the Christ of the Creator. He Derives His Proofs from St.
Luke’s Gospel; That Being the Only Historical Portion of the New
Testament Partially Accepted by Marcion. This Book May Also Be Regarded
as a Commentary on St. Luke. It Gives Remarkable Proof of Tertullian’s
Grasp of Scripture, and Proves that “The Old Testament is Not Contrary
to the New.”  It Also Abounds in Striking Expositions of Scriptural
Passages, Embracing Profound Views of Revelation, in Connection with the
Nature of Man.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p5"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.i-p5.1"></span>Chapter I.—Examination of the Antitheses of
Marcion, Bringing Them to the Test of Marcion’s Own Gospel. Certain True
Antitheses in the Dispensations of the Old and the New Testaments. These
Variations Quite Compatible with One and the Same God, Who Ordered
Them.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.i-p6.1"></span>Every</span> opinion and the whole
scheme <span id="fr_3480"></span>[3481](#fn_3480) of the impious and
sacrilegious Marcion we now bring to the test <span
id="fr_3481"></span>[3482](#fn_3481) of that very Gospel which, by his
process of interpolation, he has made his own. To encourage a belief *of
this Gospel* he has actually <span id="fr_3482"></span>[3483](#fn_3482)
devised for it a sort of dower, <span
id="fr_3483"></span>[3484](#fn_3483) in a work composed of contrary
statements set in opposition, thence entitled *Antitheses*, and compiled
with a view to such a severance of the law from the gospel as should
divide the Deity into two, nay, diverse, gods—one for each Instrument,
or Testament <span id="fr_3484"></span>[3485](#fn_3484) as it is more
usual to call it; that by such means he might also patronize <span
id="fr_3485"></span>[3486](#fn_3485) belief in “the Gospel according to
the Antitheses.” These, however, I would have attacked in special
combat, hand to hand; that is to say, I would have encountered singly
the several devices of the Pontic heretic, if it were not much more
convenient to refute them in and with that very gospel to which they
contribute their support. Although it is so easy to meet them at once
with a peremptory demurrer, <span id="fr_3486"></span>[3487](#fn_3486)
yet, in order that I may both make them admissible in argument, and
account them valid expressions of opinion, and even contend that they
make for our side, that so there may be all the redder shame for the
blindness of their author, we have now drawn out some *antitheses* of
our own in opposition to Marcion. And indeed <span
id="fr_3487"></span>[3488](#fn_3487) I do allow that one order did run
its course in the old dispensation under the Creator, <span
id="fr_3488"></span>[3489](#fn_3488) and that another is on its way in
the new under Christ. I do not deny that there is a difference in the
language of their documents, in their precepts of virtue, and in their
<span id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.i-Page_346"></span>teachings of the law; but yet all this
diversity is consistent with one and the same God, even Him by whom it
was arranged and also foretold.  Long ago <span
id="fr_3489"></span>[3490](#fn_3489) did Isaiah declare that “out of
Sion should go forth the law, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem” <span id="fr_3490"></span>[3491](#fn_3490) —some other law,
that is, and another word. In short, says he, “He shall judge among the
nations, and shall rebuke many people;” <span
id="fr_3491"></span>[3492](#fn_3491) meaning not those of the Jewish
people only, but of the nations which are judged by the new law of the
gospel and the new word of the apostles, and are amongst themselves
rebuked of their old error as soon as they have believed. And as the
result of this, “they beat their swords into ploughshares, and their
spears (which are a kind of hunting instruments) into
pruning-hooks;” <span id="fr_3492"></span>[3493](#fn_3492) that is to
say, minds, which once were fierce and cruel, are changed by them into
good dispositions productive of good fruit. And again:  “Hearken unto
me, hearken unto me, my people, and ye kings, give ear unto me; for a
law shall proceed from me, and my judgment for a light to the
nations;” <span id="fr_3493"></span>[3494](#fn_3493) wherefore He had
determined and decreed that the nations also were to be enlightened by
the law and the word of the gospel. This will be that law which
(according to David also) is unblameable, because “perfect, converting
the soul” <span id="fr_3494"></span>[3495](#fn_3494) from idols unto
God. This likewise will be the word concerning which the same Isaiah
says, “For the Lord will make a decisive word in the land.” <span
id="fr_3495"></span>[3496](#fn_3495) Because the New Testament is
compendiously short, <span id="fr_3496"></span>[3497](#fn_3496) and
freed from the minute and perplexing <span
id="fr_3497"></span>[3498](#fn_3497) burdens of the law. But why
enlarge, when the Creator by the same prophet foretells the renovation
more manifestly and clearly than the light itself?  “Remember not the
former things, neither consider the things of old” (the old things have
passed away, and new things are arising). “Behold, I will do new things,
which shall now spring forth.” <span
id="fr_3498"></span>[3499](#fn_3498) So by Jeremiah: “Break up for
yourselves new pastures, <span id="fr_3499"></span>[3500](#fn_3499) and
sow not among thorns, and circumcise yourselves in the foreskin of your
heart.” <span id="fr_3500"></span>[3501](#fn_3500) And in another
passage: “Behold, the days come, saith the Lord, that I will make a new
covenant with the house of Jacob, and with the house of Judah; not
according to the covenant that I made with their fathers in the day when
I arrested their dispensation, in order to bring them out of the land of
Egypt.” <span id="fr_3501"></span>[3502](#fn_3501) He thus shows that
the ancient covenant is temporary only, when He indicates its change;
also when He promises that it shall be followed by an eternal one. For
by Isaiah He says: “Hear me, and ye shall live; and I will make an
everlasting covenant with you,” adding “the sure mercies of
David,” <span id="fr_3502"></span>[3503](#fn_3502) in order that He
might show that that covenant was to run its course in Christ. That He
was of the family of David, according to the genealogy of Mary, <span
id="fr_3503"></span>[3504](#fn_3503) He declared in a figurative way
even by the rod which was to proceed out of the stem of Jesse. <span
id="fr_3504"></span>[3505](#fn_3504) Forasmuch then as he said, that
from the Creator there would come other laws, and other words, and new
dispensations of covenants, indicating also that the very sacrifices
were to receive higher offices, and *that* amongst all nations, by
Malachi when he says: “I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord,
neither will I accept your sacrifices at your hands. For from the rising
of the sun, even unto the going down of the same, my name shall be great
among the Gentiles; and in every place a sacrifice is offered unto my
name, even a pure offering” <span id="fr_3505"></span>[3506](#fn_3505)
—meaning simple prayer from a pure conscience,—it is of necessity that
every change which comes as the result of innovation, introduces a
diversity in those things of which *the change* is made, from which
diversity arises also a contrariety.  For as there is nothing, after it
has undergone a change, which does not become different, so there is
nothing different which is not contrary. <span
id="fr_3506"></span>[3507](#fn_3506) Of that very thing, therefore,
there will be predicated a contrariety in consequence of its diversity,
to which there accrued a change of condition after an innovation. He who
brought about the change, the same instituted the diversity also; He who
foretold the innovation, the same announced beforehand the contrariety
likewise.  Why, in your interpretation, do you impute a difference in
the state of things to a difference of powers? Why do you wrest to the
Creator’s prejudice those examples from which you draw your antitheses,
when you may recognise them all in His sensations and affections? “I
will wound,” He says, “and I will heal;” “I will kill,” He says again,
“and I will make alive” <span id="fr_3507"></span>[3508](#fn_3507) —even
<span id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.i-Page_347"></span>the same “who createth evil and maketh
peace;” <span id="fr_3508"></span>[3509](#fn_3508) from which you are
used even to censure Him with the imputation of fickleness and
inconstancy, as if He forbade what He commanded, and commanded what He
forbade. Why, then, have you not reckoned up the *Antitheses* also which
occur in the natural works of the Creator, who is for ever contrary to
Himself? You have not been able, unless I am misinformed, to recognise
the fact, <span id="fr_3509"></span>[3510](#fn_3509) that the world, at
all events, <span id="fr_3510"></span>[3511](#fn_3510) even amongst your
people of Pontus, is made up of a diversity of elements which are
hostile to one another. <span id="fr_3511"></span>[3512](#fn_3511) It
was therefore your bounden duty first to have determined that the god of
the light was one being, and the god of darkness was another, in such
wise that you might have been able to have distinctly asserted one of
them to be the god of the law and the other the god of the gospel. It
is, however, the settled conviction already <span
id="fr_3512"></span>[3513](#fn_3512) of my mind from manifest proofs,
that, as His works and plans <span id="fr_3513"></span>[3514](#fn_3513)
exist in the way of *Antitheses*, so also by the same rule exist the
mysteries of His religion. <span id="fr_3514"></span>[3515](#fn_3514)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3479"></span>[345:3480](0030400.htm#fr_3479) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p1.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p2"></span> \[The remarks of Bishop Kaye on our
author’s *Marcion* are simply invaluable, and the student cannot
dispense with what is said more particularly of this Book. See Kaye, pp.
450–480.\]

<span id="fn_3480"></span>[345:3481](0030400.htm#fr_3480) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p7"></span> Paraturam.

<span id="fn_3481"></span>[345:3482](0030400.htm#fr_3481) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p8"></span> Provocamus ad. \[Kaye, p. 469, refers to
Schleiermacher’s *Critical Essay* on St. Luke and to a learned note of
Mr. Andrews Norton of Harvard (vol. iii. Appendix C.) for valuable
remarks on Marcion’s Gospel.\]

<span id="fn_3482"></span>[345:3483](0030400.htm#fr_3482) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p9"></span> Et, emphatic.

<span id="fn_3483"></span>[345:3484](0030400.htm#fr_3483) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p10"></span> Dotem quandam.

<span id="fn_3484"></span>[345:3485](0030400.htm#fr_3484) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p11"></span> \[See cap. 2, *infra*.\]

<span id="fn_3485"></span>[345:3486](0030400.htm#fr_3485) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p12"></span> Patrocinaretur.

<span id="fn_3486"></span>[345:3487](0030400.htm#fr_3486) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p13"></span> Præscriptive occurere. This law term
(the Greek <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.i-p13.1"></span>παραγραφή</span>) seems to refer to the
Church’s “rule of faith” (præscriptio), which he might at once put in
against Marcion’s heresy; only he prefers to refute him on his own
ground.

<span id="fn_3487"></span>[345:3488](0030400.htm#fr_3487) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p14"></span> Atque adeo.

<span id="fn_3488"></span>[345:3489](0030400.htm#fr_3488) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p15"></span> Apud Creatorem.

<span id="fn_3489"></span>[346:3490](0030400.htm#fr_3489) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p16"></span> Olim.

<span id="fn_3490"></span>[346:3491](0030400.htm#fr_3490) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p17"></span> [Isa. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3491"></span>[346:3492](0030400.htm#fr_3491) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p18"></span> [Isa. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3492"></span>[346:3493](0030400.htm#fr_3492) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p19"></span> [Isa. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3493"></span>[346:3494](0030400.htm#fr_3493) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p20"></span> [Isa. ii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p20.1"></span>,
according to the Sept.

<span id="fn_3494"></span>[346:3495](0030400.htm#fr_3494) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p21"></span> [Ps. xix.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3495"></span>[346:3496](0030400.htm#fr_3495) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p22"></span> T.’s version of [Isa. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p22.1"></span>.
“Decisus Sermo” ="determined” of <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.i-p22.3"></span>A.V.</span>

<span id="fn_3496"></span>[346:3497](0030400.htm#fr_3496) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p22.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p23"></span> Compendiatum.

<span id="fn_3497"></span>[346:3498](0030400.htm#fr_3497) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p24"></span> Laciniosis.

<span id="fn_3498"></span>[346:3499](0030400.htm#fr_3498) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p25"></span> [Isa.
43:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3499"></span>[346:3500](0030400.htm#fr_3499) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p26"></span> Novate novamen novum. Agricultural
words.

<span id="fn_3500"></span>[346:3501](0030400.htm#fr_3500) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p27"></span> Altered version of [Jer.
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3501"></span>[346:3502](0030400.htm#fr_3501) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p28"></span> [Jer.
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p28.1"></span>,
with slight change.

<span id="fn_3502"></span>[346:3503](0030400.htm#fr_3502) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p29"></span> [Isa. lv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3503"></span>[346:3504](0030400.htm#fr_3503) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p29.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p30"></span> Secundum Mariæ censum. See Kitto’s
*Cyclopædia of Biblical Literature* (third edition), in the article
“Genealogy of Jesus Christ,” where the translator of this work has
largely given reasons for believing that St. Luke in his genealogy,
(chap. iii.) has traced the descent of the Virgin <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.i-p30.2"></span>Mary</span>. To the authorities there given
may be added this passage of Tertullian, and a fuller one, *Adversus
Judæos*, ix., towards the end. \[p. 164, *supra*.\]

<span id="fn_3504"></span>[346:3505](0030400.htm#fr_3504) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p30.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p31"></span> [Isa. xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3505"></span>[346:3506](0030400.htm#fr_3505) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p32"></span> [Mal.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3506"></span>[346:3507](0030400.htm#fr_3506) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p33"></span> To its former self.

<span id="fn_3507"></span>[346:3508](0030400.htm#fr_3507) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p34"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3508"></span>[347:3509](0030400.htm#fr_3508) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p34.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p35"></span> [Isa. xlv.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#007)<span id="v.iv.v.i-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3509"></span>[347:3510](0030400.htm#fr_3509) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p36"></span> Recogitare.

<span id="fn_3510"></span>[347:3511](0030400.htm#fr_3510) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p37"></span> Saltim.

<span id="fn_3511"></span>[347:3512](0030400.htm#fr_3511) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p38"></span> Æmularum invicem.

<span id="fn_3512"></span>[347:3513](0030400.htm#fr_3512) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p39"></span> Præjudicatum est.

<span id="fn_3513"></span>[347:3514](0030400.htm#fr_3513) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p40"></span> In the external world.

<span id="fn_3514"></span>[347:3515](0030400.htm#fr_3514) <span
id="v.iv.v.i-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.i-p41"></span> Sacramenta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: St. Luke's Gospel, Selected by Marcion as His Authority, and
Mutilated by Him. The Other Gospels Equally Authoritative. Marcion's
Terms of Discussion, However, Accepted, and Grappled with on the Footing
of St. Luke's Gospel Alone.](0030401)
