[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030424)  [Next](0030426) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI.—From St. Luke’s Eleventh
Chapter Other Evidence that Christ Comes from the Creator. The Lord’s
Prayer and Other Words of Christ.  The Dumb Spirit and Christ’s
Discourse on Occasion of the Expulsion. The Exclamation of the Woman in
the Crowd.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p2"></span>When in a certain place he had been
praying to that Father above, <span id="fr_4527"></span>[4528](#fn_4527)
looking up with insolent and audacious eyes to the heaven of the
Creator, by whom in His rough and cruel nature he might have been
crushed with hail and lightning—just as it was by Him contrived that he
was (afterwards) attached to a cross <span
id="fr_4528"></span>[4529](#fn_4528) at Jerusalem—one of his disciples
came to him and said, “Master, teach us to pray, as John also taught his
disciples.”  This he said, forsooth, because he thought that different
prayers were required for different gods! Now, he who had advanced such
a conjecture as this should first show that another god had been
proclaimed by Christ. For nobody would have wanted to know how to pray,
before he had learned whom he was to pray to. If, however, he had
already learned this, prove it. If you find nowhere any proof, let me
tell you <span id="fr_4529"></span>[4530](#fn_4529) that it was to the
Creator that he asked <span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-Page_392"></span>for instruction in prayer, to whom
John’s disciples also used to pray.  But, inasmuch as John had
introduced some new order of prayer, this disciple had not improperly
presumed to think that he ought also to ask of Christ whether they too
must not (according to some special rule of their Master) pray, not
indeed to another god, but in another manner. Christ accordingly <span
id="fr_4530"></span>[4531](#fn_4530) would not have taught His disciple
prayer before He had given him the knowledge of God Himself. Therefore
what He actually taught was prayer to Him whom the disciple had already
known. In short, you may discover in the import <span
id="fr_4531"></span>[4532](#fn_4531) of the prayer what God is addressed
therein.  To whom can I say, “Father?” <span
id="fr_4532"></span>[4533](#fn_4532) To him who had nothing to do with
making me, from whom I do not derive my origin? Or to Him, who, by
making and fashioning me, became my parent? <span
id="fr_4533"></span>[4534](#fn_4533) Of whom can I ask for His Holy
Spirit? Of him who gives not even the mundane spirit; <span
id="fr_4534"></span>[4535](#fn_4534) or of Him “who maketh His angels
spirits,” and whose Spirit it was which in the beginning hovered upon
the waters. <span id="fr_4535"></span>[4536](#fn_4535) Whose kingdom
shall I wish to come—his, of whom I never heard as the king of glory; or
His, in whose hand are even the hearts of kings? Who shall give me my
daily <span id="fr_4536"></span>[4537](#fn_4536) bread? Shall it be he
who produces for me not a grain of millet-seed; <span
id="fr_4537"></span>[4538](#fn_4537) or He who even from heaven gave to
His people day by day the bread of angels? <span
id="fr_4538"></span>[4539](#fn_4538) Who shall forgive me my
trespasses? <span id="fr_4539"></span>[4540](#fn_4539) He who, by
refusing to judge them, does not retain them; or He who, unless He
forgives them, will retain them, even to His judgment? Who shall suffer
us not to be led into temptation? He before whom the tempter will never
be able to tremble; or He who from the beginning has beforehand
condemned <span id="fr_4540"></span>[4541](#fn_4540) the angel tempter?
If any one, with such a form, <span id="fr_4541"></span>[4542](#fn_4541)
invokes another god and not the Creator, he does not pray; he only
blasphemes. <span id="fr_4542"></span>[4543](#fn_4542) In like manner,
from whom must I ask that I may receive? Of whom seek, that I may find?
To whom knock, that it may be opened to me? <span
id="fr_4543"></span>[4544](#fn_4543) Who has to give to him that asks,
but He to whom all things belong, and whose am I also that am the asker?
What, however, have I lost before that other god, that I should seek of
him and find it.  If it be wisdom and prudence, it is the Creator who
has hidden them. Shall I resort to him, then, in quest of them? If it be
health <span id="fr_4544"></span>[4545](#fn_4544) and life, they are at
the disposal of the Creator. Nor must anything be sought and found
anywhere else than there, where it is kept in secret that it may come to
light. So, again, at no other door will I knock than at that out of
which my privilege has reached me. <span
id="fr_4545"></span>[4546](#fn_4545) In fine, if to receive, and to
find, and to be admitted, is the fruit of labour and earnestness to him
who has asked, and sought, and knocked, understand that these duties
have been enjoined, and results promised, by the Creator. As for that
most excellent god of yours, coming as he professes gratuitously to help
man, who was not his (creature), <span
id="fr_4546"></span>[4547](#fn_4546) he could not have imposed upon him
any labour, or (endowed him with) any earnestness. For he would by this
time cease to be the most excellent god, were he not spontaneously to
give to every one who does not ask, and permit every one who seeks not
to find, and open to every one who does not knock. The Creator, on the
contrary, <span id="fr_4547"></span>[4548](#fn_4547) was able to
proclaim these duties and rewards by Christ, in order that man, who by
sinning had offended his God, might toil on (in his probation), and by
his perseverance in asking might receive, and in seeking might find, and
in knocking might enter. Accordingly, the preceding similitude <span
id="fr_4548"></span>[4549](#fn_4548) represents the man who went at
night and begged for the loaves, in the light of a friend and not a
stranger, and makes him knock at a friend’s house and not at a
stranger’s. But even if he has offended, man is more of a friend with
the Creator than with the god of Marcion. At His door, therefore, does
he knock to whom he had the right of access; whose gate he had found;
whom he knew to possess bread; in bed now with His children, whom He had
willed to be born. <span id="fr_4549"></span>[4550](#fn_4549) Even
though the knocking is late in the day, it is yet the Creator’s time. To
Him belongs the latest hour who owns an entire age <span
id="fr_4550"></span>[4551](#fn_4550) and the end thereof. As for the new
god, however, no one could have knocked at his door late, for he has
hardly yet <span id="fr_4551"></span>[4552](#fn_4551) seen the light of
morning. It is the Creator, who once shut the door to the Gentiles,
which was then knocked at by the Jews, that both rises and gives, if not
now to man as a friend, yet not as a stranger, but, as He says, “because
<span id="page_393">p. 393</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-Page_393"></span>of his importunity.” <span
id="fr_4552"></span>[4553](#fn_4552) *Importunate*, however, the recent
god could not have permitted any one to be in the short time (since his
appearance). <span id="fr_4553"></span>[4554](#fn_4553) Him, therefore,
whom you call the Creator recognise also as “Father.” It is even He who
knows what His children require.  For when they asked for bread, He gave
them manna from heaven; and when they wanted flesh, He sent them
abundance of quails—not a serpent for a fish, nor for an egg a
scorpion. <span id="fr_4554"></span>[4555](#fn_4554) It will, however,
appertain to Him not to give evil instead of good, who has both one and
the other in His power. Marcion’s god, on the contrary, not having a
scorpion, was unable to refuse to give what he did not possess; only He
(could do so), who, having a scorpion, yet gives it not. In like manner,
it is He who will give the Holy Spirit, at whose command <span
id="fr_4555"></span>[4556](#fn_4555) is also the unholy spirit. When He
cast out the “demon which was dumb” <span
id="fr_4556"></span>[4557](#fn_4556) (and by a cure of this sort
verified Isaiah), <span id="fr_4557"></span>[4558](#fn_4557) and having
been charged with casting out demons by Beelzebub, He said, “If I by
Beelzebub cast out demons, by whom do your sons cast them out?” <span
id="fr_4558"></span>[4559](#fn_4558) By such a question what does He
otherwise mean, than that He ejects the spirits by the same power by
which their sons also did—that is, by the power of the Creator?  For if
you suppose the meaning to be, “If I by Beelzebub, etc., by whom your
sons?”—as if He would reproach them with having the power of
Beelzebub,—you are met at once by the preceding sentence, that “Satan
cannot be divided against himself.” <span
id="fr_4559"></span>[4560](#fn_4559) So that it was not by Beelzebub
that even they were casting out demons, but (as we have said) by the
power of the Creator; and that He might make this understood, He adds:
“But if I with the finger of God cast out demons, is not the kingdom of
God come near unto you?” <span id="fr_4560"></span>[4561](#fn_4560) For
the magicians who stood before Pharaoh and resisted Moses called the
power of the Creator “*the finger of God*.” <span
id="fr_4561"></span>[4562](#fn_4561) It was the finger of God, because
it was a sign <span id="fr_4562"></span>[4563](#fn_4562) that even a
thing of weakness was yet abundant in strength. This Christ also showed,
when, recalling to notice (and not obliterating) those ancient wonders
which were really His own, <span id="fr_4563"></span>[4564](#fn_4563) He
said that the power of God must be understood to be the finger of none
other God than Him, under <span id="fr_4564"></span>[4565](#fn_4564)
whom it had received this appellation. *His* kingdom, therefore, was
come near to them, whose power was called His “finger.”  Well,
therefore, did He connect <span id="fr_4565"></span>[4566](#fn_4565)
with the parable of “the strong man armed,” whom “a stronger man still
overcame,” <span id="fr_4566"></span>[4567](#fn_4566) the prince of the
demons, whom He had already called Beelzebub and Satan; signifying that
it was he who was overcome by the finger of God, and not that the
Creator had been subdued by another god.  Besides, <span
id="fr_4567"></span>[4568](#fn_4567) how could His kingdom be still
standing, with its boundaries, and laws, and functions, whom, even if
the whole world were left entire to Him, Marcion’s god could possibly
seem to have overcome as “the stronger than He,” if it were not in
consequence of His law that even Marcionites were constantly dying, by
returning in their dissolution <span
id="fr_4568"></span>[4569](#fn_4568) to the ground, and were so often
admonished by even a scorpion, that the Creator had by no means been
overcome? <span id="fr_4569"></span>[4570](#fn_4569) “A (certain) mother
of the company exclaims, ‘Blessed is the womb that bare Thee, and the
paps which Thou hast sucked;’ but the Lord said, ‘Yea, rather, blessed
are they that hear the word of God, and keep it.’” <span
id="fr_4570"></span>[4571](#fn_4570) Now He had in precisely similar
terms rejected His mother or His brethren, whilst preferring those who
heard and obeyed God. <span id="fr_4571"></span>[4572](#fn_4571) His
mother, however, was not here present with Him. On that former occasion,
therefore, He had not denied that He was her son by birth. <span
id="fr_4572"></span>[4573](#fn_4572) On hearing this (salutation) the
second time, He the second time transferred, as He had done
before, <span id="fr_4573"></span>[4574](#fn_4573) the “blessedness” to
His disciples from the womb and the paps of His mother, from whom,
however, unless He had in her (a real mother) He could not have
transferred it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4527"></span>[391:4528](0030425.htm#fr_4527) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p3"></span> [Luke xi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4528"></span>[391:4529](0030425.htm#fr_4528) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p4"></span> Suffigi.

<span id="fn_4529"></span>[391:4530](0030425.htm#fr_4529) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p5"></span> Scito.

<span id="fn_4530"></span>[392:4531](0030425.htm#fr_4530) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p6"></span> Proinde.

<span id="fn_4531"></span>[392:4532](0030425.htm#fr_4531) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p7"></span> Sensum.

<span id="fn_4532"></span>[392:4533](0030425.htm#fr_4532) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p8"></span> [Luke xi.
2](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4533"></span>[392:4534](0030425.htm#fr_4533) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p9"></span> Generavit.

<span id="fn_4534"></span>[392:4535](0030425.htm#fr_4534) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p10"></span> Mundialis spiritus: perhaps “the
breath of life.”

<span id="fn_4535"></span>[392:4536](0030425.htm#fr_4535) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p11"></span> [Gen. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4536"></span>[392:4537](0030425.htm#fr_4536) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p12"></span> [Luke xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4537"></span>[392:4538](0030425.htm#fr_4537) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p13"></span> Milium.

<span id="fn_4538"></span>[392:4539](0030425.htm#fr_4538) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p14"></span> [Ps. lxviii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4539"></span>[392:4540](0030425.htm#fr_4539) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p15"></span> [Luke xi.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4540"></span>[392:4541](0030425.htm#fr_4540) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p16"></span> Prædamnavit.

<span id="fn_4541"></span>[392:4542](0030425.htm#fr_4541) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p17"></span> Hoc ordine.

<span id="fn_4542"></span>[392:4543](0030425.htm#fr_4542) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p18"></span> Infamat.

<span id="fn_4543"></span>[392:4544](0030425.htm#fr_4543) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p19"></span> [Luke xi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#009)<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4544"></span>[392:4545](0030425.htm#fr_4544) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p20"></span> Salutem: perhaps salvation.

<span id="fn_4545"></span>[392:4546](0030425.htm#fr_4545) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p21"></span> Unde sum functus. This obscure clause
may mean “the right of praying,” or “the right of access, and boldness
to knock.”

<span id="fn_4546"></span>[392:4547](0030425.htm#fr_4546) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p22"></span> Ad præstandum non suo homini.

<span id="fn_4547"></span>[392:4548](0030425.htm#fr_4547) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p23"></span> Autem.

<span id="fn_4548"></span>[392:4549](0030425.htm#fr_4548) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p24"></span> See [Luke xi.
5-8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4549"></span>[392:4550](0030425.htm#fr_4549) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p25"></span> A sarcastic allusion to the
*ante-nuptial* error of Marcion, which he has exposed more than once
(see book i. chap. xxix. and book iv. chap. xxiii. p. 386.).

<span id="fn_4550"></span>[392:4551](0030425.htm#fr_4550) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p26"></span> Sæculum.

<span id="fn_4551"></span>[392:4552](0030425.htm#fr_4551) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p27"></span> Tantum quod = vixdum (Oehler).

<span id="fn_4552"></span>[393:4553](0030425.htm#fr_4552) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p27.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p28"></span> [Luke xi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4553"></span>[393:4554](0030425.htm#fr_4553) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p29"></span> Tam cito.

<span id="fn_4554"></span>[393:4555](0030425.htm#fr_4554) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p30"></span> [Luke xi.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4555"></span>[393:4556](0030425.htm#fr_4555) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p31"></span> Apud quem.

<span id="fn_4556"></span>[393:4557](0030425.htm#fr_4556) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p32"></span> [Luke xi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4557"></span>[393:4558](0030425.htm#fr_4557) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p33"></span> [Isa. xxix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4558"></span>[393:4559](0030425.htm#fr_4558) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p34"></span> [Luke xi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4559"></span>[393:4560](0030425.htm#fr_4559) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p35"></span> [Luke xi.
18](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4560"></span>[393:4561](0030425.htm#fr_4560) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p36"></span> [Luke xi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4561"></span>[393:4562](0030425.htm#fr_4561) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p37"></span> [Ex. viii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4562"></span>[393:4563](0030425.htm#fr_4562) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p38"></span> Significaret.

<span id="fn_4563"></span>[393:4564](0030425.htm#fr_4563) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p39"></span> Vetustatum scilicet suarum.

<span id="fn_4564"></span>[393:4565](0030425.htm#fr_4564) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p40"></span> Apud.

<span id="fn_4565"></span>[393:4566](0030425.htm#fr_4565) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p41"></span> Applicuit.

<span id="fn_4566"></span>[393:4567](0030425.htm#fr_4566) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p42"></span> [Luke
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4567"></span>[393:4568](0030425.htm#fr_4567) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p43"></span> Ceterum.

<span id="fn_4568"></span>[393:4569](0030425.htm#fr_4568) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p44"></span> Defluendo.

<span id="fn_4569"></span>[393:4570](0030425.htm#fr_4569) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p45"></span> The *scorpion* here represents any
class of the lowest animals, especially such as stung.  The Marcionites
impiously made it a reproach to the Creator, that He had formed such
worthless and offensive creatures.  Compare book i. chap. 17, note 5. p.
283.

<span id="fn_4570"></span>[393:4571](0030425.htm#fr_4570) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p46"></span> [Luke
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#028)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4571"></span>[393:4572](0030425.htm#fr_4571) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p47"></span> See above, on [Luke viii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4572"></span>[393:4573](0030425.htm#fr_4572) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p48"></span> Natura.

<span id="fn_4573"></span>[393:4574](0030425.htm#fr_4573) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxvi-p49"></span> Proinde.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Christ's Reprehension of the Pharisees Seeking a Sign. His
Censure of Their Love of Outward Show Rather Than Inward Holiness. 
Scripture Abounds with Admonitions of a Similar Purport. Proofs of His
Mission from the Creator.](0030426)
