[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030409)  [Next](0030411) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xi"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI.—The Call of Levi the Publican.
Christ in Relation to the Baptist. Christ as the Bridegroom. The Parable
of the Old Wine and the New. Arguments Connecting Christ with the
Creator.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p2"></span>The publican who was chosen by the
Lord, <span id="fr_3810"></span>[3811](#fn_3810) he adduces for a proof
that he was chosen as a stranger to the law and uninitiated in <span
id="fr_3811"></span>[3812](#fn_3811) Judaism, by one who was an
adversary to the law. The case of Peter escaped his memory, who,
although he was a man of the law, was not only chosen by the Lord, but
also obtained the testimony of possessing knowledge which was given to
him by the Father. <span id="fr_3812"></span>[3813](#fn_3812) He had
nowhere read of Christ’s being foretold as the light, and hope, and
expectation of the Gentiles! *He*, however, rather spoke of the Jews in
a favourable light, when he said, “The whole needed not a physician, but
they that are sick.” <span id="fr_3813"></span>[3814](#fn_3813) For
since by “those that are sick” he meant that the heathens and publicans
should be understood, whom he was choosing, he affirmed of the Jews that
they were “whole” for whom he said that a physician was not necessary.
This being the case, he makes a mistake in coming down <span
id="fr_3814"></span>[3815](#fn_3814) to destroy the law, as if for the
remedy of a diseased condition. because they who were living under it
were “whole,” and “not in want of a physician.” How, moreover, does it
happen that he proposed the similitude of a *physician*, if he did not
verify it? For, just as nobody uses a physician for healthy persons, so
will no one do so for strangers, in so far as he is one of Marcion’s
god-made men, <span id="fr_3815"></span>[3816](#fn_3815) having to
himself both a creator and preserver, and a specially good physician, in
his Christ. This much the comparison predetermines, that a physician is
more usually furnished by him to whom the sick people belong. Whence,
too, does John come upon the scene? Christ, suddenly; and just as
suddenly, John! <span id="fr_3816"></span>[3817](#fn_3816) After this
fashion occur all things in Marcion’s system. They have their own
special and plenary course <span id="fr_3817"></span>[3818](#fn_3817) in
the Creator’s dispensation. Of John, however, what else I have to say
will be found in another passage. <span
id="fr_3818"></span>[3819](#fn_3818) To the several points which now
come before us an answer must be given. This, then, I will take care to
do <span id="fr_3819"></span>[3820](#fn_3819) —demonstrate that,
reciprocally, John is suitable to Christ, and Christ to John, the
latter, of course, as a prophet of the Creator, just as the former is
the Creator’s Christ; and so the heretic may blush at frustrating, to
his own frustration, the mission of John *the Baptist*. For if there had
been no ministry of John at all—“the voice,” as Isaiah calls him, “of
one crying in the wilderness,” and the preparer of the ways of the Lord
by denunciation and recommendation of repentance; if, too, he had not
baptized (Christ) Himself <span id="fr_3820"></span>[3821](#fn_3820)
along with others, nobody could have challenged the disciples of Christ,
as they ate and drank, to a comparison with the disciples of John, who
were constantly fasting and praying; because, if there existed any
diversity <span id="fr_3821"></span>[3822](#fn_3821) between Christ and
John, and their followers respectively, no exact comparison would be
possible, nor would there be a single point where it could be
challenged. For nobody would feel surprise, and nobody would be
perplexed, although there should arise rival predictions of a diverse
deity, which should also mutually differ about modes of conduct, <span
id="fr_3822"></span>[3823](#fn_3822) having a prior difference about the
authorities <span id="fr_3823"></span>[3824](#fn_3823) upon which they
were based. Therefore Christ belonged to John, and John to Christ; while
both belonged to the Creator, and both were of the law and the prophets,
preachers and masters. Else Christ would have rejected the discipline of
John, as of the rival god, and would also have defended the disciples,
as very properly pursuing a different walk, because consecrated to the
service of another and contrary deity.  But as it is, while
modestly <span id="fr_3824"></span>[3825](#fn_3824) giving a reason why
“the children of the bridegroom are unable to fast during the <span
id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span id="v.iv.v.xi-Page_361"></span>time
the bridegroom is with them,” but promising that “they should afterwards
fast, when the bridegroom was taken away from them,” <span
id="fr_3825"></span>[3826](#fn_3825) He neither defended the disciples,
(but rather excused them, as if they had not been blamed without some
reason), nor rejected the discipline of John, but rather allowed <span
id="fr_3826"></span>[3827](#fn_3826) it, referring it to the time of
John, although destining it for His own time. Otherwise His purpose
would have been to reject it, <span id="fr_3827"></span>[3828](#fn_3827)
and to defend its opponents, if He had not Himself already belonged to
it as then in force. I hold also that it is my Christ who is meant by
the bridegroom, of whom the psalm says: “He is as a bridegroom coming
out of his chamber; His going forth is from the end of the heaven, and
His return is back to the end of it again.” <span
id="fr_3828"></span>[3829](#fn_3828) By the mouth of Isaiah He also says
exultingly of the Father: “Let my soul rejoice in the Lord; for He hath
clothed me with the garment of salvation and with the tunic of joy, as a
bridegroom.  He hath put a mitre round about my head, as a bride.” <span
id="fr_3829"></span>[3830](#fn_3829) To Himself likewise He
appropriates <span id="fr_3830"></span>[3831](#fn_3830) the church,
concerning which the same <span id="fr_3831"></span>[3832](#fn_3831)
Spirit says to Him: “Thou shalt clothe Thee with them all, as with a
bridal ornament.” <span id="fr_3832"></span>[3833](#fn_3832) This spouse
Christ invites home to Himself also by Solomon from the call of the
Gentiles, because you read: “Come with me from Lebanon, my
spouse.” <span id="fr_3833"></span>[3834](#fn_3833) He elegantly makes
mention of Lebanon (the mountain, of course) because it stands for the
name of frankincense with the Greeks; <span
id="fr_3834"></span>[3835](#fn_3834) for it was from idolatry that He
betrothed Himself the church. Deny now, Marcion, your utter madness, (if
you can)! Behold, you impugn even the law of your god. He unites not in
the nuptial bond, nor, when contracted, does he allow it; no one does he
baptize but a *cælebs* or a eunuch; until death or divorce does he
reserve baptism. <span id="fr_3835"></span>[3836](#fn_3835) Wherefore,
then, do you make his Christ a bridegroom? This is the designation of
Him who united man and woman, not of him who separated them. You have
erred also in that declaration of Christ, wherein He seems to make a
difference between things new and old. You are inflated about the old
bottles, and brain-muddled with the new wine; and therefore to the old
(that is to say, to the prior) gospel you have sewed on the patch of
your new-fangled heresy. I should like to know in what respect the
Creator is inconsistent with Himself. <span
id="fr_3836"></span>[3837](#fn_3836) When by Jeremiah He gave this
precept, “Break up for yourselves new pastures,” <span
id="fr_3837"></span>[3838](#fn_3837) does He not turn away from the old
state of things? And when by Isaiah He proclaims how “old things were
passed away; and, behold, all things, which I am making, are new,” <span
id="fr_3838"></span>[3839](#fn_3838) does He not advert to a new state
of things?  We have generally been of opinion <span
id="fr_3839"></span>[3840](#fn_3839) that the destination of the former
state of things was rather promised by the Creator, and exhibited in
reality by Christ, only under the authority of one and the same God, to
whom appertain both the old things and the new. For new wine is not put
into old bottles, except by one who has the old bottles; nor does
anybody put a new piece to an old garment, unless the old garment be
forthcoming to him. That person only <span
id="fr_3840"></span>[3841](#fn_3840) does not do a thing when it is not
to be done, who has the materials wherewithal to do it if it were to be
done.  And therefore, since His object in making the comparison was to
show that He was separating the new condition <span
id="fr_3841"></span>[3842](#fn_3841) of the gospel from the old
state <span id="fr_3842"></span>[3843](#fn_3842) of the law, He proved
that that <span id="fr_3843"></span>[3844](#fn_3843) from which He was
separating His own <span id="fr_3844"></span>[3845](#fn_3844) ought not
to have been branded <span id="fr_3845"></span>[3846](#fn_3845) as a
separation <span id="fr_3846"></span>[3847](#fn_3846) of things which
were alien to each other; for nobody ever unites his own things with
things that are alien to them, <span
id="fr_3847"></span>[3848](#fn_3847) in order that he may afterwards be
able to separate them from the alien things. A separation is possible by
help of the conjunction through which it is made.  Accordingly, the
things which He separated He also proved to have been once one; as they
would have remained, were it not for His separation. But still we make
this concession, that there is a separation, by reformation, by
amplification, <span id="fr_3848"></span>[3849](#fn_3848) by progress;
just as the fruit is separated from the seed, although the fruit comes
from the seed. So likewise the gospel is separated from the law, whilst
it advances <span id="fr_3849"></span>[3850](#fn_3849) from the law—a
different thing <span id="fr_3850"></span>[3851](#fn_3850) from it, but
not an alien one; diverse, but not contrary. Nor in Christ do we even
find any novel form of discourse. Whether He proposes simili<span
id="page_362">p. 362</span> <span id="v.iv.v.xi-Page_362"></span>tudes
or refute questions, it comes from the seventy-seventh Psalm.  “I will
open,” says He, “my mouth in a parable” (that is, in a similitude); “I
will utter *dark* problems” (that is, I will set forth questions). <span
id="fr_3851"></span>[3852](#fn_3851) If you should wish to prove that a
man belonged to another race, no doubt you would fetch your proof from
the idiom of his language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3810"></span>[360:3811](0030410.htm#fr_3810) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p3"></span> He means Levi or St. Matthew; see [Luke
v. 27-39](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3811"></span>[360:3812](0030410.htm#fr_3811) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p4"></span> Profanum.

<span id="fn_3812"></span>[360:3813](0030410.htm#fr_3812) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p5"></span> [Matt. xvi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3813"></span>[360:3814](0030410.htm#fr_3813) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p6"></span> [Luke v.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#031)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3814"></span>[360:3815](0030410.htm#fr_3814) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p7"></span> Male descendit.

<span id="fn_3815"></span>[360:3816](0030410.htm#fr_3815) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p8"></span> Homo a deo Marcionis.

<span id="fn_3816"></span>[360:3817](0030410.htm#fr_3816) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p9"></span> See chap. vii. of this book, and chap.
ii. of book. iii.

<span id="fn_3817"></span>[360:3818](0030410.htm#fr_3817) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p10"></span> Plenum ordinem.

<span id="fn_3818"></span>[360:3819](0030410.htm#fr_3818) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p11"></span> See below, chap. xviii.

<span id="fn_3819"></span>[360:3820](0030410.htm#fr_3819) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p12"></span> Tuebor.

<span id="fn_3820"></span>[360:3821](0030410.htm#fr_3820) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p13"></span> Ipsum.

<span id="fn_3821"></span>[360:3822](0030410.htm#fr_3821) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p14"></span> Marcion’s *diversitas* implied an utter
incompatibility between John and Christ; for it assigned John to the
Creator, from whom it took Christ away.

<span id="fn_3822"></span>[360:3823](0030410.htm#fr_3822) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p15"></span> De disciplinis: or, “about
discipleships.”

<span id="fn_3823"></span>[360:3824](0030410.htm#fr_3823) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p16"></span> De auctoritatibus; or, “about the
authors thereof.”

<span id="fn_3824"></span>[360:3825](0030410.htm#fr_3824) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p17"></span> Humiliter.

<span id="fn_3825"></span>[361:3826](0030410.htm#fr_3825) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p18"></span> [Luke
5:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#035)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3826"></span>[361:3827](0030410.htm#fr_3826) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p19"></span> Concessit.

<span id="fn_3827"></span>[361:3828](0030410.htm#fr_3827) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p20"></span> Rejecturus alioquin.

<span id="fn_3828"></span>[361:3829](0030410.htm#fr_3828) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p21"></span> [Ps.
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3829"></span>[361:3830](0030410.htm#fr_3829) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p22"></span> [Isa. lxi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3830"></span>[361:3831](0030410.htm#fr_3830) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p23"></span> Deputat.

<span id="fn_3831"></span>[361:3832](0030410.htm#fr_3831) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p24"></span> The same, which spake again by Isaiah.

<span id="fn_3832"></span>[361:3833](0030410.htm#fr_3832) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p25"></span> [Isa. xlix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3833"></span>[361:3834](0030410.htm#fr_3833) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p26"></span> [Song of Sol. iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3834"></span>[361:3835](0030410.htm#fr_3834) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p27"></span> There is also in Hebrew an affinity
between <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p27.1"></span>הנבל</span>, “frankincense,” and <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="v.iv.v.xi-p27.2"></span>זובבִל</span>,
“Lebanon.” \[Note this strange but reiterated and emphatic
identification of incense with *idolatry*. In the Gentile church it was
thoroughly identified with Paganism.\]

<span id="fn_3835"></span>[361:3836](0030410.htm#fr_3835) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p27.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p28"></span> See also book i. chap. xxix. \[On this
reservation of Baptism see Elucidation II.\]

<span id="fn_3836"></span>[361:3837](0030410.htm#fr_3836) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p29"></span> Alter.

<span id="fn_3837"></span>[361:3838](0030410.htm#fr_3837) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p30"></span> [Jer. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3838"></span>[361:3839](0030410.htm#fr_3838) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p31"></span> His reading of (probably) [Isa.
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019), [2 Cor.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3839"></span>[361:3840](0030410.htm#fr_3839) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p32"></span> Olim statuimus.

<span id="fn_3840"></span>[361:3841](0030410.htm#fr_3840) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p33"></span> Ille.

<span id="fn_3841"></span>[361:3842](0030410.htm#fr_3841) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p34"></span> Novitas.

<span id="fn_3842"></span>[361:3843](0030410.htm#fr_3842) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p35"></span> Vetustas.

<span id="fn_3843"></span>[361:3844](0030410.htm#fr_3843) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p36"></span> That is, “the oldness of the law.”

<span id="fn_3844"></span>[361:3845](0030410.htm#fr_3844) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p37"></span> That is, “the newness of the gospel.”

<span id="fn_3845"></span>[361:3846](0030410.htm#fr_3845) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p38"></span> Notandam.

<span id="fn_3846"></span>[361:3847](0030410.htm#fr_3846) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p39"></span> Separatione. The more general reading
is *separationem*.

<span id="fn_3847"></span>[361:3848](0030410.htm#fr_3847) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p40"></span> Alienis: i.e., “things not his own.”

<span id="fn_3848"></span>[361:3849](0030410.htm#fr_3848) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p41"></span> Amplitudinem.

<span id="fn_3849"></span>[361:3850](0030410.htm#fr_3849) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p42"></span> Provehitur, “is developed.”

<span id="fn_3850"></span>[361:3851](0030410.htm#fr_3850) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p43"></span> Aliud.

<span id="fn_3851"></span>[362:3852](0030410.htm#fr_3851) <span
id="v.iv.v.xi-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p44"></span> See [Ps. lxxviii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.xi-p44.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Christ's Authority Over the Sabbath. As Its Lord He Recalled It
from Pharisaic Neglect to the Original Purpose of Its Institution by the
Creator the Case of the Disciples Who Plucked the Ears of Corn on the
Sabbath. The Withered Hand Healed on the Sabbath.](0030411)
