[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030689)  [Next](0030691) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.x.ix"></span>

<span id="v.x.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.x.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.</span>

<span id="v.x.ix-p2"></span>It remains for us, lest ancient times may
perhaps have had the sacrament <span
id="fr_8269"></span>[8270](#fn_8269) (exclusively) their own, to review
the modern Christian system, as though, being also from God, it might be
different *from what preceded*, and besides, therefore, opposed thereto
in its code of rules likewise, so that its Wisdom knows not to murder
her own sons! Evidently, in the case of Christ both the divine nature
and the will and the sect are different *from any previously known*!  He
will have commanded either no martyrdoms at all, or those which must be
understood in a sense different from the ordinary, being such a person
as to urge no one to a risk of this kind as to promise no reward to them
who suffer for Him, because He does not wish them to suffer; and
therefore does He say, when setting forth His chief commands, “Blessed
are they who are persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the
kingdom of heaven.” <span id="fr_8270"></span>[8271](#fn_8270) The
following statement, indeed, applies *first* to all without restriction,
then specially to the apostles themselves:  “Blessed shall ye be when
men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of
evil against you, for my sake. Rejoice and be exceeding glad, since very
great is your reward in heaven; for so used their fathers to do even to
the prophets.” So that He likewise foretold their having to be
themselves also slain, after the example of the prophets. Though, even
if He had appointed all this persecution in case He were obeyed for
those only who were then apostles, assuredly through them along with the
entire sacrament, with the shoot of the name, with the layer of the Holy
Spirit, the rule about enduring persecution also would have had respect
to us too, as to disciples by inheritance, and, (as it were,) bushes
from the apostolic seed. For even thus again does He address words of
guidance to the apostles: “Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves;” and, “Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to
the councils, and they will scourge you in their synagogues; and ye
shall be brought before governors and kings for my sake, for a testimony
against them and the Gentiles,” etc. <span
id="fr_8271"></span>[8272](#fn_8271) Now when He adds, “But the brother
will deliver up the brother to death, and the father the child; and the
children shall rise up against their parents, and cause them to be put
to death,” He has clearly announced with reference to the others, (that
they would be subjected to) this form of unrighteous conduct, which we
do not find *exemplified* in the case of the apostles. For none of them
had experience of a father or a brother as a betrayer, which very many
of us have. Then He returns to the apostles: “And ye shall be hated of
all men for my name’s sake.” How much more shall we, for whom there
exists the necessity of being delivered up by parents too! Thus, by
allotting this very betrayal, now to the apostles, now to all, He pours
out the same destruction upon all the possessors of the name, on whom
the name, along with the condition that it be an object of hatred, will
rest. But he who will endure on to the end—this man will be saved. By
enduring what but persecution,—betrayal,—death? For to endure to the end
is nought else than to suffer the end. And therefore there immediately
follow, “The disciple is not above his master, nor the servant above his
own lord;” because, seeing the Master and Lord Himself was stedfast in
suffering persecution, betrayal and death, much more will it be the duty
of His servants and disciples to bear the same, that they may not seem
as if superior to Him, or to have got an immunity from the assaults of
unrighteousness, since this itself should be glory enough for them, to
be conformed to the sufferings of their Lord and Master; and, preparing
them for the endurance of these, He reminds them that they must not fear
such persons as kill the body only, but are not able to destroy the
soul, but that they must dedicate fear to Him rather <span
id="page_642">p. 642</span> <span id="v.x.ix-Page_642"></span>who has
such power that He can kill both body and soul, and destroy them in
hell. Who, pray, are these slayers of the body only, but the governors
and kings aforesaid—men, I ween? Who is the ruler of the soul also, but
God only? Who is this but the threatener of fires *hereafter*, He
without whose will not even one of two sparrows falls to the ground;
that is, not even one of the two substances of man, flesh or spirit,
because the number of our hairs also has been recorded before Him? Fear
ye not, therefore. When He adds, “Ye are of more value than many
sparrows,” He makes promise that we shall not in vain—that is, not
without profit—fall to the ground if we choose to be killed by men
rather than by God. “Whosoever therefore will confess in me before men,
in him will I confess also before my Father who is in heaven; <span
id="fr_8272"></span>[8273](#fn_8272) and whosoever shall deny me before
men, him will I deny also before my Father who is in heaven.” Clear, as
I think, are the terms used in announcing, and the way to explain, the
confession as well as the denial, although the mode of putting them is
different. He who confesses himself a Christian, beareth witness that he
is Christ’s; he who is Christ’s must be in Christ. If he is in Christ,
he certainly confesses in Christ, when he confesses himself a
Christian.  For he cannot be this without being in Christ. Besides, by
confessing in Christ he confesses Christ too: since, by virtue of being
a Christian, he is in Christ, while *Christ* Himself also is in him. For
if you have made mention of day, you have also held out to view the
element of light which gives us day, although you may not have made
mention of light. Thus, albeit He has not expressly said, “He who will
confess me,” (yet) the conduct involved in daily confession is not
different from what is meant in our Lord’s declaration. For he who
confesses himself to be what he is, that is, a Christian, confesses that
likewise by which he is it, that is, Christ. Therefore he who has denied
that he is a Christian, has denied in Christ, by denying that he is in
Christ while he denies that he is a Christian; and, on the other hand,
by denying that Christ is in him, while He denies that he is in Christ,
he will deny Christ too. Thus both he who will deny in Christ, will deny
Christ, and he who will confess in Christ will confess Christ. It would
have been enough, therefore, though our Lord had made an announcement
about confessing merely. For, from His mode of presenting confession, it
might be decided beforehand with reference to its opposite too—denial,
that is—that denial is repaid by the Lord with denial, just as
confession is with confession. And therefore, since in the mould in
which the confession has been cast the state of (the case with reference
to) denial also may be perceived, it is evident that to another manner
of denial belongs what the Lord has announced concerning it, in terms
different from those in which He speaks of confession, when He says,
“Who will deny me,” not “Who will deny in me.” For He had foreseen that
this form of violence also would, for the most part, immediately follow
when any one had been forced to renounce the Christian name,—that he who
had denied that he was a Christian would be compelled to deny Christ
Himself too by blaspheming Him.  As not long ago, alas, we shuddered at
the struggle waged in this way by some with their entire faith, which
had had favourable omens. Therefore it will be to no purpose to say,
“Though I shall deny that I am a Christian, I shall not be denied by
Christ, for I have not denied Himself.” For even so much will be
inferred from that denial, by which, seeing he denies Christ in him by
denying that he is a Christian, he has denied *Christ* Himself also. But
there is more, because He threatens likewise shame with shame (in
return): “Whosoever shall be ashamed of me before men, of him will I
also be ashamed before my Father who is in heaven.” For He was aware
that denial is produced even most of all by shame, that the state of the
mind appears in the forehead, and that the wound of shame precedes that
in the body.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8269"></span>[641:8270](0030690.htm#fr_8269) <span
id="v.x.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.ix-p3"></span> Tertullian means martyrdom.—<span
class="sc"><span id="v.x.ix-p3.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_8270"></span>[641:8271](0030690.htm#fr_8270) <span
id="v.x.ix-p3.3"></span>

<span id="v.x.ix-p4"></span> [Matt.
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010), [Luke
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#023)<span id="v.x.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8271"></span>[641:8272](0030690.htm#fr_8271) <span
id="v.x.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.x.ix-p5"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span id="v.x.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_8272"></span>[642:8273](0030690.htm#fr_8272) <span
id="v.x.ix-p5.3"></span>

<span id="v.x.ix-p6"></span> The words in the Greek, though correctly
rendered in our authorized version, are, when translated literally, what
Tertullian represents them to be.—<span class="sc"><span
id="v.x.ix-p6.2"></span>Tr</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X.](0030691)
