[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030052)  [Next](0030054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xlvii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlvii-p2"></span>Unless I am utterly mistaken, there is
nothing so old as the truth; and the already proved antiquity of the
divine writings is so far of use to me, that it leads men more easily to
take it in that they are the treasure-source whence all later wisdom has
been taken. And were it not necessary to keep my work to a moderate
size, I might launch forth also into the proof of this. What poet or
sophist has not drunk at the fountain of the prophets? Thence,
accordingly, the philosophers watered their arid minds, so that it is
the things they <span id="page_52">p. 52</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xlvii-Page_52"></span>have from us which bring us into
comparison with them. For this reason, I imagine, philosophy was
banished by certain states—I mean by the Thebans, by the Spartans also,
and the Argives—its disciples sought to imitate our doctrines; and
ambitious, as I have said, of glory and eloquence alone, if they fell
upon anything in the collection of sacred Scriptures which displeased
them, in their own peculiar style of research, they perverted it to
serve their purpose: for they had no adequate faith in their divinity to
keep them from changing them, nor had they any sufficient understanding
of them, either, as being still at the time under veil—even obscure to
the Jews themselves, whose peculiar possession they seemed to be. For
so, too, if the truth was distinguished by its simplicity, the more on
that account the fastidiousness of man, too proud to believe, set to
altering it; so that even what they found certain they made uncertain by
their admixtures.  Finding a simple revelation of God, they proceeded to
dispute about Him, not as He had revealed to them, but turned aside to
debate about His properties, His nature, His abode. Some assert Him to
be incorporeal; others maintain He has a body,—the Platonists teaching
the one doctrine, and the Stoics the other.  Some think that He is
composed of atoms, others of numbers: such are the different views of
Epicurus and Pythagoras. One thinks He is made of fire; so it appeared
to Heraclitus. The Platonists, again, hold that He administers the
affairs of the world; the Epicureans, on the contrary, that He is idle
and inactive, and, so to speak, a nobody in human things. Then the
Stoics represent Him as placed outside the world, and whirling round
this huge mass from without like a potter; while the Platonists place
Him within the world, as a pilot is in the ship he steers. So, in like
manner, they differ in their views about the world itself, whether it is
created or uncreated, whether it is destined to pass away or to remain
for ever. So again it is debated concerning the nature of the soul,
which some contend is divine and eternal, while others hold that it is
dissoluble. According to each one’s fancy, He has introduced either
something new, or refashioned the old. Nor need we wonder if the
speculations of philosophers have perverted the older Scriptures. Some
of their brood, with their opinions, have even adulterated our new-given
Christian revelation, and corrupted it into a system of philosophic
doctrines, and from the one path have struck off many and inexplicable
by-roads. <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) And I have alluded to
this, lest any one becoming acquainted with the variety of parties among
us, this might seem to him to put us on a level with the philosophers,
and he might condemn the truth from the different ways in which it is
defended. But we at once put in a plea in bar against these tainters of
our purity, asserting that this is the rule of truth which comes down
from Christ by transmission through His companions, to whom we shall
prove that those devisers of different doctrines are all posterior.
Everything opposed to the truth has been got up from the truth itself,
the spirits of error carrying on this system of opposition. By them all
corruptions of wholesome discipline have been secretly instigated; by
them, too, certain fables have been introduced, that, by their
resemblance to the truth, they might impair its credibility, or
vindicate their own higher claims to faith; so that people might think
Christians unworthy of credit because the poets or philosophers are so,
or might regard the poets and philosophers as worthier of confidence
from their not being followers of Christ. Accordingly, we get ourselves
laughed at for proclaiming that God will one day judge the world. For,
like us, the poets and philosophers set up a judgment-seat in the realms
below.  And if we threaten Gehenna, which is a reservoir of secret fire
under the earth for purposes of punishment, we have in the same way
derision heaped on us. For so, too, they have their Pyriphlegethon, a
river of flame in the regions of the dead. And if we speak of
Paradise, <span id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) the place of heavenly
bliss appointed to receive the spirits of the saints, severed from the
knowledge of this world by that fiery zone as by a sort of enclosure,
the Elysian plains have taken possession of their faith. Whence is it, I
pray you have all this, so like us, in the poets and philosophers?  The
reason simply is, that they have been taken from our religion. But if
they are taken from our sacred things, as being of earlier date, then
ours are the truer, and have higher claims upon belief, since even their
imitations find faith among you. If they maintain their sacred mysteries
to have sprung from their own minds, in that case ours will be
reflections of what are later than themselves, which by the nature of
things is impossible, for never does the shadow precede the body which
casts it, or the image the reality. <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[52:145](0030053.htm#fr_144) <span
id="iv.iii.xlvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlvii-p3"></span> \[See Irenæus, vol. i. p. 377 this
Series.\]

<span id="fn_145"></span>[52:146](0030053.htm#fr_145) <span
id="iv.iii.xlvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlvii-p4"></span> \[Elucidation X.\]

<span id="fn_146"></span>[52:147](0030053.htm#fr_146) <span
id="iv.iii.xlvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlvii-p5"></span> True, in the sense that a shadow
cannot be projected by a body not yet existent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVIII.](0030054)
