[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030099)  [Next](0030101.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xvi-p2"></span>Since, then, all passionate excitement is
forbidden us, we are debarred from every kind of spectacle, and
especially from the circus, where such excitement presides as in its
proper element. See the people coming to it already under strong
emotion, already tumultuous, already passion-blind, already agitated
about their bets. The prætor is too slow for them: their eyes are ever
rolling as though along with the lots in his urn; then they hang all
eager on the signal; there is the united shout of a common madness.
Observe how “out of themselves” they are by their foolish speeches. “He
has thrown it!” they exclaim; and they announce each one to his
neighbour what all have seen. I have clearest evidence of their
blindness; they do not see what is really thrown. They think it a
“signal cloth,” but it is the likeness of the devil cast headlong from
on high. And the result accordingly is, that they fly into rages, and
passions, and discords, and all that they who are consecrated to peace
ought never to indulge in. Then there are curses and reproaches, with no
cause of hatred; there are cries of applause, with nothing to merit
them.  What are the partakers in all this—not their own masters—to
obtain of it for themselves? unless, it may be, that which makes them
not their own: they are saddened by another’s sorrow, they are gladdened
by another’s joy. Whatever they desire on the one hand, or detest on the
other, is entirely foreign to themselves. So love with them is a useless
thing, and hatred is unjust. Or is a causeless love perhaps more
legitimate than a causeless hatred? God certainly forbids us to hate
even with a reason for our hating; for He commands us to love our
enemies. God forbids us to curse, though there be some ground for doing
so, in commanding that those who curse us we are to bless. But what is
more merciless than the circus, where people do not spare even their
rulers and fellow-citizens? If any of its madnesses are becoming
elsewhere in the saints of God, they will be seemly in the circus too;
but if they are nowhere right, so neither are they there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII.](0030101.md)
