[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030018)  [Next](0030020.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p2"></span>“But they are gods to us,” you say. And
how is it, then, that in utter inconsistency with this, you are
convicted of impious, sacrilegious, and irreligious conduct to them,
neglecting those you imagine to exist, destroying those who are the
objects of your fear, making mock of those whose honour you avenge? See
now if I go beyond the truth. First, indeed, seeing you worship, some
one god, and some another, of course you give offence to those you do
not worship. You cannot continue to give preference to one without
slighting another, for selection implies rejection. You despise,
therefore, those whom you thus reject; for in your rejection of them, it
is plain you have no dread of giving them offence. For, as we have
already shown, every god depended on the decision of the senate for his
godhead. No god was he whom man in his own counsels did not wish to be
so, and thereby condemned. The family deities you call Lares, you
exercise a domestic authority over, pledging them, selling them,
changing them—making sometimes a cooking-pot of a Saturn, a firepan of a
Minerva, as one or other happens to be worn down, or broken in its long
sacred use, or as the family head feels the pressure of some more sacred
home necessity. In like manner, by public law you disgrace your state
gods, putting them in the auction-catalogue, and making them a source of
revenue. Men seek to get the Capitol, as they seek to get the herb
market, under the voice of the crier, under the auction spear, under the
registration of the quæstor. Deity is struck off and farmed out to the
highest bidder. But indeed lands burdened with tribute are of less
value; men under the assessment of a poll-tax are less noble; for these
things are the marks of servitude. In the case of the gods, on the other
hand, the sacredness is great in proportion to the tribute which they
yield; nay, the more sacred is a god, the larger is the tax he pays.
Majesty is made a source of gain. Religion goes about the taverns
begging. You demand a price for the privilege of standing on temple
ground, for access to the sacred services; there is no gratuitous
knowledge of your divinities permitted—you must buy their favours with a
price. What honours in any way do you render to them that you do not
render to the dead? You have temples in the one case just as in the
other; you have altars in the one case as in the other. Their statues
have the same dress, the same insignia. As the dead man had his age, his
art, his occupation, so it is with the deity. In what respect does the
funeral feast differ from the feast of Jupiter? or the bowl of the gods
from the ladle of the manes? or the undertaker from the soothsayer, as
in fact this latter personage also attends upon the dead? With perfect
propriety you give divine honours to your departed emperors, as you
worship them in life. The gods will count themselves indebted to you;
nay, it will be matter of high rejoicing among them that their masters
are made their equals.  But when you adore Larentina, a public
prostitute—I could have wished that it might at least have been Lais or
Phryne—among your Junos, and Cereses, and Dianas; when you instal in
your Pantheon Simon Magus, <span id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) giving
him a statue and the title of Holy God; when you make an infamous court
page a god of the sacred synod, although your ancient deities are in
reality no better, they will still think themselves affronted by you,
that the privilege antiquity conferred on them alone, has been allowed
to others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_89"></span>[29:90](0030019.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p3"></span> \[Confirming the statement of Justin
Martyr. See Vol. I., p. 187, note 1, and p. 193, this Series.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV.](0030020.md)
