[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030086)  [Next](0030088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III.</span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p2"></span>Fortified by this knowledge against
heathen views, let us rather turn to the unworthy reasonings of our own
people; for the faith of some, either too simple or too scrupulous,
demands direct authority from Scripture for giving up the shows, and
holds out that the matter is a doubtful one, because such abstinence is
not clearly and in words imposed upon God’s servants. Well, we never
find it expressed with the same precision, “Thou shalt not enter circus
or theatre, thou shalt not look on combat or show;” as it is plainly
laid down, “Thou shalt not kill; thou shalt not worship an idol; thou
shalt not commit adultery or fraud.” <span
id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) But we find that that first word of
David bears on this very sort of thing:  “Blessed,” he says, “is the man
who has not gone into the assembly of the impious, <span id="page_81">p.
81</span> <span id="iv.v.iii-Page_81"></span>nor stood in the way of
sinners, nor sat in the seat of scorners.” <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) Though he seems to have predicted
beforehand of that just man, that he took no part in the meetings and
deliberations of the Jews, taking counsel about the slaying of our Lord,
yet divine Scripture has ever far-reaching applications: after the
immediate sense has been exhausted, in all directions it fortifies the
practice of the religious life, so that here also you have an utterance
which is not far from a plain interdicting of the shows. If he called
those few Jews an assembly of the wicked, how much more will he so
designate so vast a gathering of heathens! Are the heathens less
impious, less sinners, less enemies of Christ, than the Jews were then?
And see, too, how other things agree. For at the shows they also stand
in the way. For they call the spaces between the seats going round the
amphitheatre, and the passages which separate the people running down,
ways. The place in the curve where the matrons sit is called a chair.
Therefore, on the contrary, it holds, unblessed is he who has entered
any council of wicked men, and has stood in any way of sinners, and has
sat in any chair of scorners. We may understand a thing as spoken
generally, even when it requires a certain special interpretation to be
given to it. For some things spoken with a special reference contain in
them general truth. When God admonishes the Israelites of their duty, or
sharply reproves them, He has surely a reference to all men; when He
threatens destruction to Egypt and Ethiopia, He surely pre-condemns
every sinning nation, whatever. If, reasoning from *species* to *genus*,
every nation that sins against them is an Egypt and Ethiopia; so also,
reasoning from genus to species, with reference to the origin of shows,
every show is an assembly of the wicked.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_351"></span>[80:352](0030087.htm#fr_351) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p3"></span> [Ex. xx.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014)<span id="iv.v.iii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[81:353](0030087.htm#fr_352) <span
id="iv.v.iii-p3.3"></span>

<span id="iv.v.iii-p4"></span> [Ps. i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)<span id="iv.v.iii-p4.1"></span>.
\[Kaye’s censure of this use of the text, (p. 366) seems to me
gratuitous.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV.](0030088)
