[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030188)  [Next](0030190) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Of the Times of Christ’s Birth
and Passion, and of Jerusalem’s Destruction.</span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p2"></span>Accordingly the times must be inquired
into of the predicted and future nativity of the Christ, and of His
passion, and of the extermination of the city of Jerusalem, that is, its
devastation. For Daniel says, that “both the holy city and the holy
place are exterminated together with the coming Leader, and that the
pinnacle is destroyed unto ruin.” <span
id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225) And so the times of the coming
Christ, the Leader, <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226) must be
inquired into, which we shall trace in Daniel; and, after computing
them, shall prove Him to be come, even on the ground of the times
prescribed, and of competent signs and operations of His.  Which matters
we prove, again, on the ground of the consequences which were ever
announced as to follow His advent; in order that we may believe all to
have been as well fulfilled as foreseen.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p5"></span>In such wise, therefore, did Daniel
predict concerning Him, as to show both when and in what time He was to
set the nations free; and how, after the passion of the Christ, that
city had to be exterminated. For he says thus: “In the first year under
Darius, son of Ahasuerus, of the seed of the Medes, who reigned over the
kingdom of the Chaldees, I Daniel understood in the books the number of
the years.…And while I was yet speaking in my prayer, behold, the man
Gabriel, whom I saw in the vision in the beginning, flying; and he
touched me, as it were, at the hour of the evening sacrifice, and made
me understand, and spake with me, and said, Daniel I am now come out to
imbue thee with understanding; in the beginning of thy supplication went
out a word. And I am come to announce to thee, because thou art a man
<span id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span
id="iv.ix.viii-Page_159"></span>of desires; <span
id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227) and ponder thou on the word, and
understand in the vision. Seventy hebdomads have been abridged <span
id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228) upon thy commonalty, and upon the
holy city, until delinquency be made inveterate, and sins sealed, and
righteousness obtained by entreaty, and righteousness eternal
introduced; and in order that vision and prophet may be sealed, and an
holy one of holy ones anointed.  And thou shalt know, and thoroughly
see, and understand, from the going forth of a word for restoring and
rebuilding Jerusalem unto the Christ, the Leader, hebdomads (seven and
an half, and <span id="fr_1229"></span>[1230](#fn_1229) ) lxii and an
half: and it shall convert, and shall be built into height and
entrenchment, and the times shall be renewed: and after these lxii
hebdomads shall the anointing be exterminated, and shall not be; and the
city and the holy place shall he exterminate together with the Leader,
who is making His advent; and they shall be cut short as in a deluge,
until (the) end of a war, which shall be cut short unto ruin. And he
shall confirm a testament in many. In one hebdomad and the half of the
hebdomad shall be taken away my sacrifice and libation, and in the holy
place the execration of devastation, (and <span
id="fr_1230"></span>[1231](#fn_1230) ) until the end of (the) time
consummation shall be given with regard to this devastation.” <span
id="fr_1231"></span>[1232](#fn_1231)

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p11"></span>Observe we, therefore, the limit,—how,
in truth, he predicts that there are to be lxx hebdomads, *within which*
if they receive Him, “it shall be built into height and entrenchment,
and the times shall be renewed.” But God, foreseeing what was to be—that
they will not merely not receive Him, but will both persecute and
deliver Him to death—both recapitulated, and said, that in lx and ii and
an half of an hebdomad He is born, and an holy one of holy ones is
anointed; but that when vii hebdomads <span
id="fr_1232"></span>[1233](#fn_1232) and an half were fulfilling, He had
to suffer, and the holy city had to be exterminated after one and an
half hebdomad—whereby namely, the seven and an half hebdomads have been
completed. For he says thus: “And the city and the holy place to be
exterminated together with the leader who is to come; and they shall be
cut short as in a deluge; and he shall destroy the pinnacle unto
ruin.” <span id="fr_1233"></span>[1234](#fn_1233) Whence, therefore, do
we show that the Christ came within the lxii and an half hebdomads?  We
shall count, moreover, from the first year of Darius, as at this
particular time is shown to Daniel this particular vision; for he says,
“And understand and conjecture that at the completion of thy word <span
id="fr_1234"></span>[1235](#fn_1234) I make thee these answers.” Whence
we are bound to compute from the first year of Darius, when Daniel saw
this vision.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p15"></span>Let us see, therefore, how the years
are filled up until the advent of the Christ:—

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p16"></span>For Darius reigned…xviiii <span
id="fr_1235"></span>[1236](#fn_1235) years (19).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p18"></span>Artaxerxes reigned…xl and i years (41).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p19"></span>Then King Ochus (who is also called
Cyrus) reigned…xxiiii years (24).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p20"></span>Argus…one year.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p21"></span>Another Darius, who is also named
Melas…xxi years (21).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p22"></span>Alexander the Macedonian…xii years (12)

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p23"></span>Then, after Alexander, who had reigned
over both Medes and Persians, whom he had reconquered, and had
established his kingdom firmly in Alexandria, when withal he called that
(city) by his own name; <span id="fr_1236"></span>[1237](#fn_1236) after
him reigned, (there, in Alexandria,)

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p25"></span>Soter…xxxv years (35).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p26"></span>To whom succeeds Philadelphus,
reigning…xxx and viii years (38).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p27"></span>To him succeeds Euergetes…xxv years
(25).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p28"></span>Then Philopator…xvii years (17).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p29"></span>After him Epiphanes…xxiiii years (24).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p30"></span>Then another Euergetes…xxviiii years
(29).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p31"></span>Then another Soter,…xxxviii years (38).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p32"></span>Ptolemy…xxxvii years (37).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p33"></span>Cleopatra,…xx years v months (20 5–12).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p34"></span>Yet again Cleopatra reigned jointly
with Augustus…xiii years (13).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p35"></span>After Cleopatra, Augustus reigned
other…xliii years (43).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p36"></span>For all the years of the empire of
Augustus were…lvi years (56).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p37"></span>Let us see, moreover, how in the
forty-first year of the empire of Augustus, when he has been reigning
for xx and viii years after the death of Cleopatra, the Christ is born. 
(And the same Augustus survived, after Christ is born, xv years; and the
remaining times of years to the day of the birth of Christ will <span
id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span id="iv.ix.viii-Page_160"></span>bring
us to the xl first year, which is the xx and viiith of Augustus after
the death of Cleopatra.) There are, (then,) made up cccxxx and vii
years, v months: (whence are filled up lxii hebdomads and an half: 
which make up ccccxxxvii years, vi months:) on the day of the birth of
Christ. And (then) “righteousness eternal” was manifested, and “an Holy
One of holy ones was anointed”—that is, Christ—and “sealed was vision
and prophet,” and “sins” were remitted, which, through faith in the name
of Christ, are washed away <span id="fr_1237"></span>[1238](#fn_1237)
for all who believe on Him. But what does he mean by saying that “vision
and prophecy *are sealed*?” That all prophets ever announced of Him that
He was to come and had to suffer. Therefore, since the prophecy was
fulfilled through His advent, for that reason he said that “vision and
prophecy *were sealed*;” inasmuch as He is the signet of all prophets,
fulfilling all things which in days bygone they had announced of
Him. <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238) For after the advent of
Christ and His passion there is no longer “vision or prophet” to
announce Him as to come. In short, if this is not so, let the Jews
exhibit, subsequently to Christ, any volumes of prophets, visible
miracles wrought by any angels, (such as those) which in bygone days the
patriarchs saw until the advent of Christ, who is now come; since which
event “sealed is vision and prophecy,” that is, confirmed.  And justly
does the evangelist <span id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239) write,
“The law and the prophets (were) until John” the Baptist. For, on
Christ’s being baptized, that is, on His sanctifying the waters in His
own baptism, <span id="fr_1240"></span>[1241](#fn_1240) all the
plenitude of bygone spiritual grace-gifts ceased in Christ, sealing as
He did all vision and prophecies, which by His advent He fulfilled.
Whence most firmly does he assert that His advent “seals visions and
prophecy.”

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p42"></span>Accordingly, showing, (as we have
done,) both the number of the years, and the time of the lx two and an
half fulfilled hebdomads, on completion of which, (we have shown) that
Christ is come, that is, has been born, let us see what (mean) other
“vii and an half hebdomads,” which have been subdivided in the abscision
of <span id="fr_1241"></span>[1242](#fn_1241) the former hebdomads; (let
us see, namely,) in what event they have been fulfilled:—

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p44"></span>For, after Augustus who survived after
the birth of Christ, are made up…xv years (15).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p45"></span>To whom succeeded Tiberius Cæsar, and
held the empire…xx years, vii months, xxviii days (20 etc.).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p46"></span>(In the fiftieth year of his empire
Christ suffered, being about xxx years of age when he suffered.)

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p47"></span>Again Caius Cæsar, also called
Caligula,…iii years, viii months, xiii days (3 etc.).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p48"></span>Nero Cæsar,…xi years, ix months, xiii
days (11 etc.).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p49"></span>Galba…vii months, vi days. (7 etc.).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p50"></span>Otho…iii days.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p51"></span>Vitellius,…viii mos., xxvii days (8
mos.).

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p52"></span>Vespasian, in the first year of his
empire, subdues the Jews in war; and there are made lii years, vi
months.  For he reigned xi years. And thus, in the day of their
storming, the Jews fulfilled the lxx hebdomads predicted in Daniel.

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p53"></span>Therefore, when these times also were
completed, and the Jews subdued, there afterwards ceased in that place
“libations and sacrifices,” which thenceforward have not been able to be
in that place celebrated; for “the unction,” too, <span
id="fr_1242"></span>[1243](#fn_1242) was “exterminated” in that place
after the passion of Christ. For it had been predicted that the unction
*should* be exterminated in that place; as in the Psalms it is
prophesied, “They exterminated my hands and feet.” <span
id="fr_1243"></span>[1244](#fn_1243) And the suffering of this
“extermination” was perfected within the times of the lxx hebdomads,
under Tiberius Cæsar, in the consulate of Rubellius Geminus and Fufius
Geminus, in the month of March, at the times of the passover, on the
eighth day before the calends of April, <span
id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244) on the first day of unleavened
bread, on which they slew the lamb at even, just as had been enjoined by
Moses. <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245) Accordingly, all the
synagogue of Israel *did* slay Him, saying to Pilate, when he was
desirous to dismiss Him, “His blood be upon us, and upon our
children;” <span id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246) and, “If thou
dismiss him, thou art not a friend of Cæsar;” <span
id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247) in order that all things might be
fulfilled which had been written of Him. <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[158:1226](0030189.htm#fr_1225) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p3"></span> See [Dan. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#026)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p3.1"></span>
(especially in the LXX.).

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[158:1227](0030189.htm#fr_1226) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p4"></span> Comp. [Isa. lv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[159:1228](0030189.htm#fr_1227) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p6"></span> Vir desideriorum; Gr. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iv.ix.viii-p6.1"></span>ἀνὴρ ἐπιθυμιῶν</span>;
Eng. ver. “a man greatly beloved.” Elsewhere Tertullian has another
rendering—“miserabilis.” See *de Jej.* cc. vii, ix.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[159:1229](0030189.htm#fr_1228) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p7"></span> Or, “abbreviated;” breviatæ sunt; Gr.
<span class="Greek"><span
id="iv.ix.viii-p7.1"></span>συνετμήθνσαν</span>. For this rendering, and
the interpretations which in ancient and modern days have been founded
on it, see G. S. Faber’s Dissert. on the prophecy of the seventy weeks,
pp. 5, 6, 109–112. (London, 1811.) The whole work will repay perusal.

<span id="fn_1229"></span>[159:1230](0030189.htm#fr_1229) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p8"></span> These words are given, by Oehler and
Rig., on the authority of Pamelius. The <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ix.viii-p8.2"></span>mss.</span> and early editions are without
them.

<span id="fn_1230"></span>[159:1231](0030189.htm#fr_1230) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p9"></span> Also supplied by Pamelius.

<span id="fn_1231"></span>[159:1232](0030189.htm#fr_1231) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p10"></span> See [Dan.
9:0](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#000), Dan. 24:0<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p10.1"></span>. It seemed best to render with the
strictest literality, without regard to anything else; as an idea will
thus then be given of the condition of the text, which, as it stands,
differs widely, as will be seen, from the Hebrew and also from the LXX.,
as it stands in the ed. Tisch. Lips. 1860, to which I always adapt my
references.

<span id="fn_1232"></span>[159:1233](0030189.htm#fr_1232) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p12"></span> Hebdomad*es* is preferred to Oehler’s
-*as*, a reading which he follows apparently on slender authority.

<span id="fn_1233"></span>[159:1234](0030189.htm#fr_1233) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p13"></span> There is no trace of these last words
in Tischendorf’s LXX. here; and only in his footnotes is the “pinnacle”
mentioned.

<span id="fn_1234"></span>[159:1235](0030189.htm#fr_1234) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p14"></span> Or, “speech.” The reference seems to
be to [Dan. 9.23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p14.1"></span>, but there is no such statement in Daniel.

<span id="fn_1235"></span>[159:1236](0030189.htm#fr_1235) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p17"></span> So Oehler; and I print all these
numbers uniformly—as in the former part of the present chapter—exactly
in accordance with the Latin forms, for the sake of showing how easily,
in such calculations, errors may creep in.

<span id="fn_1236"></span>[159:1237](0030189.htm#fr_1236) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p24"></span> Comp. [Ps. xlix.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p24.1"></span>
(in LXX. [Ps. xlviii. 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p24.2"></span>).

<span id="fn_1237"></span>[160:1238](0030189.htm#fr_1237) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p38"></span> Diluuntur. So Oehler has amended for
the reading of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.ix.viii-p38.2"></span>mss.</span> and edd., “tribuuntur.”

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[160:1239](0030189.htm#fr_1238) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p38.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p39"></span> Comp. Pusey on Daniel, pp. 178, 179,
notes 6, 7, 8, and the passages therein referred to. And for the whole
question of the seventy weeks, and of the LXX. version of Daniel, comp.
the same book, Lect. iv. and Note E (2d thousand, 1864). See also pp.
376–381 of the same book; and Faber (as above), pp. 293–297.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[160:1240](0030189.htm#fr_1239) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p40"></span> Or rather, our Lord Himself. See
[Matt. 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#013), [Luke
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1240"></span>[160:1241](0030189.htm#fr_1240) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p40.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p41"></span> Comp. the very obscure passage in *de
Pu.* c. vi., towards the end, on which this expression appears to cast
some light.

<span id="fn_1241"></span>[160:1242](0030189.htm#fr_1241) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p42.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p43"></span> Or, “in abscision from.”

<span id="fn_1242"></span>[160:1243](0030189.htm#fr_1242) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p54"></span> And, without “unction”—i.e. without a
priesthood, the head whereof, or high priest, was always anointed—no
“sacrifices” were lawful.

<span id="fn_1243"></span>[160:1244](0030189.htm#fr_1243) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p55"></span> See [Ps. xxii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p55.1"></span>
(xxi. 17 in LXX.)

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[160:1245](0030189.htm#fr_1244) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p56"></span> i.e., March 25.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[160:1246](0030189.htm#fr_1245) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p56.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p57"></span> Comp. [Exod.
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006), [Mark
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012), [Luke
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[160:1247](0030189.htm#fr_1246) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p57.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p58"></span> See [Matt.
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024),
[25](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#025)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p58.1"></span>, with [John xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p58.2"></span>
and [Acts iii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#013)<span
id="iv.ix.viii-p58.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[160:1248](0030189.htm#fr_1247) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p58.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p59"></span> [John xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#012)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[160:1249](0030189.htm#fr_1248) <span
id="iv.ix.viii-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ix.viii-p60"></span> Comp. [Luke xxiv.
44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044)<span id="iv.ix.viii-p60.1"></span>,
etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Prophecies of the Birth and Achievements of
Christ.](0030190)
