[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030103)  [Next](0030105) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xx-p2"></span>How vain, then—nay, how desperate—is the
reasoning of persons, who, just because they decline to lose a pleasure,
hold out that we cannot point to the specific words or the very place
where this abstinence is mentioned, and where the servants of God are
directly forbidden to have anything to do with such assemblies! I heard
lately a novel defence of himself by a certain play-lover. “The sun,”
said he, “nay, God Himself, looks down from heaven on the show, and no
pollution is contracted.” Yes, and the sun, too, pours down his rays
into the common sewer without being defiled. As for God, would that all
crimes were hid from His eye, that we might all escape judgment! But He
looks on robberies too; He looks on falsehoods, adulteries, frauds,
idolatries, and these same shows; and precisely on that account we will
not look on them, lest the All-seeing see us. You are putting on the
same level, O man, the criminal and the judge; the criminal who is a
criminal because he is seen, and the Judge who is a Judge because He
sees.  Are we set, then, on playing the madman outside the circus
boundaries? Outside the gates of the theatre are we bent on lewdness,
outside the course on arrogance, and outside the amphitheatre on
cruelty, because outside the porticoes, the tiers and the curtains, too,
God has eyes? Never and nowhere is that free from blame which God ever
condemns; never and nowhere is it right to do what you may not do at all
times and in all places.  It is the freedom of the truth from change of
opinion and varying judgments which constitutes its perfection, and
gives it its claims to full mastery, unchanging reverence, and faithful
obedience. That which is really good or really evil cannot be ought
else. But in all things the truth of God is immutable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI.](0030105)
