[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030407)  [Next](0030409) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.ix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX.—Out of St. Luke’s Fifth Chapter
are Found Proofs of Christ’s Belonging to the Creator, E.g. In the Call
of Fishermen to the Apostolic Office, and in the Cleansing of the Leper.
Christ Compared with the Prophet Elisha.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p2"></span>Out of so many kinds of occupations, why
indeed had He such respect for that of fishermen, as to select from it
for apostles Simon and the sons of Zebedee (for it cannot seem to be the
mere fact itself for which the narrative was meant to be drawn out <span
id="fr_3710"></span>[3711](#fn_3710) ), saying to Peter, when he
trembled at the very large draught of the fishes, “Fear not; from
henceforth thou shalt catch men?” <span
id="fr_3711"></span>[3712](#fn_3711) By saying this, He suggested to
them the meaning of the fulfilled prophecy, that it was even He who by
Jeremiah had foretold, “Behold, I will send many fishers; and they shall
fish them,” <span id="fr_3712"></span>[3713](#fn_3712) that is, men.
Then at last they left their boats, and followed Him, understanding that
it was He who had begun to accomplish what He had declared. It is quite
another case, when he affected to choose from the college of
shipmasters, intending one day to appoint the shipmaster Marcion his
apostle. We have indeed already laid it down, in opposition to his
*Antitheses*, that the position of Marcion derives no advantage from the
diversity which he supposes to exist between the Law and the Gospel,
inasmuch as even this was ordained by the Creator, and indeed predicted
in the promise of the new Law, and the new Word, and the new Testament. 
Since, however, he quotes with especial care, <span
id="fr_3713"></span>[3714](#fn_3713) as a proof in his domain, <span
id="fr_3714"></span>[3715](#fn_3714) a certain companion in misery
(<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p7.1"></span>συνταλαίπωρον</span>), and associate in
hatred (<span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p7.2"></span>συμμισούμενον</span> ), with himself, for the
cure of leprosy, <span id="fr_3715"></span>[3716](#fn_3715) I shall not
be sorry to meet him, and before anything else to point out to him the
force of the law figuratively interpreted, which, in this example of a
leper (who was not to be touched, but was rather to be removed from all
intercourse with others), prohibited any communication with a person who
was defiled with sins, with whom the apostle also forbids us even to eat
food, <span id="fr_3716"></span>[3717](#fn_3716) forasmuch as the taint
of sins would be communicated as if contagious, wherever a man should
mix himself with the sinner.  The Lord, therefore, wishing that the law
should be more profoundly understood as signifying spiritual truths by
carnal facts <span id="fr_3717"></span>[3718](#fn_3717) —and thus <span
id="fr_3718"></span>[3719](#fn_3718) not de<span id="page_356">p.
356</span> <span id="v.iv.v.ix-Page_356"></span>stroying, but rather
building up, that *law* which He wanted to have more earnestly
acknowledged—touched the leper, by whom (even although as man He might
have been defiled) He could not be defiled as God, being of course
incorruptible. The prescription, therefore, could not be meant for Him,
that He was bound to observe the law and not touch the unclean person,
seeing that contact with the unclean would not cause defilement to Him.
I thus teach that this (immunity) is consistent in my Christ, the rather
when I show that it is not consistent in yours. Now, if it was as an
enemy <span id="fr_3719"></span>[3720](#fn_3719) of the law that He
touched the leper—disregarding the precept of the law by a contempt of
the defilement—how could he be defiled, when he possessed not a
body <span id="fr_3720"></span>[3721](#fn_3720) which could be defiled?
For a phantom is not susceptible of defilement. He therefore, who could
not be defiled, as being a phantom, will not have an immunity from
pollution by any divine power, but owing to his fantastic vacuity; nor
can he be regarded as having despised pollution, who had not in fact any
material capacity <span id="fr_3721"></span>[3722](#fn_3721) for it;
nor, in like manner, as having destroyed the law, who had escaped
defilement from the occasion of his phantom nature, not from any display
of virtue. If, however, the Creator’s prophet Elisha cleansed Naaman the
Syrian alone, <span id="fr_3722"></span>[3723](#fn_3722) to the
exclusion of <span id="fr_3723"></span>[3724](#fn_3723) so many lepers
in Israel, <span id="fr_3724"></span>[3725](#fn_3724) this fact
contributes nothing to the distinction of Christ, as if he were in this
way the better one for cleansing this Israelite leper, although a
stranger to him, whom his own Lord had been unable to cleanse. The
cleansing of the Syrian rather <span
id="fr_3725"></span>[3726](#fn_3725) was significant throughout the
nations of the world <span id="fr_3726"></span>[3727](#fn_3726) of their
own cleansing in Christ their light, <span
id="fr_3727"></span>[3728](#fn_3727) steeped as they were in the stains
of the seven deadly sins: <span id="fr_3728"></span>[3729](#fn_3728)
idolatry, blasphemy, murder, adultery, fornication, false-witness, and
fraud. <span id="fr_3729"></span>[3730](#fn_3729) Seven times,
therefore, as if once for each, <span
id="fr_3730"></span>[3731](#fn_3730) did he wash in Jordan; both in
order that he might celebrate the expiation of a perfect hebdomad; <span
id="fr_3731"></span>[3732](#fn_3731) and because the virtue and fulness
of the one baptism was *thus* solemnly imputed <span
id="fr_3732"></span>[3733](#fn_3732) to Christ, alone, who was one day
to establish on earth not only a revelation, but also a baptism, endued
with compendious efficacy. <span id="fr_3733"></span>[3734](#fn_3733)
Even Marcion finds here an antithesis: <span
id="fr_3734"></span>[3735](#fn_3734) how that Elisha indeed required a
material resource, applied water, and that seven times; whereas Christ,
by the employment of a word only, and that but once for all, instantly
effected <span id="fr_3735"></span>[3736](#fn_3735) the cure. And surely
I might venture <span id="fr_3736"></span>[3737](#fn_3736) to
claim <span id="fr_3737"></span>[3738](#fn_3737) the Very Word also as
of the Creator’s substance. There is nothing of which He who was the
primitive Author is not also the more powerful one. Forsooth, <span
id="fr_3738"></span>[3739](#fn_3738) it is incredible that that power of
the Creator should have, by a word, produced a remedy for a single
malady, which once by a word brought into being so vast a fabric as the
world! From what can the Christ of the Creator be better discerned, than
from the power of His word? But Christ is on this account another
(Christ), because He acted differently from Elisha—because, *in fact*,
the master is more powerful than his servant! Why, Marcion, do you lay
down the rule, that things are done by servants just as they are by
their very masters? Are you not afraid that it will turn to your
discredit, if you deny that Christ belongs to the Creator, on the ground
that He was *once* more powerful than a servant of the Creator—since, in
comparison with the weakness of Elisha, He is acknowledged to be the
greater, if indeed greater! <span id="fr_3739"></span>[3740](#fn_3739)
For the cure is the same, although there is a difference in the working
of it. What has your Christ performed more than my Elisha?  Nay, what
great thing has the word of your Christ performed, when it has *simply*
done that which a river of the Creator effected? On the same principle
occurs all the rest. So far as renouncing all human glory went, He
forbade the man to publish abroad *the cure*; but so far as the honour
of the law was concerned, He requested that the usual course should be
followed: “Go, show thyself to the priest, and <span id="page_357">p.
357</span> <span id="v.iv.v.ix-Page_357"></span>present the offering
which Moses commanded.” <span id="fr_3740"></span>[3741](#fn_3740) For
the figurative signs of the law in its types He still would have
observed, because of their prophetic import. <span
id="fr_3741"></span>[3742](#fn_3741) These types signified that a man,
once a sinner, but afterwards purified <span
id="fr_3742"></span>[3743](#fn_3742) from the stains thereof by the word
of God, was bound to offer unto God in the temple a gift, even prayer
and thanksgiving in the church through Christ Jesus, who is the Catholic
Priest of the Father. <span id="fr_3743"></span>[3744](#fn_3743)
Accordingly He added: “that it may be for a testimony unto you”—one, no
doubt, whereby He would testify that He was not destroying the law, but
fulfilling it; whereby, too, He would testify that it was He Himself who
was foretold as about to undertake <span
id="fr_3744"></span>[3745](#fn_3744) their sicknesses and infirmities.
This very consistent and becoming explanation of “the testimony,” that
adulator of his own Christ, Marcion seeks to exclude under the cover of
mercy and gentleness. For, being both good (such are his words), and
knowing, besides, that every man who had been freed from leprosy would
be sure to perform the solemnities of the law, therefore He gave this
precept. Well, what then? Has He continued in his goodness (that is to
say, in his permission of the law) or not?  For if he has persevered in
his goodness, he will never become a destroyer of the law; nor will he
ever be accounted as belonging to another god, because there would not
exist that destruction of the law which would constitute his claim to
belong to the other god. If, however, he has not continued good, by a
subsequent destruction of the law, it is a false testimony which he has
since imposed upon them in his cure of the leper; because he has
forsaken his goodness, in destroying the law. If, therefore, he was good
whilst upholding the law, <span id="fr_3745"></span>[3746](#fn_3745) he
has now become evil as a destroyer of the law. However, by the support
which he gave to the law, he affirmed that the law was good.  For no one
permits himself in the support of an evil thing. Therefore he is not
only bad if he has permitted obedience to a bad law; but even worse
still, if he has appeared <span id="fr_3746"></span>[3747](#fn_3746) as
the destroyer of a good law. So that if he commanded the offering of the
gift because he knew that every cured leper would be sure to bring one;
he possibly abstained from commanding what he knew would be
spontaneously done. In vain, therefore, was his coming down, as if with
the intention of destroying the law, when he makes concessions to the
keepers of the law. And yet, <span id="fr_3747"></span>[3748](#fn_3747)
because he knew their disposition, <span
id="fr_3748"></span>[3749](#fn_3748) he ought the more earnestly to have
prevented their neglect of the law, <span
id="fr_3749"></span>[3750](#fn_3749) since he had come for this purpose.
Why then did he not keep silent, that man might of his own simple will
obey the law? For then might he have seemed to some extent <span
id="fr_3750"></span>[3751](#fn_3750) to have persisted in his patience.
But he adds also his own authority increased by the weight of this
“testimony.” Of what testimony, I ask, <span
id="fr_3751"></span>[3752](#fn_3751) if not that of the assertion of the
law?  Surely it matters not in what way he asserted the law—whether as
good, or as supererogatory, <span id="fr_3752"></span>[3753](#fn_3752)
or as patient, or as inconstant—provided, Marcion, I drive you from your
position. <span id="fr_3753"></span>[3754](#fn_3753) Observe, <span
id="fr_3754"></span>[3755](#fn_3754) he commanded that the law should be
fulfilled.  In whatever way he commanded it, in the same way might he
also have first uttered that sentiment: <span
id="fr_3755"></span>[3756](#fn_3755) “I came not to destroy the law, but
to fulfil it.” <span id="fr_3756"></span>[3757](#fn_3756) What business,
therefore, had you to erase out of the Gospel that which was quite
consistent in it? <span id="fr_3757"></span>[3758](#fn_3757) For you
have confessed that, in his goodness, he did in act what you deny that
he did in word. <span id="fr_3758"></span>[3759](#fn_3758) We have
therefore good proof that He uttered the word, in the fact that He did
the deed; and that you have rather expunged the Lord’s word, than that
our (evangelists) <span id="fr_3759"></span>[3760](#fn_3759) have
inserted it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3710"></span>[355:3711](0030408.htm#fr_3710) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p3"></span> Argumentum processurum erat.

<span id="fn_3711"></span>[355:3712](0030408.htm#fr_3711) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p4"></span> See [Luke v.
1-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3712"></span>[355:3713](0030408.htm#fr_3712) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p5"></span> [Jer. xvi.
16](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#016)<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3713"></span>[355:3714](0030408.htm#fr_3713) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p6"></span> Attentius argumentatur.

<span id="fn_3714"></span>[355:3715](0030408.htm#fr_3714) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p7"></span> Apud illum, i.e., the Creator.

<span id="fn_3715"></span>[355:3716](0030408.htm#fr_3715) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p7.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p8"></span> [Luke v.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3716"></span>[355:3717](0030408.htm#fr_3716) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p9"></span> [1 Cor. v.
11](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#011)<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3717"></span>[355:3718](0030408.htm#fr_3717) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p10"></span> Per carnalia, by *material* things.

<span id="fn_3718"></span>[355:3719](0030408.htm#fr_3718) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p11"></span> Hoc nomine.

<span id="fn_3719"></span>[356:3720](0030408.htm#fr_3719) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p12"></span> Æmulus.

<span id="fn_3720"></span>[356:3721](0030408.htm#fr_3720) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p13"></span> Another allusion to Marcion’s *Docetic*
doctrine.

<span id="fn_3721"></span>[356:3722](0030408.htm#fr_3721) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p14"></span> Materiam.

<span id="fn_3722"></span>[356:3723](0030408.htm#fr_3722) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p15"></span> Unicum.

<span id="fn_3723"></span>[356:3724](0030408.htm#fr_3723) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p16"></span> Ex., literally, “alone of.” So [Luke
iv. 27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3724"></span>[356:3725](0030408.htm#fr_3724) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p17"></span> Compare [2 Kings
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#009), [Luke
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3725"></span>[356:3726](0030408.htm#fr_3725) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p18"></span> Facilius—rather than of Israelites.

<span id="fn_3726"></span>[356:3727](0030408.htm#fr_3726) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p19"></span> Per Nationes. \[Bishop Andrewes thus
classifies the “Sins of the Nations,” as Tertullian’s idea seems to have
suggested: (1) *Pride*, Amorite; (2) *Envy*, Hittite; (3) *Wrath*,
Perizzite; (4) *Gluttony*, Girgashite; (5) *Lechery*, Hivite; (6)
*Covetousness*, Canaanite; (7) *Sloth*, Jebusite.\]

<span id="fn_3727"></span>[356:3728](0030408.htm#fr_3727) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p20"></span> Compare, in Simeon’s song, [Luke ii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032)<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p20.1"></span>,
the designation, “A light to lighten the Gentiles.”

<span id="fn_3728"></span>[356:3729](0030408.htm#fr_3728) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p20.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p21"></span> \[See Elucidation I.\]

<span id="fn_3729"></span>[356:3730](0030408.htm#fr_3729) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p22"></span> Such seems to be the meaning of the
obscure passage in the original, “Syro facilius emundato significato per
nationes emundationis in Christo lumine earum quæ septem maculis,
capitalium delictorum inhorrerent, idoatria,” etc. We have treated
*significato* as one member of an ablative absolute clause, from
*significatum*, a noun occuring in Gloss. Lat. Gr. synonymous with <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.ix-p22.1"></span>δήλωσις</span>. Rigault,
in a note on the passage, imputes the obscurity to Tertullian’s arguing
on the Marcionite hypothesis. “Marcion,” says he, “held that the
prophets, like Elisha, belonged to the Creator, and Christ to the good
God. To magnify Christ’s beneficence, he prominently dwells on the
alleged fact, that Christ, although a stranger to the Creator’s world,
yet vouchsafed to do good in it. This vain conceit Tertullian refutes
from the Marcionite hypothesis itself. God the Creator, said they, had
found Himself incapable of cleansing this Israelite; but He had more
easily cleansed the Syrian.  Christ, however, cleansed the Israelite,
and so showed himself the superior power. Tertullian denies both
positions.”

<span id="fn_3730"></span>[356:3731](0030408.htm#fr_3730) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p23"></span> Quasi per singulos titulos.

<span id="fn_3731"></span>[356:3732](0030408.htm#fr_3731) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p24"></span> There was a mystic completeness in the
number *seven*.

<span id="fn_3732"></span>[356:3733](0030408.htm#fr_3732) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p25"></span> Dicabatur.

<span id="fn_3733"></span>[356:3734](0030408.htm#fr_3733) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p26"></span> Sicut sermonem compendiatum, ita et
lavacrum. In chap. i. of this book, the N.T. is called the
*compendiatum*. This illustrates the present phrase.

<span id="fn_3734"></span>[356:3735](0030408.htm#fr_3734) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p27"></span> Et hoc opponit.

<span id="fn_3735"></span>[356:3736](0030408.htm#fr_3735) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p28"></span> Repræsentavit.

<span id="fn_3736"></span>[356:3737](0030408.htm#fr_3736) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p29"></span> Quasi non audeam.

<span id="fn_3737"></span>[356:3738](0030408.htm#fr_3737) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p30"></span> Vindicare in.

<span id="fn_3738"></span>[356:3739](0030408.htm#fr_3738) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p31"></span> Plane. An ironical cavil from the
Marcionite view.

<span id="fn_3739"></span>[356:3740](0030408.htm#fr_3739) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p32"></span> Si tamen major.

<span id="fn_3740"></span>[357:3741](0030408.htm#fr_3740) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p33"></span> [Luke v.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#014)<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3741"></span>[357:3742](0030408.htm#fr_3741) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p34"></span> Utpote prophetatæ.

<span id="fn_3742"></span>[357:3743](0030408.htm#fr_3742) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p34.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p35"></span> Emaculatum.

<span id="fn_3743"></span>[357:3744](0030408.htm#fr_3743) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p36"></span> \[i.e., the Great High Priest whose
sacrifice is accepted of the Father, for the sins of the whole world.\]

<span id="fn_3744"></span>[357:3745](0030408.htm#fr_3744) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p36.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p37"></span> Suscepturus: *to carry* or *take away*.

<span id="fn_3745"></span>[357:3746](0030408.htm#fr_3745) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p38"></span> Legis indultor.

<span id="fn_3746"></span>[357:3747](0030408.htm#fr_3746) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p39"></span> Advenit.

<span id="fn_3747"></span>[357:3748](0030408.htm#fr_3747) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p40"></span> Atquin.

<span id="fn_3748"></span>[357:3749](0030408.htm#fr_3748) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p41"></span> Formam.

<span id="fn_3749"></span>[357:3750](0030408.htm#fr_3749) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p42"></span> Ab ea avertendos.

<span id="fn_3750"></span>[357:3751](0030408.htm#fr_3750) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p42.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p43"></span> Aliquatenus.

<span id="fn_3751"></span>[357:3752](0030408.htm#fr_3751) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p43.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p44"></span> Jam.

<span id="fn_3752"></span>[357:3753](0030408.htm#fr_3752) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p45"></span> Supervacuus.

<span id="fn_3753"></span>[357:3754](0030408.htm#fr_3753) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p45.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p46"></span> Gradu.

<span id="fn_3754"></span>[357:3755](0030408.htm#fr_3754) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p47"></span> Ecce.

<span id="fn_3755"></span>[357:3756](0030408.htm#fr_3755) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p48"></span> Sententiam.

<span id="fn_3756"></span>[357:3757](0030408.htm#fr_3756) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p48.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p49"></span> [Matt. v.
17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_3757"></span>[357:3758](0030408.htm#fr_3757) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p50"></span> Quod salvum est.

<span id="fn_3758"></span>[357:3759](0030408.htm#fr_3758) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p50.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p51"></span> That is, you retain the passage in St.
Luke, which relates the *act* of honouring the law; but you reject that
in St. Matthew, which contains Christ’s profession of honouring the law.

<span id="fn_3759"></span>[357:3760](0030408.htm#fr_3759) <span
id="v.iv.v.ix-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.ix-p52"></span> Nostros: or, perhaps, “our
people,”—that is, the Catholics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Further Proofs of the Same Truth in the Same Chapter, from the
Healing of the Paralytic, and from the Designation Son of Man Which
Jesus Gives Himself. Tertullian Sustains His Argument by Several
Quotations from the Prophets.](0030409)
