[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030029)  [Next](0030031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxiv-p2"></span>This whole confession of these beings,
in which they declare that they are not gods, and in which they tell you
that there is no God but one, the God whom we adore, is quite sufficient
to clear us from the crime of treason, chiefly against the Roman
religion. For if it is certain the gods have no existence, there is no
religion in the case. If there is no religion, because there are no
gods, we are assuredly not guilty of any offence against religion.
Instead of that, the charge recoils on your own head: worshipping a lie,
you are really guilty of the crime you charge on us, not merely by
refusing the true religion of the true God, but by going the further
length of persecuting it. But now, granting that these objects of your
worship are really gods, is it not generally held that there is one
higher and more potent, as it were the world’s chief ruler, endowed with
absolute power and majesty? For the common way is to apportion deity,
giving an imperial and supreme domination to one, while its offices are
put into the hands of many, as Plato describes great Jupiter in the
<span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span
id="iv.iii.xxiv-Page_39"></span>heavens, surrounded by an array at once
of deities and demons. It behooves us, therefore, to show equal respect
to the procurators, prefects, and governors of the divine empire. And
yet how great a crime does he commit, who, with the object of gaining
higher favour with the Cæsar, transfers his endeavours and his hopes to
another, and does not confess that the appellation of God as of Emperor
belongs only to the Supreme Head, when it is held a capital offence
among us to call, or hear called, by the highest title any other than
Cæsar himself! Let one man worship God, another Jupiter; let one lift
suppliant hands to the heavens, another to the altar of Fides; let
one—if you choose to take this view of it—count in prayer the clouds,
and another the ceiling panels; let one consecrate his own life to his
God, and another that of a goat. For see that you do not give a further
ground for the charge of irreligion, by taking away religious
liberty, <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md) and forbidding free
choice of deity, so that I may no longer worship according to my
inclination, but am compelled to worship against it. Not even a human
being would care to have unwilling homage rendered him; and so the very
Egyptians have been permitted the legal use of their ridiculous
superstition, liberty to make gods of birds and beasts, nay, to condemn
to death any one who kills a god of their sort. Every province even, and
every city, has its god. Syria has Astarte, Arabia has Dusares, the
Norici have Belenus, Africa has its Cælestis, Mauritania has its own
princes. I have spoken, I think, of Roman provinces, and yet I have not
said their gods are Roman; for they are not worshipped at Rome any more
than others who are ranked as deities over Italy itself by municipal
consecration, such as Delventinus of Casinum, Visidianus of Narnia,
Ancharia of Asculum, Nortia of Volsinii, Valentia of Ocriculum, Hostia
of Satrium, Father Curis of Falisci, in honour of whom, too, Juno got
her surname. In, fact, we alone are prevented having a religion of our
own. We give offence to the Romans, we are excluded from the rights and
privileges of Romans, because we do not worship the gods of Rome. It is
well that there is a God of all, whose we all are, whether we will or
no. But with you liberty is given to worship any god but the true God,
as though He were not rather the God all should worship, to whom all
belong.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[39:113](0030030.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="iv.iii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xxiv-p3"></span> \[Observe our author’s assertion that
in its own nature, worship must be a voluntary act, and note this
expression *libertatem religionis*.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV.](0030031.md)
