[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030464)  [Next](0030466) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.—The Epistle to the Colossians.
Time the Criterion of Truth and Heresy. Application of the Canon. The
Image of the Invisible God Explained. Pre-Existence of Our Christ in the
Creator’s Ancient Dispensations. What is Included in the Fulness of
Christ. The Epicurean Character of Marcion’s God. The Catholic Truth in
Opposition Thereto. The Law is to Christ What the Shadow is to the
Substance.</span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p2"></span>I am accustomed in my prescription
against all heresies, to fix my compendious criterion <span
id="fr_6056"></span>[6057](#fn_6056) (of truth) in the testimony of
*time*; claiming *priority* therein as our rule, and alleging *lateness*
to be the characteristic of every heresy. This shall now be proved even
by the apostle, when he says: “For the hope which is laid up for you in
heaven, whereof ye heard before in the word of the truth of the gospel;
which is come unto you, as it is unto all the world.” <span
id="fr_6057"></span>[6058](#fn_6057) For if, even at that time, the
tradition of the gospel had spread everywhere, how much more now! Now,
if it is our gospel which has spread everywhere, rather than any
heretical gospel, much less Marcion’s, which only dates from the reign
of Antoninus, <span id="fr_6058"></span>[6059](#fn_6058) then ours will
be the gospel of the apostles.  But should Marcion’s gospel succeed in
filling the whole world, it would not even in that case be entitled to
the character of apostolic. For this quality, it will be evident, can
only belong to that gospel which was the first to fill the world; in
other words, to the gospel of that God who of old declared this of its
promulgation: “Their sound is gone out through all the earth, and their
words to the end of the world.” <span
id="fr_6059"></span>[6060](#fn_6059) He calls Christ “the image of the
invisible God.” <span id="fr_6060"></span>[6061](#fn_6060) We in like
manner say that the Father of Christ is invisible, for we know that it
was the Son who was seen in ancient times (whenever any appearance was
vouchsafed to men in the name of God) as the image of (the Father)
Himself. He must not be regarded, however, as making any difference
between a visible and an invisible God; because long before he wrote
this we find a description of our God to this effect: “No man can see
the Lord, and live.” <span id="fr_6061"></span>[6062](#fn_6061) If
Christ is not “the first-begotten before every creature,” <span
id="fr_6062"></span>[6063](#fn_6062) as that “Word of God by whom all
things were made, and without whom nothing was made;” <span
id="fr_6063"></span>[6064](#fn_6063) if “all things were” not “in Him
created, whether in heaven or on earth, visible and invisible, whether
they be thrones or dominions, or principalities, or powers;” if “all
things were” not “created by Him and for Him” (for these truths Marcion
ought not to allow concerning Him), then the apostle could not have so
positively laid it down, that “He is before all.” <span
id="fr_6064"></span>[6065](#fn_6064) For how is He before all, if He is
not before *all things*? <span id="fr_6065"></span>[6066](#fn_6065) How,
again, is He before all things, if He is not “the first-born of every
creature”—if He is not the Word of the Creator? <span
id="fr_6066"></span>[6067](#fn_6066) Now how will he be proved to have
been before all things, who appeared after all things?  Who can tell
whether he had a prior existence, when he has found no proof that he had
any existence at all?  In what way also could it have “pleased (the
Father) that in Him should all fulness dwell?” <span
id="fr_6067"></span>[6068](#fn_6067) For, to begin with, what fulness is
that which is not comprised of the constituents which Marcion has
removed from it,—even those that were “created in Christ, whether in
heaven or on earth,” whether angels or men? which is not made of the
things that are visible and invisible? which consists not of thrones and
dominions and principalities and powers? If, on the other hand, <span
id="fr_6068"></span>[6069](#fn_6068) our false apostles and Judaizing
gospellers <span id="fr_6069"></span>[6070](#fn_6069) have in<span
id="page_471">p. 471</span> <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-Page_471"></span>troduced all these things out of their
own stores, and Marcion has applied them to constitute the fulness of
his own god, (this hypothesis, absurd though it be, alone would justify
him;) for how, on any other supposition, <span
id="fr_6070"></span>[6071](#fn_6070) could the rival and the destroyer
of the Creator have been willing that His fulness should dwell in his
Christ? To whom, again, does He “reconcile all things by Himself, making
peace by the blood of His cross,” <span
id="fr_6071"></span>[6072](#fn_6071) but to Him whom those very things
had altogether <span id="fr_6072"></span>[6073](#fn_6072) offended,
against whom they had rebelled by transgression, (but) to whom they had
at last returned? <span id="fr_6073"></span>[6074](#fn_6073)
*Conciliated* they might have been to a strange god; but *reconciled*
they could not possibly have been to any other than their own God.
Accordingly, ourselves “who were sometime alienated and enemies in our
mind by wicked works” <span id="fr_6074"></span>[6075](#fn_6074) does He
reconcile to the Creator, against whom we had committed
offence—worshipping the creature to the prejudice of the Creator. As,
however, he says elsewhere, <span id="fr_6075"></span>[6076](#fn_6075)
that the Church is the body of Christ, so here also (the apostle)
declares that he “fills up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ in his flesh for His body’s sake, which is the Church.” <span
id="fr_6076"></span>[6077](#fn_6076) But you must not on this account
suppose that on every mention of His body the term is only a metaphor,
instead of meaning real flesh. For he says above that we are “reconciled
in His body through death;” <span id="fr_6077"></span>[6078](#fn_6077)
meaning, of course, that He died in that body wherein death was possible
through the flesh: (therefore he adds,) not *through the Church* <span
id="fr_6078"></span>[6079](#fn_6078) (*per ecclesiam*), but expressly
*for the sake of the Church* (*proper ecclesiam*), exchanging body for
body—one of flesh for a spiritual one.  When, again, he warns them to
“beware of subtle words and philosophy,” as being “a vain deceit,” such
as is “after the rudiments of the world” (not understanding thereby the
mundane fabric of sky and earth, but worldly learning, and “the
tradition of men,” subtle in their speech and their philosophy), <span
id="fr_6079"></span>[6080](#fn_6079) it would be tedious, and the proper
subject of a separate work, to show how in this sentence (of the
apostle’s) all heresies are condemned, on the ground of their consisting
of the resources of subtle speech and the rules of philosophy. But (once
for all) let Marcion know that the principle term of his creed comes
from the school of Epicurus, implying that the Lord is stupid and
indifferent; <span id="fr_6080"></span>[6081](#fn_6080) wherefore he
refuses to say that He is an object to be feared. Moreover, from the
porch of the Stoics he brings out *matter*, and places it on a par with
the Divine Creator. <span id="fr_6081"></span>[6082](#fn_6081) He also
denies the resurrection of the flesh,—a truth which none of the schools
of philosophy agreed together to hold. <span
id="fr_6082"></span>[6083](#fn_6082) But how remote is our (Catholic)
verity from the artifices of this heretic, when it dreads to arouse the
anger of God, and firmly believes that He produced all things out of
nothing, and promises to us a restoration from the grave of the same
flesh (that died) and holds without a blush that Christ was born of the
virgin’s womb! At this, philosophers, and heretics, and the very
heathen, laugh and jeer. For “God hath chosen the foolish things of the
world to confound the wise” <span id="fr_6083"></span>[6084](#fn_6083)
—that God, no doubt, who in reference to this very dispensation of His
threatened long before that He would “destroy the wisdom of the
wise.” <span id="fr_6084"></span>[6085](#fn_6084) Thanks to this
simplicity of truth, so opposed to the subtlety and vain deceit of
philosophy, we cannot possibly have any relish for such perverse
opinions.  Then, if God “quickens us together with Christ, forgiving us
our trespasses,” <span id="fr_6085"></span>[6086](#fn_6085) we cannot
suppose that sins are forgiven by Him against whom, as having been all
along unknown, they could not have been committed. Now tell me, Marcion,
what is your opinion of the apostle’s language, when he says, “Let no
man judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of a holy day, or of
the new moon, or of the sabbath, which is a shadow of things to come,
but the body is of Christ?” <span id="fr_6086"></span>[6087](#fn_6086)
We do not now treat of the law, further than (to remark) that the
apostle here teaches clearly how it has been abolished, even by passing
from shadow to substance—that is, from figurative types to the reality,
which is Christ. The shadow, therefore, is His to whom belongs the body
also; in other words, the law is His, and so is Christ. If you separate
the law and Christ, assigning one to one god and the other to another,
it is the same as if you were to at<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>
<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-Page_472"></span>tempt to separate the shadow from
the body of which it is the shadow. Manifestly Christ has relation to
the law, if the body has to its shadow. But when he blames those who
alleged visions of angels as their authority for saying that men must
abstain from meats—“you must not touch, you must not taste”—in a
voluntary humility, (at the same time) “vainly puffed up in the fleshly
mind, and not holding the Head,” <span
id="fr_6087"></span>[6088](#fn_6087) (the apostle) does not in these
terms attack the law or Moses, as if it was at the suggestion of
superstitious angels that he had enacted his prohibition of sundry
aliments. For Moses had evidently received the law from God. When,
therefore, he speaks of their “following the commandments and doctrines
of men,” <span id="fr_6088"></span>[6089](#fn_6088) he refers to the
conduct of those persons who “held not the Head,” even Him in whom all
things are gathered together; <span id="fr_6089"></span>[6090](#fn_6089)
for they are all recalled to Christ, and concentrated in Him as their
initiating principle <span id="fr_6090"></span>[6091](#fn_6090) —even
the meats and drinks which were indifferent in their nature. All the
rest of his precepts, <span id="fr_6091"></span>[6092](#fn_6091) as we
have shown sufficiently, when treating of them as they occurred in
another epistle, <span id="fr_6092"></span>[6093](#fn_6092) emanated
from the Creator, who, while predicting that “old things were to pass
away,” and that He would “make all things new,” <span
id="fr_6093"></span>[6094](#fn_6093) commanded men “to break up fresh
ground for themselves,” <span id="fr_6094"></span>[6095](#fn_6094) and
thereby taught them even then to put off the old man and put on the new.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6056"></span>[470:6057](0030465.htm#fr_6056) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p3"></span> Compendium figere.

<span id="fn_6057"></span>[470:6058](0030465.htm#fr_6057) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p4"></span> [Col.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6058"></span>[470:6059](0030465.htm#fr_6058) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p5"></span> Antoniniani Marcionis: see above in
book i. chap. xix.

<span id="fn_6059"></span>[470:6060](0030465.htm#fr_6059) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p6"></span> [Ps. xix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6060"></span>[470:6061](0030465.htm#fr_6060) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p7"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6061"></span>[470:6062](0030465.htm#fr_6061) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p8"></span> [Ex. xxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6062"></span>[470:6063](0030465.htm#fr_6062) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p9"></span> [Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p9.1"></span>.
Our author’s “primogenitus conditionis” is St. Paul’s <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p9.2"></span>πρωτότοκος πάσης
κτίσεως</span>, for the meaning of which see Bp. Ellicott, *in loc.*

<span id="fn_6063"></span>[470:6064](0030465.htm#fr_6063) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p9.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p10"></span> [John i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6064"></span>[470:6065](0030465.htm#fr_6064) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p11"></span> Ante omnes.

<span id="fn_6065"></span>[470:6066](0030465.htm#fr_6065) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p12"></span> Ante amina.

<span id="fn_6066"></span>[470:6067](0030465.htm#fr_6066) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p13"></span> *Creatoris* is our author’s word.

<span id="fn_6067"></span>[470:6068](0030465.htm#fr_6067) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p14"></span> [Col. i.
19](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6068"></span>[470:6069](0030465.htm#fr_6068) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p14.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p15"></span> Aut si.

<span id="fn_6069"></span>[470:6070](0030465.htm#fr_6069) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p16"></span> Evangelizatores.

<span id="fn_6070"></span>[471:6071](0030465.htm#fr_6070) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p17"></span> Ceterum quale.

<span id="fn_6071"></span>[471:6072](0030465.htm#fr_6071) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p18"></span> [Col. i.
20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6072"></span>[471:6073](0030465.htm#fr_6072) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p19"></span> “Una ipsa” is Oehler’s reading
instead of *universa*.

<span id="fn_6073"></span>[471:6074](0030465.htm#fr_6073) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p19.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p20"></span> Cujus novissime fuerant.

<span id="fn_6074"></span>[471:6075](0030465.htm#fr_6074) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p21"></span> [Col. i.
21](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6075"></span>[471:6076](0030465.htm#fr_6075) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p22"></span> [Eph. i.
23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6076"></span>[471:6077](0030465.htm#fr_6076) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p23"></span> [Col. i.
24](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#024)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6077"></span>[471:6078](0030465.htm#fr_6077) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p24"></span> [Col. i.
22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6078"></span>[471:6079](0030465.htm#fr_6078) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p24.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p25"></span> As if only in a *metaphorical* body,
in which sense the Church is “His body.”

<span id="fn_6079"></span>[471:6080](0030465.htm#fr_6079) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p26"></span> [Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6080"></span>[471:6081](0030465.htm#fr_6080) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p27"></span> “Dominum inferens *hebetem*;” with
which may be compared Cicero (*De Divin.* ii. 50, 103): “Videsne
Epicurum quem hebetem et rudem dicere solent Stoici…qui negat, quidquam
deos nec alieni curare, nec sui.” The *otiose* and *inert* character of
the god of Epicurus is referred to by Tertullian not unfrequently; see
above, in book iv. chap. xv.; *Apolog.* 47, and *Ad Nationes*, ii. 2;
whilst in *De Anima*, 3, he characterizes the philosophy of Epicurus by
a similar term: “Prout aut Platonis honor, aut Zenonis vigor, aut
Aristotelis tenor, aut *Epicuri stupor*, aut Heracliti mæror, aut
Empedoclis furor persuaserunt.”

<span id="fn_6081"></span>[471:6082](0030465.htm#fr_6081) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p28"></span> The Stoical dogma of *the eternity*
of matter and its *equality* with God was also held by Hermogenes; see
his *Adv. Hermogenem*, c. 4, “Materiam parem Deo infert.”

<span id="fn_6082"></span>[471:6083](0030465.htm#fr_6082) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p28.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p29"></span> Pliny, *Nat. Hist.* vii. 55, refers
to the peculiar opinion of Democritus on this subject (Fr. Junius).

<span id="fn_6083"></span>[471:6084](0030465.htm#fr_6083) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p30"></span> [1 Cor. i.
27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6084"></span>[471:6085](0030465.htm#fr_6084) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p31"></span> [Isa.
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014), [1 Cor.
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019), [Jer.
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009), [Job
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6085"></span>[471:6086](0030465.htm#fr_6085) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p32"></span> [Col. ii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6086"></span>[471:6087](0030465.htm#fr_6086) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p33"></span> [Col.
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6087"></span>[472:6088](0030465.htm#fr_6087) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p33.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p34"></span> [Col.
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#019),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6088"></span>[472:6089](0030465.htm#fr_6088) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p35"></span> [Col. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6089"></span>[472:6090](0030465.htm#fr_6089) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p36"></span> Recensentur: [Eph. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6090"></span>[472:6091](0030465.htm#fr_6090) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p37"></span> Initium.

<span id="fn_6091"></span>[472:6092](0030465.htm#fr_6091) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p38"></span> Contained in Vol. iii. and iv.

<span id="fn_6092"></span>[472:6093](0030465.htm#fr_6092) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p39"></span> In the Epistle to the Laodiceans or
Ephesians; see his remarks in the preceding chapter of this book v.

<span id="fn_6093"></span>[472:6094](0030465.htm#fr_6093) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p40"></span> [Isa.
43:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#018),
[19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019), [Isa.
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017), [2 Cor.
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_6094"></span>[472:6095](0030465.htm#fr_6094) <span
id="v.iv.vi.xix-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p41"></span> [Jer. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.vi.xix-p41.1"></span>.
This and the passage of Isaiah just quoted are also cited together
above, book iv. chap. i. and ii. p. 345.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Epistle to the Philippians. The Variances Amongst the
Preachers of Christ No Argument that There Was More Than One Only
Christ. St. Paul's Phrases--Form of a Servant, Likeness, and Fashion of
a Man--No Sanction of Docetism. No Antithesis (Such as Marcion Alleged)
in the God of Judaism and the God of the Gospel Deducible from Certain
Contrasts Mentioned in This Epistle. A Parallel with a Passage in
Genesis. The Resurrection of the Body, and the Change Thereof.](0030466)
