[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030437)  [Next](0030439) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX.—Concerning Those Who Come
in the Name of Christ. The Terrible Signs of His Coming. He Whose Coming
is So Grandly Described Both in the Old Testament and the New Testament,
is None Other Than the Christ of the Creator.  This Proof Enhanced by
the Parable of the Fig-Tree and All the Trees. Parallel Passages of
Prophecy.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p2"></span>As touching the propriety of His
names, it has already been seen <span
id="fr_5014"></span>[5015](#fn_5014) that both of them <span
id="fr_5015"></span>[5016](#fn_5015) are suitable to Him who was the
first both to announce His *Christ* to mankind, and to give Him the
further name <span id="fr_5016"></span>[5017](#fn_5016) of *Jesus*. The
impudence, therefore, of Marcion’s Christ will be evident, when he says
that many will come in his name, whereas this name does not at all
belong to *him*, since he is not the Christ and Jesus of the Creator, to
whom these names do properly appertain; and more especially when he
prohibits those to be received whose very equal in imposture he is,
inasmuch as he (equally with them <span
id="fr_5017"></span>[5018](#fn_5017) ) comes in a name which belongs to
another—unless it was his business to warn off from a mendaciously
assumed name the disciples (of One) who, by reason of His name being
properly given to Him, possessed also the verity thereof. But when “they
shall by and by come and say, I am Christ,” <span
id="fr_5018"></span>[5019](#fn_5018) they will be received by you, who
have already received one altogether like them. <span
id="fr_5019"></span>[5020](#fn_5019) Christ, however, comes in His own
<span id="page_415">p. 415</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-Page_415"></span>name. What will you do, then, when He
Himself comes who is the very Proprietor of these names, the Creator’s
Christ and Jesus? Will you reject Him? But how iniquitous, how unjust
and disrespectful to the good God, that you should not receive Him who
comes in His own name, when you have received another in His name! Now,
let us see what are the signs which He ascribes to the times. “Wars,” I
observe, “and kingdom against kingdom, and nation against nation, and
pestilence, and famines, and earthquakes, and fearful sights, and great
signs from heaven” <span id="fr_5020"></span>[5021](#fn_5020) —all which
things are suitable for a severe and terrible God. Now, when He goes on
to say that “all these things must needs come to pass,” <span
id="fr_5021"></span>[5022](#fn_5021) what does He represent Himself to
be?  The Destroyer, or the Defender of the Creator? For He affirms that
these appointments of His must fully come to pass; but surely as the
good God, He would have frustrated rather than advanced events so sad
and terrible, if they had not been His own (decrees). “But before all
these,” He foretells that persecutions and sufferings were to come upon
them, which indeed were “to turn for a testimony to them,” and for their
salvation. <span id="fr_5022"></span>[5023](#fn_5022) Hear what is
predicted in Zechariah: “The Lord of hosts <span
id="fr_5023"></span>[5024](#fn_5023) shall protect them; and they shall
devour them, and subdue them with sling-stones; and they shall drink
their blood like wine, and they shall fill the bowls as it were of the
altar. And the Lord shall save them in that day, even His people, like
sheep; because as sacred stones they roll,” <span
id="fr_5024"></span>[5025](#fn_5024) etc. And that you may not suppose
that these predictions refer to such sufferings as await them from so
many wars with strangers, <span id="fr_5025"></span>[5026](#fn_5025)
consider the nature (of the sufferings).  In a prophecy of wars which
were to be waged with legitimate arms, no one would think of enumerating
stones as weapons, which are better known in popular crowds and unarmed
tumults.  Nobody measures the copious streams of blood which flow in war
by bowlfuls, nor limits it to what is shed upon a single altar. No one
gives the name of sheep to those who fall in battle with arms in hand,
and while repelling force with force, but only to those who are slain,
yielding themselves up in their own place of duty and with patience,
rather than fighting in self-defence. In short, as he says, “they roll
as sacred stones,” and not like soldiers fight.  Stones are they, even
foundation stones, upon which we are ourselves edified—“built,” as St.
Paul says, “upon the foundation of the apostles,” <span
id="fr_5026"></span>[5027](#fn_5026) who, like “consecrated stones,”
were rolled up and down exposed to the attack of all men. And therefore
in this passage He forbids men “to meditate before what they answer”
when brought before tribunals, <span
id="fr_5027"></span>[5028](#fn_5027) even as once He suggested to Balaam
the message which he had not thought of, <span
id="fr_5028"></span>[5029](#fn_5028) nay, contrary to what he had
thought; and promised “a mouth” to Moses, when he pleaded in excuse the
slowness of his speech, <span id="fr_5029"></span>[5030](#fn_5029) and
that wisdom which, by Isaiah, He showed to be irresistible: “One shall
say, I am the Lord’s, and shall call himself by the name of Jacob, and
another shall subscribe himself by the name of Israel.” <span
id="fr_5030"></span>[5031](#fn_5030) Now, what plea is wiser and more
irresistible than the simple and open <span
id="fr_5031"></span>[5032](#fn_5031) confession made in a martyr’s
cause, who “prevails with God”—which is what “Israel” means? <span
id="fr_5032"></span>[5033](#fn_5032) Now, one cannot wonder that He
forbade “premeditation,” who actually Himself received from the Father
the ability of uttering words in season: “The Lord hath given to me the
tongue of the learned, that I should know how to speak a word in season
(to him that is weary);” <span id="fr_5033"></span>[5034](#fn_5033)
except that Marcion introduces to us a Christ who is not subject to the
Father. That persecutions from one’s nearest friends are predicted, and
calumny out of hatred to His name, <span
id="fr_5034"></span>[5035](#fn_5034) I need not again refer to. But “by
patience,” <span id="fr_5035"></span>[5036](#fn_5035) says He, “ye shall
yourselves be saved.” <span id="fr_5036"></span>[5037](#fn_5036) Of this
very patience the Psalm says, “The patient endurance of the just shall
not perish for ever;” <span id="fr_5037"></span>[5038](#fn_5037) because
it is said in another Psalm, “Precious (in the sight of the Lord) is the
death of the just”—arising, no doubt, out of their patient endurance, so
that Zechariah declares: “A crown shall be to them that endure.” <span
id="fr_5038"></span>[5039](#fn_5038) But that you may not boldly contend
that it was as announcers of another god that the apostles were
persecuted by the Jews, remember that even the prophets suffered the
same treatment of the Jews, and that they were not the heralds of any
other god than the Creator. Then, having shown what was to be the period
of the destruction, even “when Jerusalem should <span id="page_416">p.
416</span> <span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-Page_416"></span>begin to be compassed
with armies,” <span id="fr_5039"></span>[5040](#fn_5039) He described
the signs of the end of all things: “portents in the sun, and the moon,
and the stars, and upon the earth distress of nations in perplexity—like
the sea roaring—by reason of their expectation of the evils which are
coming on the earth.” <span id="fr_5040"></span>[5041](#fn_5040)

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p30"></span>That “the very powers also of heaven
have to be shaken,” <span id="fr_5041"></span>[5042](#fn_5041) you may
find in Joel: “And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the
earth—blood and fire, and pillars of smoke; the sun shall be turned into
darkness, and the moon into blood, before the great and terrible day of
the Lord come.” <span id="fr_5042"></span>[5043](#fn_5042) In Habakkuk
also you have this statement: “With rivers shall the earth be cleaved;
the nations shall see thee, and be in pangs. Thou shalt disperse the
waters with thy step; the deep uttered its voice; the height of its fear
was raised; <span id="fr_5043"></span>[5044](#fn_5043) the sun and the
moon stood still in their course; into light shall thy coruscations go;
and thy shield shall be (like) the glittering of the lightning’s flash;
in thine anger thou shalt grind the earth, and shalt thresh the nations
in thy wrath.” <span id="fr_5044"></span>[5045](#fn_5044) There is thus
an agreement, I apprehend, between the sayings of the Lord and of the
prophets touching the shaking of the earth, and the elements, and the
nations thereof. But what does the Lord say afterwards? “And then shall
they see the Son of man coming from the heavens with very great power. 
And when these things shall come to pass, ye shall look up, and raise
your heads; for your redemption hath come near,” that is, at the time of
the kingdom, of which the parable itself treats. <span
id="fr_5045"></span>[5046](#fn_5045) “So likewise ye, when ye shall see
these things come to pass, know ye that the kingdom of God is nigh at
hand.” <span id="fr_5046"></span>[5047](#fn_5046) This will be the great
day of the Lord, and of the glorious coming of the Son of man from
heaven, of which Daniel wrote: “Behold, one like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven,” <span id="fr_5047"></span>[5048](#fn_5047)
etc. “And there was given unto Him the kingly power,” <span
id="fr_5048"></span>[5049](#fn_5048) which (in the parable) “He went
away into a far country to receive for Himself,” leaving money to His
servants wherewithal to trade and get increase <span
id="fr_5049"></span>[5050](#fn_5049) —even (that universal kingdom of)
all nations, which in the Psalm the Father had promised to give to Him:
Ask of me, and I will give Thee the heathen for Thine
inheritance.” <span id="fr_5050"></span>[5051](#fn_5050) “And all that
glory shall serve Him; His dominion shall be an everlasting one, which
shall not be taken from Him, and His kingdom that which shall not be
destroyed,” <span id="fr_5051"></span>[5052](#fn_5051) because in it
“men shall not die, neither shall they marry, but be like the
angels.” <span id="fr_5052"></span>[5053](#fn_5052) It is about the same
advent of the Son of man and the benefits thereof that we read in
Habakkuk: “Thou wentest forth for the salvation of Thy people, even to
save Thine anointed ones,” <span id="fr_5053"></span>[5054](#fn_5053)
—in other words, those who shall look up and lift their heads, being
redeemed in the time of His kingdom. Since, therefore, these
descriptions of the promises, on the one hand, agree together, as do
also those of the great catastrophes, on the other—both in the
predictions of the prophets and the declarations of the Lord, it will be
impossible for you to interpose any distinction between them, as if the
catastrophes could be referred to the Creator, as the terrible God,
being such as the good god (of Marcion) ought not to permit, much less
expect—whilst the promises should be ascribed to the good god, being
such as the Creator, in His ignorance of the said god, could not have
predicted. If, however, He did predict these promises as His own, since
they differ in no respect from the promises of Christ, He will be a
match in the freeness of His gifts with the good god himself; and
evidently no more will have been promised by your Christ than by my Son
of man. (If you examine) the whole passage of this Gospel Scripture,
from the inquiry of the disciples <span
id="fr_5054"></span>[5055](#fn_5054) down to the parable of the
fig-tree <span id="fr_5055"></span>[5056](#fn_5055) you will find the
sense in its connection suit in every point the Son of man, so that it
consistently ascribes to Him both the sorrows and the joys, and the
catastrophes and the promises; nor can you separate them from Him in
either respect. For as much, then, as there is but one Son of man whose
advent is placed between the two issues of catastrophe and promise, it
must needs follow that to that one Son of man belong both the judgments
upon the nations, and the prayers of the saints. He who thus comes in
midway so as to be common to both issues, will terminate one of them by
inflicting judgment on the nations at His coming; and will at the same
time commence the other by fulfilling the prayers of His saints: so that
if (on the one hand) you grant that the coming of the Son of man is (the
advent) of *my Christ*, then, when you ascribe to Him the infliction of
the judgments which precede His appearance, you are compelled also to
assign to <span id="page_417">p. 417</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-Page_417"></span>Him the blessings which issue from the
same. If (on the other hand) you will have it that it is the coming of
*your Christ*, then, when you ascribe to him the blessings which are to
be the result of his advent, you are obliged to impute to him likewise
the infliction of the evils which precede his appearance.  For the evils
which precede, and the blessings which immediately follow, the coming of
the Son of man, are both alike indissolubly connected with that event.
Consider, therefore, which of the two Christs you choose to place in the
person of the Son of man, to whom you may refer the execution of the two
dispensations. You make either the Creator a most beneficent God, or
else your own god terrible in his nature! Reflect, in short, on the
picture presented in the parable: “Behold the fig-tree, and all the
trees; when they produce their fruit, men know that summer is at hand.
So likewise ye, when ye see these things come to pass, know ye that the
kingdom of God is very near.” <span id="fr_5056"></span>[5057](#fn_5056)
Now, if the fructification of the common trees <span
id="fr_5057"></span>[5058](#fn_5057) be an antecedent sign of the
approach of summer, so in like manner do the great conflicts of the
world indicate the arrival of that kingdom which they precede. But every
sign is His, to whom belong the thing of which it is the sign; and to
everything is appointed its sign by Him to whom the thing belongs.  If,
therefore, these tribulations are the signs of the kingdom, just as the
maturity of the trees is of the summer, it follows that the kingdom is
the Creator’s to whom are ascribed the tribulations which are the signs
of the kingdom. Since the beneficent Deity had premised that these
things must needs come to pass, although so terrible and dreadful, as
they had been predicted by the law and the prophets, therefore He did
not destroy the law and the prophets, when He affirmed that what had
been foretold therein must be certainly fulfilled.  He further declares,
“that heaven and earth shall not pass away till all things be
fulfilled.” <span id="fr_5058"></span>[5059](#fn_5058) What things,
pray, are these? Are they the things which the Creator made? Then the
elements will tractably endure the accomplishment of their Maker’s
dispensation.  If, however, they emanate from your excellent god, I much
doubt whether <span id="fr_5059"></span>[5060](#fn_5059) the heaven and
earth will peaceably allow the completion of things which their
Creator’s enemy has determined! If the Creator quietly submits to this,
then He is no “jealous God.” But let heaven and earth pass away, since
their Lord has so determined; only let His word remain for evermore! And
so Isaiah predicted that it should. <span
id="fr_5060"></span>[5061](#fn_5060) Let the disciples also be warned,
“lest their hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and
cares of this world; and so that day come upon them unawares, like a
snare” <span id="fr_5061"></span>[5062](#fn_5061) —if indeed they should
forget God amidst the abundance and occupation of the world. Like this
will be found the admonition of Moses,—so that He who delivers from “the
snare” of that day is none other than He who so long before addressed to
men the same admonition. <span id="fr_5062"></span>[5063](#fn_5062) Some
places there were in Jerusalem where to teach; other places outside
Jerusalem whither to retire <span id="fr_5063"></span>[5064](#fn_5063)
—“in the day-time He was teaching in the temple;” just as He had
foretold by Hosea: “In my house did they find me, and there did I speak
with them.” <span id="fr_5064"></span>[5065](#fn_5064) “But at night He
went out to the Mount of Olives.” For thus had Zechariah pointed out:
“And His feet shall stand in that day on the Mount of Olives.” <span
id="fr_5065"></span>[5066](#fn_5065) Fit hours for an audience there
also were. “Early in the morning” <span
id="fr_5066"></span>[5067](#fn_5066) must they resort to Him, who
(having said by Isaiah, “The Lord giveth me the tongue of the learned”)
added, “He hath appointed me the morning, and hath also given me an ear
to hear.” <span id="fr_5067"></span>[5068](#fn_5067) Now if this is to
*destroy* the prophets, <span id="fr_5068"></span>[5069](#fn_5068) what
will it be to *fulfil* them?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5014"></span>[414:5015](0030438.htm#fr_5014) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p3"></span> See above: book iii. chap. xv. and
xvi. pp. 333, 334.

<span id="fn_5015"></span>[414:5016](0030438.htm#fr_5015) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p4"></span> The *illam* here refers to the
*nominum* proprietas, i.e., His title <span class="sc"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p4.2"></span>Christ</span> and His name <span
class="sc"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p4.3"></span>Jesus</span>.

<span id="fn_5016"></span>[414:5017](0030438.htm#fr_5016) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p4.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p5"></span> Transnominaret.

<span id="fn_5017"></span>[414:5018](0030438.htm#fr_5017) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p6"></span> Proinde.

<span id="fn_5018"></span>[414:5019](0030438.htm#fr_5018) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p7"></span> [Luke xxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5019"></span>[414:5020](0030438.htm#fr_5019) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p8"></span> Consimilem: of course Marcion’s
Christ; the Marcionite being challenged in the “*you*.”

<span id="fn_5020"></span>[415:5021](0030438.htm#fr_5020) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p9"></span> [Luke xxi.
9-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#009)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5021"></span>[415:5022](0030438.htm#fr_5021) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p10"></span> Compare, in [Luke
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#009),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#022),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#031),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5022"></span>[415:5023](0030438.htm#fr_5022) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p11"></span> [Luke
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5023"></span>[415:5024](0030438.htm#fr_5023) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p11.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p12"></span> Omnipotens: <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p12.1"></span>παντοκράτωρ</span>
(Sept.); of hosts—A.V.

<span id="fn_5024"></span>[415:5025](0030438.htm#fr_5024) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p13"></span> [Zech.
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p13.1"></span> (Septuagint).

<span id="fn_5025"></span>[415:5026](0030438.htm#fr_5025) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p13.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p14"></span> Allophylis.

<span id="fn_5026"></span>[415:5027](0030438.htm#fr_5026) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p15"></span> [Eph. ii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5027"></span>[415:5028](0030438.htm#fr_5027) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p16"></span> [Luke xxi.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5028"></span>[415:5029](0030438.htm#fr_5028) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p16.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p17"></span> [Num.
xxii.-xxiv](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5029"></span>[415:5030](0030438.htm#fr_5029) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p18"></span> [Ex. iv.
10-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5030"></span>[415:5031](0030438.htm#fr_5030) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p18.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p19"></span> [Isa. xliv.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5031"></span>[415:5032](0030438.htm#fr_5031) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p20"></span> Exserta.

<span id="fn_5032"></span>[415:5033](0030438.htm#fr_5032) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p21"></span> See [Gen. xxxii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5033"></span>[415:5034](0030438.htm#fr_5033) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p21.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p22"></span> [Isa. l.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5034"></span>[415:5035](0030438.htm#fr_5034) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p23"></span> [Luke
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#016),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5035"></span>[415:5036](0030438.htm#fr_5035) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p23.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p24"></span> Per tolerantiam: “*endurance*.”

<span id="fn_5036"></span>[415:5037](0030438.htm#fr_5036) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p25"></span> Comp. [Luke
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019), [Matt.
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5037"></span>[415:5038](0030438.htm#fr_5037) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p25.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p26"></span> [Ps. ix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5038"></span>[415:5039](0030438.htm#fr_5038) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p26.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p27"></span> After the Septuagint he makes a
plural appellative (“eis qui toleraverint,” LXX. <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p27.1"></span>τοῖς
ὑπομένονσι</span>) of the Hebrew <span class="Hebrew"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p27.2"></span>םלֶח”לְ</span>, which in A.V. and the
Vulgate (and also Gesenius and Fuerst) is the dative of a proper name.

<span id="fn_5039"></span>[416:5040](0030438.htm#fr_5039) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p27.4"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p28"></span> [Luke xxi.
20](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5040"></span>[416:5041](0030438.htm#fr_5040) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p29"></span> [Luke
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5041"></span>[416:5042](0030438.htm#fr_5041) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p30.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p31"></span> [Luke xxi.
26](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#026)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5042"></span>[416:5043](0030438.htm#fr_5042) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p32"></span> [Joel
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#030),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#031)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p32.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5043"></span>[416:5044](0030438.htm#fr_5043) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p32.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p33"></span> Elata: “fear was raised to its very
highest.”

<span id="fn_5044"></span>[416:5045](0030438.htm#fr_5044) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p33.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p34"></span> [Hab. iii.
9-12](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p34.1"></span> (Septuagint).

<span id="fn_5045"></span>[416:5046](0030438.htm#fr_5045) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p35"></span> [Luke
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5046"></span>[416:5047](0030438.htm#fr_5046) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p35.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p36"></span> [Luke xxi.
31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#031)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5047"></span>[416:5048](0030438.htm#fr_5047) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p37"></span> [Dan. vii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5048"></span>[416:5049](0030438.htm#fr_5048) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p37.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p38"></span> [Dan. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5049"></span>[416:5050](0030438.htm#fr_5049) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p38.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p39"></span> [Luke
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p39.1"></span>, etc.

<span id="fn_5050"></span>[416:5051](0030438.htm#fr_5050) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p39.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p40"></span> [Ps. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p40.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5051"></span>[416:5052](0030438.htm#fr_5051) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p40.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p41"></span> [Dan. vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5052"></span>[416:5053](0030438.htm#fr_5052) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p41.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p42"></span> [Luke
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#035),
[36](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#036)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5053"></span>[416:5054](0030438.htm#fr_5053) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p43"></span> [Hab. iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5054"></span>[416:5055](0030438.htm#fr_5054) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p43.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p44"></span> In [Luke xxi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#007)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5055"></span>[416:5056](0030438.htm#fr_5055) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p45"></span> [Luke xxi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#033)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5056"></span>[417:5057](0030438.htm#fr_5056) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p45.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p46"></span> [Luke xxi.
29-31](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#029)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5057"></span>[417:5058](0030438.htm#fr_5057) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p46.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p47"></span> Arbuscularum.

<span id="fn_5058"></span>[417:5059](0030438.htm#fr_5058) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p47.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p48"></span> [Luke xxi.
33](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#033)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5059"></span>[417:5060](0030438.htm#fr_5059) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p49"></span> Nescio an.

<span id="fn_5060"></span>[417:5061](0030438.htm#fr_5060) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p49.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p50"></span> [Isa. xl.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#008)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5061"></span>[417:5062](0030438.htm#fr_5061) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p51"></span> [Luke
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034),
[35](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#035)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p51.1"></span>. \[Here follows a rich selection of
parallels to [Luke xxi. 34-38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#034)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p51.2"></span>.\]

<span id="fn_5062"></span>[417:5063](0030438.htm#fr_5062) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p51.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p52"></span> Comp. [Deut. viii.
12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#012)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5063"></span>[417:5064](0030438.htm#fr_5063) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p52.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p53"></span> [Luke xxi.
37](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#037)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5064"></span>[417:5065](0030438.htm#fr_5064) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p54"></span> [Hosea xii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p54.1"></span>. One reading of the LXX. is, <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p54.2"></span>ἐν τῳ οἴκῳ μου
εὕρεσάν με</span>.

<span id="fn_5065"></span>[417:5066](0030438.htm#fr_5065) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p54.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p55"></span> [Zech. xiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5066"></span>[417:5067](0030438.htm#fr_5066) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p56"></span> [Luke xxi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#038)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5067"></span>[417:5068](0030438.htm#fr_5067) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p57"></span> [Isa. l.
4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_5068"></span>[417:5069](0030438.htm#fr_5068) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p57.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxix-p58"></span> Literally, “the prophecies.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How the Steps in the Passion of the Saviour Were Predetermined in
Prophecy. The Passover.  The Treachery of Judas. The Institution of the
Lord's Supper. The Docetic Error of Marcion Confuted by the Body and the
Blood of the Lord Jesus Christ.](0030439)
