[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030095)  [Next](0030097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p1"></span> <span id="page_85">p. 85</span> <span
id="iv.v.xii-Page_85"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p2"></span>It remains for us to examine the
“spectacle” most noted of all, and in highest favour. It is called a
dutiful service (*munus*), from its being an office, for it bears the
name of “*officium*” as well as “*munus*.” The ancients thought that in
this solemnity they rendered offices to the dead; at a later period,
with a cruelty more refined, they somewhat modified its character.  For
formerly, in the belief that the souls of the departed were appeased by
human blood, they were in the habit of buying captives or slaves of
wicked disposition, and immolating them in their funeral obsequies.
Afterwards they thought good to throw the veil of pleasure over their
iniquity. <span id="fr_356"></span>[357](#fn_356) Those, therefore, whom
they had provided for the combat, and then trained in arms as best they
could, only that they might learn to die, they, on the funeral day,
killed at the places of sepulture. They alleviated death by murders.
Such is the origin of the “Munus.” But by degrees their refinement came
up to their cruelty; for these human wild beasts could not find pleasure
exquisite enough, save in the spectacle of men torn to pieces by wild
beasts. Offerings to propitiate the dead then were regarded as belonging
to the class of funeral sacrifices; and these are idolatry: for
idolatry, in fact, is a sort of homage to the departed; the one as well
as the other is a service to dead men. Moreover, demons have abode in
the images of the dead. To refer also to the matter of names, though
this sort of exhibition has passed from honours of the dead to honours
of the living, I mean, to quæstorships and magistracies—to priestly
offices of different kinds; yet, since idolatry still cleaves to the
dignity’s name, whatever is done in its name partakes of its impurity.
The same remark will apply to the procession of the “Munus,” as we look
at that in the pomp which is connected with these honours themselves;
for the purple robes, the fasces, the fillets, the crowns, the
proclamations too, and edicts, the sacred feasts of the day before, are
not without the pomp of the devil, without invitation of demons. What
need, then, of dwelling on the place of horrors, which is too much even
for the tongue of the perjurer? For the amphitheatre <span
id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) is consecrated to names more numerous
and more dire <span id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358) than is the
Capitol itself, temple of all demons as it is. There are as many unclean
spirits there as it holds men. To conclude with a single remark about
the arts which have a place in it, we know that its two sorts of
amusement have for their patrons Mars and Diana.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_356"></span>[85:357](0030096.htm#fr_356) <span
id="iv.v.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p3"></span> \[The authority of Tertullian, in this
matter, is accepted by the critics, as of historic importance.\]

<span id="fn_357"></span>[85:358](0030096.htm#fr_357) <span
id="iv.v.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p4"></span> \[Though this was probably written at
Carthage, his reference to the Flavian theatre in this place is plain
from the immediate comparison with the Capitol.\]

<span id="fn_358"></span>[85:359](0030096.htm#fr_358) <span
id="iv.v.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xii-p5"></span> \[To the infernal deities and first of
all to Pluto. See vol. I. note 6, p. 131, this Series.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII.](0030097)
