[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030209)  [Next](0030211) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—The Arguments of the Platonists
for the Soul’s Incorporeality, Opposed, Perhaps Frivolously.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p2"></span>These conclusions the Platonists disturb
more by subtilty than by truth. Every body, they say, has necessarily
either an animate nature <span id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527) or
an inanimate one. <span id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528) If it has
the inanimate nature, it receives motion externally to itself; if the
animate one, internally. Now the soul receives motion neither externally
nor internally: not externally, since it has not the inanimate nature;
nor internally, because it is itself rather the giver of motion to the
body. It evidently, then, is not a bodily substance, inasmuch as it
receives motion neither way, according to the nature and law of
corporeal substances. Now, what first surprises us here, is the
unsuitableness of a definition which appeals to objects which have no
affinity with the soul. For it is impossible for the soul to be called
either an animate body or an inanimate one, inasmuch as it is the soul
itself which makes the body either animate, if it be present to it, or
else inanimate, if it be absent from it.  That, therefore, which
produces a result, cannot itself be the result, so as to be entitled to
the designation of an animate thing or an inanimate one. The soul is so
called in respect of its own substance. If, then, that which is the soul
admits not of being called an animate body or an inanimate one, how can
it challenge comparison with the nature and law of animate and inanimate
bodies? Furthermore, since it is characteristic of a body to be moved
externally by something else, and as we have already shown that the soul
receives motion from some other thing when it is swayed (from the
outside, of course, by something else) by prophetic influence or by
madness, therefore I must be right in regarding that as bodily substance
which, according to the examples we have quoted, is moved by some other
object from without. Now, if to receive motion from some other thing is
characteristic of a body, how much more is it so to impart motion to
something else!  But the soul moves the body, all whose efforts are
apparent externally, and from without. It is the soul which gives motion
to the feet for walking, and to the hands for touching, and to the eyes
for sight, and to the tongue for speech—a sort of internal image which
moves and animates the surface. Whence could accrue such power to the
soul, if it were incorporeal? How could an unsubstantial thing propel
solid objects? But in what way do the senses in man seem to be divisible
into the corporeal and the intellectual classes? They tell us that the
qualities of things corporeal, such as earth and fire, are indicated by
the bodily senses—of touch and sight; whilst (the qualities) of
incorporeal things—for instance, benevolence and malignity—are <span
id="page_186">p. 186</span> <span
id="iv.xi.vi-Page_186"></span>discovered by the intellectual faculties.
And from this (they deduce what is to them) the manifest conclusion,
that the soul is incorporeal, its properties being comprehended by the
perception not of bodily organs, but of intellectual faculties.  Well,
(I shall be much surprised) if I do not at once cut away the very ground
on which their argument stands.  For I show them how incorporeal things
are commonly submitted to the bodily senses—sound, for instance, to the
organ of hearing; colour, to the organ of sight; smell, to the olfactory
organ.  And, just as in these instances, the soul likewise has its
contact with <span id="fr_1529"></span>[1530](#fn_1529) the body; not to
say that the incorporeal objects are reported to us through the bodily
organs, for the express reason that they come into contact with the said
organs. Inasmuch, then, as it is evident that even incorporeal objects
are embraced and comprehended by corporeal ones, why should not the
soul, which is corporeal, be equally comprehended and understood by
incorporeal faculties? It is thus certain that their argument fails.
Among their more conspicuous arguments will be found this, that in their
judgment every bodily substance is nourished by bodily substances;
whereas the soul, as being an incorporeal essence, is nourished by
incorporeal aliments—for instance, by the studies of wisdom. But even
this ground has no stability in it, since Soranus, who is a most
accomplished authority in medical science, affords us as answer, when he
asserts that the soul is even nourished by corporeal aliments; that in
fact it is, when failing and weak, actually refreshed oftentimes by
food. Indeed, when deprived of all food, does not the soul entirely
remove from the body? Soranus, then, after discoursing about the soul in
the amplest manner, filling four volumes with his dissertations, and
after weighing well all the opinions of the philosophers, defends the
corporeality of the soul, although in the process he has robbed it of
its immortality. For to all men it is not given to believe the truth
which Christians are privileged to hold. As, therefore, Soranus has
shown us from facts that the soul is nourished by corporeal aliments,
let the philosopher (adopt a similar mode of proof, and) show that it is
sustained by an incorporeal food. But the fact is, that no one has even
been able to quench this man’s <span
id="fr_1530"></span>[1531](#fn_1530) doubts and difficulties about the
condition of the soul with the honey-water of Plato’s subtle eloquence,
nor to surfeit them with the crumbs from the minute nostrums of
Aristotle. But what is to become of the souls of all those robust
barbarians, which have had no nurture of philosopher’s lore indeed, and
yet are strong in untaught practical wisdom, and which although very
starvelings in philosophy, without your Athenian academies and porches,
and even the prison of Socrates, do yet contrive to live? For it is not
the soul’s actual substance which is benefited by the aliment of learned
study, but only its conduct and discipline; such ailment contributing
nothing to increase its bulk, but only to enhance its grace. It is,
moreover, a happy circumstance that the Stoics affirm that even the arts
have corporeality; since at the rate the soul too must be corporeal,
since it is commonly supposed to be nourished by the arts.  Such,
however, is the enormous preoccupation of the philosophic mind, that it
is generally unable to see straight before it. Hence (the story of)
Thales falling into the well. <span id="fr_1531"></span>[1532](#fn_1531)
It very commonly, too, through not understanding even its own opinions,
suspects a failure of its own health. Hence (the story of) Chrysippus
and the hellebore. Some such hallucination, I take it, must have
occurred to him, when he asserted that two bodies could not possibly be
contained in one: he must have kept out of mind and sight the case of
those pregnant women who, day after day, bear not one body, but even two
and three at a time, within the embrace of a single womb. One finds
likewise, in the records of the civil law, the instance of a certain
Greek woman who gave birth to a quint <span
id="fr_1532"></span>[1533](#fn_1532) of children, the mother of all
these at one parturition, the manifold parent of a single brood, the
prolific produce from a single womb, who, guarded by so many bodies—I
had almost said, a people—was herself no less then the sixth person! The
whole creation testifies how that those bodies which are naturally
destined to issue from bodies, are already (included) in that from which
they proceed. Now that which proceeds from some other thing must needs
be second to it. Nothing, however, proceeds out of another thing except
by the process of generation; but then they are two (things).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[185:1528](0030210.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="iv.xi.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p3"></span> Animale, “having the nature of soul.”

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[185:1529](0030210.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="iv.xi.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p4"></span> Inanimale.

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[186:1530](0030210.htm#fr_1529) <span
id="iv.xi.vi-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p5"></span> Accedit.

<span id="fn_1530"></span>[186:1531](0030210.htm#fr_1530) <span
id="iv.xi.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p6"></span> We follow Oehler’s view of this obscure
passage, in preference to Rigaltius’.

<span id="fn_1531"></span>[186:1532](0030210.htm#fr_1531) <span
id="iv.xi.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p7"></span> See Tertullian’s *Ad Nationes* (our
translation), p. 33, *Supra.*.

<span id="fn_1532"></span>[186:1533](0030210.htm#fr_1532) <span
id="iv.xi.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.vi-p8"></span> Quinionem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Soul's Corporeality Demonstrated Out of the
Gospels.](0030211)
