[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030254)  [Next](0030256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.li"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.li-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.li-p1.1"></span>Chapter LI.—Death Entirely Separates the Soul
from the Body.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.li-p2"></span>But the operation of death is plain and
obvious: it is the separation of body and soul. Some, however, in
reference to the soul’s immortality, on which they have so feeble a hold
through not being taught of God, maintain it with such beggarly
arguments, that they would fain have it supposed that certain souls
cleave to the body even after death. It is indeed in this sense that
Plato, although he despatches at once to heaven such souls as he
pleases, <span id="fr_1788"></span>[1789](#fn_1788) yet in his
*Republic* <span id="fr_1789"></span>[1790](#fn_1789) exhibits to us the
corpse of an unburied person, which was preserved a long time without
corruption, by reason of the soul remaining, as he says, unseparated
from the body. To the same purport also Democritus remarks on the growth
for a considerable while of the human nails and hair in the grave. Now,
it is quite possible that the nature of the atmosphere tended to the
preservation of the above-mentioned corpse.  What if the air were
particularly dry, and the ground of a saline nature? What, too, if the
substance of the body itself were unusually dry and arid?  What,
moreover, if the mode of the death had already eliminated from the
corpse all corrupting matter? As for the nails, since they are the
commencement of the nerves, they may well seem to be prolonged, owing to
the nerves themselves being relaxed and extended, and to be protruded
more and more as the flesh fails.  The hair, again, is nourished from
the brain, which would cause it endure for a long time as its secret
aliment and defence. Indeed, in the case of living persons themselves,
the whole head of hair is copious or scanty in proportion to the
exuberance of the brain. You have medical men (to attest the fact). But
not a particle of the soul can possibly remain in the body, which is
itself destined to disappear when time shall have abolished the entire
scene on which the body has played its part. And yet even this partial
survival of the soul finds a place in the opinions of some men; and on
this account they will not have the body consumed at its funeral by
fire, because they would spare the small residue of the soul. There is,
however, another way of accounting for this pious treatment, not as if
it meant to favour the relics of the soul, but as if it would avert a
cruel custom in the interest even of the body; since, being human, it is
itself undeserving of an end which is also inflicted upon murderers. The
truth is, the soul is indivisible, because it is immortal; (and this
fact) compels us to believe that death itself is an indivisible process,
accruing indivisibly to the soul, not indeed because it is immortal, but
because it is indivisible. Death, however, would have to be divided in
its operation, if the soul were divisible into particles, any one of
which has to be reserved for a later stage of death.  At this rate, a
part of death will have to stay behind for a portion of the soul. I am
not ignorant that some vestige of this opinion still exists. I have
found it out from one of my own people.  I am acquainted with the case
of a woman, the daughter of Christian parents, <span
id="fr_1790"></span>[1791](#fn_1790) who in the very flower of her age
and beauty slept peacefully (in Jesus), after a singularly happy though
brief married life.  Before they laid her in her grave, and when the
priest began the appointed office, at the very first breath of his
prayer she withdrew her hands from her side, placed them in an attitude
of devotion, and after the holy service was concluded restored them to
their lateral position. Then, again, there is that well-known story
among our own people, that a body voluntarily made way in a certain
cemetery, to afford room for another body to be placed near to it. If,
as is the case, similar stories are told amongst the heathen, (we can
only conclude that) God everywhere manifests signs of His own power—to
His own people for their comfort, to strangers for a testimony unto
them. I would indeed much rather suppose that a portent of this kind
happened from the direct agency of God than from any relics of the
soul:  for if there were a residue of these, they would be certain to
move the other limbs; and even if they moved the hands, this still would
not have been for the purpose of a prayer. Nor would the corpse have
been simply content to have made way <span id="page_229">p. 229</span>
<span id="iv.xi.li-Page_229"></span>for its neighbour: it would,
besides, have benefited its own self also by the change of its
position.  But from whatever cause proceeded these phenomena, which you
must put down amongst signs and portents, it is impossible that they
should regulate nature. Death, if it once falls short of totality in
operation, is not death. If any fraction of the soul remain, it makes a
living state. Death will no more mix with life, than will night with
day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1788"></span>[228:1789](0030255.htm#fr_1788) <span
id="iv.xi.li-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.li-p3"></span> See below, ch. liv.

<span id="fn_1789"></span>[228:1790](0030255.htm#fr_1789) <span
id="iv.xi.li-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.li-p4"></span> Ch. x. p. 614.

<span id="fn_1790"></span>[228:1791](0030255.htm#fr_1790) <span
id="iv.xi.li-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.li-p5"></span> Vernaculam ecclesiæ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: All Kinds of Death a Violence to Nature, Arising from Sin.--Sin
an Intrusion Upon Nature as God Created It.](0030256)
