[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030001)  [Next](0030003.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span> <span id="page_v">p. v</span> <span
id="iii-Page_v"></span>

<span id="iii-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iii-p1.1"></span>Preface.</span>

<span id="iii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii-p3"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii-p3.1"></span>We</span> present a volume widely differing, in its
contents, from those which have gone before; it contains the works of
the great founder of Latin Christianity, the versatile and brilliant
Tertullian. Not all his works, indeed, for they could not be contained
in one of our books. This book, however, considerably overruns the
promised number of pages, and gives three complete parts of Tertullian’s
writings, according to the classification of our Editor-in-chief. The
Fourth volume will begin with the fourth class of his works, those which
exhibit our author’s ascetic ideas and the minor morals of the Primitive
Christians, that collection being closed by the four treatises which
were written in support of a defined and schismatical Montanism.

<span id="iii-p4"></span>The Editor-in-chief has been in active
correspondence with representative men of divers theological schools,
hoping to secure their co-operation in editorial work.  As yet, however,
the result has not enabled us to announce more than one additional
collaborator: the rapidity with which the successive volumes must be
furnished proving an almost insurmountable obstacle in the way of
securing as co-workers, divines actively engaged in professional duties
and literary tasks. The sympathy and encouragement which have been
expressed by all with whom a correspondence has been opened, have been
most cheering. To the Rev. Dr. Riddle, of Hartford, well known as one of
the most learned of the AmericaHærn Revisers of the New Testament, we
are indebted for his consent to edit one of the concluding volumes of
the Series, accompanying it with a Bibliographical Review of the entire
Literature of the *Patrologia* of the Ante-Nicene period: supplying
therein a compendious view of all the writers upon this period and of
the latest critical editions of the Ante-Nicene authors themselves. The
editor-in-chief will continue his annotations and the usual prefaces, in
Professor Riddle’s volume, but will be relieved, in some degree, of the
laborious and minute attention to details which earlier volumes have
necessarily exacted.

<span id="iii-p5"></span>It is needful to remind the reader that he
possesses in this volume what has long been a *desideratum* among
divines. The crabbed Latin of the great Tertullian has been thought to
defy translation: and the variety and uncertain dates of his works have
rendered classification and arrangement almost an equal difficulty. But
here is the work achieved by competent hands, and now, for the first
time, reduced to orderly and methodical plan. We have little doubt that
the student on comparing our edition with that of the Edinburgh Series,
will congratulate himself on the great gain of the arrangement; and we
trust the original matter with which it is illustrated may be found not
less acceptable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](0030003.md)
