[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030115)  [Next](0030117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.vi.i"></span> <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="iv.vi.i-Page_93"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p1"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p1.1"></span>IV.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p2"></span><span class="c17"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p2.1"></span>The Chaplet, or De Corona. <span
id="fr_379"></span>[380](#fn_379) </span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="iv.vi.i-p5"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p5.1"></span>Chapter I.</span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p6"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p6.1"></span>Very</span> lately it happened thus: while the
bounty of our most excellent emperors <span
id="fr_380"></span>[381](#fn_380) was dispensed in the camp, the
soldiers, laurel-crowned, were approaching. One of them, more a soldier
of God, more stedfast than the rest of his brethren, who had imagined
that they could serve two masters, his head alone uncovered, the useless
crown in his hand—already even by that peculiarity known to every one as
a Christian—was nobly conspicuous. Accordingly, all began to mark him
out, jeering him at a distance, gnashing on him near at hand. The murmur
is wafted to the tribune, when the person had just left the ranks. The
tribune at once puts the question to him, Why are you so different in
your attire? He declared that he had no liberty to wear the crown with
the rest.  Being urgently asked for his reasons, he answered, I am a
Christian. O soldier! boasting thyself in God. Then the case was
considered and voted on; the matter was remitted to a higher tribunal;
the offender was conducted to the prefects. At once he put away the
heavy cloak, his disburdening commenced; he loosed from his foot the
military shoe, beginning to stand upon holy ground; <span
id="fr_381"></span>[382](#fn_381) he gave up the sword, which was not
necessary either for the protection of our Lord; from his hand likewise
dropped the laurel crown; and now, purple-clad with the hope of his own
blood, shod with the preparation of the gospel, girt with the sharper
word of God, completely equipped in the apostles’ armour, and crowned
more worthily with the white crown of martyrdom, he awaits in prison the
largess of Christ. Thereafter adverse judgments began to be passed upon
his conduct—whether on the part of Christians I do not know, for those
of the heathen are not different—as if he were headstrong and rash, and
too eager to die, because, in being taken to task about a mere matter of
dress, he brought trouble on the bearers of the Name, <span
id="fr_382"></span>[383](#fn_382) —he, forsooth, alone brave among so
many soldier-brethren, he alone a Christian. It is plain that as they
have rejected the prophecies of the Holy Spirit, <span
id="fr_383"></span>[384](#fn_383) they are also purposing the refusal of
martyrdom. So they murmur that a peace so good and long is endangered
for them. Nor do I doubt that some are already turning their back on the
Scriptures, are making ready their luggage, are equipped for flight from
city to city; for that is all of the gospel they care to remember. I
know, too, their pastors are lions in peace, deer in the fight. As to
the questions asked for extorting confessions from us, we shall teach
elsewhere.  Now, as they put forth also the objection—But where are we
forbidden to be crowned?—I shall take this point up, as more suitable to
be treated of here, being the essence, in fact, of the present
contention. So that, on the one hand, the inquirers who are ignorant,
but anxious, may be instructed; and on the other, those may be refuted
who try to vindicate the sin, especially the laurel-crowned Christians
themselves, to whom it is merely a question of debate, as if it might be
regarded as either no trespass at all, or at least a doubtful one,
because it may be made the subject of investigation.  That it is neither
sinless nor doubtful, I shall now, however, show.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_379"></span>[93:380](0030116.htm#fr_379) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p3"></span> \[Kaye, apparently accepting the judgment
of Dr. Neander, assigns this treatise to <span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 204. The bounty here spoken of,
then, must be that dispensed in honour of the victories over the
Parthians, under Severus.\]

<span id="fn_380"></span>[93:381](0030116.htm#fr_380) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p7"></span> “Emperors.” The Emperor Severus associated
his two sons with him in the possession of the imperial power; Caracalla
in the year 198, Geta in 208.—<span class="sc"><span
id="iv.vi.i-p7.2"></span>Tr</span>.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[93:382](0030116.htm#fr_381) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p8"></span> \[A touch of our author’s genius, inspired
by the Phrygian enthusiasm for martyrdom. The ground on which a martyr
treads begins to be holy, even before the sacrifice, and in loosing his
shoe the victim consecrates the spot and at the same time pays it
homage.\]

<span id="fn_382"></span>[93:383](0030116.htm#fr_382) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p9"></span> \[The name of Christ: and the Antiochian
name of Christians.\]

<span id="fn_383"></span>[93:384](0030116.htm#fr_383) <span
id="iv.vi.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.vi.i-p10"></span> \[Gibbon will have it that the *De
Corona* was written while Tertullian was orthodox, but this reference to
the Montanist notion of “New Prophecy” seems to justify the decision of
critics against Gibbon, who, as Kaye suggests (p. 53) was anxious to
make Christianity itself responsible for military insubordination and
for offences against Imperial Law.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II.](0030117)
