[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030104)  [Next](0030106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.v.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.v.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI.</span>

<span id="iv.v.xxi-p2"></span>The heathen, who have not a full
revelation of the truth, for they are not taught of God, hold a thing
evil and good as it suits self-will and passion, making that which is
good in one place evil in another, and that which is evil in one place
in another good. So it strangely happens, that the same man who can
scarcely in public lift up his tunic, even when necessity of nature
presses him, takes it off in the circus, as if bent on exposing himself
before everybody; the father who carefully protects and guards his
virgin daughter’s ears from every polluting word, takes her to the
theatre himself, exposing her to all its vile words and attitudes; he,
again, who in the streets lays hands on or covers with reproaches the
brawling pugilist, in the arena gives all encouragement to combats of a
much more serious kind; and he who looks with horror on the corpse of
one who has died under the common law of nature, in the amphitheatre
gazes down with most patient eyes on bodies all mangled and torn and
smeared with their own blood; nay, the very man who comes to the show,
because he thinks murderers ought to suffer for their crime, drives the
unwilling gladiator to the murderous deed with rods and scourges; and
one who demands the lion for every manslayer of deeper dye, will have
the staff for the savage swordsman, and rewards him with the cap of
liberty. Yes and he must have the poor victim back again, that he may
get a sight of his face—with zest inspecting near at hand the man whom
he wished torn in pieces at safe distance from him: so much the more
cruel he if that was not his wish.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII.](0030106)
