[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030615)  [Next](0030617) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV.—Christ Plainly Testifies to
the Resurrection of the Entire Man. Not in His Soul Only, Without the
Body.</span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p2"></span>To begin with the passage where He
says that He is come to “*to seek and* to save that which is
lost.” <span id="fr_7505"></span>[7506](#fn_7505) What do you suppose
that to be which is lost? Man, undoubtedly. The entire man, or only a
part of him? The whole man, of course. In fact, since the transgression
which caused man’s ruin was committed quite as much by the instigation
of the soul from concupiscence as by the action of the flesh from actual
fruition, it has marked the entire man with the sentence of
transgression, and has therefore made him deservedly amenable to
perdition. So that he will be wholly saved, since he has by sinning been
wholly lost. Unless it be true that the sheep (of the parable) is a
“lost” one, irrespective of its body; then its recovery may be effected
without the body. Since, however, it is the bodily substance as well as
the soul, making up the entire animal, which was carried on the
shoulders of the Good Shepherd, we have here unquestionably an example
how man is restored in both his natures. Else how unworthy it were of
God to bring only a moiety of man to salvation—and almost less than
that; whereas the munificence of princes of this world always claims for
itself the merit of a plenary grace! Then must the devil be understood
to be stronger for injuring man, ruining him wholly? and must God have
the character of comparative weakness, since He does not relieve and
help man in his entire state? The apostle, however, suggests that “where
sin abounded, there has grace much more abounded.” <span
id="fr_7506"></span>[7507](#fn_7506) How, in fact, can he be regarded as
saved, who can at the same time be said to be lost—lost, that is, in the
flesh, but saved as to his soul? Unless, indeed, *their argument* now
makes it necessary that the soul should be placed in a “lost” condition,
that it may be susceptible of salvation, on the ground that is properly
saved which has been lost. We, however, so understand the soul’s
immortality as to believe it “lost,” not in the sense of destruction,
but of punishment, that is, in hell. And if this is the case, then it is
not the soul which salvation will affect, since it is “safe” already in
its own nature by reason of its immortality, but rather the flesh,
which, as all readily allow, is subject to destruction. Else, if the
soul is also perishable (in this sense), in other words, not
immortal—the condition of the flesh—then this same condition ought in
all fairness to benefit the flesh also, as being similarly mortal and
perishable, since that which perishes the Lord purposes to save. I do
not care now to follow the clue of our discussion, so far as to consider
whether it is in one of his natures or in the other that perdition puts
in its claim on man, provided that salvation is equally distributed over
the two substances, and makes him its aim in respect of them both. For
observe, in which substance so-ever you assume man to have perished, in
the other he does not perish. He will therefore be saved in the
substance in which <span id="page_570">p. 570</span> <span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-Page_570"></span>he does not perish, and yet obtain
salvation in that in which he does perish. You have (then) the
restoration of the entire man, inasmuch as the Lord purposes to save
that part of him which perishes, whilst he will not of course lose that
portion which cannot be lost. Who will any longer doubt of the safety of
both natures, when one of them is to obtain salvation, and the other is
not to lose it?  And, still further, the Lord explains to us the meaning
of the thing when He says: “I came not to do my own will, but the
Father’s, who hath sent me.” <span id="fr_7507"></span>[7508](#fn_7507)
What, I ask, is that will? “That of all which He hath given me I should
lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last day.” <span
id="fr_7508"></span>[7509](#fn_7508) Now, what had Christ received of
the Father but that which He had Himself put on?  Man, of course, in his
texture of flesh and soul. Neither, therefore, of those parts which He
has received will He allow to perish; nay, no considerable portion—nay,
not the least fraction, of either. If the flesh be, *as our opponents
slightingly think*, but a poor fraction, then the flesh is safe, because
not a fraction *of man is to perish*; and no larger portion is in
danger, because every portion of man is in equally safe keeping with
Him. If, however, He will not raise the flesh also up at the last day,
then He will permit not only a fraction of man to perish, but (as I will
venture to say, in consideration of so important a part) almost the
whole of him. But when He repeats His words with increased emphasis,
“And this is the Father’s will, that every one which seeth the Son, and
believeth on Him, may have eternal life: and I will raise him up at the
last day,” <span id="fr_7509"></span>[7510](#fn_7509) —He asserts the
full extent of the resurrection.  For He assigns to each several nature
that reward which is suited to its services: both to the flesh, for by
it the Son was “seen;” and to the soul, for by it He was “believed on.”
Then, you will say, to them was this promise given by whom Christ was
“seen.” Well, be it so; only let the same hope flow on from them to us!
For if to them who saw, and therefore believed, such fruit then accrued
to the operations of the flesh and the soul, how much more to us! For
more “blessed,” says Christ, “are they who have not seen, and yet have
believed;” <span id="fr_7510"></span>[7511](#fn_7510) since, even if the
resurrection of the flesh must be denied to *them*, it must at any rate
be a fitting boon to *us, who are* the more blessed. For how could we be
blessed, if we were to perish in any part of us?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7505"></span>[569:7506](0030616.htm#fr_7505) <span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p3"></span> [Luke xix.
10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)<span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7506"></span>[569:7507](0030616.htm#fr_7506) <span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p4"></span> [Rom. v.
20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020)<span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7507"></span>[570:7508](0030616.htm#fr_7507) <span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p5"></span> [John vi.
38](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#038)<span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7508"></span>[570:7509](0030616.htm#fr_7508) <span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p6"></span> [John
6.39](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#039)<span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7509"></span>[570:7510](0030616.htm#fr_7509) <span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p7"></span> [John
6.40](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#040)<span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_7510"></span>[570:7511](0030616.htm#fr_7510) <span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.xxxiv-p8"></span> [John xx.
29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)<span
id="v.viii.xxxiv-p8.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Explanation of What is Meant by the Body, Which is to Be Raised
Again. Not the Corporeality of the Soul.](0030617)
