[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030433)  [Next](0030435) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXV.—The Judicial Severity of
Christ and the Tenderness of the Creator, Asserted in Contradiction to
Marcion. The Cure of the Ten Lepers. Old Testament Analogies. The
Kingdom of God Within You; This Teaching Similar to that of Moses.
Christ, the Stone Rejected by the Builders.  Indications of Severity in
the Coming of Christ. Proofs that He is Not the Impassible Being Marcion
Imagined.</span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p2"></span>Then, turning to His disciples, He
says: “Woe unto him through whom offences come! It were better for him
if he had not been born, or if a millstone were hanged about his neck
and he were cast into the sea, than that he should offend one of these
little ones,” <span id="fr_4859"></span>[4860](#fn_4859) that is, one of
His disciples. Judge, then, what the sort of punishment is which He so
severely threatens. For it is no stranger who is to avenge the offence
done to His disciples. Recognise also in Him the Judge, and one too, who
expresses Himself on the safety of His followers with the same
tenderness as that which the Creator long ago exhibited: “He that
toucheth you toucheth the apple of my eye.” <span
id="fr_4860"></span>[4861](#fn_4860) Such identity of care proceeds from
one and the same Being. A trespassing brother He will have
rebuked. <span id="fr_4861"></span>[4862](#fn_4861) If one failed in
this duty of reproof, he in fact sinned, either because out of hatred he
wished his brother to continue in sin, or else spared him from mistaken
friendship, <span id="fr_4862"></span>[4863](#fn_4862) although
possessing the injunction in Leviticus: “Thou shalt not hate thy brother
in thine heart; thy neighbor thou shalt seriously rebuke, and on his
account shalt not contract sin.” <span
id="fr_4863"></span>[4864](#fn_4863) Nor is it to be wondered at, if
*He* thus teaches who forbids your refusing to bring back even your
brother’s cattle, if you find them astray in the road; much more should
you bring back your erring brother to himself. He commands you to
forgive your brother, should he trespass against you even “seven
times.” <span id="fr_4864"></span>[4865](#fn_4864) But that surely, is a
small matter; for with the Creator there is a larger *grace*, when He
sets no limits to forgiveness, indefinitely charging you “not to bear
any malice against your brother,” <span
id="fr_4865"></span>[4866](#fn_4865) and to give not merely to him who
asks, but even to him who does not ask. For His will is, not that you
should forgive <span id="fr_4866"></span>[4867](#fn_4866) an offence,
but forget it. The law about lepers had a profound meaning as
respects <span id="fr_4867"></span>[4868](#fn_4867) the forms of the
disease itself, and of the inspection by the high priest. <span
id="fr_4868"></span>[4869](#fn_4868) The interpretation of this sense it
will be our task to ascertain. Marcion’s labour, however, is to object
to us the strictness <span id="fr_4869"></span>[4870](#fn_4869) of the
law, with the view of maintaining that here also Christ is its
enemy—forestalling <span id="fr_4870"></span>[4871](#fn_4870) its
enactments even in His cure of the ten lepers. These He simply commanded
to show themselves to the priest; “and as they went, He cleansed
them” <span id="fr_4871"></span>[4872](#fn_4871) —without a touch, and
without a word, by His silent power and simple will. Well, but what
necessity was there for Christ, who had been once for all announced as
the healer of our sicknesses and sins, and had proved Himself such by
His acts, <span id="fr_4872"></span>[4873](#fn_4872) to busy Himself
with inquiries <span id="fr_4873"></span>[4874](#fn_4873) into the
qualities *and details* of cures; or for the Creator to be summoned to
the scrutiny of the law in the person of Christ? If any part of this
healing was effected by Him in a way different from the law, He *yet*
Himself did it to perfection; for surely the Lord may by Himself, or by
His Son, produce after one manner, and after another manner by His
servants the prophets, those proofs of His power and might especially,
which (as excelling in glory and strength, because they are His own
acts) rightly enough leave in the distance behind them the works which
are done by His servants. But enough <span id="page_408">p. 408</span>
<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-Page_408"></span>has been already said on this
point in a former passage. <span id="fr_4874"></span>[4875](#fn_4874)
Now, although He said in a preceding chapter, <span
id="fr_4875"></span>[4876](#fn_4875) that “there were many lepers in
Israel in the days of Eliseus the prophet, and none of them was cleansed
saving Naaman the Syrian,” yet of course the mere number proves nothing
towards a difference in the gods, as tending to the abasement <span
id="fr_4876"></span>[4877](#fn_4876) of the Creator in curing only one,
and the pre-eminence of Him who healed ten. For who can doubt that many
might have been cured by Him who cured one more easily than ten by him
who had never healed one before? But His main purpose in this
declaration was to strike at the unbelief or the pride of Israel, in
that (although there were many lepers amongst them, and a prophet was
not wanting to them) not one had been moved even by so conspicuous an
example to betake himself to God who was working in His prophets.
Forasmuch, then, as He was Himself the veritable <span
id="fr_4877"></span>[4878](#fn_4877) High Priest of God the Father, He
inspected them according to the hidden purport of the law, which
signified that Christ was the true distinguisher and extinguisher of the
defilements of mankind.  However, what was obviously required by the law
He commanded should be done: “Go,” said He, “show yourselves to the
priests.” <span id="fr_4878"></span>[4879](#fn_4878) Yet why this, if He
meant to cleanse them first? Was it as a despiser of the law, in order
to prove to them that, having been cured already on the road, the law
was now nothing to them, nor even the priests?  Well, the matter must of
course pass as it best may, <span id="fr_4879"></span>[4880](#fn_4879)
if anybody supposes that Christ had such views as these! <span
id="fr_4880"></span>[4881](#fn_4880) But there are certainly better
interpretations to be found of the passage, and more deserving of
belief: how that they were cleansed on this account, because <span
id="fr_4881"></span>[4882](#fn_4881) they were obedient, and went as the
law required, when they were commanded to go to the priests; and it is
not to be believed that persons who observed the law could have found a
cure from a god that was destroying the law. Why, however, did He not
give such a command to the leper who first returned? <span
id="fr_4882"></span>[4883](#fn_4882) Because Elisha did not in the case
of Naaman the Syrian, and yet was not on that account less the Creator’s
agent? This is a sufficient answer. But the believer knows that there is
a profounder reason. Consider, therefore, the true motives. <span
id="fr_4883"></span>[4884](#fn_4883) The miracle was performed in the
district of Samaria, to which country also belonged one of the
lepers. <span id="fr_4884"></span>[4885](#fn_4884) Samaria, however, had
revolted from Israel, carrying with it the disaffected nine
tribes, <span id="fr_4885"></span>[4886](#fn_4885) which, having been
alienated <span id="fr_4886"></span>[4887](#fn_4886) by the prophet
Ahijah, <span id="fr_4887"></span>[4888](#fn_4887) Jeroboam settled in
Samaria. Besides, the Samaritans were always pleased with the mountains
and the wells of their ancestors. Thus, in the Gospel of John, the woman
of Samaria, when conversing with the Lord at the well, says, “No
doubt <span id="fr_4888"></span>[4889](#fn_4888) Thou art greater,”
etc.; and again, “Our fathers worshipped in this mountain; but ye say,
that in Jerusalem is the place where men ought to worship.” <span
id="fr_4889"></span>[4890](#fn_4889) Accordingly, He who said, “Woe unto
them that trust in the mountain of Samaria,” <span
id="fr_4890"></span>[4891](#fn_4890) vouchsafing now to restore that
very region, purposely requests the men “to go and show themselves to
the priests,” because these were to be found only there where the temple
was; submitting <span id="fr_4891"></span>[4892](#fn_4891) the Samaritan
to the Jew, inasmuch as “salvation was of the Jews,” <span
id="fr_4892"></span>[4893](#fn_4892) whether to the Israelite or the
Samaritan.  To the tribe of Judah, indeed, wholly appertained the
promised Christ, <span id="fr_4893"></span>[4894](#fn_4893) in order
that men might know that at Jerusalem were both the priests and the
temple; that there also was the womb <span
id="fr_4894"></span>[4895](#fn_4894) of religion, and its *living*
fountain, not its *mere* “well.” <span
id="fr_4895"></span>[4896](#fn_4895) Seeing, therefore, that they
recognised <span id="fr_4896"></span>[4897](#fn_4896) the truth that at
Jerusalem the law was to be fulfilled, He healed them, whose salvation
was to come <span id="fr_4897"></span>[4898](#fn_4897) of faith <span
id="fr_4898"></span>[4899](#fn_4898) without the ceremony of the law.
Whence also, astonished that one only out of the ten was thankful for
his release to the divine grace, He does not command him to offer a gift
according to the law, because he had already paid his tribute of
gratitude when “he glorified God”; <span
id="fr_4899"></span>[4900](#fn_4899) for thus did the Lord will that the
law’s requirement should be interpreted. And yet who was the God to whom
the Samaritan gave thanks, because thus far not even had an Israelite
heard of another god? Who else but He by whom all had hitherto been
<span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-Page_409"></span>healed through Christ? And therefore it
was said to him, “Thy faith hath made thee whole,” <span
id="fr_4900"></span>[4901](#fn_4900) because he had discovered that it
was his duty to render the true oblation to Almighty God—even
thanksgiving—in His true temple, and before His true High Priest *Jesus*
Christ. But it is impossible either that the Pharisees should seem to
have inquired of the Lord about the coming of the kingdom of the rival
god, when no other god has ever yet been announced by Christ; or that He
should have answered them concerning the kingdom of any other god than
Him of whom they were in the habit of asking Him. “The kingdom of God,”
He says, “cometh not with observation; neither do they say, Lo here! or,
lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you.” <span
id="fr_4901"></span>[4902](#fn_4901) Now, who will not interpret the
words “*within you*” to mean *in your hand, within your power*, if you
hear, and do the commandment of God? If, however, the kingdom of God
lies in His commandment, set before your mind Moses on the other side,
according to our *antitheses*, and you will find the self-same view of
the case. <span id="fr_4902"></span>[4903](#fn_4902) “The commandment is
not a lofty one, <span id="fr_4903"></span>[4904](#fn_4903) neither is
it far off from thee. It is not in heaven, that thou shouldest say, ‘Who
shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it,
and do it?’ nor is it beyond the sea, that thou shouldest say, ‘Who
shall go over the sea for us, and bring it unto us, that we may hear it,
and do it?’ But the word is very nigh unto thee, in thy mouth, and in
thy heart, and in thy hands, to do it.” <span
id="fr_4904"></span>[4905](#fn_4904) This means, “Neither in this place
nor that place is the kingdom of God; for, behold, it is within
you.” <span id="fr_4905"></span>[4906](#fn_4905) And if the heretics, in
their audacity, should contend that the Lord did not give an answer
about His own kingdom, but only about the Creator’s kingdom, concerning
which they had inquired, then the following words are against them. For
He tells them that “the Son of man must suffer many things, and be
rejected,” before His coming, <span id="fr_4906"></span>[4907](#fn_4906)
at which His kingdom will be really <span
id="fr_4907"></span>[4908](#fn_4907) revealed. In this statement He
shows that it was His own kingdom which His answer to them had
contemplated, and which was now awaiting His own sufferings and
rejection. But having to be rejected and afterwards to be acknowledged,
and taken up <span id="fr_4908"></span>[4909](#fn_4908) and glorified,
He borrowed the very word “rejected” from the passage, where, under the
figure of *a stone*, His twofold manifestation was celebrated by
David—the first in rejection, the second in honour: “The stone,” says
He, “which the builders rejected, is become the head-stone of the
corner. This is the Lord’s doing.” <span
id="fr_4909"></span>[4910](#fn_4909) Now it would be idle, if we
believed that God had predicted the humiliation, or even the glory, of
any *Christ* at all, that He could have signed His prophecy for any but
Him whom He had foretold under the figure of a *stone*, and a *rock*,
and a *mountain*. <span id="fr_4910"></span>[4911](#fn_4910) If,
however, He speaks of His own coming, why does He compare it with the
days of Noe and of Lot, <span id="fr_4911"></span>[4912](#fn_4911) which
were dark and terrible—a mild and gentle God as He is? Why does He bid
us “remember Lot’s wife,” <span id="fr_4912"></span>[4913](#fn_4912) who
despised the Creator’s command, and was punished for her contempt, if He
does not come with judgment to avenge the infraction of His precepts? If
He really does punish, like the Creator, <span
id="fr_4913"></span>[4914](#fn_4913) if He is my Judge, He ought not to
have adduced examples for the purpose of instructing me from Him whom He
yet destroys, that *He* <span id="fr_4914"></span>[4915](#fn_4914) might
not seem to be my instructor. But if He does not even here speak of His
own coming, but of the coming of the Hebrew Christ, <span
id="fr_4915"></span>[4916](#fn_4915) let us still wait in expectation
that He will vouchsafe to us some prophecy of His own advent; meanwhile
we will continue to believe that He is none other than He whom He
reminds us of in every passage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4859"></span>[407:4860](0030434.htm#fr_4859) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p3"></span> [Luke
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#002)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4860"></span>[407:4861](0030434.htm#fr_4860) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p4"></span> [Zech. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4861"></span>[407:4862](0030434.htm#fr_4861) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p5"></span> [Luke xvii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#003)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4862"></span>[407:4863](0030434.htm#fr_4862) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p6"></span> Ex acceptione personæ. The Greek <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p6.1"></span>προσωποληψία</span>,
“respect of persons.”

<span id="fn_4863"></span>[407:4864](0030434.htm#fr_4863) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p7"></span> [Lev. xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p7.1"></span>.
The last clause in A.V. runs, “And not suffer sin upon him;” but the
Sept gives this reading, <span class="Greek"><span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p7.2"></span>καὶ οὐ λήψῃ δι᾽ αὐτὸν ἁμαρτίαν</span>; nor
need the Hebrew mean other than this. The prenominal particle <span
class="Hebrew"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p7.3"></span>וייֹע</span> may be
well rendered <span class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p7.4"></span>δι᾽
αὐτόι</span> on his account.

<span id="fn_4864"></span>[407:4865](0030434.htm#fr_4864) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p7.5"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p8"></span> [Luke xvii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#004)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4865"></span>[407:4866](0030434.htm#fr_4865) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p9"></span> [Lev. xix.
18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4866"></span>[407:4867](0030434.htm#fr_4866) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p9.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p10"></span> Dones.

<span id="fn_4867"></span>[407:4868](0030434.htm#fr_4867) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p11"></span> Erga: *i.q.* circa.

<span id="fn_4868"></span>[407:4869](0030434.htm#fr_4868) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p12"></span> See [Lev.
13:0](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#000), [Lev.
14:0](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#000)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4869"></span>[407:4870](0030434.htm#fr_4869) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p12.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p13"></span> Morositatem.

<span id="fn_4870"></span>[407:4871](0030434.htm#fr_4870) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p14"></span> Prævenientem.

<span id="fn_4871"></span>[407:4872](0030434.htm#fr_4871) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p15"></span> [Luke xvii.
11-19](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4872"></span>[407:4873](0030434.htm#fr_4872) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p15.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p16"></span> Or, perhaps, “had proved the prophecy
true by His accomplishment of it.”

<span id="fn_4873"></span>[407:4874](0030434.htm#fr_4873) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p17"></span> Retractari.

<span id="fn_4874"></span>[408:4875](0030434.htm#fr_4874) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p17.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p18"></span> See above in chap. ix.

<span id="fn_4875"></span>[408:4876](0030434.htm#fr_4875) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p18.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p19"></span> Præfatus est: see [Luke iv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#027)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4876"></span>[408:4877](0030434.htm#fr_4876) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p20"></span> Destructionem.

<span id="fn_4877"></span>[408:4878](0030434.htm#fr_4877) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p21"></span> Authenticus. “He was the *true*, the
original Priest, of whom the priests under the Mosaic law were only
copies” (Bp. Kaye, *On the Writings of Tertullian*, pp. 293, 294, and
note 8).

<span id="fn_4878"></span>[408:4879](0030434.htm#fr_4878) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p22"></span> [Luke xvii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#014)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4879"></span>[408:4880](0030434.htm#fr_4879) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p23"></span> Et utique viderit.

<span id="fn_4880"></span>[408:4881](0030434.htm#fr_4880) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p24"></span> Tam opiniosus.

<span id="fn_4881"></span>[408:4882](0030434.htm#fr_4881) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p24.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p25"></span> Qua: “I should prefer *quia*”
(Oehler).

<span id="fn_4882"></span>[408:4883](0030434.htm#fr_4882) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p26"></span> Pristino leproso: but doubtful.

<span id="fn_4883"></span>[408:4884](0030434.htm#fr_4883) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p27"></span> Causas.

<span id="fn_4884"></span>[408:4885](0030434.htm#fr_4884) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p28"></span> [Luke xvii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#017)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4885"></span>[408:4886](0030434.htm#fr_4885) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p29"></span> Schisma illud ex *novem* tribubus.
There is another reading which substitutes the word *decem*. “It is,
however, immaterial; either number will do *roundly*. If ‘ten’ be the
number, it must be understood that the tenth is divided, accurately
making nine and a half tribes. If ‘nine’ be read, the same amount is
still made up, for *Simeon* was reckoned with *Judah*, and half of the
tribe of Benjamin remained loyal” (Fr. Junius).

<span id="fn_4886"></span>[408:4887](0030434.htm#fr_4886) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p30"></span> Avulsas.

<span id="fn_4887"></span>[408:4888](0030434.htm#fr_4887) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p31"></span> [1 Kings
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029), [1 Kings
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#015)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4888"></span>[408:4889](0030434.htm#fr_4888) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p32"></span> Næ.

<span id="fn_4889"></span>[408:4890](0030434.htm#fr_4889) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p32.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p33"></span> [John
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#012),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4890"></span>[408:4891](0030434.htm#fr_4890) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p33.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p34"></span> [Amos vi.
1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4891"></span>[408:4892](0030434.htm#fr_4891) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p34.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p35"></span> Subiciens: or “subjecting.”

<span id="fn_4892"></span>[408:4893](0030434.htm#fr_4892) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p35.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p36"></span> [John iv.
22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p36.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4893"></span>[408:4894](0030434.htm#fr_4893) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p36.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p37"></span> Tota promissio Christus.

<span id="fn_4894"></span>[408:4895](0030434.htm#fr_4894) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p37.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p38"></span> Matricem.

<span id="fn_4895"></span>[408:4896](0030434.htm#fr_4895) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p38.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p39"></span> Fontem non puteum salutis.

<span id="fn_4896"></span>[408:4897](0030434.htm#fr_4896) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p39.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p40"></span> Agnovisse.

<span id="fn_4897"></span>[408:4898](0030434.htm#fr_4897) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p40.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p41"></span> Justificandos.

<span id="fn_4898"></span>[408:4899](0030434.htm#fr_4898) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p41.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p42"></span> [Luke xvii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p42.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4899"></span>[408:4900](0030434.htm#fr_4899) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p42.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p43"></span> [Luke xvii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#015)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4900"></span>[409:4901](0030434.htm#fr_4900) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p43.3"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p44"></span> [Luke xvii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#019)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4901"></span>[409:4902](0030434.htm#fr_4901) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p44.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p45"></span> [Luke
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4902"></span>[409:4903](0030434.htm#fr_4902) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p45.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p46"></span> Una sententia.

<span id="fn_4903"></span>[409:4904](0030434.htm#fr_4903) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p46.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p47"></span> Excelsum: Sept. <span
class="Greek"><span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p47.1"></span>ὑπέρογχος</span>.

<span id="fn_4904"></span>[409:4905](0030434.htm#fr_4904) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p47.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p48"></span> [Deut. xxx.
11-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4905"></span>[409:4906](0030434.htm#fr_4905) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p48.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p49"></span> [Luke xvii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4906"></span>[409:4907](0030434.htm#fr_4906) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p49.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p50"></span> [Luke xvii.
25](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#025)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4907"></span>[409:4908](0030434.htm#fr_4907) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p50.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p51"></span> Substantialiter.

<span id="fn_4908"></span>[409:4909](0030434.htm#fr_4908) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p51.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p52"></span> Assumi.

<span id="fn_4909"></span>[409:4910](0030434.htm#fr_4909) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p52.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p53"></span> [Ps. cxviii.
21](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#021)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4910"></span>[409:4911](0030434.htm#fr_4910) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p53.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p54"></span> See [Isa.
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014), [1 Cor.
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4911"></span>[409:4912](0030434.htm#fr_4911) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p54.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p55"></span> [Luke xvii.
26-30](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4912"></span>[409:4913](0030434.htm#fr_4912) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p55.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p56"></span> [Luke xvii.
32](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#032)<span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_4913"></span>[409:4914](0030434.htm#fr_4913) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p56.2"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p57"></span> Ut ille.

<span id="fn_4914"></span>[409:4915](0030434.htm#fr_4914) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p57.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p58"></span> Ille: emphatic.

<span id="fn_4915"></span>[409:4916](0030434.htm#fr_4915) <span
id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p58.1"></span>

<span id="v.iv.v.xxxv-p59"></span> That is, the *Creator’s* Christ from
the Marcionite point of view.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Parables of the Importunate Widow, and of the Pharisee and
the Publican. Christ's Answer to the Rich Ruler, the Cure of the Blind
Man. His Salutation--Son of David. All Proofs of Christ's Relation to
the Creator, Marcion's Antithesis Between David and Christ
Confuted.](0030435)
