[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030050)  [Next](0030052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xlv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xlv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLV.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xlv-p2"></span>We, then, alone are without crime. Is
there ought wonderful in that, if it be a very necessity with us? For a
necessity indeed it is. Taught of God himself what goodness is, we have
both a perfect knowledge of it as revealed to us by a perfect Master;
and faithfully we do His will, as enjoined on us by a Judge we dare not
despise. But your ideas of virtue you have got from mere human opinion;
on human authority, too, its obligation rests: hence your system of
practical morality is deficient, both in the fulness and authority
requisite to produce a life of real virtue. Man’s wisdom to point out
what is good, is no greater than his authority to exact the keeping of
it; the one is as easily deceived as the other is despised. And so,
which is the ampler rule, to say, “Thou shalt not kill,” or to teach,
“Be not even angry?” Which is more perfect, to forbid adultery, or to
restrain from even a single lustful look?  Which indicates the higher
intelligence, interdicting evil-doing, or evil-speaking? Which is more
thorough, not allowing an injury, or not even suffering an injury done
to you to be repaid? Though withal you know that these very laws also of
yours, which seem to lead to virtue, have been borrowed from the law of
God as the ancient model.  Of the age of Moses we have already spoken.
But what is the real authority of human laws, when it is in man’s power
both to evade them, by generally managing to hide himself out of sight
in his crimes, and to despise them sometimes, if inclination or
necessity leads him to offend?  Think of these things, too, in the light
of the brevity of any punishment you can inflict—never to last longer
than till death. On this ground Epicurus makes light of all suffering
and pain, maintaining that if it is small, it is contemptible; and if it
is great, it is not long-continued.  No doubt about it, we, who receive
our awards under the judgment of an all-seeing God, and who look forward
to eternal punishment from Him for sin,—we alone make real effort to
attain a blameless life, under the influence of our ampler knowledge,
the impossibility of concealment, and the greatness of the threatened
torment, not merely long-enduring but everlasting, fearing Him, whom he
too should fear who the fearing judges,—even God, I mean, and not the
proconsul.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XLVI.](0030052.md)
