[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030010)  [Next](0030012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>To say a word about the origin of laws of
the kind to which we now refer, there was an old decree that no god
should be consecrated by the emperor till first approved by the senate.
Marcus Æmilius had experience of this in reference to his god Alburnus. 
And this, too, makes for our case, that among you divinity is allotted
at the judgment of human beings. Unless gods give satisfaction to men,
there will be no deification for them: the god will have to propitiate
the man. Ti<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span
id="iv.iii.v-Page_22"></span>berius <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md)
accordingly, in whose days the Christian name made its entry into the
world, having himself received intelligence from Palestine of events
which had clearly shown the truth of Christ’s divinity, brought the
matter before the senate, with his own decision in favour of Christ. 
The senate, because it had not given the approval itself, rejected his
proposal. Cæsar held to his opinion, threatening wrath against all
accusers of the Christians. Consult your histories; you will there find
that Nero was the first who assailed with the imperial sword the
Christian sect, making progress then especially at Rome.  But we glory
in having our condemnation hallowed by the hostility of such a wretch.
For any one who knows him, can understand that not except as being of
singular excellence did anything bring on it Nero’s condemnation. 
Domitian, too, a man of Nero’s type in cruelty, tried his hand at
persecution; but as he had something of the human in him, he soon put an
end to what he had begun, even restoring again those whom he had
banished. Such as these have always been our persecutors,—men unjust,
impious, base, of whom even you yourselves have no good to say, the
sufferers under whose sentences you have been wont to restore. But among
so many princes from that time to the present day, with anything of
divine and human wisdom in them, point out a single persecutor of the
Christian name.  So far from that, we, on the contrary, bring before you
one who was their protector, as you will see by examining the letters of
Marcus Aurelius, that most grave of emperors, in which he bears his
testimony that that Germanic drought was removed by the rains obtained
through the prayers of the Christians who chanced to be fighting under
him.  And as he did not by public law remove from Christians their legal
disabilities, yet in another way he put them openly aside, even adding a
sentence of condemnation, and that of greater severity, against their
accusers. What sort of laws are these which the impious alone execute
against us—and the unjust, the vile, the bloody, the senseless, the
insane? which Trajan to some extent made naught by forbidding Christians
to be sought after; which neither a Hadrian, though fond of searching
into all things strange and new, nor a Vespasian, though the subjugator
of the Jews, nor a Pius, nor a Verus, ever enforced? It should surely be
judged more natural for bad men to be eradicated by good princes as
being their natural enemies, than by those of a spirit kindred with
their own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[22:82](0030011.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span> \[Elucidation IV.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI.](0030012.md)
