[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030583)  [Next](0030585.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.viii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p1"></span> <span id="page_546">p. 546</span> <span
id="v.viii.ii-Page_546"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="v.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II.—The Jewish Sadducees a Link
Between the Pagan Philosophers and the Heretics on This Doctrine. Its
Fundamental Importance Asserted. The Soul Fares Better Than the Body, in
Heretical Estimation, as to Its Future State.  Its Extinction, However,
Was Held by One Lucan.</span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p2"></span>Since there is even within the confines
of God’s *Church* <span id="fr_7292"></span>[7293](#fn_7292.md) a sect
which is more nearly allied to the Epicureans than to the prophets, an
opportunity is afforded us of knowing <span
id="fr_7293"></span>[7294](#fn_7293.md) what estimate Christ forms of the
(said sect, even the) Sadducees. For to Christ was it reserved to lay
bare everything which before was concealed:  to impart certainty to
doubtful points; to accomplish those of which men had had but a
foretaste; to give present reality to the objects of prophecy; *and* to
furnish not only by Himself, but actually in Himself, certain proofs of
the resurrection of the dead. It is, however, against other Sadducees
that we have now to prepare ourselves, but still partakers of their
doctrine. For instance, they allow a moiety of the resurrection; that
is, simply of the soul, despising the flesh, just as they also do the
Lord of the flesh Himself.  No other persons, indeed, refuse to concede
to the substance of the body its recovery from death, <span
id="fr_7294"></span>[7295](#fn_7294.md) heretical inventors of a second
deity.  Driven then, as they are, to give a different dispensation to
Christ, so that He may not be accounted as belonging to the Creator,
they have achieved their first error in *the article of* His very flesh;
contending with Marcion and Basilides that it possessed no reality; or
else holding, after the heretical tenets of Valentinus, and according to
Apelles, that it had qualities peculiar to itself. And so it follows
that they shut out from all recovery from death that substance of which
they say that Christ did not partake, confidently assuming that it
furnishes the strongest presumption against the resurrection, since the
flesh is already risen in Christ. Hence it is that we have ourselves
previously issued our volume *On the flesh of Christ*; in which we both
furnish proofs of its reality, <span
id="fr_7295"></span>[7296](#fn_7295.md) in opposition to the idea of its
being a vain phantom; and claim for it a human nature without any
peculiarity of condition—such a nature as has marked out Christ to be
both man and the Son of man.  For when we prove Him to be invested with
the flesh and in a bodily condition, we at the same time refute heresy,
by establishing the rule that no other being than the Creator must be
believed to be God, since we show that Christ, in whom God is plainly
discerned, is precisely of such a nature as the Creator promised that He
should be.  Being thus refuted touching God as the Creator, and Christ
as the Redeemer of the flesh, they will at once be defeated also on the
resurrection of the flesh. No procedure, indeed, can be more reasonable.
And we affirm that controversy with heretics should in most cases be
conducted in this way. For due method requires that conclusions should
always be drawn from the most important premises, in order that there be
a prior agreement on the essential point, by means of which the
particular question under review may be said to have been determined.
Hence it is that the heretics, from their conscious weakness, never
conduct discussion in an orderly manner. They are well aware how hard is
their task in insinuating the existence of a second god, to the
disparagement of the Creator of the world, who is known to all men
naturally by the testimony of His works, who is before all others in the
mysteries <span id="fr_7296"></span>[7297](#fn_7296.md) *of His being*, and
is especially manifested in the prophets; <span
id="fr_7297"></span>[7298](#fn_7297.md) then, under the pretence of
considering a more urgent inquiry, namely man’s own salvation—a question
which transcends all others in its importance—they begin with doubts
about the resurrection; for there is greater difficulty in believing the
resurrection of the flesh than the oneness of the Deity. In this way,
after they have deprived the discussion of the advantages of its logical
order, and have embarrassed it with doubtful insinuations <span
id="fr_7298"></span>[7299](#fn_7298.md) in disparagement of the flesh, they
gradually draw their argument to the reception of a second god after
destroying and changing the very ground of our hopes. For when once a
man is fallen or removed from the sure hope which he had placed in the
Creator, he is easily led away to the object of a different hope, whom
however of his own accord he can hardly help suspecting. Now it is by a
discrepancy in the promises that a difference of gods is insinuated. How
many do we thus see drawn into the net vanquished on the resurrection of
the flesh, before they could carry their point on the oneness of the
Deity! In respect, then, of the heretics, we have shown with what
weapons we ought to meet them. And indeed we have already encountered
them in treatises severally directed against them: on the one only God
and His Christ, in our work against Marcion, <span
id="fr_7299"></span>[7300](#fn_7299.md) on the Lord’s flesh, in our book
against the four <span id="page_547">p. 547</span> <span
id="v.viii.ii-Page_547"></span>heresies, <span
id="fr_7300"></span>[7301](#fn_7300.md) for the special purpose of opening
the way to the present inquiry: so that we have now only to discuss the
resurrection of the flesh, (treating it) just as if it were uncertain in
regard to ourselves also, that is, in the system of the Creator. <span
id="fr_7301"></span>[7302](#fn_7301.md) Because many persons are
uneducated; still more are of faltering faith, and several are
weak-minded: these will have to be instructed, directed, strengthened,
inasmuch as the very oneness of the Godhead will be defended along with
the maintenance of our doctrine. <span
id="fr_7302"></span>[7303](#fn_7302.md) For if the resurrection of the
flesh be denied, *that prime article of the faith* is shaken; if it be
asserted, that is established. There is no need, I suppose, to treat of
the soul’s safety; for nearly all the heretics, in whatever way they
conceive of it, certainly refrain from denying *that*. We may ignore a
certain Lucan, <span id="fr_7303"></span>[7304](#fn_7303.md) who does not
spare even this part of our nature, which he follows Aristotle in
reducing to dissolution, and substitutes some other thing in lieu of it.
Some third nature it is which, according to him, is to rise again,
neither soul nor flesh; in other words, not man, but a bear perhaps—for
instance, Lucan himself. <span id="fr_7304"></span>[7305](#fn_7304.md) Even
he <span id="fr_7305"></span>[7306](#fn_7305.md) has received from us a
copious notice in our book on the entire condition of the soul, <span
id="fr_7306"></span>[7307](#fn_7306.md) the especial immortality of which
we there maintain, whilst we also both acknowledge the dissolution of
the flesh alone, and emphatically assert its restitution. Into the body
of that work were collected whatever points we elsewhere had to reserve
from the pressure of incidental causes. For as it is my custom to touch
some questions but lightly on their first occurrence, so I am obliged
also to postpone the consideration of them, until the outline can be
filled in with complete detail, and the deferred points be taken up on
their own merits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7292"></span>[546:7293](0030584.htm#fr_7292.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p3"></span> Apud Deum.

<span id="fn_7293"></span>[546:7294](0030584.htm#fr_7293.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p4"></span> Sciemus.

<span id="fn_7294"></span>[546:7295](0030584.htm#fr_7294.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p5"></span> Salutem.

<span id="fn_7295"></span>[546:7296](0030584.htm#fr_7295.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p6"></span> Eam solidam.

<span id="fn_7296"></span>[546:7297](0030584.htm#fr_7296.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p7"></span> In sacramentis.

<span id="fn_7297"></span>[546:7298](0030584.htm#fr_7297.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p8"></span> In prædicationibus: “in the declarations
of the prophets.”

<span id="fn_7298"></span>[546:7299](0030584.htm#fr_7298.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p9"></span> Scrupulis.

<span id="fn_7299"></span>[546:7300](0030584.htm#fr_7299.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p10"></span> See books ii. and iii. of our
*Anti-Marcion*.

<span id="fn_7300"></span>[547:7301](0030584.htm#fr_7300.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p11"></span> He means the *De Carne Christi.*

<span id="fn_7301"></span>[547:7302](0030584.htm#fr_7301.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p12"></span> Tanquam penes nos quoque incerta, id
est penes Creatorem. This obscure clause is very variously read.  One
reading, approved by Fr. Junius, has: “Tanquam penes nos incertum, dum
sit quoque certum penes Creatorem,” *q.d.*, “As a subject full of
uncertainty as respects ourselves, although of an opposite character in
relation to the Creator;” whatever that may mean.

<span id="fn_7302"></span>[547:7303](0030584.htm#fr_7302.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p13"></span> Hoc latere.

<span id="fn_7303"></span>[547:7304](0030584.htm#fr_7303.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p14"></span> Compare *Adv. Omnes Hæreses*, c. vi.

<span id="fn_7304"></span>[547:7305](0030584.htm#fr_7304.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p15"></span> Varro’s words help us to understand
this rough joke: “*Ursi Lucana origo*,” etc. (*De Ling. Lat.* v. 100.)

<span id="fn_7305"></span>[547:7306](0030584.htm#fr_7305.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p16"></span> Iste: rather his *subject* than his
person.

<span id="fn_7306"></span>[547:7307](0030584.htm#fr_7306.md) <span
id="v.viii.ii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.viii.ii-p17"></span> i.e. the *De Anima*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Some Truths Held Even by the Heathen. They Were, However, More
Often Wrong Both in Religious Opinions and in Moral Practice.  The
Heathen Not to Be Followed in Their Ignorance of the Christian Mystery.
The Heretics Perversely Prone to Follow Them.](0030585.md)
