[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030211)  [Next](0030213) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.xi.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.xi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—Other Platonist Arguments
Considered.</span>

<span id="iv.xi.viii-p2"></span>Besides, it would be a harsh and absurd
proceeding to exempt anything from the class of corporeal beings, on the
ground that it is not exactly like the other constituents of that class.
And where individual creatures possess various properties, does not this
variety in works of the same class indicate the greatness of the
Creator, in making them at the same time different and yet like,
amicable yet rivals?  Indeed, the philosophers themselves agree in
saying that the universe consists of harmonious oppositions, according
to Empedocles’ (theory of) friendship and enmity. Thus, then, although
corporeal essences are opposed to incorporeal ones, they yet differ from
each other in such sort as to amplify their species by their variety,
without changing their genus, remaining all alike corporeal;
contributing to God’s glory in their manifold existence by reason of
their variety; so various, by reason of their differences; so diverse,
in that some of them possess one kind of perception, others another;
some feeding on one kind of aliment, others on another; some, again,
possessing visibility, while others are invisible; some being weighty,
others light. They are in the habit of saying that the soul must be
pronounced incorporeal on this account, because the bodies of the dead,
after its departure from them, become heavier, whereas they ought to be
lighter, being deprived of the weight of a body—since the soul is a
bodily substance.  But what, says Soranus (in answer to this argument),
if men should deny that the sea is a bodily substance, because a ship
out of the water becomes a heavy and motionless mass? How much truer and
stronger, then, is the soul’s corporeal essence, which carries about the
body, which eventually assumes so great a weight with the nimblest
motion! Again, even if the soul is invisible, it is only in strict
accordance with the condition of its own corporeality, and suitably to
the property of its own essence, as well as to the nature of even those
beings to which its destiny made it to be invisible. The eyes of the owl
cannot endure the sun, whilst the eagle is so well able to face his
glory, that the noble character of its young is determined by the
unblinking strength of their gaze; while the eaglet, which turns away
its eye from the sun’s ray, is expelled from the nest as a degenerate
creature! So true is it, therefore, than to one eye an object is
invisible, which may be quite plainly seen by another,—without implying
any incorporeality in that which is not endued with an equally strong
power (of vision). The sun is indeed a bodily substance, because it is
(composed of) fire; the object, however, which the eaglet at once admits
the existence of, the owl denies, without any prejudice, nevertheless,
to the testimony of the eagle. There is the selfsame difference in
respect of the soul’s corporeality, which is (perhaps) invisible to the
flesh, but perfectly visible to the spirit. Thus John, being “in the
Spirit” <span id="page_188">p. 188</span> <span
id="iv.xi.viii-Page_188"></span>of God, <span
id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537) beheld plainly the souls of the
martyrs. <span id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[188:1538](0030212.htm#fr_1537) <span
id="iv.xi.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.viii-p3"></span> [Rev. i.
10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010)<span id="iv.xi.viii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[188:1539](0030212.htm#fr_1538) <span
id="iv.xi.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iv.xi.viii-p4"></span> [Rev. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009)<span id="iv.xi.viii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Particulars of the Alleged Communication to a Montanist
Sister.](0030213)
