[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](0030024)  [Next](0030026) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iv.iii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX.</span>

<span id="iv.iii.xix-p2"></span>Their high antiquity, first of all,
claims authority for these writings.  With you, too, it is a kind of
religion to demand belief on this very ground. Well, all the substances,
all the materials, the origins, classes, contents of your most ancient
writings, even most nations and cities illustrious in the records of the
past and noted for their antiquity in books of annals,—the very forms of
your letters, those revealers and custodiers of events, nay (I think I
speak still within the mark), your very gods themselves, your very
temples and oracles, and sacred rites, are less ancient than the work of
a single prophet, in whom you have the *thesaurus* of the entire Jewish
religion, and therefore too of ours. If you happen to have heard of a
certain Moses, I speak first of him: he is as far back as the Argive
Inachus; by nearly four hundred years—only seven less—he precedes
Danaus, your most ancient name; while he antedates by a millennium the
death of Priam. I might affirm, too, that he is five hundred years
earlier than Homer, and have supporters of that view. The other prophets
also, though of later date, are, even the most recent of them, as far
back as the first of your philosophers, and legislators, and
historians.  It is not so much the difficulty of the subject, as its
vastness, that stands in the way of a statement of the grounds on which
these statements rest; the matter is not so arduous as it would be
tedious. It would require the anxious study of many books, and the
fingers busy reckoning.  The histories of the most ancient nations, such
as the Egyptians, the Chaldeans, the Phœnicians, would need to be
ransacked; the men of these various nations who have information to
give, would have to be called in as witnesses. Manetho the Egyptian, and
Berosus the Chaldean, and Hieromus the Phœnician king of Tyre; their
successors too, Ptolemy the Mendesian, and Demetrius Phalereus, and King
Juba, and Apion, and Thallus, and their critic the Jew Josephus, the
native vindicator of the ancient history of his people, who either
authenticates or refutes the others. Also the Greek censors’ lists must
be compared, and the dates of events ascertained, that the chronological
connections may be opened up, and thus the reckonings of the various
annals be made to give forth light. We must go abroad into the histories
and literature of all nations. And, in fact, we have already brought the
proof in part before you, in giving those hints as to how it is to be
effected. But it seems better to delay the full discussion of this, lest
in our haste we do not sufficiently carry it out, or lest in its
thorough handling we make too lengthened a digression.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XX.](0030026)
