[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym03)  [Next](pym05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE THIRD BOOK, THE HOLY SERMON**

THE glory of all things, God, and that which is Divine, and the Divine
Nature, the beginning of things that are.

2\. God, and the Mind, and Nature, and Matter, and Operation or Working,
and Necessity, and Matter, and Operation or Working, and Necessity, and
the End, and Renovation.

3\. For there were in the *Chaos* an infinite darkness in the Abyss or
bottomless Depth, and Water, and a subtle in Spirit intelligible in
Power; and there went out the Holy Light, and the Elements were
coagulated from the Sand out of the moist substance.

4\. And all the Gods distinguished the Nature full of Seeds.

5\. And when all things were interminated and unmade up, the light
things were divided on high. And the heavy things were founded upon the
moist Sand, all things being Terminated or Divided by Fire, and being
sustained or hung up by the Spirit, they were so carried, and the Heaven
was seen in *Seven Circles*.

6\. And the Gods were seen in their *Ideas* of the Stars, with all their
signs, and the Stars were numbered with the Gods in them. And the Sphere
was all lined with *Air*, carried about in a circular motion by the
Spirit of God.

7\. And every God, by his internal power, did that which was commanded
him; and there were made four-footed things, and creeping things, and
such as live in the water, and such as fly, and every fruitful seed, and
Grass, and the Flowers of all Greens, all which had sowed in themselves
the Seeds of Regeneration.

8\. As also the Generations of Men, to the Knowledge of the Divine
Works, and a lively or working Testimony of Nature, and a multitude of
men, and the dominion of all things under Heaven, and the Knowledge of
good things, and to be increased in increasing, and multiplied in
multitude.

9\. And every Soul in Flesh, by the wonderful working of the Gods in the
Circles, to the beholding of Heaven, the Gods Divine Works, and the
operations of Nature; and for signs of good things, and the Knowledge of
the Divine Power, and to find out every cunning Workmanship of good
things.

10\. So it beginneth to live in them, and to be wise according to the
operation of the course of the circular Gods; and to be resolved into
that which shall be great Monuments and Rememberances of the cunning
Works done upon earth, leaving them to be read by the darkness of times.

11\. And every Generation of living Flesh, of Fruit, Seed, and all
Handicrafts, though they be lost, must of necessity be renewed by the
renovation of the Gods, and of the Nature of a Circle, moving in number;
for it is a Divine thing that every worldly temperature should be
renewed by Nature; for in that which is Divine is Nature also
established.

The End of the Fragments of the Third Book, THE HOLY SERMON….

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fourth Book, Called the Key](pym05.md)
