[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym02)  [Next](pym04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SECOND BOOK, CALLED, POEMANDER**

MY THOUGHTS being once seriously busied about things that are, and my
Understanding lifted up, all my bodily Senses being exceedingly holden
back, as it is with them that are heavy of sleep, by reason either of
fulness of meat, or of bodily labour: Methought I saw one of an
exceeding great stature, and of an infinite greatness, call me by my
name, and say unto me, *What wouldst thou hear and see?* Or what wouldst
thou understand to learn and know?

2\. Then said I, *Who are Thou?* I am, quoth he, *Poemander*, the mind
of the great Lord, the most mighty and absolute *Emperor*: I know what
thou wouldst have, and I am always present with thee.

3\. Then I said, *I would learn the things that are, and understand the
nature of them, and know God.* How? said he. I answered that I would
gladly hear. Then said he, Have me again in they mind, and whasoever
though wouldst learn, I will teach thee.

4\. When he had thus said, he was changed in his *Idea* or *Form*, and
straightway, in the twinkling of an eye, all things were opened unto me.
And I saw an infinite sight, all things were become light, both sweet
and exceeding pleasant; and I was wonderfully delighted in the beholding
it.

5\. But after a little while, there was a darkness made in part, coming
down obliquely, fearful and hideous, which seemed unto me to be changed
*into a certain moist nature*, unspeakably troubled, which yielded a
smoke as from Fire; and from whence proceeded a voice unutterable, and
very mournful, but inarticulate, inasmuch as it seemed to have come from
the Light.

6\. Then from that Light, a certain *holy Word joined itself unto
Nature*, and outflew the pure and unmixed Fire from the moist nature
upwards on high; it was exceeding *Light*, and *sharp*, and *operative*
withal. And the *Air*, which was also light, followed the *Spirit* and
mourned up to *Fire* (from the Earth and the Water), insomuch that it
seemed to hang and depend upon it.

7\. And the Earth and the Water stayed by themselves so mingled
together, that the Earth could not be seen for the Water, but they were
moved because of the *Spiritual word* that was carried upon them.

8\. Then said *Poemander* unto me, Dost thou understand this *vision*,
and what it meaneth? I shall know, said I. Then said he, *I am that
Light*, the *Mind*, *thy God, who am before that moist nature that
appeared out of darkness; and that bright and lightful Word from the
mind is the Son of God.*

9\. How is that, quoth I? Thus, replied he, understand it: That which in
thee seeth and heareth, the Word of the Lord, and the Mind the Father,
God, differ not one from the other; and the union of these is Life.  
 *Trismeg.*--I thank thee.  
 *Pimand.*--But first conceive well the Light in they mind, and know it.

10\. When he had said thus, for a long time we looked steadfastly one
upon the other, insomuch that I trembled at his *Idea* or *Form*.

11\. But when he nodded to me, I beheld in my mind the Light that is in
innumerable, and the truly indefinite *ornament* or *world*; and that
the *Fire* is comprehended or contained in, or by a great moist Power,
and constrained to keep its station.

12\. These things I understood, seeing the word, or *Pimander*; and when
I was mightily amazed, he said again unto me, Hast thou seen in thy mind
that Archetypal Form which was before the interminated and infinite
Beginning? Thus *Pimander* to me. But whence, quoth I, or whereof are
the Elements of Nature made?  
* Pimander.*--Of the Will and counsel of God; which taking the Word, and
beholding the beautiful World (in the Archetype thereof) imitated it,
and so made this World, by the principles and vital seeds or Soul-like
productions of itself.

13\. For the *Mind* being God, *Male and Female, Life and Light*,
brought forth by his *Word* another *Mind* or *Workman*; which being God
of the *Fire*, and the *Spirit*, fashioned and formed seven other
Governors, which in their circles contain the *Sensible World*, whose
Government or disposition is called *Fate* or *Destiny*.

14\. *Straightway* leaped out, or exalted itself from the downward
Elements of God, *The Word of God*, into the clean and pure Workmanship
of Nature, and was united to the *Workman*, *Mind*, for it was
*Consubstantial*; and so the downward born elements of Nature were left
without Reason, that they might be the only Matter.

15\. But the *Workman*, *Mind*, together with the *Word*, containing the
circles, and whirling them about, turned round as a wheel, his own
Workmanships; and suffered them to be turned from an indefinite
Beginning to an indeterminable end, for they always begin where they
end.

16\. And the *Circulation* or running round of these, as the mind
willeth, out of the lower or downward-born Elements, brought forth
unreasonable or brutish Creatures, for they had no reason, the Air
flying things, and the Water such as swim.

17\. And the Earth and the Water were separated, either from the other,
as the *Mind* would; and the Earth brought forth from herself, such
living creatures as she had, four-footed and creeping beasts, wild and
tame.

18\. But the Father of all things, the *Mind* being *Life* and *Light*,
brought forth *Man* like unto himself, whom he loved s his proper
*Birth*; for he was all beauteous, having the image of his *Father*.

19\. For indeed God was exceedingly enamoured of his own form or shape,
and delivered unto it all his own Workmanships. But he, seeing and
understanding the *Creation* of the Workman in the whole, would needs
also himself *fall to work*, and so was separated from the Father, being
in the sphere of Generation or Operation.

20\. Having all Power, he considered the Operations or Workmanships of
the *Seven*; but they loved him, and everyone made him partaker of his
own order.

21\. And he learning diligently, and understanding their Essence, and
partaking their Nature, resolved to pierce and break through the
*Circumference* of the Circles, and to understand the power of him that
sits upon the Fire.

22\. And having already all power of mortal things, of the Living, and
of the unreasonable creatures of the World, stooped down and peeped
through the *Harmony*, and breaking through the strength of the Circles,
so showed and made manifest the downward-born Nature, the fair and
beautiful Shape or Form of God.

23\. Which, when he saw, having in itself the unsatiable Beauty, and all
the operations of the *Seven Governors*, and the Form or Shape of God,
he *smiled* for love, as if he had seen the shape or likeness in the
Water, or the shadow upon the Earth, of the fairest Human form.

24\. And seeing in the Water a Shape, a Shape like unto himself, in
himself he loved it, and would cohabit with it, and immediately upon the
resolution ensued the operation, and brought forth the unreasonable
Image or Shape.

25\. Nature presently laying hold of what it so much loved, did wholly
wrap herself about it, and they were mingled, for they loved one
another.

26\. And from this cause *Man* above all things that live upon earth is
double: *Mortal*, because of his body, and *Immortal*, because of the
substantial Man. For being immortal, and having power of all things, he
yet suffers mortal things, and such as are subject to Fate or Destiny.

27\. And therefore being above all *Harmony*, he is made and become a
servant to *Harmony*, he is *Hermaphrodite*, or Male and Female, and
watchful, he is governed by and subjected to a Father, that is both Male
and Female, and watchful.

28\. After these things, I said, *Thou art my mind, and I am in love
with Reason.*

29\. Then said *Pimander*, This is the *Mystery* that to this day is
hidden and kept secret; for Nature being mingled with man, brought forth
a Wonder most Wonderful; for he having the nature of the *Harmony* of
the *Seven*, from him whom I told thee, the Fire and the Spirit, Nature
continued not, but forthwith brought forth seven Men, all *Males* and
*Females*, and sublime, or on high, according to the Natures of the
seven Governors.

30\. And after these things, O *Pimander*, quoth I, I am now come into a
great desire and longing to hear; do not digress or run out.

31\. But he said, Keep silence, for I have not yet finished the first
speech.

32\. *Trism.* Behold, I am silent.

33\. *Pim.* The Generation therefore of these Seven was after this
manner:--The *Air* being *Feminine* and the Water desirous of
Copulation, took from the Fire its ripeness, and from the aether Spirit,
and so Nature produced Bodies after the species and shape of men.

34\. And man was made of *Life* and *Light*, into *Soul* and *Mind*; of
*Life* the soul, of *Light* the *Mind*.

35\. And so all the members of the *Sensible World*, continued unto the
period of the end, bearing rule and generating.

36\. Hear now the rest of that speech thou so much desireth to hear.

37\. When that *period* was fulfilled, the bond of all things was loosed
and untied by the will of God; for all living *Creatures* being
Hermaphroditical, or *Male* and *Female*, were loosed and untied
together with man; and so the Males were apart by themselves and the
Females likewise.

38\. And straightways God said to the Holy Word, *Increase in increasing
and multiplying in multitude all you my Creatures and Workmanships. And
let him that is endued with mind, know himself to be immortal; and that
the cause of death is the love of the body, and let him learn all things
that are.*

39\. When he had thus said, *Providence by Fate of Harmony*, made the
mixtures and established the Generations, and all things were multiplied
according to their kind. And he that knew himself, came at length to the
*Superstantial* of every way substantial good.

40\. But he that thro' the error of Love loved the *Body*, abideth
wandering in darkness, sensible, suffering the things of death.

41\. *Trism.* But why do they that are ignorant, sin so much, that they
should therefore be deprived of immortality?

42\. *Pim.* Thou seemest not to have understood what thou hast heard.

43\. *Trism.* Peradventure I seem so to thee; but I both understand and
remember them.

44\. *Pim.* I am glad for thy sake if thou understoodest them.

45\. *Trism.* Tell me why are they worthy of death, that are in death?

46\. *Pim.* Because there goeth a sad and dismal darkness before its
body; of which darkness is the moist nature, of which moist nature the
Body consisteth in the sensible world, from whence death is derived. Has
thou understood this aright?

47\. *Trism.* But why, or how doth he that understands himself, go or
pass into God?

48\. *Pim.* That which the Word of God said, say I: Because the Father
of all things consists of Life and Light, whereof man is made.

49\. *Trism.* Thou sayest very well.

50\. *Pim.* God and the Father is Light and Life, of which Man is made.
If therefore thou learn and believe thyself to be of the Life and Light,
thou shalt again pass into Life.

51\. *Trism.* But yet tell me more, O my Mind, how I shall go into Life.

52\. *Pim.* God saith, Let man, endued with a mind, mark, consider, and
know himself well.

53\. *Trism.* Have not all men a mind?

54\. *Pim.* Take heed what thou sayest, for I the mind come unto men
that are holy and good, pure and merciful, and that live piously and
religiously; and my presence is a help unto them. And forthwith they
know all things, and lovingly they supplicate and propitiate the Father;
and blessing him, they give him thanks, and sing hymns unto him, being
ordered and directed by filial Affection and natural Love. And before
they give up their bodies to the death of them, they hate their senses,
knowing their Works and Operations.

55\. Rather I that am the Mind itself, will not suffer the operations or
Works, which happen or belong to the body, to be finished and brought to
perfection in them; but being the *Porter* or *Doorkeeper*, I will shut
up the entrances of Evil, and cut off the thoughtful desires of filthy
works.

56\. But to the foolish, and evil, and wicked, and envious, and
covetous, and murderous, and profane, I am far off, giving place to the
revenging *Demon*, which applying unto him the sharpness of fire,
tormenteth such a man sensible, and armeth him the more to all
wickedness, that he may obtain the greater punishment.

57\. And such an one never ceaseth, having unfulfiled desires, and
unsatisfiable concupiscences, and always fighting in darkness; for the
*Demon* always afflicts and tormenteth him continually, and increaseth
the fire upon him more and more.

58\. *Trism.* Thou hast, O Mind, most excellently taught me all things,
as I desired; but tell me, moreover, after the return is made, what
then?

59\. *Pim.* First of all, in the resolution of the material body, the
Body itself is given up to alteration, and the form which it had
becometh invisible; and the idle manners are permitted, and left to the
*Demon*, and the senses of the body return into their Fountains, being
parts, and again made up into Operations.

60\. And Anger, and concupiscence, go into the brutish or unreasonable
nature; and the rest striveth upward by Harmony.

61\. And to the first *Zone* it giveth the power it had of increasing
and diminishing.

62\. To the second, the machinations or plotting of evils, and one
effectual deceit or craft.

63\. To the third, the idle deceit of Concupiscence.

64\. To the fourth, the desire of Rule, and unsatiable Ambition.

65\. To the fifth, profane Boldness, and the headlong rashness of
confidence.

66\. To the sixth, Evil and ineffectual occasions of Riches.

67\. To the seventh *Zone*, subtle Falsehood, always lying in wait.

68\. And then being made naked of all the Operations of *Harmony*, it
cometh to the Eighth Nature, having its proper power, and singeth
praises to the father with the things that are, and all they that are
present rejoice, and congratulate the coming of it; and being made like
to them with whom it converseth, it heareth also the Powers that are
above the Eighth Nature, singing Praise to God in a certain voice that
is peculiar to them.

69\. And then in order they return unto the Father, and themselves
deliver themselves to the Powers, and becoming Powers they are in God.

70\. This is the Good, and to them that know, to be desired.

71\. Furthermore, why sayest thou, What resteth, but that understanding
all men thou become a guide, and way-leader to them that are worthy;
that the kind of *Humanity*, or *Mankind*, may be saved by God?

72\. When *Pimander* had thus said unto me, he was mingled among the
Powers.

73\. But I, giving thanks, and blessing the father of all things, rose
up, being enabled by him, and taught the Nature of the Nature of the
whole, and having seen the greatest sight or spectacle.

74\. And I began to Preach unto men, the beauty and fairness of Piety
and Knowledge.

75\. *O ye people, men, born and made of the earth, which have given
yourselves over to drunkenness and sleep, and to the ignorance of God,
be sober and cease your surfeit, whereunto you are allured and visited
by brutish and unreasonable sleep.*

76\. And they that heard me come willingly and with one accord; and then
I said further:

77\. *Why, O Men of the Offspring of Earth, why have you delivered
yourselves over unto Death, having power to partake of Immortality?
Repent and change your minds, you that have together walked in Error,
and have been darkened in ignorance.*

78\. Depart from that dark light, be partakers of Immortality, and leave
or forsake corruption.

79\. And some of *them that heard me*, mocking and scorning went away,
and delivered themselves up to the way of Death.

80\. But others casting themselves down before my feet, besought me that
they might be taught; but I, causing them to rise up, became a guide of
mankind, teaching them the reasons how, and by what means they may be
saved. And I sowed in them the Words of Wisdom, and nourished them with
*Ambrozian* Water of *Immortality*.

81\. And when it was evening and the brightness of the same began wholly
to go down, I commanded them to go down, I commanded them to give thanks
to God; and when they had finished their thanksgiving, everyone returned
to his own lodging.

82\. But I wrote in myself the bounty and benevolence of *Pimander*; and
being filled with what I most desired, I was exceedingly glad.

83\. For the sleep of the body was the sober watchfulness of the mind;
and the shutting of my eyes the true sight, and my silence great with
child and full of good; and the pronouncing of my words the blossoms and
fruits of good things.

84\. And thus it came to pass or happened unto me, which I received from
my mind, that is *Pimander*, the Lord of the Word; whereby I became
inspired by God with the Truth.

85\. For which cause, with my soul and whole strength, I give praise and
blessing unto God the Father.

86\. *Holy is God, the Father of all things.*

87\. *Holy is God, whose will is performed and accomplished by his own
powers.*

88\. *Holy is God, that determineth to be known, and is known by his
own, or those that are his.*

89\. *Holy art thou, that by thy Word has established all things.*

90\. *Holy art thou, of whom all Nature is the Image.*

91\. *Holy art thou, whom Nature hath not formed.*

92\. *Holy art thou, that art stronger than all power.*

93\. *Holy art thou, that art stronger than all excellency.*

94\. *Holy art thou, that art better than all praise.*

95\. *Accept these reasonable sacrifices from a pure soul, and a heart
that stretched out unto thee.*

96\. *O unspeakable, unutterable, to be praised with silence!*

97\. *I beseech thee, that I may never err from the knowledge of thee;
look mercifully upon me, and enable me, and enlighten with this Grace
those that are in Ignorance, the brothers of my kind, but thy Sons.*

98\. *Therefore I believe thee, and bear witness, and go into the Life
and Light.*

99\. *Blessed art thou, O Father; thy man would be sanctified with thee,
as thou hast given him all power.*

The End of The Second Book, Called, POEMANDER….

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Third Book, the Holy Sermon](pym04.md)
