[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym05)  [Next](pym07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FIFTH BOOK, THAT GOD IS NOT MANIFEST, AND YET MOST MANIFEST**

THIS Discourse, I will also make to thee, *O Tat*, that thou mayest not
be ignorant of the more excellent name of God.

2\. But do thou contemplate in thy Mind how that which to many seems
hidden and unmanifest may be most manifest to thee.

3\. For it were not all, if it were apparent, for whatsoever is apparent
is generated or made; for it was made manifest, but that which is not
manifest is ever.

4\. For it needeth not be manifested, for it is always.

5\. And he maketh all other things manifest, being unmanifest, as being
always, and making other things manifest, he is not made manifest.

6\. Himself is not made, yet in fantasie he fantasieth all things, or in
appearance he maketh them appear; for appearance is only of those things
that are generated or made, for appearance is nothing but generation.

7\. But he that is *One*, that is not made nor generated, is also
unapparent and unmanifest.

8\. But making all things appear, he appeareth in all, and by all; but
especially he is manifested to or in those things wherein himself
listeth.

9\. Thou, therefore, *O Tat*, my Son, pray first to the *Lord and
Father*, and to the *Alone*, and to the *One*, from whom is one to be
merciful to thee, that thou mayest know and understand so great a God;
and that he would shine one of his beams upon thee in thy understanding.

10\. For only the Understanding see that which is not manifest, or
apparent, as being itself not manifest or apparent; and if thou canst,
*O Tat*, it will appear to the eyes of thy Mind.

11\. For the Lord, void of envy, appeareth through the whole world. Thou
mayest see the intelligence, and take it into they hands, and
contemplate the image of God.

12\. But if that which is in thee, be not known or apparent unto thee,
how shall he in thee be seen, and appear unto thee by the eyes?

13\. But if thou will see him, consider and understand the *Sun*,
consider the course of the *Moon*, consider the order of the *Stars*.

14\. Who is he that keepeth order? For all order is circumscribed or
terminated in number and place.

15\. The Sun is the greatest of the Gods in Heaven, to whom all the
Heavenly Gods give place, as to a King and Potentate; and yet he being
such an one, greater than the Earth or the Sea, is content to suffer
infinite lesser stars to walk and move above himself: whom doth he fear
the while, O Son?

16\. Every one of these Stars that are in Heaven do not make the like,
or an equal course; who is it that hath prescribed unto every one the
manner and the greatness of their course?

17\. This Bear that turns round about its own self, and carries round
the whole World with her, who possessed and made such an Instrument?

18\. Who hath set the bounds to the Sea? Who hath established the Earth?
For there is somebody, *O Tat*, that is the Maker and Lord of these
things.

19\. For it is impossible, O Son, that either place, or number, or
measure, should be observed without a maker.

20\. For no order can be made by disorder or disproportion.

21\. I would it were possible for thee, O my Son, to have wings, and to
fly into the Air, and being taken up in the midst, between Heaven and
Earth, to see the stability of the Earth, the fluidness of the Sea, the
courses of the Rivers, the largeness of the Air, the sharpness and
swiftness of the Fire, the motion of the Stars, and the speediness of
the Heaven, by which it goeth round about all these.

22\. O Son, what a happy sight it were, at one instant, to see all
these; that which is immoveable moved, and that which is hidden appear
and be manifest!

23\. And if thou wilt see and behold this Workman, even by mortal things
that are upon earth, and in the deep, consider, O Son, how Man is made
and framed in the Womb; and examine diligently the skill and cunning of
the Workman, and learn who it was that wrought and fashioned the
beautiful and Divine shape of *Man*; who circumscribed and marked out
his eyes? who bored his nostrils and ears? who opened his mouth? who
stretched out and tie together his sinews? who channelled the veins? who
hardened and made strong the bones? who clothed the flesh with skin? who
divided the fingers and joints? who flatted and made broad the soles of
the feet? who digged the pores? who stretched out the spleen? who made
the Heart like a *Pyramis*? who made the Liver broad? who made the
Lights spungy, and full of holes? who made the belly large and
capacious? who set to outward view the more honorable parts, and hid the
filthy ones?

24\. See how many arts in one Matter, and how many Works in one
Superscription, and all exceedingly beautiful and all done in measure,
and yet all differing.

25\. Who hath made all these things? What Mother? What Father? Save only
god that is not manifest; that made all things by his own will.

26\. And no man says that a statue or an image is made without a Carver
or a Painter, and was this Workmanship made without a Workman? O Great
Blindness! O Great Impiety! O Great Ignorance!

27\. Never, *O Son Tat*, canst thou deprive the Workmanship of the
Workman; rather, it is the best Name of all the Names of God, to call
him the *Father* of all, for so he is alone; and this is his work to be
the Father.

28\. And if thou will force me to say anything more boldly, it is his
Essence to be pregnant, or great with all things, and to make them.

29\. And as without a maker it is impossible that anything should be
made, so it is that he should not always be, and always be making all
things in Heaven, in the Air, in the Earth, in the Deep, in the whole
World, and in every part of the whole, that is or that is not.

30\. For there is nothing in the whole World that is not himself; both
the things that are, and the things that are not.

31\. For the things that are he hath made manifest, and the things that
are not he hath hid in himself.

32\. This is God that is better than any name; this is he that is
secret; this is he that is most manifest; this is he that is to be seen
by the Mind; this is he that is visible to the Eye; this is he that hath
no body; and this is he that hath many bodies; rather, there is nothing
of any body which is not *he*.

33\. For he alone is all things.

34\. *And for this cause he hath many Names, because he is the One
Father; and therefore he hath no Name, because he is the Father of all.*

35\. Who therefore can bless thee, or give thanks for thee, or to thee?

36\. Which way shall I look when I praise thee? upward? downward?
outward? inward?

37\. For about these there is no manner nor place, nor anything else of
all things that are.

38\. But all things are in thee; all things from thee; thou givest all
things, and takest nothing; for thou hast all things; and there is
nothing that thou hast not.

39\. When shall I praise thee, *O Father*, for it is neither possible to
comprehend thy hour, nor they time?

40\. For what shall I praise thee? For what thou hast made, or for what
thou hast not made? for those things thou hast manifested, or for those
things thou hast hidden?

41\. Wherefore shall I praise thee, as being of myself, or having
anything of mine own, or rather being anothers?

42\. For thou art what I am, thou art what I do, thou art what I say.

43\. *Thou art all things, and there is nothing else thou art not.*

44\. *Thou are thou, all that is made, and all that is not made.*

45\. The Mind that understandeth.

46\. The Father that maketh and frameth.

47\. The Good that worketh.

48\. The Good that doth all things.

49\. Of the matter, the most subtle and slender is *Air*; of the Air the
*Soul*; of the soul the *Mind*; of the mind *God*.

The End of the Fifth Book....  
THAT GOD IS NOT MANIFEST, AND YET MOST MANIFEST...

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Sixth Book, That in God Alone is Good](pym07.md)
