[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym06)  [Next](pym08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SIXTH BOOK, THAT IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD**

GOD, *O Asclepius*, is in nothing but in God alone, or rather God
himself is the Good always.

2\. And if it be so, then must he be an Essence or Substance, void of
all Motion and Generation; but nothing is void or empty of him.

3\. And this Essence hath about or in himself a *Stable* and firm
*Operation*, wanting nothing, most full and giving abundantly.

4\. One thing is the Beginning of all things, for it giveth all things;
and when I name the Good, I mean that which is altogether and always
Good.

5\. This is present to none, but God alone; for he wanteth nothing that
he should desire to have it, nor can anything be taken from him; the
loss whereof may grieve him; for sorrow is a part of evilness.

6\. Nothing is stronger than he, that he should be opposed by it; nor
nothing equal to him, that he should be in love with it; nothing unheard
of to be angry, with nothing wiser to be envious at.

7\. And none of these being in his Essence, what remains but only the
Good?

8\. For as in this, being such an Essence, there is none of the evils;
so in none of the other things shall the Good be found.

9\. For in all other things, are all those other things, as well in the
small as the great, and as well in the particulars as in this living
Creature; the greater and mightiest of all.

10\. For all things that are made or generated, are full of passion,
Generation itself being a passion; and where Passion is, there is not
the Good; where the Good is, there is no Passion; where it is day, it is
not Night; where it is night, it is not Day.

11\. Wherefore it is impossible that in Generation should be the Good,
but only in that which is not generated or made.

12\. Yet as the Participation of all things is in the Matter bound, so
also of that which is Good. After this manner is the World Good, as it
maketh all things, and in the part of making or doing … it is Good, but
in all other things not good.

13\. For it is passable and moveable, and the Maker of passable things.

14\. In Man also the Good is ordered *(or taketh denomination)* in
comparison of that which is evil; for that which is not very Evil, is
here Good; and that which is here called Good, is the least particle, or
proportion of Evil.

15\. It is impossible, therefore, that the Good should be here pure from
Evil; for here the Good groweth Evil, and growing Evil, it doth not
still abide Good; and not abiding Good, it becomes Evil.

16\. Therefore in God alone is the Good, or rather God is the Good.

17\. Therefore, *O Asclepius*, there is nothing in men *(or among men)*
but the name of Good, the thing itself is not, for it is impossible; for
a material Body receiveth *(or comprehendeth)*, is not as being on every
side encompassed and coacted with evils, and labours, and griefs, and
desires, and wrath, and deceits, and foolish opinions.

18\. And in that which is the worst of all, *Asclepius*, every one of
the forenames things, is here believed to be the greatest Good,
especially that supreme mischief … the pleasures of the Belly, and the
ringleader of all evils. Error is here the absence of the Good.

19\. And I give thanks unto God, that, concerning the knowledge of good,
put this assurance in my Mind, that it is impossible it should be in the
World.

20\. For the World is the fulness of Evilness; but God is the fulness of
Good, or good of God.

21\. For the eminencies of all appearing Beauty, are in the Essence more
pure, and more sincere, and peradventure they are also the Essences of
it.

22\. For we must be bold to say, *Asclepius*, that the Essence of God,
if he have an Essence, is … that which is fair or beautiful; but no good
is comprehended in this World.

23\. For all things that are subject to the eye, are Idols, and as it
were Shadows; but those things that are not subject to the eye, are
ever, especially the *Essence* of the Fair and the Good.

24\. And as the Eye cannot see God, so neither the Fair and the Good.

25\. For those are the parts of God, that partake the Nature of the
whole, proper, and familiar unto him alone, inseparable, most lovely,
whereof either God is enamoured, or they are enamoured of God.

26\. If thou canst understand God, thou shall understand the *Fair*, and
the Good, which is most shining, and enlightening, and most enlightened
by God.

27\. For that Beauty is above Comparison, and that Good is inimitable,
as God himself.

28\. As, therefore, thou understandest God, so understand the Fair and
the Good; for these are incommunicable to any other living creatures,
because they are inseparable from God.

29\. If thou seek concerning God, thou seekest or asketh also of the
Fair, for there is one way which leadeth to the same thing, that is
*Piety*, with *Knowledge*.

30\. Wherefore, they that are ignorant, and go not in the way of
*Piety*, dare call Men Fair and Good, never seeing so much as in a
dream, what good is; but being infolded and wrapped upon all evil, and
believing that the Evil is the Good, they, by that means, both use it
insatiable, and are afraid to be deprived of it; and therefore they
strive, by all possible means, that they may not only have it, but also
increase it.

31\. Such, *O Asclepius*, are the good and fair things of Men, which we
can neither love nor hate; for this is the hardest thing of all, that we
have need of them, and cannot live without them.

The End of the Sixth Book....  
THAT IN GOD ALONE IS GOOD....

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Seventh Book, His Secret Sermon in the Mount of Regeneration,
Profession of Silence](pym08)
