[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym07)  [Next](pym09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE SEVENTH BOOK, HIS SECRET SERMON IN THE MOUNT OF REGENERATION,**
**AND THE PROFESSION OF SILENCE**

TO HIS SON *TAT.*

*Tat.*  
IN the general speeches, O Father, discoursing of the *Divinity*, thou
speakest enigmatically, and didst not clearly reveal thyself, saying,
That no man can be saved before *Regeneration*.

2\. And when I did humbly entreat thee, at the going up to the Mountain,
after thou hadst discoursed to me, having a great desire to learn this
*Argument of Regeneration*; because among all the rest, I am ignorant
only of this, thou toldst me thou wouldst impart it to me, when I would
estrange myself from the world; whereupon I made myself ready, and have
vindicated the understanding that is in me, from the deceit of the
World.

3\. Now, then fulfil my defect, and as thou saidst, instruct me of
*Regeneration*, either by word of mouth or secretly; for I know not, *O
Trismegistus*, of what Substance, or what Seed, or what Womb, a man is
thus born.

4\. *Herm.* O Son, this wisdom is to be understood in silence, and the
seed is the true Good.

5\. *Tat.* Who soweth it, O Father? for I am utterly ignorant and
doubtful.

6\. *Herm.* The Will of God, O Son.

7\. And what manner of Man is he that is thus born? for in this point, I
am clean deprived of the Essence that understandeth in me.

8\. *Herm.* The Son of God will be another. God made the universe, that
in everything consisteth of all powers.

9\. *Tat.* Thou tellest me a Riddle, Father, and dost not speak as a
Father to a Son.

10\. *Herm.* Son, things of this kind are not taught, but are by God,
when he pleaseth, brought to remembrance.

11\. *Tat.* Thou speakest of things strained, or far fetched, and
impossible, Father; and therefore I will directly contradict them.

12\. *Herm.* Wilt thou prove a Stranger, Son, to thy Father's kind?

13\. *Tat.* Do not envy me, Father, or pardon me, I am thy Natural Son;
discourse unto me the manner of *Regeneration*.

14\. *Herm.* What shall I say, O my Son? I have nothing to say more than
this, That I see in myself an unstrained sight or spectacle, made by the
mercy of God; and I am gone out of myself into an immortal body, and am
not now, what I was before, but was begotten in Mind.

15\. This thing is not taught, nor is it to be seen in this formed
element; for which the first compounded form was neglected by me, and
that I am now separated from it; for I have both the touch and the
measure of it, yet am I now estranged from them.

16\. Thou seest, O Son, with thine eyes; but though thou never look so
steadfastly upon me, with the Body, and the Bodily sight, thou canst not
see nor understand what I am now.

17\. *Tat.* Thou hast driven me, O Father, into no small fury and
distraction of mind, for I do not now see myself.

18\. *Herm.* I would, O Son, that thou also wert gone out of thyself,
like them that Dream in their sleep.

19\. *Tat.* Then tell me this, who is the Author and Maker of
Regeneration?

20\. *Herm.* The Child of God, one Man by the Will of God.

21\. *Tat.* Now, O Father, thou hast put me to silence for ever, and all
my former thoughts have quite left and forsaken me; for I see the
greatness and shape of things here below, and nothing but falsehood in
them all.

22\. And so thence this mortal form is daily changed, and turned by time
into increase or diminution, as being falsehood: What therefore is true,
O Trismegistus?

23\. *Trism.* That, O my Son, which is not troubled, nor bounded; not
coloured, not figured, not changed, that which is naked, high.
Comprehensible only of itself, unalterable, unbodily.

24\. *Tat.* Now I am mad indeed, O Father, for when I thought me to have
been made a wise man by thee, with these thoughts, thou hast quite
dulled all my senses.

25\. *Herm. Yet is it so as I say, O Son, He that looketh only upon*
that which is carried upward as Fire, that which is carried downward as
Earth, that which is moist as Water, and that which bloweth, or is
subject to blast, as Air; how can he sensibly understand that which is
neither hard nor moist, nor tangible, nor perspicuous, seeing it is only
understood in power and operation? But I beseech and pray to the Mind,
which alone can understand the *Generation* which is in God.

26\. *Tat.* Then am I, O Father, utterly unable to do it.

27\. *Herm.* God forbid, Son, rather draw or pull him unto thee *(or
study to know him)* and he will come, *be but willing and it shall be
done*; quite (or make idle) the senses of the Body, purging thyself from
the unreasonable brutish torments of matter.

28\. *Tat.* Have I any (revengers or) tormentors in myself, *Father*?

29\. *Herm.* Yea, and those not a few, but many, and fearful ones.

30\. *Tat.* I do not know them, Father.

31\. *Herm.* One Torment, Son, is *Ignorance*: a second, *Sorrow*; a
third, *Intemperance*; a fourth, *Concupiscence*; a fifth, *Injustice*;
a sixth, *Covetousness*; a seventh, *Deceit*; an eighth, *Envy*; a
ninth, *Fraud* or *Guile*; a tenth, *Wrath*; an eleventh, *Rashness*; a
twelfth, *Maliciousness*.

32\. They are in number twelve, and under these many more; some which
through the prison of the Body do force the inwardly placed man to
suffer sensibly.

33\. And they do not suddenly or easily depart from him that hath
obtained mercy of God; and herein consists both the manner and the
reason of *Regeneration*.

34\. For the rest, O Son, hold thy peace, and praise God in silence, and
by that means the mercy of God will not cease, or be wanting unto us.

35\. Therefore, rejoice, my Son, from henceforward, being purged by the
powers of God, to the Knowledge of the Truth.

36\. For the revelation of God is come to us, and when that came, all
ignorance was cast out.

37\. The Knowledge of Joy is come unto us. And when that comes, Sorrow
shall fly away to them that are capable.

38\. I call unto Joy the power of Temperance, a power whose Virtue is
most sweet; let us take her unto ourselves, O son, most willingly, for
how at her coming hath she put away Intemperance?

39\. Now I call forth, Continence, the power which is over
Concupiscence. This, O Son, is the stable and firm foundation of
Justice.

40\. For see how without labour she hath chased away Injustice; and we
are justified, O Son, when Injustice is away.

41\. The sixth Virtue, which comes into us, I call *Communion*, which is
against Covetousness.

42\. And when that (Covetousness) is gone, I call Truth, and when she
cometh, Error and Deceit vanisheth.

43\. See, O Son, how the Good is fulfilled by the access of Truth; for
by this means Envy is gone from us; for Truth is accompanied with the
Good, together also with Life and Light.

44\. And there came no more any torment of Darkness, but being overcome,
they all fled away suddenly and tumultuously.

45\. Thou hast understood, O Son, the manner of regeneration; for upon
the coming of these Ten, the Intellectual Generation is perfected, and
then it driveth away the Twelve; and we have seen it in the Generation
itself.

46\. Whoseoever therefore hath of Mercy obtained this Generation, which
is according to God, he leaving all bodily sense, knoweth himself to
consist of divine things, and rejoiceth, being made by god Stable and
immutable.

47\. *Tat.* O Father, I conceive and understand, not by the sight of
mine eyes, but by the Intellectual operation, which is by the Powers. I
am in Heaven, in the Earth, in the Water, in the Air; I am in Living
Creatures, in Plants, in the Womb, everywhere.

48\. Yet tell me, further, this one thing, How are the Torments of
Darkness, being in number Twelve, driven away and expelled by the Ten
Powers? What is the manner of it, *Trismegistus*?

49\. This Tabernacle, O Son, consists of the Zodiacal Circle; and this
consisting of Twelve numbers, the *Idea* of one; but all formed Nature
admit divers Conjugations to the deceiving of Man.

50\. And though they be different in themselves, yet are they united in
practice (as, for example, Rashness is inseparable from Anger), and they
are also indeterminate. Therefore, with good reason do they make their
departure, being driven away by the Ten Powers; that is to say, by the
dead.

51\. For the number of Ten, O Son, is the begetter of Souls. And there
Life and Light are united, where the number of *Unity* is born of the
spirit.

52\. Therefore, according to Reason, Unity hath the number of Ten, and
the number of Ten hath Unity.

53\. *Tat.* O Father, I now see the Universe and myself in the Mind.

54\. *Herm.* This is *Regeneration*, O Son, that we should not any
longer fix our imagination upon this Body, subject to the three
dimensions, according to this, according to this speech which we have
now commented, that we may not at all caluminate the Universe.

55\. *Tat.* Tell me, O Father, This body that consists of Powers, shall
it ever admit of Dissolution?

56\. *Herm.* Good words, Son, and speak not things impossible; for so
thou shalt sin, and the eye of thy mind grow wicked.

57\. The sensible body of Nature is far from the Essential Generation,
for that is subject to dissolution, but this is not; and that is mortal,
but this immortal. Dost thou not know that thou art born a God, and the
Son of the One, as I am?

58\. *Tat.* How feign would I, O Father, hear that praise given by a
Hymn, which thou saidst thou heardest from the Powers, when I was in the
*Octonary*?

59\. *Herm.* As *Pimander* said, by way of Oracle to the *Octonary*:
Thou dost well, O Son, to desire the Solution of the *Tabernacle*, for
thou art purified.

60\. Pimander, the Mind of Absolute Power and Authority, hath delivered
no more unto me, than those that are written; knowing that of myself, I
can understand all things, and hear, and see what I will. And he
commanded me to do those things that are good; and therefore all the
powers that are in me sing.

61\. *Tat.* I would hear thee, O Father, and understand these things.

62\. *Herm.* Be quiet, O Son, and now hearken to that harmonious
blessing and thanksgiving; the hymn of *Regeneration*, which I did not
determine to have spoken of so plainly, but to thyself in the end of
all.

63\. Wherefore, this is not taught, but hid in silence.

64\. So then, O son, do thou, standing in the open Air, worship, looking
to the North Wind, about the going down of the Sun; and to the South,
when the Sun ariseth. And now keep silence, Son.  
  

THE SECRET SONG.  
The Holy Speech.

65\. Let all the Nature of the World entertain the hearing of this Hymn.

66\. Be opened, O Earth, and let all the Treasure of the Rain be opened.

67\. You Trees, tremble not, for I will sing and praise the Lord of the
Creation, and the *All*, and the *One*.

68\. Be opened, you Heavens; ye Winds, stand still, and let the immortal
Circle of God receive these words.

69\. For I will sing and praise him that created all things, that fixed
the earth, and hung up the Heavens, and commanded the sweet water to
come out of the *Ocean*, into all the World, inhabited and not
inhabited, to the use and nourishment of all things or men.

70\. That commanded the fire to shine for every action, both to Gods and
Men.

71\. Let us altogether give him blessing, which rideth upon the Heavens,
the Creator of all Nature.

72\. This is he that is the Eye of the Mind, and will accept the praise
of my Powers.

73\. O all ye Powers that are in me, praise the *One*, and *All*.

74\. Sing together with my Will, all you Powers that are in me.

75\. O Holy knowledge, being enlightened by thee, I magnify the
intelligible Light, and rejoice in the joy of the Mind.

76\. All my Powers sing praise with me, and now, my Continence, sing,
praise my Righteousness by me; praise that which is righteous.

77\. O Communion which is in me; praise the *All*.

78\. By me the *Truth* sings praise to the *Truth*, the Good praiseth
the Good.

79\. O Life, O Light, from us, unto you, comes this praise and
thanksgiving.

80\. I give thanks unto thee, O Father, the operation or act of my
Powers.

81\. I give thanks unto thee, O God, the Power of my operations.

82\. By me the Word sings praise unto thee; receive by me this
reasonable (or verbal) Sacrifice in words.

83\. The powers that are in me cry these things, they praise the *All*,
they fulfil thy Will; thy Will and counsel is form thee unto thee.

84\. *O All*, receive a reasonable sacrifice from all things.

85\. *O Life*, save all that is in us; *O Light*, enlighten, *O God*,
the *Spirit*; for the Mind guideth (or feedeth) the Word; O
Spirit-bearing Workman.

86\. Thou are *God*, thy *Man* cryeth these things unto thee through, by
the Fire, by the Air, by the Earth, by the Water, by the Spirit, by thy
Creatures.

87\. From eternity I have found (means to) bless and praise thee, and I
have what I seek; for I rest in thy Will.

88\. *Tat.* O Father, I see thou hast sung this song of praise and
blessing, with thy whole Will; and therefore have I put and placed it in
my World.

89\. *Herm.* Say *in thy Intelligible World,* O Son.

90\. *Tat.* I do mean in my Intelligible world; for by thy Hymn and song
of praise my mind is enlightened, and gladly would I send from my
Understanding, a Thanksgiving unto God.

91\. *Herm.* Not rashly, O Son.

92\. *Tat.* In my Mind, O Father.

93\. *Herm.* Those things that I see and contemplate, I infuse them into
thee, and therefore say, thou Son, *Tat*, the author of thy succeeding
Generations, I send unto god these reasonable sacrifices.

94\. *O God, thou art the Father, thou art the Lord, thou art the Mind,
accept these reasonable sacrifices which thou requirest of me.*

95\. For all things are done as the Mind willeth.

96\. Thou, O Son, send this acceptable Sacrifice to god, the Father of
all things; but propound it also, O Son, by word.

97\. *Tat.* I thank thee, Father, thou hast advised and instructed me
thus to give thanks and praise.

98\. *Herm.* I am glad, O Son, to see the Truth bring forth the Fruits
of Good things, and such immortal Branches.

99\. And learn this from me: Above all other Virtues entertain Silence,
and impart unto no man, O Son, the tradition of *Regeneration*, lest we
be reputed Calumniators; for we both have now sufficiently meditated, I
in speaking, thou in hearing. And now thou dost intellectually know
thyself and our Father.

The End of the Seventh Book….HIS SECRET SERMON IN THE MOUNT OF
REGENERATION,  
AND THE PROFESSION OF SILENCE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eighth Book, the Greatest Evil in Man is the not Knowing
God](pym09)
