[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym10)  [Next](pym12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE TENTH BOOK,** **THE MIND TO HERMES**

FORBEAR thy Speech, *O Hermes Trismegistus,* and call to mind to those
things that are said; but I will not delay to speak what comes into my
mind, sithence many men have spoken many things, and those very
different, concerning the Universe, and Good; but I have not learned the
Truth.

2\. Therefore, the Lord make it plain to me in this point; for I will
believe thee only, for the manifestation of these things.

3\. Then said the Mind how the case stands.

4\. God and All.

5\. God, Eternity, the World, Time, Generation.

6\. God made Eternity, Eternity the World, the world Time, and Time
Generation.

7\. Of God, as it were, the Substance, is the *Good*, the *Fair*,
*Blessedness*, *Wisdom*.

8\. Of Eternity, Identity, or Selfness.

9\. Of the World, Order.

10\. Of Time, Change.

11\. Of Generation, Life and Death.

12\. But the Operation of God, is Mind and Soul.

13\. Of Eternity, Permanence, or Long-lasting, and Immortality.

14\. Of the World, Restitution, and Decay, or Destruction.

15\. Of Time, Augmentation and Diminution.

16\. And of Generation qualities.

17\. Therefore, Eternity is in God.

18\. The World in Eternity.

19\. Time in the World.

20\. And Generation in Time.

21\. And Eternity standeth about God.

22\. The World is moved in Eternity.

23\. Time is determined in the World.

24\. Generation is done in Time.

25\. Therefore, the Spring and Fountain of all things is God.

26\. The Substance Eternity.

27\. The Matter is the World.

28\. The Power of God is Eternity.

29\. And the Work of Eternity, is the World not yet made, and yet ever
made by Eternity.

30\. Therefore, shall nothing be at any time destroyed, for Eternity is
incorruptible.

31\. Neither can anything perish, or be destroyed in the World, the
World being contained and embraced by Eternity.

32\. But what is the Wisdom of God? Even the *Good* and the *Fair*, and
*Blessedness*, and every Virtue, and Eternity.

33\. Eternity, therefore, put into the Matter Immortality and
Everlastingness; for the Generation of that depends upon Eternity, even
as Eternity doth of God.

34\. For Generation and Time, in Heaven and in Earth, are of a double
Nature; in Heaven they are unchangeable and incorruptible; but on Earth
they are changeable and corruptible.

35\. And the Soul of Eternity is God; and the Soul of the World,
Eternity; and of the Earth, Heaven.

36\. God is in the Mind, the Mind in the Soul, the Soul in the Matter,
all things by Eternity.

37\. All this Universal Body, in which are all Bodies, is full of Soul,
the Soul full of Mind, the Mind full of God.

38\. For within he fills them, and without he contains them, quickening
the Universe.

39\. Without, he quickens this perfect living thing the World, and
within all living Creatures.

40\. And above in Heaven he abides in Identity or Selfness, but below
upon Earth he changeth Generation.

41\. Eternity comprehendeth the World either by necessity, or
Providence, or Nature.

42\. And if any man shall think any other thing, it is God that
actuateth, or operateth this All.

43\. But the operation or Act of God, is Power insuperable, to which
none may compare anything, either Humane or Divine.

44\. Therefore, O *Hermes,* think none of these things below, or the
things above, in anywise like unto God; for if thou dost, thou errest
from the Truth.

45\. For nothing can be like the unlike, and only, and One; nor mayest
thou think that he hath given of his Power to any other thing.

46\. For who after him can make anything, either of Life or Immortality:
of Change or of Quality? and himself, what other things should he make?

47\. For God is not idle, for then all things would be idle; for all
things are full of God.

48\. But there is not anywhere in the World, such a thing as Idleness;
for Idleness is a name that implieth a thing void or empty, both of a
Doer, and a thing done.

49\. But all things must necessarily be made or done both always, and
according to the nature of every place.

50\. For he that maketh or doth, is in all things, yet not fastened or
comprehended in anything; nor making or doing one thing, but all things.

51\. For being an active or operating Power, and sufficient of himself
for the things that are made, and the things that are made are under
him.

52\. Look upon, through me, the World is subject to thy sight, and
understand exactly the Beauty thereof.

53\. A Body perpetual, than the which there is nothing more ancient, yet
always vigorous and young.

54\. See also the Seven Worlds set over us, adorned with an everlasting
order, and filling Eternity with a different course.

55\. For all things are full of Light, but the Fire is nowhere.

56\. For the friendship and commixture of contraries and unlike, become
Light shining from the Act or Operation of God, the Father of all Good,
the Prince of all Order, and the Ruler of the Seven Worlds.

57\. Look also upon the Moon, the forerunner of them all, the Instrument
of Nature, and which changeth the matter here below.

58\. Behold the Earth the middle of the Whole, the firm and stable
Foundation of the Fair World, the Feeder and Nurse of Earthly things.

59\. Consider, moreover, how great the multitude is of immortal living
things, and of mortal ones also; and see the Moon going about in the
midst of both, to wit, of things immortal and mortal.

60\. But all things are full of Soul, and all things are properly moved
by it; some things about the Heaven, and some things about the Earth;
and neither of those on the right hand to the left; nor those on the
left hand to the right; nor those things that are above, downward; nor
those things that are below, upwards.

61\. And that all these things are made, O beloved *Hermes,* thou needst
not learn of me.

62\. For they are Bodies, and have a Soul, and are moved.

63\. And that all these should come together into one, it is impossible
without something to gather them together.

64\. Therefore, there must be some such ones, and he altogether One.

65\. For seeing that the motions are divers, and many, and the Bodies
not alike, and yet one ordered swiftness among them all; It is
impossible there should be two or more Makers.

66\. For one order is not kept by many.

67\. But in the weaker there would be jealousy of the stronger, and
thence also contentions.

68\. And if there were one Maker, of mutable mortal living Wights, he
would desire also to make immortal ones, as he that were the Maker of
immortal ones, would do to make mortal.

69\. Moreover, also, if there were two, the Matter of being one, who
should be chief, or have the disposing of the future?

70\. Or if both of them, which of them the greater part?

71\. But thinks thus that every living Body hath its consistence of
Matter and soul; and of that which is immortal, and that which is mortal
and unreasonable.

72\. For all living Bodies have a Soul; and those things that are not
living, are only matter by itself.

73\. And the Soul likewise of itself drawing near her Maker, is the
cause of Life and Being, and Being the cause of Life is, after a manner,
the cause of immortal things.

74\. How then are mortal Wights other from immortal?

75\. Or how cannot he make living Wights, that causeth immortal things
and immortality?

76\. That there is some Body that doth these things it is apparent, and
that he is also one, it is most manifest.

77\. For there is one Soul, one Life, and one matter.

78\. Who is this? who can it be, other than the *One God*?

79\. For whom else can it benefit to make living things, save only God
alone?

80\. There is therefore One God.

81\. For it is a ridiculous thing to confess the World to be one, one
Sun, one Moon, one Divinity, and yet to have, I know not how many gods.

82\. He therefore being One, doth all things in many things.

83\. And what great thing is it for God, to make Life, and Soul, and
Immortality, and Change, when thyself dost so many things?

84\. For thou both seest, speaketh, and hearest, smellest, tastest, and
touchest, walkest, understandest, and breathest.

85\. And it is not one that sees, and another that heareth, and another
that speaketh, and another that toucheth, and another that smelleth, and
another that walketh, and another that understandeth, and another that
breatheth; but one that doth all these things.

86\. Yet neither can these things possibly be without God.

87\. For as thou, if thou shouldest cease from doing these things, were
not a living wight, so if God should cease from those, he were not
(which is not lawful to say) any longer God.

88\. For if it be already demonstrated that nothing can be idle or
empty, how much more may be affirmed of God?

89\. For if there be anything which he doth not do, then is he (if it
were lawful to say so) imperfect.

90\. Whereas, seeing he is not idle, but perfect, certainly he doth all
things.

91\. Now give thyself unto me, O *Hermes*, for a little while, thou
shalt the more easily understand, that it is the necessary work of God,
that all things should be made or done that are done, or were once done,
or shall be done.

92\. And this, O best beloved, is Life.

93\. And this is the *Fair*.

94\. And this is the *Good*.

95\. And this is *God*.

96\. And if thou will understand this by work also, mark what happens to
thyself when thou will generate.

97\. And yet this is not like unto him, for he is not sensible of
pleasure, for neither hath he any other Fellow Workman.

98\. But being himself the only Workman, he is always in the work,
himself being that which he doth or maketh.

99\. For all things, if they were separate from him, must needs fall and
die, as there being no life in them.

100\. And again, if all things be living wights, both which are in
heaven, and upon earth, and that there be one Life in all things which
are made by God, and that is God, then certainly all things are made or
done by God.

101\. Life is the union of the Mind and the Soul.

102\. But death is not the destruction of those things that were
gathered together, but a dissolving of the Union.

103\. The Image therefore of God, is Eternity; of Eternity, the World;
of the World, the Sun: of the Sun, Man.

104\. But the people say, That changing is Death, because the body is
dissolved, and the Life goeth into that which appeareth not.

105\. By this discourse, my dearest *Hermes*, I affirm as thou hearest.
That the World is changed, because every day part thereof becomes
invisible, but that it is never dissolved.

106\. And these are the Passions of the World, Revolutions and
Occultations, and Revolution is a turning, but Occultation is
Renovation.

107\. And the World being all formed, hath not the forms lying without
it, but itself changeth in itself.

108\. Seeing then the World is all formed, what must he be that made it!
for without form, he cannot be.

109\. And if he be all formed, he will be kept like the World, but if he
have but one form, he shall be in this regardless of the world.

110\. What do we then say that he is? We will not raise any doubts by
our speech, for nothing that is doubtful concerning God is yet known.

111\. He hath therefore one *Idea,* which is proper to him, which,
because it is unbodily, is not subject to the sight, and yet shows all
forms by the Bodies.

112\. And do not wonder if there be an incorruptible *Idea*.

113\. For they are like the Margents of the Speech, which is in writing;
for they seem to be high and swelling, but they are by nature smooth and
even.

114\. But understand well this that I say, more boldly, for it is more
true: As man cannot live without life, so neither can God live not doing
good.

115\. For this is, as it were, the Life and Motion of God, to Move all
things, and Quicken them.

116\. But some of the things I have said, must have a particular
explanation; Understand then what I say.

117\. All things are in God, not as lying in a place, for Place is both
a body and immoveable, and those things that are placed, have no motion.

118\. For they lie otherwise in that which is unbodily, than in the
fantasie, or to appearance.

119\. Consider him that contains all things, and understand that nothing
is more capacious, than that which is incorporeal, nothing more swift,
nothing more powerful, but it is most capacious, most swift, and most
strong.

120\. And judge of this by thyself, command thy Soul to go into *India*,
and sooner than thou canst bid it, it will be there.

121\. Bid it likewise pass over the *Ocean*, and suddenly it will be
there; not as passing from place to place, but suddenly it will be
there.

122\. Command it to fly into Heaven, and it will not need no wings,
neither shall anything hinder it, not the fire of the Sun, not the
*Aether*, not the turning of the Spheres, not the bodies of any other
Stars, but cutting through all, it will fly up to the last and furthest
body.

123\. And if thou wilt even break the whole, and see those things that
are without the world (if there be anything without), thou mayest.

124\. Behold, how great power, how great swiftness thou hast! Canst thou
do all thee things, and cannot God?

125\. After this manner, therefore, contemplate God to have all the
whole world to himself, as it were, all thoughts, or intellections.

126\. If therefore thou wilt not equal thyself to God, thou canst not
understand God.

127\. For the like is intelligible by the like.

128\. Increase thyself unto an immeasureable greatness, leaping beyond
every Body, and transcending all Time, become Eternity, and thou shalt
understand God: If thou believe in thyself, that nothing is impossible,
but accountest thyself immortal, and that thou canst understand all
things, every Art, every Science, and the manner and custom of every
living thing.

129\. Become higher than all height, lower than all depths, comprehend
in thyself the qualitites of all the Creatures, of the Fire, the Water,
the Dry, and Moist, and conceive likewise, that thou canst at once be
everywhere, in the Sea, in the Earth.

130\. Thou shalt at once understand thyself, not yet begotten in the
Womb, young, old, to be dead, the things after death, and all these
together, as also times, places, deeds, qualities, quantities, or else
thou canst not yet understand God.

131\. But if thou shut up thy Soul in the Body, and abuse it, and say, I
understand nothing, I can do nothing, I am afraid of the Sea, I cannot
climb up to Heaven, I know not who I am, I cannot tell what I shall be:
What hast thou to do with god? for thou canst understand none of those
Fair and Good things, and be a lover of the body and Evil.

132\. For it is the greatest Evil, not to know God.

133\. But to be able to know, and to will, and to hope, is the straight
way, and Divine way, proper to the Good, and it will everywhere meet
thee, and everywhere be seen of thee, plain and easy, when thou dost not
expect or look for it; it will meet thee waking, sleeping, sailing,
travelling, by night, by day, when thou speakest, and when thou keepest
silence.

134\. For there is nothing which is not the Image of God.

135\. And yet thou sayest, God is invisible; but be advised, for who is
more manifest than He?

136\. For therefore hath he made all things, that thou by all things
mayest see Him.

137\. This is the Good of God, this is the Virtue, to appear, and to be
seen in all things.

138\. There is nothing invisible, no, not of those things that are
incorporeal.

139\. The Mind is seen in understanding, and God is seen in doing or
making.

140\. Let these things thus far forth, be made manifest unto thee, O
*Trismegistus*.

141\. Understand in like manner, all other things by thyself, and thou
shalt not be deceived.

The End of the Tenth Book,  
THE MIND TO HERMES.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Eleventh Book of the Common Mind, to Tat](pym12)
