[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym14)  [Next](pym16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE FOURTEENTH BOOK,** **OF OPERATION AND SENSE**

*Tat.*  
THOU has well explained these things, Father. Teach me furthermore these
things, for thou sayest, that *Science* and *Art* were the operations of
the Rational, but now thou sayest, that Beasts are unreasonable, and for
want of Reason, both are, and are called Brutes, so that by this reason,
it must needs follow, that unreasonable Creatures partake not of
Science, or Art, because they come short of Reason.

2\. *Herm.* It must needs be so, Son.

3\. *Tat.* Why then, O Father, do we see some unreasonable living
Creatures use both Science and Art; as the *Pismires* treasure up for
themselves food against Winter, and Fowls of the Air likewise make them
Nests, and four-footed Beasts know their own Dens?

4\. These things they do, O Son, not by Science or Art, but by Nature;
For Science and Art are things that are taught, but none of these Brute
Beasts are taught any of these things.

5\. But these things being Natural unto them, are wrought by Nature,
whereas, Art and Science do not happen unto all, but unto some.

6\. As Men are Musitians, but not all; neither are all Archers, or
Huntsmen, or the rest, but some of them have learned something by the
working of Science, or Art.

7\. After the same manner also, if some *Pismires* did so, and some not,
thou mightest well say, they gather their Food according to Science and
Art.

8\. But being, they are all led by Nature, to the same thing, even
against their Wills, it is manifest they do not do it by Science or Art.

9\. For operations, O *Tat*, being unbodily are in Bodies, and work by
bodies.

10\. Wherefore, O *Tat*, in as much as they are unbodily, thou must
needs say, they are immortal.

11\. But inasmuch as they cannot act without Bodies, I say they are
always in a Body.

12\. For those things that are to anything, or for the cause of anything
made subject to Providence or Necessity, cannot possibly remain idle of
their own proper operation.

13\. For that which is, shall ever be, for both the Body, and the Life
of it, is the same.

14\. And by this reason, it follows, that the Bodies also are always,
because I affirm: That this corporeity is always by the Act and
Operation, or for them.

15\. For although Earthly Bodies be subject to dissolution, yet these
bodies must be the Places, and the Organs, and Instruments of Acts or
Operations.

16\. But acts or Operations are immortal, and that which is Immortal is
always in Act, and therefore also *Corporification* if it be always.

17\. Acts or operations do follow the Soul, yet come not suddenly or
promiscuously; but some of them come together with being made man, being
about brutish or unreasonable things.

18\. But the purer operations do insensibly in the change of time, work
with the oblique part of the Soul.

19\. And these operations depend upon Bodies, and truly they that are
*Corporifying*, come from the Divine Bodies into Mortal ones.

20\. But every one of them acteth both about the Body and the Soul, and
are present with the Soul, even without the Body.

21\. And they are always Acts or operations, but the Soul is not always
in a Mortal Body, for it can be without a Body, but Acts or Operations
cannot be without Bodies.

22\. This is a sacred Speech, Son; *the Body cannot consist without a
Soul.*

23\. *Tat.* How meanest thou that, Father?

24\. *Herm.* Understand it thus, O *Tat*: When the Soul is separated
from the Body, there remaineth that same body.

25\. And this same Body, according to the time of its abode, is
actuated, or operated in that it is dissolved and becomes invisible.

26\. And these things the Body cannot suffer without act or operation,
and consequently there remaineth with the Body, the same act or
operation.

27\. This then is the difference between an Immortal Body and a Mortal
one, that the Immortal one consists of one Matter, and so doth not the
Mortal one, and the immortal one doth, but this suffereth.

28\. And every thing that acteth or operateth is stronger, and ruleth,
but that which is actuated or operated, is ruled.

29\. And that which ruleth, directeth, and governeth as free, but the
other is rules, a servant.

30\. Acts or Operations, do not only act or operate, living or
breathing, or insouled … Bodies, but also Breathless Bodies, or without
Souls, Wood and Stones, and such like, encreasing and bearing fruit,
ripening, corrupting, rotting, putrifying and breaking, or working such
like things, and whatsoever inanimate Bodies can suffer.

31\. Act or Operation, O Son, is called, whatsoever is, or is made or
done, and there are always many things made, or rather all things.

32\. For the World is never widowed or forsaken of any of those things
that are, but being always carried or moved in itself, it is in labour
to bring forth the things that are, which shall never be left by it to
corruption.

33\. Let, therefore, every act or operation be understood to be always
immortal, in what manner of Body soever it be.

34\. But some Acts or Operations be of Divine, some of corruptible
bodies, some universal, some peculiar, and some of the generals, and
some of the parts of everything.

35\. Divine Acts or Operations, therefore, there be, and such as work or
operate upon their proper Bodies, and these also are perfect, and being
upon or in perfect Bodies.

36\. Particular are they which work by any of the living Creatures.

37\. Proper be they that work upon any of the things that are.

38\. By this Discourse, therefore, O Son, it is gathered that all things
are full of Acts or Operations.

39\. For if necessarily they be in every Body, and that there be many
Bodies in the World, I may very well affirm, that there be many other
Acts or Operations.

40\. For many items in one Body, there if one, and a second, and a
third, besides these universal ones that follow.

41\. And universal operations, I call them that are indeed bodily, and
are done by the Senses and Motions.

42\. For without these, it is impossible that the Body should consist.

43\. But other operations are proper to the Souls of Men, by Arts,
Sciences, Studies, and Actions.

44\. The Senses also follow these Operations, or rather are the effects
or perfections … of them.

45\. Understand, therefore, O Son, the difference of Operations, it is
sent from above.

46\. But Sense being in the Body, and having its essence from it, when
it receiveth Act or Operation, manifesteth it, making it as it were
corporeal.

47\. Therefore, I say, that the Senses are both corporeal and mortal,
having so much existence as the Body, for they are born with the Body,
and die with it.

48\. But mortal things themselves have not Sense, as *not* consisting of
such an Essence.

49\. For Sense can be of no other than a corporeal apprehension, either
of Evil or Good, that comes to the Body.

50\. But to External Bodies there is nothing comes, nothing departs,
therefore there is no Sense in them.

51\. *Tat.* Doth the Sense therefore perceive or apprehend in every
Body?

52\. *Herm.* In every Body, O Son.

53\. *Tat.* And do the Acts or Operations work in all things?

54\. *Herm.* Even in things inanimate, O Son, but there are differences
of Senses.

55\. For the Senses of things rational, are with Reason, of things
unreasonable, Corporeal only; but the Senses of things inanimate, are
passive only, according to Augmentation and Diminution.

56\. But Passion and Sense depend both upon one head, or hight, and are
gathered together into the same, by Acts or Operations.

57\. But in living Wights, there be two other Operations that follow the
Senses and Passions, to wit, *Grief* and *Pleasure*.

58\. And without these, it is impossible that a living Wight, especially
a reasonable one, should perceive or apprehend.

59\. And, therefore, I say, that these are the *Ideas* of Passions that
bear rule, especially in reasonable living wights.

60\. The Operations work indeed, but the Senses do declare and manifest
the operations, and they being bodily, are moved by the brutish parts of
the Soul; therefore, I say, they are both malificial, or doers of evil.

61\. For that which affords the Sense to rejoice with Pleasure, is
strightway the cause of many evils, happening to him that suffers it.

62\. But sorrow gives stronger torments and Anguish, therefore,
doubtless, are they both malificial.

63\. The same may be said of the Sense of the Soul.

64\. *Tat.* Is not the soul incorporeal, and the sense a Body, Father?
Or is it rather in the Body?

65\. *Herm.* If we put it in a Body, O So, we shall make it like the
Soul, or the Operations; for these being unbodily, we say are in Bodies.

66\. But Sense is neither Operation, nor Soul, nor anything else that
belongs to the Body, but as we have said, and, therefore, it is not
incorporeal.

67\. And if it be not incorporeal, it must needs be a Body, for we
always say, that of things that are, some are Bodies, and some
incorporeal.

The End of The Fourteenth Book,  
OF OPERATION AND SENSE.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fifteenth Book, of Truth to His Son Tat](pym16)
