[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](pym11)  [Next](pym13.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE6GQ/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Divine Pymander*, by Hermes Mercurius Trismegistus, tr. by John
Everard, \[1650\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

**THE ELEVENTH BOOK** **OF THE COMMON MIND, TO TAT**

THE Mind, O *Tat*, is of the very Essence of God, if yet there be any
Essence of God.

2\. What kind of Essence that is, he alone knows himself exactly.

3\. The Mind therefore is not cut off, or divided from the essentiality
of God, but united as the light of the Sun.

4\. And this Mind in men, is God, and therefore are some men Divine, and
their Humanity is near Divinity.

5\. For the good *Demon* called the Gods, immortal Men, and men mortal
Gods.

6\. But in the brute Beast, or unreasonable living Wights, the Mind is
their Nature.

7\. For where there is a Soul, there is the Mind, as where there is Life
there is also a Soul.

8\. In living Creatures, therefore, that are without Reason, the Soul is
Life, void of the operations of the Mind.

9\. For the Mind is the Benefactor of the Souls of men, and worketh to
the proper Good.

10\. And in unreasonable things it co-operateth with the nature of
everyone of them, but in men it worketh against their Natures.

11\. For the Soul being in the body, is straightway made Evil by Sorrow,
and Grief, and Pleasure, or Delight.

12\. For Grief and Pleasure, flow like juices from the compound Body,
whereinto when the Soul entereth or descendeth, she is moistened and
tinctured with them.

13\. As many Souls, therefore, as the Mind governeth, or overruleth, to
them it shows its own Light, resisting their prepossessions or
presumptions.

14\. As a good Physician grieveth the Body, prepossessed of a disease,
by burning or lancing it for health's sake;

15\. After the same manner also the Mind grieveth the Soul, by drawing
it out of Pleasure, from whence every disease of the Soul proceedeth.

16\. But the Great Disease of the Soul is *Atheism,* because that
opinion followeth to all Evil, and no Good.

17\. Therefore, the Mind resisting, it procureth Good to the Soul, as a
Physician to the Body.

18\. But as many Souls of Men, as do not admit or entertain the Mind for
their Governor, do suffer the same thing that the Soul of unreasonable
living things.

19\. For the Soul being a *Co-operator* with them, permits or leaves
them to their concupiscences, whereunto they are carried by the torrent
of their Appetite, and so tend to brutishness.

20\. And as brute Bests, they are angry without reason, and they desire
without reason, and never cease, nor are satisfied with evil.

21\. For unreasonable Angers and Desires are the most exceeding Evils.

22\. And therefore hath God set the Mind over there, as a Revenger and
Reprover of them.

23\. *Tat.* Here, O Father, that discourse of Fate of Destiny, which
thou madest to me, is in danger of being overthrown; for if it be fatal
for any man to commit *Adultery* or *Sacrilege*, or do any evil, he is
punished also, though he, of necessity, do the work of the Fate or
Destiny.

24\. *Herm.* All things, O Son, are the work of Fate, and without it can
no bodily thing, either Good or Evil, be done.

25\. For it is decreed by Fate, that he that doth any evil, should also
suffer for it.

26\. And therefore he doth it, that he may suffer that which he
suffereth because he did it.

27\. But for the present, let alone that speech, concerning Evil and
Fate, for at other times we have spoken of it.

28\. Now, our discourse is about the Mind, and what it can do, and how
it differs, and is in men such a one, but in brute Beasts changed.

29\. And again in brute Beasts it is not beneficial, but in men by
quenching both their Anger and Concupiscences.

30\. And of man, thou must understand, some to be rational, or governed
by reason, and some irrational.

31\. But all men are subject to Fate, and to Generation, and Change, for
these are the beginning and end of Fate or Destiny

32\. And all men suffer those things that are decreed by Fate.

33\. But rational men, over whom, as we said, the mind bears rule, do
not suffer like unto other men; but being free from viciousness, and
being not evil, they do suffer evil.

34\. *Tat.* How sayest thou this again, Father? An *Adulterer*, is he
not evil? A *Murderer*, is he not evil? and so of others.

35\. *Herm.* But the rational man, O Son, will not suffer for Adultery,
but as the Adulterer not for Murder, but as the Murderer.

36\. And it is impossible to escape the Quality of change as of
Generation, but the Viciousness, he that hath the Mind, may escape.

37\. And therefore, O Son, I have always heard the good *Demon* say, and
if he had delivered it in writing, he had much profited all mankind. For
he alone, O So, as the first born, God seeing all things, truly spake
Divine words. *I have heard him sometimes, That all things are one
thing, especially intelligible Bodies, or that all especially
intelligible Bodies are one.*

38\. We live in Power, in Act, and in Eternity.

39\. Therefore, a good mind is that which the soul of him is.

40\. And if this be so, then no intelligible thing differs from
intelligible things.

41\. As, therefore, it is possible that the Mind, the Prince of all
things; so likewise, that the soul that is of God, can do whatsoever it
will.

42\. But understand thou well, for this Discourse I have made to the
Question which thou askest of me before, I man concerning Fate and the
Mind.

43\. First, if, O Son, thou shalt diligently withdraw thyself from all
contentious speeches, thou shalt find that in Truth, the Mind, the Soul
of God bears rule over all things, both over Fate, and Law, and all
other things.

44\. And nothing is impossible to him, no, not of the things that are of
Fate.

45\. Therefore, though the Soul of Man be above it, let it not neglect
the things that happen to be under Fate.

46\. And these, thus far, were the excellent sayings of the good
*Demon*.

47\. *Tat.* Most divinely spoken, O Father, and truly and profitably,
yet clear this one thing unto me.

48\. Thou sayest, that in brute Beasts the Mind worketh or acteth after
the manner of Nature, co-operating also with their )… impetus)
inclinations.

49\. Now, the impetuous inclinations of brute Beasts, as I conceive, are
Passions. If, therefore, the Mind do co-operate with these impetuous
Inclinations, and that they are the Passions in brute Beasts, certainly
the Mind is also a Passion, conforming itself to Passions.

50\. *Herm.* Well done, Son, thou askest nobly, and yet it is just that
I should answer thee.

51\. All incorporeal things, O Son, that are in the Body, are passible,
nay, they are properly Passions.

52\. Everything that moveth is incorporeal; everything that is moved is
a Body; and it is moved into the Bodies by the Mind. Now, Motion is
passion, and there they both suffer; as well that which moveth, as that
which is moved, as well that which ruleth, as that which is ruled.

53\. But being freed from the Body, it is freed likewise from Passion.

54\. But especially, O Son, there is nothing impassible, but all things
are passible.

55\. But Passion differs from that which is passible; for that (Passion)
acteth, but this suffers.

56\. Bodies also of themselves do act; for either they are unmoveable,
or else are moved; and which soever it be, it is a Passion.

57\. But incorporeal things do always act, or work, and therefore they
are passible.

58\. Let not, therefore, the appellations or names trouble thee, for
Action and Passion are the same thing, but that it is not grievous to
use the more honorable name.

59\. *Tat.* O Father, thou hast delivered this discourse most plainly.

60\. *Herm.* Consider this also, O Son, that God hath freely bestowed
upon man, above all other living things, these two, to wit, Mind and
Speech, or Reason …, equal to immortality.

61\. These, if any man use, or employ upon what he ought, he shall
differ nothing from the Immortals.

62\. Yea, rather going out of the Body, he shall be guided and led by
them, both into the Choir and Society of the God, and blessed ones.

63\. *Tat.* Do not other living creatures use speech, O Father?

64\. *Herm.* No, Son, but only voice. Now, speech and voice do differ
exceeding much; for speech is common to all men, but voice is proper
unto every kind of living thing.

65\. *Tat.* Yea, but the Speech of men is different, O Father; every man
according to his Nation.

66\. *Herm.* It is true, O Son, they do differ: yet as Man is one, so is
Speech one also, and it is interpreted and found the same, both in
*Egypt*, *Persia*, and *Greece*.

67\. But thou seemest unto me, Son, to be ignorant of the Vertue, or
Power and greatness of Speech.

68\. For the blessed God, the good *Demon* said or commanded the Soul to
be in the Body, the Mind in the Soul …, the Word, or Speech, or Reason
in the Mind, and the Mind in God, and that God is the Father of them
all.

69\. Therefore, the Word is the Image of the Mind, and the Mind of God,
and the Body of the *Idea*, and the *Idea* of the Soul.

70\. Therefore, of the Matter, the subtilest or smallest part is Air, of
the Air the Soul, of the Soul the Mind, of the Mind God.

71\. And God is about all things, and through all things, but the Mind
about the Soul, the Soul about the Air, and the Air about the Matter.

72\. But Necessity, and Providence, and Nature, are the Organs or
Instruments of the World, and of the Order of Matter.

73\. For of those things that are intelligible, everyone is; but the
essence of them is Identity.

74\. But of the Bodies of the whole, or universe, every one is many
things.

75\. For the Bodies that are put together, and that have, and make their
changes into other, having this Identity, do always and preserve the
incorruption of the Identity.

76\. But in every one of the compound Bodies there is a Number

77\. For without Number it is impossible there should be consistence or
constitution, or composition, or dissolution.

78\. But Unities do both beget and increase Numbers, and again being
dissolved, come into themselves.

79\. And the Matter is One.

80\. But this whole World, the great God, and the Image of the Greater,
and united unto him, and concerning the Order, and Will of the Father,
is the fulness of Life.

81\. And there is nothing therein, through all the Eternity of the
Revolution, neither of the whole, nor of the parts which doth not live.

82\. For there is nothing dead, that either hath been, or is, or shall
be in the World.

83\. For the Father would have it, as long as it lasts, to be a living
thing; and therefore it must needs be God also.

84\. How, therefore, O Son, can there be in God in the image of the
Universe, in the fulness of Life, any dead things?

85\. For dying is Corruption, and corruption is destruction.

86\. How, then, can any part of the incorruptible be corrupted, or of
God be destroyed?

87\. *Tat.* Therefore, O Father, do not the living things in the World
die, though they be parts thereof?

88\. *Herm.* Be wary in thy speech, O Son, and not deceived in the names
of things.

89\. For they do not die, O Son, but as Compound bodies they are
dissolved.

90\. But dissolution is not death; and they are dissolved, not that they
may be destroyed, but that they may be made new.

91\. *Tat.* What, then, is the operation of Life? Is it not Motion?

92\. *Herm.* And what is there in the World unmoveable? Nothing at all,
O Son.

93\. *Tat.* Why, doth not the Earth seem immoveable to thee, O Father?

94\. *Herm.* No, but subject to many Motions, though after a manner, it
alone be stable.

95\. What a ridiculous thing it were that the nurse of all things should
be immoveable which beareth and bringeth forth all things.

96\. For it is impossible that anything that bringeth forth, should
bring forth without Motion.

97\. And a ridiculous question it is, whether the fourth part of the
whole, be idle; for the word immoveable, or without motion, signifies
nothing else, but idleness.

98\. Know generally, O Son, that whatsoever is in the World is moved
either according to Augmentation or Diminution.

99\. But that which is moved, liveth also, yet it is not necessary that
a living thing should be or continue the same.

100\. For while the whole world is together, it is unchangeable, O Son,
but all the parts thereof are changeable.

101\. Yet nothing is corrupted or destroyed, and quite abolished, but
the names trouble men.

102\. For Generation is not Life, but Sense, neither is Change Death,
but Forgetfulness, or rather Occultation, and lying hid. Or better
thus:--

103\. *For Generation is not a Creation of Life, but a production of
things to Sense, and making them manifest. Neither is Change Death, but
an Occultation of hiding of that which was.*

104\. These things being so, all things are Immortal, Matter, Life,
Spirit, Soul, Mind, whereof every living thing consisteth.

105\. Every living thing therefore is Immortal, because of the Mind, but
especially Man, who both receiveth God, and converseth with him.

106\. For with this living wight, alone is God familiar; in the night by
dreams, in the day by Symbols or Signs.

107\. And by all things doth he foretell him of things to come, by
Birds, by Fowls, by the Spirit, or Wind, and by an Oak.

108\. Wherefore, also, Man professeth to know things that have been,
things that are present, and things to come.

109\. Consider this also, O Son, that every other living Creature goeth
upon one part of the World, Swimming things in the Water, Land wights
upon the Earth, Flying Fowls in the Air.

110\. But Man useth all these, the Earth, the Water, the Air, and the
Fire, nay, he seeth and toucheth Heaven by his senses.

111\. But God is both about all things, and through all things, for he
is both Act and Power.

112\. And it is no hard thing, O Son, to understand God.

113\. And if thou wilt also see him, look upon the Necessity of things
that appear, and the Providence of things that have been, and are done.

114\. See the Matter being most full of Life, and so great a God moved,
with all good, and Fair, both Gods, and *Demons*, and Men.

115\. *Tat.* But these, O Father, are wholly Acts, or Operations.

116\. *Herm.* If they be, therefore, wholly acts or operations, O Son,
by whom are they acted or operated, but by God?

117\. Or art thou ignorant, that as parts of the World, are Heaven, and
Earth, and Water, and Air; after the same manner, the Members of God,
are Life, and Immortality, and Eternity, and Spirit, and Necessity, and
Providence, and Nature, and Soul, and Mind, and the Continuance or
Perseverance of all these which is called Good.

118\. And there is not anything of all that hath been, and all that is,
where God is not.

119\. *Tat.* What, in Matter, O Father?

120\. *Herm.* The Matter, Son, what is it without God, that thou
shouldst ascribe a proper place to it?

121\. Or what dost thou think it to be? Peradventure, some heap that is
not actuated or operated.

122\. But if it be actuated, by whom is it actuated? for we have said,
that Acts or Operations, are the parts of God.

123\. By whom are all living things quickened? and the Immortal, by whom
are they immortalized? the things that are changeable, by whom are they
changed?

124\. Whether thou speak of Matter or Body, or Essence, know that all
these are Acts of God.

125\. And that the Act of Matter is materiality, and of the Bodies
corporality, and of essence essentiality, and this is God the whole.

126\. And in the whole, there is nothing that is not God.

127\. Wherefore, about God, there is neither Greatness, Place, Quality,
Figure, or time, foe he is All, and the All, through all, and about all.

128\. This Word, O Son, worship and adore. And the only service of God,
is not to be evil.

The End of the Eleventh Book  
OF THE COMMON MIND, TO TAT.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Twelfth Book, His Crater or Monas](pym13.md)
