[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo03)  [Next](flo05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### THE LEGEND OF THE TERRESTRIAL PARADISE OF SHEDDÁD, THE SON OF ’A’D.

Arabian

<span class="smallcaps">It</span> is related that ’Abd Allah, the son of
Aboo Kilábeh, went forth to seek a camel that had run away, and while he
was proceeding over the deserts of El-Yeman and the district of Seba, he
chanced to arrive at a vast city encompassed by enormous fortifications,
around the circuit of which were pavilions rising high into the sky. So
when he approached it, he imagined that there must be inhabitants within
it, of whom he might inquire for his camel; and, accordingly, he
advanced, but on coming to it he found that it was desolate, without any
one to cheer its solitude.

"I alighted," says he, "from my she-camel, and tied up her foot; and
then, composing my mind, entered the city. On approaching the
fortifications, I found that they had two enormous gates, the like of
which, for size and height, have never been seen elsewhere in the world,
set with a variety of jewels and jacinths, white and red, and yellow and
green;

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and when I beheld this, I was struck with the utmost wonder at it, and
the sight astonished me. I entered the fortifications in a state of
terror and with a wandering mind, and saw them to be of the same large
extent as the city, and to comprise elevated pavilions, every one of
these containing lofty chambers, and all of them constructed of gold and
silver, and adorned with rubies and chrysolites and pearls and
various-coloured jewels. The folding-doors of these pavilions were like
those of the fortifications in beauty, and the floors were overlaid with
large pearls, and with balls like hazel-nuts, composed of musk and
ambergris and saffron. And when I came into the midst of the city, I saw
not in it a created being of the sons of Adam; and I almost died of
terror. I then looked down from the summits of the lofty chambers and
pavilions, and saw rivers running beneath them; and in the great
thoroughfare-streets of the city were fruit-bearing trees and tall
palm-trees. And the construction of the city was of alternate bricks of
gold and silver; so I said within myself, No doubt this is the paradise
promised in the world to come.

"I carried away of the jewels which were as its gravel, and the musk
that was as its dust, as much as I could bear, and returned to my
district, where I acquainted the people with the occurrence. And the
news reached Mo’áwiyeh, the son of Aboo Sufyán (who was then Caliph), in
the Hejáz; so he

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

wrote to his lieutenant in San’a of El-Yemen, saying, 'Summon that man,
and inquire of him the truth of the matter!' His lieutenant therefore
caused me to be brought, and demanded of me an account of my adventure,
and of what had befallen me; and I informed him of what I had seen. He
then sent me to Mo’áwiyeh, and I acquainted him also with that which I
had seen, but he disbelieved it; so I produced to him some of those
pearls and the little balls of ambergris and musk and saffron. The
latter retained somewhat of their sweet scent; but the pearls had become
yellow and discoloured.

"At the sight of these Mo’áwiyeh wondered, and he sent and caused Kaab
el-Ahbár to be brought before him, and said to him, 'O Kaab el-Ahbár, I
have called thee on account of a matter of which I desire to know the
truth, and I hope that thou mayest be able to certify me of it.' 'And
what is it, O Prince of the Faithful?' asked Kaab el-Ahbár. Mo’áwiyeh
said, 'Hast thou any knowledge of the existence of a city constructed of
gold and silver, the pillars whereof are of chrysolite and ruby, and the
gravel of which is of pearls, and of balls like hazel-nuts, composed of
musk and ambergris and saffron?' He answered, 'Yes, O Prince of the
Faithful! It is Irem Zat-el-’Emád, the like of which hath never been
constructed in the regions of the earth; and Sheddád, the son of ’A’d
the Greater, built it.' 'Relate to us,' said Mo’áwiyeh, 'somewhat

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

of its history.' And Kaab el-Ahbár replied thus:—

"'’A’d the Greater had two sons, Shedeed and Sheddád, and when their
father perished they reigned conjointly over the countries after him,
and there was no one of the kings of the earth who was not subject to
them. And Shedeed the son of ’A’d died, so his brother Sheddád ruled
alone over the earth after him. He was fond of reading the ancient
books; and when he met with the description of the world to come, and of
paradise, with its pavilions and lofty chambers, and its trees and
fruits, and of the other things in paradise, his heart enticed him to
construct its like on the earth, after this manner which hath been above
mentioned. He had under his authority a hundred thousand kings, under
each of whom were a hundred thousand valiant chieftains, and under each
of these were a hundred thousand soldiers. And he summoned them all
before him, and said to them, "I find in the ancient books and histories
the description of the paradise that is in the other world, and I desire
to make its like upon the earth. Depart ye therefore to the most
pleasant and most spacious vacant tract in the earth, and build for me
in it a city of gold and silver, and spread, as its gravel, chrysolites
and rubies and pearls, and as the supports of the vaulted roofs of that
city make columns of chrysolite, and fill it with pavilions, and over
the pavilions construct

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

lofty chambers, and beneath them plant, in the by-streets and
great-thoroughfare streets, varieties of trees bearing different kinds
of ripe fruits, and make rivers to run beneath them in channels of gold
and silver." To this they all replied, "How can we accomplish that which
thou hast described to us, and how can we procure the chrysolites and
rubies and pearls that thou hast mentioned?" But he said, "Know ye not
that the kings of the world are obedient to me, and under my authority,
and that no one who is in it disobeyeth my command?" They answered,
"Yes, we know that." "Depart then," said he, "to the mines of chrysolite
and ruby, and to the places where pearls are found, and gold and silver,
and take forth and collect their contents from the earth, and spare no
exertions. Take also for me, from the hands of me, such of those things
as ye find, and spare none, nor let any escape you; and beware of
disobedience!"

"'He then wrote a letter to each of the kings in the regions of the
earth, commanding them to collect all the articles of the kinds above
mentioned that their subjects possessed, and to repair to the mines in
which these things were found, and extract the precious stones that they
contained, even from the beds of the seas. And they collected the things
that he required in the space of twenty years; after which he sent forth
the geometricians and sages,

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

and labourers and artificers, from all the countries and regions, and
they dispersed themselves through the deserts and wastes, and tracts and
districts, until they came to a desert wherein was a vast open plain,
clear from hills and mountains, and in it were springs gushing forth,
and rivers running. So they said, "This is the kind of place which the
king commanded us to seek, and called us to find." They then busied
themselves in building the city according to the direction of the King
Sheddád, king of the whole earth, in its length and breadth; and they
made through it the channels for the rivers, and laid the foundations
conformably with the prescribed extent. The kings of the various
districts of the earth sent thither the jewels and stones, and large and
small pearls, and carnelian and pure gold, upon camels over the deserts
and wastes, and sent great ships with them over the seas; and a quantity
of those things, such as cannot be described nor calculated nor defined,
was brought to the workmen, who laboured in the construction of this
city three hundred years. And when they had finished it, they came to
the king and acquainted him with the completion; and he said to them,
"Depart, and make around it impregnable fortifications of great height,
and construct around the circuit of the fortifications a thousand
pavilions, each with a thousand pillars beneath it, in order that there
may be in each pavilion a vizier." So they went immediately,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

and did this in twenty years; after which they presented themselves
before Sheddád, and informed him of the accomplishment of his desire.

"'He therefore ordered his viziers, who were a thousand in number, and
his chief officers, and such of his troops and others as he confided in,
to make themselves ready for departure, and to prepare themselves for
removal to Irem Zat-el-’Emád, in attendance upon the king of the world,
Sheddád, the son of ’A’d. He ordered also such as he chose of his women
and his hareem, as his female slaves and his eunuchs, to fit themselves
out. And they passed twenty years in equipping themselves. Then Sheddád
proceeded with his troops, rejoiced at the accomplishment of his desire,
until there remained between him and Irem Zat-el-’Emád one day's
journey, when God sent down upon him and upon the obstinate infidels who
accompanied him a loud cry from the heaven of His power, and it
destroyed them all by the vehemence of its sound. Neither Sheddád nor
any of those who were with him arrived at the city, or came in sight of
it, and God obliterated the traces of the road that led to it, but the
city remaineth as it was in its place until the hour of the judgment!'

"At this narrative, related by Kaab el-Ahbár, Mo’áwiyeh wondered, and he
said to him, 'Can any one of mankind arrive at that city?' 'Yes,'
answered Kaab el-Ahbár; 'a man of the companions

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

of Mohammed (upon whom be blessing and peace!), in appearance like this
man who is sitting here, without any doubt.' Esh-Shaabee also saith, 'It
is related, on the authority of the learned men of Hemyer, in El-Yemen,
that when Shed dad and those who were with him were destroyed by the
loud cry, his son Sheddád the Less reigned after him; for his father,
Sheddád the Greater, had left him as successor to his kingdom, in the
land of Hadramót and Seba, on his departure with the troops who
accompanied him to Irem Zat-el-’Emád. And as soon as the news reached
him of the death of his father, on the way before his arrival at the
city of Irem, he gave orders to carry his father's body from those
desert tracts to Hadramót, and to excavate the sepulchre for him in a
cavern. And when they had done this, he placed his body in it, upon a
couch of gold, and covered the corpse with seventy robes, interwoven
with gold and adorned with precious jewels; and he placed at his head a
tablet of gold, whereon were inscribed these verses:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Be admonished, O thou who art deceived by a
prolonged life!  
  I am Sheddâd, the son of ’A’d, the lord of a strong fortress,  
  The lord of power and might, and of excessive valour.  
  The inhabitants of the earth obeyed me, fearing my severity and
threats;  
  And I held the east and west under a strong dominion.  
  And a preacher of the true religion invited us to the right way; <span
id="page_29">p. 29</span>  
  But we opposed him, and said, Is there no refuge from it?  
  And a loud cry assaulted us from a tract of the distant horizon;  
  Whereupon we fell down like corn in the midst of a plain at harvest;  
  And now, beneath the earth, we await the threatened day.'</span>

</div>

"Eth-Tha’álibee also saith, 'It happened that two men entered this
cavern, and found at its upper end some steps, and having descended
these, they found an excavation, the length whereof was a hundred
cubits, and its breadth forty cubits, and its height a. hundred cubits.
And in the midst of this excavation was a couch of gold, upon which was
a man of enormous bulk, occupying its whole length and breadth, covered
with ornaments and with robes interwoven with gold and silver; and at
his head was a tablet of gold, whereon was an inscription. And they took
that tablet, and carried away from the place as much as they could of
bars of gold and silver and other things.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Tomb Of Noosheerwân](flo05.md)
