[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo16)  [Next](flo18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE MAN AND HIS WIFE.

When Ssidi had been captured as before, and was being carried away in
the sack, he inquired, as he had always done, as to telling a tale; but
the Son of the Chan shook his head without speaking a word. Whereupon
Ssidi began the following relation:—

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

"Many, many years since, there lived in the kingdom of Olmilsong two
brothers, and they were both married. Now the elder brother and his wife
were niggardly and envious, while the younger brother was of quite a
different disposition.

"Once upon a time the elder brother, who had contrived to gather
together abundance of riches, gave a great feast, and invited many
people to partake of it. When this was known, the younger thought to
himself, 'Although my elder brother has hitherto not treated me very
well, yet he will now, no doubt, since he has invited so many people to
his feast, invite also me and my wife.' This he certainly expected, but
yet he was not invited. 'Probably,' thought he, 'my brother will summon
me to-morrow morning to the brandy-drinking.' Because, however, he was
not even invited unto that, he grieved very sore, and said unto himself,
'This night, when my brother's wife has drunk the brandy, I will go unto
the house and steal somewhat.'

"When, however, he had glided into the treasure-chamber of his brother,
there lay the wife of his brother near her husband; but presently she
arose and went into the kitchen, and cooked meat and sweet food, and
went out of the door with it. The concealed one did not venture at this
moment to steal anything, but said unto himself, 'Before I steal
anything, I will just see what all this means.'

"So saying, he went forth and followed the

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

woman to a mountain where the dead were wont to be laid. On the top,
upon a green mound, lay a beautiful ornamental tomb over the body of a
dead man. This man had formerly been the lover of the woman. Even when
afar off she called unto the dead man by name, and when she had come
unto him she threw her arms about his neck; and the younger brother was
nigh unto her, and saw all that she did.

"The woman next handed the sweet food which she had prepared to the dead
man, and because the teeth of the corse did not open, she separated them
with a pair of brazen pincers, and pushed the food into his mouth.
Suddenly the pincers bounced back from the teeth of the dead man, and
snapped off the tip of the woman's nose; while, at the same time, the
teeth of the dead man closed together and bit off the end of the woman's
tongue. Upon this the woman took up the dish with the food and went back
to her home.

"The younger brother thereupon followed her home, and concealed himself
in the treasure-chamber, and the wife laid herself down again by her
husband. Presently the man began to move, when the wife immediately
cried out, 'Woe is me! woe is me! was there ever such a man?' And the
man said, 'What is the matter now?' The wife replied, 'The point of my
tongue, and the tip of my nose, both these thou hast bitten off. What
can a woman

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

do without these two things? To-morrow the Chan shall be made acquainted
with this conduct.' Thus spake she, and the younger brother fled from
the treasure-chamber without stealing anything.

"On the following morning the woman presented herself before the Chan,
and addressed him, saying, 'My husband has this night treated me
shamefully. Whatsoever punishment may be awarded to him, I myself will
see it inflicted.'

"But the husband persisted in asserting, 'Of all this I know nothing!'
Because the complaint of the wife seemed well-founded, and the man could
not exculpate himself, the Chan said, 'Because of his evil deeds, let
this man be burnt."

"When the younger brother heard what had befallen the elder, he went to
see him. And after the younger one had related to him all the affair, he
betook himself unto the Chan, saying, 'That the evil-doer may be really
discovered, let both the woman and her husband be summoned before you; I
will clear up the mystery.'

"When they were both present, the younger brother related the wife's
visit to the dead man, and because the Chan would not give credence unto
his story, he said: 'In the mouth of the dead man you will find the end
of the woman's tongue; and the blood-soiled tip of her nose you will
find in the pincers of brass. Send thither, and see if it be not so.

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

"Thus spake he, and people were sent to the place, and confirmed all
that he had asserted. Upon this the Chan said, 'Since the matter stands
thus, let the woman be placed upon the pile of fagots and consumed with
fire.' And the woman was placed upon the pile of fagots and consumed
with fire."

"That served her right!" said the Son of the Chan.

"Ruler of Destiny, thou hast spoken words! Ssarwala missdood jakzang!"
Thus spake Ssidi, and burst from the sack through the air.

Thus Ssidi's tenth relation treats of the Man and his Wife.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Maiden Ssuwarandari](flo18)
