[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo15)  [Next](flo17.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### THE STEALING OF THE HEART.

When the Son of the Chan was, as formerly, carrying Ssidi away in the
sack, Ssidi inquired of

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

him as before; but the Son of the Chan shook his head without speaking a
word, so Ssidi proceeded as follows:—

"Many, many years ago there ruled over a certain kingdom a Chan named
Guguluktschi. Upon the death of this Chan his son, who was of great
reputation and worth, was elected Chan in his place.

"One berren (a measure of distance) from the residence of the Chan dwelt
a man, who had a daughter of wonderful abilities and extraordinary
beauty. The son of the Chan was enamoured of this maiden, and visited
her daily; until, at length, he fell sick of a grievous malady, and
died, without the maiden being made aware of it.

"One night, just as the moon was rising, the maiden heard a knocking at
the door, and the face of the maiden was gladdened when she beheld the
son of the Chan; and the maiden arose and went to meet him, and she led
him in and placed arrack and cakes before him. 'Wife,' said the son of
the Chan, 'come with me!'

"The maiden followed, and they kept going further and further, until
they arrived at the dwelling of the Chan, from which proceeded the sound
of cymbals and kettledrums.

"'Chan, what is this?' she asked. The son of the Chan replied to these
inquiries of the maiden, 'Do you not know that they are now celebrating
the feast of my funeral?' Thus spake he; and the

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

maiden replied, 'The feast of thy funeral! Has anything then befallen
the Chan's son?' And the son of the Chan replied, 'He is departed. Thou
wilt, however, bear a son unto him. And when the season is come, go into
the stable of the elephant, and let him be born there. In the palace
there will arise a contention betwixt my mother and her attendants,
because of the wonderful stone of the kingdom. The wonderful stone lies
under the table of sacrifice. After it has been discovered, do you and
my mother reign over this kingdom until such time as my son comes of
age.'

"Thus spake he, and vanished into air. But his beloved fell, from very
anguish; into a swoon. 'Chan! Chan!' exclaimed she sorrowfully, when she
came to herself again. And because she felt that the time was come, she
betook herself to the stable of the elephants, and there gave birth to a
son.

"On the following morning, when the keeper of the elephants entered the
stable, he exclaimed, 'What! has a woman given birth to a son in the
stable of the elephants? This never happened before. This may be an
injury to the elephants.'

"At these words the maiden said, 'Go unto the mother of the Chan, and
say unto her, "Arise! something wonderful has taken place."'

"When these words were told unto the mother of the Chan, then she arose
and went unto the stable,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

and maiden related unto her all that had happened. 'Wonderful!' said the
mother of the Chan. 'Otherwise the Chan had left no successors. Let us
go together into the house.'

"Thus speaking, she took the maiden with her into the house, and nursed
her, and tended her carefully. And because her account of the wonderful
stone was found correct, all the rest of her story was believed. So the
mother of the Chan and his wife ruled over the kingdom.

"Henceforth, too, it happened that every month, on the night of the full
moon, the deceased Chan appeared to his wife, remained with her until
morning dawned, and then vanished into air. And the wife recounted this
to his mother, but his mother believed her not, and said, 'This is a
mere invention. If it were true my son would, of a surety, show himself
likewise unto me. If I am to believe your words, you must take care that
mother and son meet one another.'

"When the son of the Chan came on the night of the full moon, his wife
said unto him, 'It is well that thou comest unto me on the night of
every full moon, but it were yet better if thou camest every night.' And
as she spake thus, with tears in her eyes, the son of the Chan replied,
'If thou hadst sufficient spirit to dare its accomplishment, thou
mightest do what would bring me every night; but thou art young and
cannot do it.' 'Then,' said she,

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'if thou wilt but
come every night, I will do all that is required of me, although I
should thereby lose both flesh and bone.'

"Thereupon the son of the Chan spake as follows: Then betake thyself on
the night of the full moon a berren from this place to the iron old man,
and give unto him arrack. A little further you will come unto two rams,
to them you must offer batschimak cakes. A little further on you will
perceive a host of men in coats of mail and other armour, and there you
must share out meat and cakes. From thence you must proceed to a large
black building, stained with blood; the skin of a man floats over it
instead of a flag. Two aerliks (fiends) stand at the entrance. Present
unto them both offerings of blood. Within the mansion thou wilt discover
nine fearful exorcists, and nine hearts upon a throne. "Take me! take
me!" will the eight old hearts exclaim; and the ninth heart will cry
out, "Do not take me!" But leave the old hearts and take the fresh one,
and run home with it without looking round.'

"Much as the maiden was alarmed at the task which she had been enjoined
to perform, she set forth on the night of the next full moon, divided
the offerings, and entered the house. 'Take me not!' exclaimed the fresh
heart; but the maiden seized the fresh heart and fled with it. The
exorcists fled after her, and cried out to those who were

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

watching, 'Stop the thief of the heart!' And the two aerlic (fiends)
cried, 'We have received offerings of blood!' Then each of the armed men
cried out, 'Stop the thief!' But the rams said, 'We have received
batschimak cakes.' Then they called out to the iron old man, 'Stop the
thief with the heart!' But the old man said, 'I have received arrack
from her, and shall not stop her.'

"Thereupon the maiden journeyed on without fear until she reached home;
and she found upon entering the house the Chan's son, attired in festive
garments. And the Chan's son drew nigh, and threw his arms about the
neck of the maiden."

"The maiden behaved well indeed!" exclaimed the Son of the Chan.

"Ruler of Destiny, thou hast spoken words! Ssarwala missdood jakzang."
Thus spake Ssidi, and burst from the sack through the air.

Thus Ssidi's ninth relation treats of the Stealing of the Heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Man and His Wife](flo17.md)
