[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo19)  [Next](flo21) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

### LEGEND OF DHURRUMNATH.

Indian?

<span class="smallcaps">During</span> the reign of a mighty rajah named
Guddeh Sing, a celebrated, and as it is now supposed, deified priest, or
hutteet, called Dhurrumnath, came, and in all the characteristic
humility of his sect established a primitive and temporary resting-place
within a few miles of the rajah's residence at Runn, near Mandavie. He
was accompanied by his adopted son, Ghurreeb Nath.

From this spot Dhurrumnath despatched his son to seek for charitable
contributions from the inhabitants of the town. To this end Ghurreeb
Nath made several visits; but being unsuccessful, and at the same time
unwilling that his father should know of the want of liberality in the
city, he at each visit purchased food out of some limited funds of his
own. At length, his little hoard failing, on the sixth day he was
obliged to confess the deceit he had practised.

Dhurrumnath, on being acquainted with this, became extremely vexed, and
vowed that from that day all the rajah's putteen cities should become

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

desolate and ruined. The tradition goes on to state that in due time
these cities were destroyed; Dhurrumnath, accompanied by his son, left
the neighbourhood, and proceeded to Denodur. Finding it a desirable
place, he determined on performing Tupseeah, or penance, for twelve
years, and chose the form of standing on his head.

On commencing to carry out this determination, he dismissed his son, who
established his Doonee in the jungles, about twenty miles to the
north-west of Bhooj. After Dhurrumnath had remained Tupseeah for twelve
years, he was visited by all the angels from heaven, who besought him to
rise; to which he replied, that if he did so, the portion of the country
on which his sight would first rest would become barren: if villages,
they would disappear; if woods or fields, they would equally be
destroyed. The angels then told him to turn his head to the north-east,
where flowed the sea. Upon this he resumed his natural position, and,
turning his head in the direction he was told, opened his eyes, when
immediately the sea disappeared, the stately ships became wrecks, and
their crews were destroyed, leaving nothing behind but a barren,
unbroken desert, known as the Runn.

Dhurrumnath, too pure to remain on the earth, partook of an immediate
and glorious immortality, being at once absorbed into the spiritual
nature of

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

the creating, the finishing, the indivisible, all-pervading Brum.

This self-imposed penance of Dhurrumnath has shed a halo of sanctity
around the hill of Denodur, and was doubtless the occasion of its having
been selected as a fitting site for a Jogie establishment, the members
of which, it is probable, were originally the attendants on a small
temple that had been erected, and which still remains, on the highest
point of the hill, on the spot where the holy Dhurrumnath is said to
have performed his painful Tupseeah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Traveller's Adventure](flo21)
