[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Asia](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](flo23)  [Next](flo25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1859581994/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Folklore and Legends: Oriental*, by Charles John Tibbitts, \[1889\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

### THE FOX AND THE WOLF

Arabian?

<span class="smallcaps">A fox</span> and a wolf inhabited the same den,
resorting thither together, and thus they remained a long time. But the
wolf oppressed the fox; and it so happened that the fox counselled the
wolf to assume benignity, and to abandon wickedness, saying to him, "If
thou persevere in thine arrogance, probably God will give power over
thee to a son of Adam; for he is possessed of stratagems, and artifice,
and guile; he captureth the birds from the sky, and the fish from the
sea, and cutteth the mountains and transporteth them; and all this he
accomplisheth through his stratagems. Betake thyself, therefore, to the
practice of equity, and relinquish evil and oppression; for it will be
more pleasant to thy taste." The wolf, however, received not his advice;
on the contrary, he returned him a rough reply, saying to him, "Thou
hast no right to speak on matters of magnitude and importance." He then
gave the fox such a blow that he fell down senseless; and when he
recovered, he smiled in the wolf's face,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

apologising for his shameful words, and recited these two verses:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"If I have been faulty in my affection for you,
and  
     committed a deed of a shameful nature,  
 I repent of my offence, and your clemency will extend  
     to the evildoer who craveth forgiveness."</span>

</div>

So the wolf accepted his apology, and ceased from ill-treating him, but
said to him, "Speak not of that which concerneth thee not, lest thou
hear that which will not please thee." The fox replied, "I hear and
obey. I will abstain from that which pleaseth thee not; for the sage
hath said, 'Offer not information on a subject respecting which thou art
not questioned; and reply not to words when thou art not invited; leave
what concerneth thee not, to attend to that which *doth* concern thee;
and lavish not advice upon the evil, for they will recompense thee for
it with evil.'"

When the wolf heard these words of the fox, he smiled in his face; but
he meditated upon employing some artifice against him, and said, "I must
strive to effect the destruction of this fox." As to the fox, however,
he bore patiently the injurious conduct of the wolf, saying within
himself, "Verily, insolence and calumny occasion destruction, and betray
one into perplexity; for it hath been said, 'He who is insolent
suffereth injury, and he who is ignorant repenteth, and he who feareth
is safe: moderation is one of the qualities of the noble, and good
manners are the noblest gain.' It is advisable to

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

behave with dissimulation towards this tyrant, and he will inevitably be
overthrown." He then said to the wolf, "Verily the Lord pardoneth and
becometh propitious unto His servant when he hath sinned; and I am a
weak slave, and have committed a transgression in offering thee advice.
Had I foreknown the pain that I have suffered from thy blow, I had known
that the elephant could not withstand nor endure it; but I will not
complain of the pain of that blow, on account of the happiness that hath
resulted unto me from it; for, if it had a severe effect upon me, its
result was happiness; and the sage hath said, 'The beating inflicted by
the preceptor is at first extremely grievous; but in the end it is
sweeter than clarified honey!'" So the wolf said, "I forgive thine
offence, and cancel thy fault; but beware of my power, and confess
thyself my slave; for thou hast experienced my severity unto him who
showeth me hostility." The fox, therefore, prostrated himself before
him, saying to him, "May God prolong thy life, and mayest thou not cease
to subdue him who opposeth thee!" And he continued to fear the wolf, and
to dissemble towards him.

After this the fox went one day to a vineyard, and saw in its wall a
breach; but he suspected it, saying unto himself, "There must be some
cause for this breach, and it hath been said, 'Whoso seeth a hole in the
ground, and doth not shun it, and be

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

cautious of advancing to it boldly, exposeth himself to danger and
destruction.' It is well known that some men make a figure of the fox in
the vineyard, and even put before it grapes in plates, in order that a
fox may see it, and advance to it, and fall into destruction. Verily I
regard this breach as a snare; and it hath been said, 'Caution is the
half of cleverness.' Caution requireth me to examine this breach, and to
see if I can find there anything that may lead to perdition.
Covetousness doth not induce me to throw myself into destruction." He
then approached it, and, going round about examining it warily, beheld
it; and lo! there was a deep pit, which the owner of the vineyard had
dug to catch in it the wild beasts that despoiled the vines; and he
observed over it a slight covering. So he drew back from it, and said,
"Praise be to God that I regarded it with caution! I hope that my enemy,
the wolf, who hath made my life miserable, may fall into it, so that I
alone may enjoy absolute power over the vineyard, and live in it
securely." Then, shaking his head, and uttering a loud laugh, he merrily
sang these verses—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Would that I beheld at the present moment in this
well a wolf,  
 Who hath long afflicted my heart, and made me drink bitterness
perforce!  
 Would that my life might be spared, and that the wolf might meet his
death!  
 Then the vineyard would be free from his presence, and I should find in
it my spoil."</span>

</div>

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

Having finished his song, he hurried away until he came to the wolf,
when he said to him, "Verily God hath smoothed for thee the way to the
vineyard without fatigue. This hath happened through thy good fortune.
Mayest thou enjoy, therefore, that to which God hath granted thee
access, in smoothing thy way to that plunder and that abundant
sustenance without any difficulty!" So the wolf said to the fox, "What
is the proof of that which thou hast declared?" The fox answered, "I
went to the vineyard, and found that its owner had died; and I entered
the garden, and beheld the fruits shining upon the trees."

So the wolf doubted not the words of the fox, and in his eagerness he
arose and went to the breach. His cupidity had deceived him with vain
hopes, and the fox stopped and fell down behind him as one dead,
applying this verse as a proverb suited to the case—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Dost thou covet an interview with Leyla? It is
covetousness that causeth the loss of men's heads."</span>

</div>

When the wolf carne to the breach, the fox said to him, "Enter the
vineyard; for thou art spared the trouble of breaking down the wall of
the garden, and it remaineth for God to complete the benefit." So the
wolf walked forward, desiring to enter the vineyard, and when he came to
the middle of the covering of the hole, he fell into it; whereupon the
fox was violently excited by happiness and joy, his

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

anxiety and grief ceased, and in merry tones he sang these verses—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Fortune hath compassionated my case, and felt pity
for the length of my torment,  
 And granted me what I desired, and removed that which I dreaded.  
 I will, therefore, forgive its offences committed in former times;  
 Even the injustice it hath shown in the turning of my hair grey.  
 There is no escape for the wolf from utter annihilation;  
 And the vineyard is for me alone, and I have no stupid partner."</span>

</div>

He then looked into the pit, and beheld the wolf weeping in his
repentance and sorrow for himself, and the fox wept with him. So the
wolf raised his head towards him, and said, "Is it from thy compassion
for me that thou hast wept, O Abu-l-Hoseyn?" "No," answered the fox, "by
him who cast thee into this pit; but I weep for the length of thy past
life, and in my regret at thy not having fallen into this pit before the
present day. Hadst thou fallen into it before I met with thee, I had
experienced refreshment and ease. But thou hast been spared to the
expiration of thy decreed term and known period." The wolf, however,
said to him, "Go, O evildoer, to my mother, and acquaint her with that
which hath happened to me; perhaps she will contrive some means for my
deliverance." But the fox replied, "The excess of thy covetousness and
eager desire has entrapped thee into destruction,

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

since thou hast fallen into a pit from which thou wilt never be saved.
Knowest thou not, O ignorant wolf, that the author of the proverb saith,
'He who thinks not of results will not be secure from perils?"' "O
Abu-l-Hoseyn!" rejoined the wolf, "thou wast wont to manifest an
affection for me, and to desire my friendship, and fear the greatness of
my power. Be not, then, rancorous towards me for that which I have done
unto thee; for he who hath one in his power, and yet forgiveth, will
receive a recompense from God, and the poet hath said—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Sow good, even on an unworthy soil; for it will
not be fruitless wherever it is sown.  
  Verily, good, though it remained long buried, none will reap but him
who sowed it.'"</span>

</div>

"O most ignorant of the beasts of prey!" said the fox, "and most stupid
of the wild beasts of the regions of the earth, hast thou forgotten thy
haughtiness, and insolence, and pride, and thy disregarding the rights
of companionship, and thy refusing to be advised by the saying of the
poet?—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Tyrannise not, if thou hast the power to do so;
for the tyrannical is in danger of revenge,  
  Thine eye will sleep while the oppressed, wakeful, will call down
curses on thee, and God's eye sleepeth not."</span>

</div>

"O Abu-l-Hoseyn!" exclaimed the wolf, "be not angry with me for my
former offences, for forgiveness is required of the generous, and kind
conduct

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

is among the best means of enriching one's-self. How excellent is the
saying of the poet—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Haste to do good when thou art able; for at every
season thou hast not the power.'"</span>

</div>

He continued to abase himself to the fox, and said to him, "Perhaps thou
canst find some means of delivering me from destruction." But the fox
replied, "O artful, guileful, treacherous wolf! hope not for
deliverance; for this is the recompense of thy base conduct, and a just
retaliation." Then, shaking his jaws with laughing, he recited these two
verses—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"No longer attempt to beguile me; for thou wilt not
attain thy object.  
 What thou seekest from me is impossible. Thou hast sown, and reap,
then, vexation."</span>

</div>

"O gentle one among the beasts of prey!" resumed the wolf, "thou art in
my estimation more faithful than to leave me in this pit." He then shed
tears, and repeated this couplet—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O thou whose favours to me have been many, and
whose gifts have been more than can be numbered!  
No misfortune hath ever yet befallen me but I have found thee ready to
aid me in it."</span>

</div>

The fox replied, "O stupid enemy, how art thou reduced to humility,
submissiveness, abjectness, and obsequiousness, after thy disdain,
pride, tyranny, and haughtiness! I kept company with thee through fear
of thine oppression, and flattered thee

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

without a hope of conciliating thy kindness; but now terror hath
affected thee, and punishment hath overtaken thee." And he recited these
two verses—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"O thou who seekest to beguile! thou hast fallen in
thy base intention.  
 Taste, then, the pain of shameful calamity, and be with other wolves
cut off."</span>

</div>

The wolf still entreated him, saying, "O gentle one! speak not with the
tongue of enmity, nor look with its eye; but fulfil the covenant of
fellowship with me before the time for discovering a remedy shall have
passed. Arise and procure for me a rope, and tie one end of it to a
tree, and let down to me its other end, that I may lay hold of it.
Perhaps I may so escape from my present predicament, and I will give
thee all the treasures that I possess." The fox, however, replied, "Thou
hast prolonged a conversation that will not procure thy liberation. Hope
not, therefore, for thy escape through my means; but reflect upon thy
former wicked conduct, and the perfidy and artifice which thou
thoughtest to employ against me, and how near thou art to being stoned.
Know that thy soul is about to quit the world, and to perish and depart
from it: then wilt thou be reduced to destruction, and an evil abode is
it to which thou goest!" "O Abu-l-Hoseyn!" rejoined the wolf, "be ready
in returning to friendship, and be not so rancorous.

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Know that he who
delivereth a soul from destruction hath saved it alive, and he who
saveth a soul alive is as if he had saved the lives of all mankind.
Follow not a course of evil, for the wise abhor it; and there is no evil
more manifest than my being in this pit, drinking the suffocating pains
of death, and looking upon destruction, when thou art able to deliver me
from the misery into which I have fallen." But the fox exclaimed, "O
thou barbarous, hard-hearted wretch! I compare thee, with respect to the
fairness of thy professions and the baseness of thine intention, to the
falcon with the partridge." "And what," asked the wolf, "is the story of
the falcon and the partridge?"

The fox answered, "I entered a vineyard one day to eat of its grapes,
and while I was there, I beheld a falcon pounce upon a partridge; but
when he had captured him, the partridge escaped from him and entered his
nest, and concealed himself in it; whereupon the falcon followed him,
calling out to him, 'O idiot! I saw thee in the desert hungry, and,
feeling compassion for thee, I gathered for thee some grain, and took
hold of thee that thou mightest eat; but thou fleddest from me, and I
see no reason for thy flight unless it be to mortify. Show thyself,
then, and take the grain that I have brought thee and eat it, and may it
be light and wholesome to thee.' So when the partridge heard these words
of the falcon, he believed him and

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

came forth to him; and the falcon stuck his talons into him, and got
possession of him. The partridge therefore said to him, 'Is this that of
which thou saidst that thou hadst brought for me from the desert, and of
which thou saidst to me, "Eat it, and may it be light and wholesome to
thee?" Thou hast lied unto me; and may God make that which thou eatest
of my flesh to be a mortal poison in thy stomach!' And when he had eaten
it, his feathers fell off, and his strength failed, and he forthwith
died."

The fox then continued, "Know, O wolf, that he who diggeth a pit for his
brother soon falleth into it himself; and thou behavedst with perfidy to
me first." "Cease," replied the wolf, "from addressing me with this
discourse, and propounding fables, and mention not unto me my former
base actions. It is enough for me to be in this miserable state, since I
have fallen into a calamity for which the enemy would pity me, much more
the true friend. Consider some stratagem by means of which I may save
myself, and so assist me. If the doing this occasion thee trouble, thou
knowest that the true friend endureth for his own true friend the
severest labour, and will suffer destruction in obtaining his
deliverance; and it hath been said, 'An affectionate friend is even
better than a brother.' If thou procure means for my escape, I will
collect for thee such things as shall be a store for thee against the
time

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

of want, and then I will teach thee extraordinary stratagems by which
thou shalt make the plenteous vineyards accessible, and shalt strip the
fruitful trees: so be happy and cheerful." But the fox said, laughing as
he spoke, "How excellent is that which the learned have said of him who
is excessively ignorant like thee!" "And what have the learned said?"
asked the wolf. The fox answered, "The learned have observed that the
rude in body and in disposition is far from intelligence, and nigh unto
ignorance; for thine assertion, O perfidious idiot! that the true friend
undergoeth trouble for the deliverance of his own true friend is just as
thou hast said; but acquaint me, with thine ignorance and thy paucity of
sense, how I should bear sincere friendship towards thee with thy
treachery. Hast thou considered me a true friend unto thee when I am an
enemy who rejoiceth in thy misfortune? These words are more severe than
the piercing of arrows, if thou understand. And as to thy saying that
thou wilt give me such things as will be a store for me against the time
of want, and will teach me stratagems by which I shall obtain access to
the plenteous vineyards and strip the fruitful trees—how is it, O
guileful traitor! that thou knowest not a stratagem by means of which to
save thyself from destruction? How far, then, art thou from profiting
thyself, and how far am I from receiving thine advice? If thou know of
stratagems,

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

employ them to save thyself from this predicament from which I pray God
to make thine escape far distant. See, then, O idiot! if thou know any
stratagem, and save thyself by its means from slaughter, before thou
lavish instruction upon another. But thou art like a man whom a disease
attacked, and to whom there came a man suffering from the same disease
to cure him, saying to him, 'Shall I cure thee of thy disease?' The
first man, therefore, said to the other, 'Why hast thou not begun by
curing thyself?' So he left him and went his way. And thou, O wolf, art
in the same case. Remain, then, in thy place, and endure that which hath
befallen thee."

Now when the wolf heard these words of the fox, he knew that he had no
kindly feeling for him; so he wept for himself, and said, "I have been
careless of myself; but if God deliver me from this affliction, I will
assuredly repent of my overbearing conduct unto him that is weaker than
I; and I will certainly wear wool, and ascend the mountains,
commemorating the praises of God (whose name be exalted!) and fearing
His punishment; and I will separate myself from all the other wild
beasts, and verily I will feed the warriors in defence of the religion
and the poor." Then he wept and lamented; and thereupon the heart of the
fox was moved with tenderness for him. On hearing his humble
expressions, and the words which indicated his repenting

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

of arrogance and pride, he was affected with compassion for him, and,
leaping with joy, placed himself at the brink of the pit, and sat upon
his hind-legs and hung down his tail into the cavity. Upon this the wolf
arose, and stretched forth his paw towards the fox's tail, and pulled
him down to him; so the fox was with him in the pit. The wolf then said
to him, "O fox of little compassion! wherefore didst thou rejoice in my
misfortune? Now thou hast become my companion, and in my power. Thou
hast fallen into the pit with me, and punishment hath quickly overtaken
thee. The sages have said, 'If any one of you reproach his brother for
deriving his nourishment from miserable means, he shall experience the
same necessity,' and how excellent is the saying of the poet—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'When fortune throweth itself heavily upon some,
and encampeth by the side of others,  
  Say to those who rejoice over us, "Awake: the rejoicers over us shall
suffer as we have done."'</span>

</div>

"I must now," he continued, "hasten thy slaughter, before thou beholdest
mine." So the fox said within himself, "I have fallen into the snare
with this tyrant, and my present case requireth the employment of
artifice and frauds. It hath been said that the woman maketh her
ornaments for the day of festivity; and, in a proverb, 'I have not
reserved thee, O my tear, but for the time of my difficulty!' and if I
employ not some stratagem in the affair of

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

this tyrannical wild beast, I perish inevitably. How good is the saying
of the poet—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Support thyself by guile; for thou livest in an
age whose sons are like the lions of the forest;  
  And brandish around the spear of artifice, that the mill of
subsistence may revolve;  
  And pluck the fruits; or if they be beyond thy reach, then content
thyself with herbage.'"</span>

</div>

He then said to the wolf, "Hasten not to kill me, lest thou repent, O
courageous wild beast, endowed with might and excessive fortitude! If
thou delay, and consider what I am about to tell thee, thou wilt know
the desire that I formed; and if thou hasten to kill me, there will be
no profit to thee in thy doing so, but we shall die here together." So
the wolf said, "O thou wily deceiver! how is it that thou hopest to
effect my safety and thine own, that thou askest me to give thee a delay
I Acquaint me with the desire that thou formedst." The fox replied, "As
to the desire that I formed, it was such as requireth thee to recompense
me for it well, since, when I heard thy promises, and thy confession of
thy past conduct, and thy regret at not having before repented and done
good; and when I heard thy vows to abstain from injurious conduct to thy
companions and others, and to relinquish the eating of the grapes and
all other fruits, and to impose upon thyself the obligation of humility,
and to clip thy claws and break thy dog-teeth, and to wear

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

wool and offer sacrifice to God (whose name be exalted!) if He delivered
thee from thy present state, I was affected with compassion for thee,
though I was before longing for thy destruction. So when I heard thy
profession of repentance, and what thou vowedst to do if God delivered
thee, I felt constrained to save thee from thy present predicament. I
therefore hung down my tail that thou mightest catch hold of it and make
thine escape. But thou wouldst not relinquish thy habit of severity and
violence, nor desire escape and safety for thyself by gentleness. On the
contrary, thou didst pull me in such a way that I thought my soul had
departed, so I became a companion with thee of the abode of destruction
and death; and nothing will effect the escape of myself and thee but one
plan. If thou approve of this plan that I have to propose, we shall both
save ourselves; and after that, it will be incumbent on thee to fulfil
that which thou hast vowed to do, and I will be thy companion." So the
wolf said, "And what is thy proposal that I am to accept?" The fox
answered, "That thou raise thyself upright; then I will place myself
upon thy head, that I may approach the surface of the earth, and when I
am upon its surface I will go forth and bring thee something of which to
take hold, and after that thou wilt deliver thyself." But the wolf
replied, "I put no confidence in thy words; for the sages have said, 'He
who confideth when he should

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

hate is in error'; and it hath been said, 'He who confideth in the
faithless is deceived, and he who maketh trial of the trier will
repent.' How excellent also is the saying of the poet—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Let not your opinion be otherwise than evil; for
ill opinion is among the strongest of intellectual qualities.  
 Nothing casteth a man into a place of danger like the practice of good,
and a fair opinion!'</span>

</div>

"And the saying of another—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Always hold an evil opinion, and so be safe.  
  Whoso liveth vigilantly, his calamities will be few.  
  Meet the enemy with a smiling and an open face;  
  but raise for him an army in the heart to combat him.'</span>

</div>

"And that of another—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'The most bitter of thine enemies is the nearest
whom thou trustest in: beware then of men, and associate with them
wilily.  
  Thy favourable opinion of fortune is a weakness: think evil of it,
therefore, and regard it with apprehension!"</span>

</div>

"Verily," rejoined the fox, "an evil opinion is not commendable in every
case; but a fair opinion is among the characteristics of excellence, and
its result is escape from terrors. It is befitting, O wolf, that thou
employ some stratagem for thine escape from the present predicament; and
it will be better for us both to escape than to die. Relinquish,
therefore, thine evil opinion and thy malevolence; for if thou think
favourably of me, I shall not fail to do one of two things; either I
shall bring thee something of which to lay hold, and thou wilt escape
from thy present situation, or I shall act perfidiously

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

towards thee, and save myself and leave thee; but this is a thing that
cannot be, for I am not secured from meeting with some such affliction
as that which thou hast met with, and that would be the punishment of
perfidy. It hath been said in a proverb, 'Fidelity is good, and perfidy
is base.' It is fit, then, that thou trust in me, for I have not been
ignorant of misfortunes. Delay not, therefore, to contrive our escape,
for the affair is too strait for thee to prolong thy discourse upon it."

The wolf then said, "Verily, notwithstanding my little confidence in thy
fidelity, I knew what was in thy heart, that thou desiredst my
deliverance when thou wast convinced of my repentance; and I said within
myself, 'If he be veracious in that which he asserteth, he hath made
amends for his wickedness; and if he be false, he will be recompensed by
his Lord.' So now I accept thy proposal to me, and if thou act
perfidiously towards me, thy perfidy will be the means of thy
destruction." Then the wolf raised himself upright in the pit, and took
the fox upon his shoulders, so that his head reached the surface of the
ground. The fox thereupon sprang from the wolf's shoulders, and found
himself upon the face of the earth, when he fell down senseless. The
wolf now said to him, "O my friend! forget not my case, nor delay my
deliverance."

The fox, however, uttered a loud laugh, and replied, "O thou deceived!
it was nothing but my

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

jesting with thee and deriding thee that entrapped me into thy power;
for when I heard thy profession of repentance, joy excited me, and I was
moved with delight, and danced, and my tail hung down into the pit; so
thou didst pull me, and I fell by thee. Then God (whose name be
exalted!) delivered me from thy hand. Wherefore, then, should I not aid
in thy destruction when thou art of the associates of the devil? Know
that I dreamt yesterday that I was dancing at thy wedding, and I related
the dream to an interpreter, who said to me, 'Thou wilt fall into a
frightful danger, and escape from it.' So I knew that my falling into
thy power and my escape was the interpretation of my dream. Thou, too,
knowest, O deceived idiot! that I am thine enemy. How, then, dost thou
hope, with thy little sense and thine ignorance, that I will deliver
thee, when thou hast heard what rude language I used? And how shall I
endeavour to deliver thee, when the learned have said that by the death
of the sinner are produced ease to mankind and purgation of the earth?
Did I not fear that I should suffer, by fidelity to thee, such
affliction as would be greater than that which may result from perfidy,
I would consider upon means for thy deliverance." So when the wolf heard
the words of the fox, he bit his paw in repentance. He then spoke softly
to him, but obtained nothing thereby. With a low voice he said to him,
"Verily,

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

you tribe of foxes are the sweetest of people in tongue, and the most
pleasant in jesting, and this is jesting in thee; but every time is not
convenient for sport and joking." "O idiot!" replied the fox, "jesting
hath a limit which its employer transgresseth not. Think not that God
will give thee possession of me after He hath delivered me from thy
power." The wolf then said to him, "Thou art one in whom it is proper to
desire my liberation, on account of the former brotherhood and
friendship that subsisted between us; and if thou deliver me, I will
certainly recompense thee well." But the fox replied, "The sages have
said, 'Take not as thy brother the ignorant and wicked, for he will
disgrace thee, and not honour thee; and take not as thy brother the
liar, for if good proceed from thee he will hide it, and if evil proceed
from thee he will publish it!' And the sages have said, 'For everything
there is a stratagem, excepting death; and everything may be rectified
excepting the corruption of the very essence; and everything may be
repelled excepting destiny.' And as to the recompense which thou
assertest that I deserve of thee, I compare thee, in thy recompensing,
to the serpent fleeing from the Háwee, when a man saw her in a state of
terror, and said to her, 'What is the matter with thee, O serpent?' She
answered, 'I have fled from the Háwee, for he seeketh me; and if thou
deliver me from him, and conceal me with

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

thee, I will recompense thee well, and do thee every kindness.' So the
man took her, to obtain the reward, and eager for the recompense, and
put her into his pocket; and when the Háwee had passed and gone his way,
and what she feared had quitted her, the man said to her, 'Where is the
recompense, for I have saved thee from that which thou fearedst and
didst dread?' The serpent answered him, 'Tell me in what member I shall
bite thee; for thou knowest that we exceed not this recompense.' She
then inflicted upon him a bite, from which he died. And thee, O idiot!"
continued the fox, "I compare to that serpent with that man. Hast thou
not heard the saying of the poet?—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"'Trust not a person in whose heart thou hast made
anger to dwell, nor think his anger hath ceased.  
  Verily, the vipers, though smooth to the touch, show graceful motions,
and hide mortal poison.'"</span>

</div>

"O eloquent and comely-faced animal!" rejoined the wolf, "be not
ignorant of my condition, and of the fear with which mankind regard me.
Thou knowest that I assault the strong places, and strip the vines. Do,
therefore, what I have commanded thee, and attend to me as the slave
attendeth to his master." "O ignorant idiot! who seekest what is vain,"
exclaimed the fox, "verily I wonder at thy stupidity, and at the
roughness of thy manner, in thine ordering me to serve thee and to stand
before thee as though I were a slave. But thou shalt soon

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

see what will befall thee, by the splitting of thy head with stones, and
the breaking of thy treacherous dogteeth."

The fox then stationed himself upon a mound overlooking the vineyard,
and cried out incessantly to the people of the vineyard until they
perceived him and came quickly to him. He remained steady before them
until they drew near unto him, and unto the pit in which was the wolf,
and then he fled. So the owners of the vineyard looked into the pit, and
when they beheld the wolf in it, they instantly pelted him with heavy
stones, and continued throwing stones and pieces of wood upon him, and
piercing him with the points of spears, until they killed him, when they
departed. Then the fox returned to the pit, and standing over the place
of the wolf's slaughter, saw him dead; whereupon he shook his head in
the excess of his joy, and recited these verses—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Fate removed the wolf's soul, and it was snatched
away.  
 Far distant from happiness be his soul that hath perished.  
 How long hast thou striven, Abos Tirhán, to destroy me!  
 But now have burning calamities befallen thee.  
 Thou hast fallen into a pit into which none shall descend without
finding in it the blasts of death."</span>

</div>

After this the fox remained in the vineyard alone, and in security,
fearing no mischief.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Shepherd and the Jogie](flo25)
