<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo005)  [Next](amo007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)

[Amos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 6:1</span></span>

The prophet utters the second woe over the careless heads of the nation,
who were content with the existing state of things, who believed in no
divine judgment, and who revelled in their riches ([Amo
6:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001)). To these he announces
destruction and the general overthrow of the kingdom ([Amo
6:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#007)), because they act perversely,
and trust in their own power ([Amo
6:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012)). [Amo
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#001). "Woe to the secure upon Zion, and
to the careless upon the mountain of Samaria, to the chief men of the
first of the nations, to whom the house of Israel comes! [Amo
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002). Go over to Calneh, and see; and
proceed thence to Hamath, the great one: and go down to Gath of the
Philistines: are they indeed better than these kingdoms? or is their
territory greater than your territory? [Amo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003). Ye who keep the day of calamity
far off, and bring the seat of violence near." This woe applies to the
great men in Zion and Samaria, that is to say, to the chiefs of the
whole of the covenant nation, because they were all sunk in the same
godless security; though special allusion is made to the corrupt leaders
of the kingdom of the ten tribes, whose debauchery is still further
depicted in what follows. These great men are designated in the words
נקבי ראשׁית הגּוים, as the heads of the chosen people, who are known by
name. As ראשׁית הג is taken from [Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020), so נקבי is taken from [Num
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017), where the heads of the tribes
who were chosen as princes of the congregation to preside over the
numbering of the people are described as men אשׁר נקּבוּ בּשׁמות, who
were defined with names, i.e., distinguished by names, that is to say,
well-known men; and it is used here in the same sense. Observe, however,
with reference to ראשׁית הגּוים, that in [Num
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#020) we have not הגּוים, but simply
ראשׁית גּוים. Amalek is so called there, as being the first heathen
nation which rose up in hostility to Israel. On the other hand, ר הגוים
is the firstling of the nations, i.e., the first or most exalted of all
nations. Israel is so called, because Jehovah had chosen it out of all
the nations of the earth to be the people of His possession ([Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); cf. [Sa2
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#023)). In order to define with still
greater precision the position of these princes in the congregation,
Amos adds, "to whom the house of Israel cometh," namely, to have its
affairs regulated by them as its rulers. These epithets were intended to
remind the princes of the people of both kingdoms, "that they were the
descendants of those tribe-princes who had once been honoured to conduct
the affairs of the chosen family, along with Moses and Aaron, and whose
light shone forth from that better age as brilliant examples of what a
truly theocratical character was" (Hengstenberg, Dissertations, i. p.
148). To give still greater prominence to the exalted calling of these
princes, Amos shows in [Amo 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002) that
Israel can justly be called the firstling of the nations, since it is
not inferior either in prosperity or greatness to any of the powerful
and prosperous heathen states. Amos names three great and flourishing
capitals, because he is speaking to the great men of the capitals of the
two kingdoms of Israel, and the condition of the whole kingdom is
reflected in the circumstances of the capital. Calneh (= Calno, [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009)) is the later Ctesiphon in the
land of Shinar, or Babylonia, situated upon the Tigris opposite to
Seleucia (see at [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)); hence
the expression עברוּ, because men were obliged to cross over the river
(Euphrates) in order to get there. Hamath: the capital of the Syrian
kingdom of that name, situated upon the Orontes (see at [Gen
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#018) and [Num
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008)). There was not another Hamath,
as Hitzig supposes. The circumstance that Amos mentions Calneh first,
whereas it was much farther to the east, so that Hamath was nearer to
Palestine than Calneh was, may be explained very simply, from the fact
that the enumeration commences with the most distant place and passes
from the north-east to the south-west, which was in the immediate
neighbourhood of Israel. Gath: one of the five capitals of Philistia,
and in David's time the capital of all Philistia (see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003); [Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)). The view still defended by Baur
- namely, that Amos mentions here three cities that had either lost
their former grandeur, or had fallen altogether, for the purpose of
showing the self-secure princes of Israel that the same fate awaited
Zion and Samaria - is groundless and erroneous; for although Calneh is
spoken of in [Isa 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009) as a city that
had been conquered by the Assyrians, it cannot be proved that this was
the case as early as the time of Amos, but is a simple inference drawn
from a false interpretation of the verse before us. Nor did Jeroboam II
conquer the city of Hamath on the Orontes, and incorporate its territory
with his own kingdom (see at [Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025)). And although the Philistian
city Gath was conquered by Uzziah (2 Chronicles 26:60, we cannot infer
from [Ch2 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006), or from the fact of
Gath not being mentioned in [Amo
1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006), that this occurred before the
time of Amos (see at [Amo 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#008)). On the
other hand, the fact that it is placed by the side of Hamath in the
passage before us, is rather a proof that the conquest did not take
place till afterwards.

[Amos 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 6:2</span></span>

[Amo 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#002) states what the princes of
Israel are to see in the cities mentioned, - namely, that they are not
better off (טובים denoting outward success or earthly prosperity) than
these two kingdoms, i.e., the kingdoms of Judah and Israel, and that
their territories are not larger than theirs. It is very evident that
this does not apply to cities that have been destroyed. The double
question ה ... אם requires a negative answer. [Amo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003). assigns the reason for the woe
pronounced upon the sinful security of the princes of Israel, by
depicting the godless conduct of these princes; and this is appended in
the manner peculiar to Amos, viz., in participles. These princes fancy
that the evil day, i.e., the day of misfortune or of judgment and
punishment, is far away (מנדּים, piel of נדה = נדד, to be far off,
signifies in this instance not to put far away, but to regard as far
off); and they go so far as to prepare a seat or throne close by for
wickedness and violence, which must be followed by judgment. הגּישׁ
שׁבת, to move the sitting (shebheth from yâshabh) of violence near, or
better still, taking shebheth in the sense of enthroning, as Ewald does,
to move the throne of violence nearer, i.e., to cause violence to erect
its throne nearer and nearer among them.

[Amos 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 6:4</span></span>

This forgetfulness of God shows itself more especially in the reckless
licentiousness and debauchery of these men. [Amo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004). "They who lie upon beds of ivory,
and stretch themselves upon their couches, and eat lambs from the flock,
and calves out of the fattening stall. [Amo
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#005). Who prattle to the tune of the
harp; like David, they invent string instruments. [Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006). Who drink wine out of sacrificial
bowls, and anoint themselves with the best oils, and do not afflict
themselves for the hurt of Joseph." They lie stretched, as it were
poured out (סרחים), upon beds inlaid with ivory, to feast and fill their
belly with the flesh of the best lambs and fattened calves, to the
playing of harps and singing, in which they take such pleasure, that
they invent new kinds of playing and singing. The ἁπ. λεγ. pârat, to
strew around (cf. peret in [Lev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010)), in Arabic to throw many
useless words about, to gossip, describes the singing at the banquets as
frivolous nonsense. כּלי שׁיר, articles or instruments of singing, are
not musical instruments generally, but, as we may see from [Ch2
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#012), compared with [Ch2
29:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#026), and [Ch1
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#005), the stringed instruments that
were either invented by David (e.g., the nebel), or arranged by him for
the sacred song of the temple, together with the peculiar mode of
playing them; in other words, "the playing upon stringed instruments
introduced by David." Consequently the meaning of [Amo
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#005) is the following: As David
invented stringed instruments in honour of his God in heaven, so do
these princes invent playing and singing for their god, the belly. The
meaning to invent or devise, which Baur will not allow to חשׁב, is
established beyond all doubt by [Exo
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#004). They drink thereby out of
sacrificial bowls of wine, i.e., drink wine out of sacrificial bowls.
שׁתה with ב, as in [Gen 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen044.htm#005). Mizrâq,
in the plural mizrâqı̄m and mizrâqōth, from zâraq, to sprinkle, was the
name given both to the vessels used for the sprinkling of the blood, and
also to the bowls made use of for pouring the libation of wine upon the
table of shew-bread ([Ch2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#008)). This
word is applied by Amos to the bowls out of which the gluttons drank
their wine; with special reference to the offering of silver sacrificial
bowls made by the tribe-princes at the consecration of the altar
(Numbers 7), to show that whereas the tribe-princes of Israel in the
time of Moses manifested their zeal for the service of Jehovah by
presenting sacrificial bowls of silver, the princes of his own time
showed just as much zeal in their care for their god, the belly.
Mizrâqı̄m does not mean "rummers, or pitchers used for mixing wine."
Lastly, Amos refers to their anointing themselves with the firstling of
the oils, i.e., the best oils, as a sign of unbridled rejoicing,
inasmuch as the custom of anointing was suspended in time of mourning
([Sa2 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002)), for the purpose of
appending the antithesis ולא גחלוּ, they do not afflict or grieve
themselves for the ruin of Israel. Shēbher, breach, injury, destruction.
Joseph signifies the people and kingdom of the ten tribes.

[Amos 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 6:7</span></span>

Announcement of Punishment. - [Amo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#007). "Therefore will they now go into
captivity at the head of the captives, and the shouting of the revellers
will depart." Because these revellers do not trouble themselves about
the ruin of Israel, they will now be obliged to wander into captivity at
the head of the people (cf. [Kg1
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#009)), when the approaching shebher
occurs. בּראשׁ גּלים is chosen with direct reference to ראשׁית שׁמנים,
as Jerome has observed: "Ye who are first in riches will be the first to
bear the yoke of captivity." Serūchı̄m also points back to [Amo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004), "those who are stretched upon
their couches" - that is, the revellers; and it forms a play upon words
with mirzach. מרזח signifies a loud cry, here a joyous cry, in [Jer
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#005) a cry of lamentation.

[Amos 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 6:8</span></span>

This threat is carried out still further in [Amo
6:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008). [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008). "The Lord Jehovah hath sworn by
Himself, is the saying of Jehovah, the God of hosts: I abhor the pride
of Jacob, and his palaces I hate; and give up the city, and the fulness
thereof. [Amo 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#009). And it will come to
pass, if then men are left in a house, they shall die. [Amo
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#010). And when his cousin lifts him
up, and he that burieth him, to carry out the bones out of the house,
and saith to the one in the hindermost corner of the house, Is there
still any one with thee? and he says, Not one; then will he say, Hush;
for the name of Jehovah is not to be invoked. [Amo
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011). For, behold, Jehovah commandeth,
and men smite the great house to ruins, and the small house into
shivers." In order to show the secure debauchees the terrible severity
of the judgments of God, the Lord announces to His people with a solemn
oath the rejection of the nation which is so confident in its own power
(cf. [Amo 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#013)). The oath runs here as
in [Amo 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#002), with this exception, that
instead of בּקדשׁו we have בּנפשׁו in the same sense; for the nephesh of
Jehovah, His inmost being or self, is His holiness. מתאב, with the
guttural softened, for מתעב. The participle describes the abhorrence as
a continued lasting feeling, and not a merely passing emotion. גּאון
יעקב, the loftiness or pride of Jacob, i.e., everything of which Jacob
is proud, the true and imaginary greatness and pride of Israel, which
included the palaces of the voluptuous great men, for which reason they
are placed in parallelism with גאון יע. This glory of Israel Jehovah
abhors, and He will destroy it by giving up the city (Samaria), and all
that fills it (houses and men), to the enemies to be destroyed. גאון יע,
to give up to the enemy, as in [Deu
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030) and [Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014); not to surround, to which
וּמלאהּ is unsuitable. The words not only threaten surrounding, or
siege, but also conquest, and ([Amo
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011)) the destruction of the city. And
then, even if there are ten in one house, they will all perish. אנשׁים:
people, men. Ten in one house is a large number, which the prophet
assumes as the number, to give the stronger emphasis to the thought that
not one will escape from death. This thought is still further explained
in [Amo 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#010). A relative comes into
the house to bury his deceased blood-relation. The suffix to נשׂאו
refers to the idea involved in מתוּ, a dead man. Dōd, literally the
father's brother, here any near relation whose duty it was to see to the
burial of the dead. מסרף for משׂרף, the burner, i.e., the burier of the
dead. The Israelites were indeed accustomed to bury their dead, and not
to burn the corpses. The description of the burier as mesârēph (a
burner) therefore supposes the occurrence of such a multitude of deaths
that it is impossible to bury the dead, whose corpses are obliged to be
burned, for the purpose of preventing the air from being polluted by the
decomposition of the corpses. Of course the burning did not take place
at the house, as Hitzig erroneously infers from להוציא עצמים; for עצמים
denotes the corpse here, as in [Exo
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019); [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032), and [Kg2
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021), and not the different bones of
the dead which remained without decomposition or burning. The burier now
asks the last living person in the house, who has gone to the very back
of the house in order to save his life, whether there is any one still
with him, any one still living in the house beside himself, and receives
the answer, אפס (Adv.), "Nothing more;" whereupon he says to him, has,
"Be still," answering to our Hush! because he is afraid that, if he goes
on speaking, he may invoke the name of God, or pray for the mercy of
God; and he explains his words by adding, "The name of Jehovah must not
be mentioned." It is not Amos who adds this explanation, but the
relation. Nor does it contain "the words of one who despairs of any
better future, and whose mind is oppressed by the weight of the existing
evils, as if he said, Prayers would be of no use, for we too must die"
(Lievl., Ros.). לא להזכּיר, "it is not to (may not) be mentioned," would
be unsuitable as an utterance of despair. It rather indicates the fear
lest, by the invocation of the name of God, the eye of God should be
drawn towards this last remaining one, and he also should fall a victim
to the judgment of death. This judgment the Lord accomplishes not merely
by a pestilence which breaks out during the siege, and rages all around
(there is no ground for any such limitation of the words), but also by
sword and plague during the siege and conquest of the town. For the
reason assigned for the threat in [Amo
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011) points to the latter. כּי links
the words to the main thought in [Amo
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011), or even [Amo
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#010): "When the Lord delivers up the
city and all that fills it, they will all perish; for, behold, He
commands, orders the enemy (the nation in [Amo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014)), and it will smite in pieces the
houses, great and small." The singular הבּית is used with indefinite
generality: every house, great and small (cf. [Amo
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015)).

[Amos 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 6:12</span></span>

This judgment also, they, with their perversion of all right, will be
unable to avert by their foolish trust in their own power. [Amo
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012). "Do horses indeed run upon the
rock, or do men plough (there) with oxen, that ye turn justice into
poison, and the fruit of the righteousness into wormwood? [Amo
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#013). They who rejoice over what is
worthless, who say: with our strength we make ourselves horns! [Amo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014). For, behold, I raise over you, O
house of Israel, is the saying of Jehovah, the God of hosts, a nation;
and they will oppress you from the territory of Hamath to the brook of
the desert." To explain the threat in [Amo
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011), Amos now calls attention in [Amo
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012), under two different similes, to
the perversity with which the haughty magnates of Israel, who turn right
into bitter wrong, imagine that they can offer a successful resistance,
or bid defiance with their own strength to the enemy, whom the Lord will
raise up as the executor of His judgment. The perversion of right into
its opposite can no more bring salvation than horses can run upon rocks,
or any one plough upon such a soil with oxen. In the second question
בּסּלע (on the rock) is to be repeated from the first, as the majority
of commentators suppose. But the two questions are not to be taken in
connection with the previous verse in the sense of "Ye will no more be
able to avert this destruction than horses can run upon rocks," etc.
(Chr. B. Mich.). They belong to what follows, and are meant to expose
the moral perversity of the unrighteous conduct of the wicked. For
הפכתּם וגו, see [Amo 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#007); and for
ראשׁ, [Hos 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004). The impartial
administration of justice is called the "fruit of righteousness," on
account of the figurative use of the terms darnel and wormwood. These
great men, however, rejoice thereby in לא דבר, "a nothing," or a thing
which has no existence. What the prophet refers to may be seen from the
parallel clause, viz., their imaginary strength (chōzeq). They rested
this hope upon the might with which Jeroboam had smitten the Syrians,
and restored the ancient boundaries of the kingdom. From this might they
would take to themselves (lâqach, to take, not now for the first time to
create, or ask of God) the horns, to thrust down all their foes. Horns
are signs and symbols of power (cf. [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017); [Kg1
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011)); here they stand for the
military resources, with which they fancied that they could conquer
every foe. These delusions of God-forgetting pride the prophet casts
down, by saying that Jehovah the God of hosts will raise up a nation
against them, which will crush them down in the whole length and breadth
of the kingdom. This nation was Assyria. Kı̄ hinnēh (for behold) is
repeated from [Amo 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011); and the
threat in [Amo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014) is thereby
described as the resumption and confirmation of the threat expressed in
[Amo 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#011), although the kı̄ is
connected with the perversity condemned in [Amo
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#012), [Amo
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#013), of trusting in their own power.
Lâchats, to oppress, to crush down. On the expression לבוא חמת, as a
standing epithet for the northern boundary of the kingdom of Israel, see
[Num 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008). As the southern boundary we
have נחל הערבה instead of ים הערבה ([Kg2
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025)). This is not the willow-brook
mentioned in [Isa 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007), the present
Wady Sufsaf, or northern arm of the Wady el-Kerek (see Delitzsch on
Isaiah, l.c.), nor the Rhinokorura, the present el-Arish, which formed
the southern boundary of Canaan, because this is constantly called "the
brook of Egypt" (see at [Num 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#005);
[Jos 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#004)), but the present el-Ahsy
(Ahsa), the southern border river which separated Moab from Edom (see at
[Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 7](amo007)

</div>
