<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1010)  [Next](ch1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 11:0</span></span>

The Anointing of David to be King in Hebron, and the Conquest of
Jerusalem. A List of David's Heroes - 1 Chronicles 11

In the second book of Samuel there are passages parallel to both
sections of this chapter; [Ch1 11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)
corresponding to the narrative in [Sa2
5:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001), and vv. 10-47 to the register
in 2 Sam 23:8-39.

[1 Chronicles 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 11:1</span></span>

The anointing of David to be king over the whole of Israel in Hebron;
cf. [Sa2 5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001). - After Saul's death,
in obedience to a divine intimation, David left Ziklag, whither he had
withdrawn himself before the decisive battle between the Philistines and
the Israelites, and betook himself with his wives and his warriors to
Hebron, and was there anointed by the men of Judah to be king over their
tribe ([Sa2 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#001)). But Abner, the
captain of Saul's host, led Ishbosheth, Saul's son, with the remainder
of the defeated army of the Israelites, to Mahanaim in Gilead, and there
made him king over Gilead, and gradually also, as he reconquered it from
the Philistines, over the land of Israel, over Jezreel, Ephraim,
Benjamin, and all (the remainder of) Israel, with the exception of the
tribal domain of Judah. Ishbosheth's kingship did not last longer than
two years, while David reigned over Judah in Hebron for seven years and
a half ([Sa2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#010) and [Sa2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#011)). When Abner advanced with
Ishbosheth's army from Mahanaim against Gibeon, he was defeated by Joab,
David's captain, so that he was obliged again to withdraw beyond Jordan
(2 Sam 2:12-32); and although the struggle between the house of Saul and
the house of David still continued, yet the house of Saul waxed ever
weaker, while David's power increased. At length, when Ishbosheth
reproached the powerful Abner because of a concubine of his father's, he
threatened that he would transfer the crown of Israel to David, and
carried his threat into execution without delay. He imparted his design
to the elders of Israel and Benjamin; and when they had given their
consent, he made his way to Hebron, and announced to David the
submission of all Israel to his sway (2 Sam 3:1-21). Abner, indeed, did
not fully carry out the undertaking; for on his return journey he was
assassinated by Joab, without David's knowledge, and against his will.
Immediately afterwards, Ishbosheth, who had become powerless and
spiritless through terror at Abner's death, was murdered in his own
house by two of the leaders of his army. There now remained of Saul's
family only Jonathan's son Mephibosheth ([Sa2
4:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#001)), then not more than twelve
years old, and lame in both his feet, and all the tribes of Israel
determined to anoint David to be their king. The carrying out of this
resolution is narrated in [Ch1 11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001),
in complete agreement as to the facts with [Sa2
5:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001), where the matter has been
already commented upon. In ch. 12 23-40 there follows a more detailed
account of the assembly of the tribes of Israel in Hebron. The last
words in [Ch1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#003), וגו יהוה כּדבר,
are a didactic addition of the author of the Chronicle, which has been
derived from [Sa1 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013) and [Sa1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028). In [Sa2
5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#004), in accordance with the custom
of the author of the books of Samuel and Kings to state the age and
duration of the reign of each of the kings immediately after the
announcement of their entry upon their office, there follows after the
preceding a statement of the duration of David's reign; cf. [Sa1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001); [Sa2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#010)., [Kg1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021); [Kg1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#002), etc. This remark is to be found
in the Chronicle only at the close of David's reign; see [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029), which shows that Thenius'
opinion that this verse has been omitted from the Chronicle by a mistake
is not tenable.

[1 Chronicles 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 11:4</span></span>

The capture of the citadel of Zion, and Jerusalem chosen to be the royal
residence under the name of the city of David; cf. [Sa2
5:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006), and the commentary on this
section at that place. - יחיּה, [Ch1
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#008), to make alive, is used here, as
in [Neh 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#002), of the rebuilding of
ruins. The general remark, [Ch1 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#009),
"and David increased continually in might," etc., opens the way for the
transition to the history of David's reign which follows. As a proof of
his increasing greatness, there follows in

[1 Chronicles 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch1 11:10</span></span>

A register of the heroes who stood by him in the establishment of his
kingdom. The greater part of this register is found in 2 Sam 23:8-39
also, though there are many divergences in the names, which for the most
part have found their way into one or other of the texts by errors of
transcription. The conclusion ([Ch1
11:41-47](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#041) of the Chronicle) is not
found in 2 Sam 23, either because the author of the Chronicle followed
another and older register than that used by the author of the book of
Samuel, or because the latter has not communicated all the names
contained in his authority. The former of these is the more probable
supposition. In the Chronicle the superscription of the register is
enlarged by the insertion in [Ch1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#010), before the simple
superscription in [Ch1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011), cf. [Sa2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008), of a further superscription
informing us of the design which the chronicler had in introducing the
register at this place. "These are the chiefs of David's heroes who
stood by him strongly (עם התחזּק, as [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)) in his kingdom, with the whole
of Israel to make him king, according to the word of Jahve, over
Israel." The collocation הגּבּרים ראשׁי is accounted for by the fact
that הגּבּור is a designation of a valiant or heroic man in general,
without reference to his position, whether co-ordinate with or
subordinate to others. Among David's גּבּרים who helped to establish his
kingdom, are not merely those who are mentioned by name in the following
register, but also, as we learn from 1 Chron 12, the great number of
valiant men of all the tribes, who, even during his persecution by Saul,
crowded round him, and immediately after Saul's death came to him in
Hebron to hail him king. The enumeration in our passage contains only
the chiefs, ראשׁים, of those valiant men, i.e., those who held the first
rank among them, and who were in great part leaders in the army of
David, or became so. להמליכו is not to be confined to the mere
appointment to the kingship, but includes also his establishment in it;
for there follows an account of the heroic deeds which the men
enumerated by name performed in the wars which David waged against his
enemies in order to maintain and increase his kingly power. יהוה דּבר
יהוה .rewop concerning Israel is the word of the Lord, the import of
which is recorded in [Ch1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#003), that
David should feed His people Israel, and be ruler over them. The
ipsissima verba are not found in the earlier history of David, but the
substance of them has been deduced from [Sa1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013) and [Sa1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028); cf. herewith the remarks on
[Sa2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#018). The enumeration of these
heroes is introduced in [Ch1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011) by
a short supplementary superscription, "these the number of the heroes."
That מספּר should be used instead of the שׁמות of Samuel is surprising,
but is explained by the fact that these heroes at first constituted a
corps whose designation was derived from their number. They originally
amounted to thirty, whence they are still called the thirty, השּׁלשׁים;
cf. [Ch1 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#012), and the discussion on
[Sa2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008). In both narratives three
classes are distinguished.

Jashobeam, Eleazar, and Shammah hold the first place, and specially bold
and heroic deeds performed by them are recorded, [Ch1
11:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011), and [Sa2
23:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008). For details as to themselves
and their deeds, see on the last cited passage. There we have already
remarked, that in [Ch1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013) of the
text of the Chronicle, the three lines which in Samuel come between שׁם
נאספוּ בּפּלשׁתּים ([Sa2 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#009)) and
פלשׁתּים ויּעספוּ, [Ch1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011), have
been, through wandering of the copyist's eye, omitted; and with them the
name of the third hero, שׁמּה, has also been dropped, so that the heroic
deed done by him, [Ch1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013), [Ch1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#014), appears, according to our
present text, to have been performed by Eleazar. In place of the words,
"And the Philistines had gathered themselves together there to battle,
and there was a parcel of ground full of barley," [Ch1
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013), the text, according to the
narrative in [Sa2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011), must have
stood originally thus: "The Philistines had gathered themselves together
there to battle, and the men of Israel went up (sc., retreating from the
Philistines up the mountain); he, however, stood firm, and smote the
Philistines till his hand was wearied, and cleaved unto the sword (i.e.,
clung crampedly to his sword through fatigue): there wrought Jahve a
great deliverance on that day, and the people returned (from their
flight) behind him only to spoil. And after him was Shammah the son of
Aga the Hararite, and the Philistines had gathered themselves together
to battle," etc. In [Ch1 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#014) the
plural forms יתיצּבוּ, ויּצּילוּה, ויּכּוּ, are incorrect, and should be
changed into singulars, as in [Sa2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#012), since only the deed of the hero
Shammah is here spoken of. The plurals were probably introduced into the
text after the missing lines had been dropped out by a reader or
copyist, who, on account of the דּייד עם היה הוּא ([Ch1
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013)), understood the three clauses
of [Ch1 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#014) to refer to Eleazar and
David. ויּושׁע, on the contrary, is here perfectly appropriate, and is
not to be altered to suit the ויּעשׂ of Samuel, [Ch1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#014), for the καὶ ἐποίησε of the lxx
is not of itself a sufficient reason for doing so.

[1 Chronicles 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch1 11:15</span></span>

In [Ch1 11:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015) (cf. [Sa2
23:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013)) there follows an exploit of
three others of the thirty, whose names have not been handed down. ראשׁ
השּׁלושׁים, the thirty chiefs (not, as Thenius wrongly interprets the
words, these three knights the chief parts, i.e., these three chief
knights), are David's heroes hereafter mentioned, the thirty-two heroes
of the third class named in [Ch1
11:26-40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#026) (or vv. 24-39 of Samuel).
That three others, different from the before-mentioned Jashobeam,
Eleazar, and Shammah are intended, is plain from the omission of the
article with שׁלושׁה; for if these three were spoken of, we would have
השׁלושׁה, as in [Ch1 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#018). For
further remarks on this exploit, which was probably performed in the war
treated of in [Ch1 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#008)., and in [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)., see on [Sa2
23:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013). The words וגו האנשׁים הדם,
[Ch1 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#019), are to be translated, "The
blood of these men shall I drink in their souls? for for their souls
(i.e., for the price of their souls, at the risk of their life) have
they brought it." The expression "blood in their souls" is to be
understood according to [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004) and
[Lev 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014) (הוּא בנפשׁו דּמו, "his
blood is in the soul," is that which constitutes his soul). As there
blood and soul are used synonymously (the blood as seat of and container
of the soul, and the soul as floating in the blood), so here David,
according to our account of his words, compares the water, which those
heroes had brought for the price of their souls, to the souls of the
men, and the drinking of the water to the drinking of their souls, and
finally the souls to the blood, in order to express his abhorrence of
such a draught. The meaning therefore may be thus expressed: "Shall I
drink in this water the souls, and so the blood, of these men; for they
have brought the water even for the price of their souls?"

[1 Chronicles 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch1 11:20</span></span>

In [Ch1 11:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020) the second class of
heroes, to which Abshai (Abishai) and Benaiah belonged, cf. [Sa2
23:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018), is spoken of. They were not
equal to the preceding three in heroic deeds, but yet stood higher than
the list of heroes which follows in [Ch1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#026) and onwards. אבשׁי, as [Ch1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#016) and [Sa2
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#010), while in [Sa2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018) and elsewhere he is called
אבישׁי, was one of the three sons of Zeruiah ([Ch1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#016)). It is difficult to explain
השׁלושׁה ראשׁ, "he was the chief of the three," instead of which we find
in [Sa2 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023) השׁלשׁי, i.e., השּׁלשׁי,
"chief of the body-guard" (knights). But owing to the succeeding שׁם
(ולו) בּשּׁלושׁה ולא, where Samuel also has בּשּׁלשׁה, and to the
recurrence of השׁלושׁה on two occasions in [Ch1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021) (cf. 2 [Sa2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#019)), it does not seem possible to
alter the text with Thenius. Bertheau proposes to get rid of the
difficulty by taking the word שׁלושׁה in two different significations-on
the one hand as denoting the numeral three, and on the other as being an
abstract substantive, "the totality of the thirty." He justifies the
latter signification by comparison of [Ch1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021) with [Ch1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#025), and of [Sa2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#019) with [Ch1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#023), from which he deduces that
שׁלושׁה and שׁלושׁים denote a larger company, in which both Abishai and
Benaiah held a prominent place. But this signification cannot be made
good from these passages. In both clauses of [Ch1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#025) (and [Sa2
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023)) השּׁלשׁים and השּׁלשׁה are
contrasted, which would rather go to prove the contrary of Bertheau's
proposition, viz., that השּׁלשׁה, the three, cannot at the same time
denote the whole of the thirty, השּׁלשׁים. The truth of the matter may
be gathered from a comparison of [Ch1
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#018) with [Ch1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015). In [Ch1
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#018) השּׁלשׁה is synonymous with
השּׁלושׁים מן השׁלושׁה, [Ch1 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015);
i.e., the three in [Ch1 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#018) are the
same men who in [Ch1 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015), where they
are first met with, are called three of the thirty; and consequently
השּׁלשׁה, the three (triad), [Ch1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021) and [Ch1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#025), can only denote the triad of
heroes previously named. This is placed beyond doubt by a comparison of
[Ch1 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#024) with [Ch1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#025), since the הגּבּרים שׁלושׁה, the
triad of heroes, [Ch1 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#024),
corresponds to the simple השּׁלשׁה of [Ch1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#025). The only remaining question is,
whether by this triad of heroes we are to understand those spoken of in
[Ch1 11:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011), - Jashobeam, Eleazar,
and Shammah, - or the three whose names are not given, but whose exploit
is narrated in [Ch1 11:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015). But the
circumstance that the names of the three latter are not mentioned goes
decidedly to show that השּׁלשׁה in [Ch1
11:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020) does not denote that nameless
triad, whose exploit is manifestly adduced incidentally only as a
similar case, but the three most valiant, who held the first rank among
David's heroes. Bertheau's opinion, that in [Ch1
11:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020) one triad of heroes is
distinguished from another, cannot be regarded as well-founded, for the
three of whom Abishai was chief are not distinguished, and are not
different from the three to whom, according to [Ch1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021), he did not attain. Nor is there
greater reason to believe that the triad of [Ch1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020) and [Ch1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021) is different from that in [Ch1
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#024) and [Ch1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#025), among whom Benaiah made himself
a name, and to whom he did not attain. The fact of being chief or prince
over the three is not irreconcilably contradictory to the statement that
he did not attain to them, i.e., did not come up to them in heroic
strength, as is shown by the two classes being connected in [Ch1
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021). As to the rank which the triad
held in the regular forces of David, we know nothing further than that
Jashobeam was, according to [Ch1 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#002),
leader of that part of the army which was on duty during the first
month. Eleazar the son of Dodo, and the Hararite Shammah the son of Aga,
are not mentioned anywhere but in our list. Abishai, on the contrary,
who had already distinguished himself by his audacious courage in
David's struggle with Saul ([Sa1
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#006).), conducted together with Joab
the war against Abner (2 Sam 2:24-3:30). Afterwards, in David's war with
the Ammonites, he was under Joab in command of the second half of the
host ([Sa2 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#010).); in the war against
Absalom he commanded a third part of the host ([Ch1
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#002).); and in the struggle with the
rebel Sheba he commanded the vanguard of the royal troops sent against
the rebel ([Ch1 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#006).); and in general
held, along with Joab the commander-in-chief, the first place among
David's captains. In this position he was chief of the three heroes
before mentioned, and their leader (שׂר), and among them had made
himself a name. ולא, [Ch1 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020), is an
orthographical error for ולו, as in fifteen other passages, according to
the Masora. See on [Exo 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010) and [Isa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009).

[1 Chronicles 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch1 11:21</span></span>

[Ch1 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#021) should be translated:
honoured before the three as two; i.e., doubly honoured-he became to
them prince, leader. With regard to בשּׁנים, which, as meaningless,
Bertheau would alter so as to make it correspond with הכי (Sam.), cf.
Ew. Lehrb. 269, b. For Benaiah and his exploits, [Ch1
11:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#022), see the commentary on [Sa2
23:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020).

No special deeds of the heroes enumerated in vv. 26-47 are related, so
that we may regard them as a third class, who are not equal to the first
triad, and to the second pair, Abishai and Benaiah, and consequently
occupied a subordinate place in the collective body of the royal
body-guards. In 2 Sam 23 thirty-two names are mentioned, which, with the
above-mentioned three and two of the first and second classes, amount in
all to thirty-seven men, as is expressly remarked in [Sa2
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#039) at the conclusion. In the text
of the Chronicle no number is mentioned, and the register is increased
by sixteen names ([Ch1 11:41-47](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#041)),
which have been added in the course of time to the earlier number. The
words החילים וגבּורי, [Ch1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#026), are
to be regarded as a superscription: And valiant heroes were, etc.;
equivalent to, But besides there, there remain still the following
valiant heroes. The words החילים גּבּורי are not synonymous with החילים
שׂרי, leaders of the host, [Kg1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#020);
[Jer 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#007), (Berth.), but signify
heroes in warlike strength, i.e., heroic warriors, like חילים גּבּורי
([Ch1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#005), [Ch1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#007),[Ch1
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#011), [Ch1
7:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#040)). That חילים has here the
article, while it is not found in the passages quoted from the seventh
chapter, does not make any difference in the meaning of the words. The
article is used, here, as with הגּבּורים, [Ch1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#010), [Ch1
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011), because the heroes of David are
spoken of, and לדויד אשׁר is to be mentally supplied from [Ch1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#010). As to the names in vv. 26-41,
which are also found in the register in the book of Samuel, see the
commentary to 2 Sam 23:24-39. This list, which is common to both books,
begins with Asahel, a brother of Joab, who was slain by Abner in the war
which he waged against David ([Sa2
2:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#019)), and concludes in the book of
Samuel with Uriah the Hittite, so well known from [Sa2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#003). ([Ch1
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#041)), with whose wife David
committed adultery. But to the continuation of the register which is
found in [Ch1 11:41-47](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#041) of our text,
there is no parallel in the other writings of the Old Testament by which
we might form an idea as to the correctness of the names. The individual
names are indeed to be met with, for the most part, in other parts of
the Old Testament, but denote other men of an earlier or later time. The
names ידיעאל, [Ch1 11:45](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#045), and אליאל,
[Ch1 11:46](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#046)., are found also in [Ch1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#020), [Ch1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#011), among those of the valiant men
who before Saul's death went over to David, but we cannot with any
certainty ascertain whether the persons meant were the same. The
expression שׁלשׁים ועליו ([Ch1 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#042))
is also obscure, - "and to him in addition," i.e., together with him,
thirty, - since the thought that with Adina the chief of the Reubenites,
or besides him, there were thirty (men), has no meaning in this
register. The lxx and the Vulgate read עליו, while the Syriac, on the
contrary, makes use of the periphrasis, "And even he was a ruler over
thirty heroes;" and Bertheau accordingly recommends the emendation
השּׁלשׁים על, and thence concludes that the tribe of Reuben had thirty
leaders in its army-a conjecture as bold as it is improbable. Were
השּׁלשׁים על to be read, we could not but refer the words to the thirty
heroes of [Ch1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011), and hold Adina
to be their leader, which could not be easily reconciled with [Ch1
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011). See on [Ch1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#004).

[1 Chronicles 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">ch1 11:43</span></span>

בּן־מעכה is perhaps the same as המּעכתי, [Sa2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#034).

[1 Chronicles 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">ch1 11:44</span></span>

העשׁתּרתי, he of the city Ashtaroth ([Ch1
6:56](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#056)), in the trans-Jordanic domain of
Manasseh. הערערי, he of Aroer, or Reuben or Gad ([Jos
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#016), [Jos
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025)).

[1 Chronicles 11:46](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">ch1 11:46</span></span>

Bertheau conjectures that the somewhat strange המּחוים (lxx ὁ Μαωί,
Vulg. Mahumites) denotes המּחנימי, he of Mahanaim, in the East-Jordan
land; see [Jos 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#026).

[1 Chronicles 11:47](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">ch1 11:47</span></span>

המּצביה, which, so far as the form is concerned, is not a nomen gentil.,
Reland (Palaest. ill. p. 899) holds for a contraction of צבעויא מגדל,
Migdal Zebujah-a place which, according to the rabbins, is said to have
been somewhere in the neighbourhood of Hebron. Bertheau's opinion is,
that the article has come into the text by mistake; and when it has been
struck out, the remaining consonants, מצביה, recall the מצּבה of [Sa2
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#036) (?).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 12](ch1012)

</div>
