<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1009)  [Next](ch1011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 10:0</span></span>

II\. The History of David's Kingship - 1 Chronicles 10-29.

The account of the ruin of Saul and his house in [Ch1
10:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001), cf. 1 Sam, forms the
introduction to the history of the kingship of David, which is narrated
in two sections. In the first, 1 Chron 11-21, we have a consecutive
narrative of the most important events of David's life, and his attempts
to settle the kingship of Israel on a firmer basis, from the time of his
being anointed king over all Israel to the numbering of the people in
the latter years of his reign. The second, 1 Chron 22-29, contains an
account of the preparations made towards the end of his reign for the
building of the temple, of the arrangement of the service of the Levites
and the army, and the last commands of the grey-haired king as to the
succession of his son Solomon to the kingdom, and matters connected with
it. The first section runs parallel to the account of the reign of David
in 2 Samuel; the second is peculiar to the Chronicle, and has no
parallel in the earlier historical books, Samuel and Kings. Now, if we
compare the first section with the parallel narrative in 2 Samuel, it is
manifest that, apart from that omission of David's seven years' reign
over the tribe of Judah in Hebron, and of all the events having
reference to and connection with his family relationships, of which we
have already spoken, in the Chronicle the same incidents are recounted
as in the second book of Samuel, and with few exceptions the order is
the same. The main alterations in the order of the narrative are: (a)
that the catalogues of David's heroes who helped him to establish his
kingdom (1 Chron 11:10-47), and of the valiant men of all the tribes,
who even in Saul's lifetime had joined themselves to David (1 Chron 12),
follow immediately upon the account of the choosing of Jerusalem to be
the capital of the kingdom, after the conquest of the fortress Jebus
([Ch1 11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)), while in 2 Samuel the
former of these catalogues is found in 2 Sam 23:8-39, in connection with
the history of his reign, and the latter is entirely omitted; and (b)
the account of his palace-building, his wives and children, and of some
battles with the Philistines, which in [Sa2
5:11-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011) follows immediately after the
account of the conquest of the citadel of Zion, is inserted in the
fourteenth chapter of Chronicles, in the account of the bringing of the
ark of the covenant from Kirjath-jearim ([Ch1
13:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#001)), and its transfer to
Jerusalem (1 Chron 15). Both these transpositions and the
before-mentioned omissions are connected with the peculiar plan of the
Chronicle. In the second book of Samuel the reign of David is so
described as to bring out, in the first place, the splendidly victorious
development of his kingship, and then its humiliation through great
transgression on David's part; the author of the Chronicle, on the other
hand, designed to portray to his contemporaries the glories of the
Davidic kingship, so that the divine election of David to be ruler over
the people of Israel might be manifest. In accordance with this purpose
he shows, firstly, how after the death of Saul Jahve bestowed the
kingship upon David, all Israel coming to Hebron and anointing him king,
with the confession, "Jahve thy God hath said to thee, Thou shalt be
ruler over my people Israel;" how the heroes of the whole nation helped
him in the establishing of his kingdom (1 Chron 11); and how, even
before the death of Saul, the most valiant men of all the tribes had
gone over to him, and had helped him in the struggle (1 Chron 12). In
the second place, he narrates how David immediately determined to bring
the ark into the capital of his kingdom (1 Chron 15); how,
notwithstanding the misfortunes caused by a transgression of the law
([Ch1 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#007), [Ch1
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#009).), so soon as he had learned that
the ark would bring a blessing ([Ch1
13:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#001), 14), and that God would bless
him in his reign (1 Chron 14), he carried out his purpose, and not only
brought the ark to Jerusalem, but organized the public worship around
this sanctuary (1 Chron 15 and 16); and how he formed a resolution to
build a temple to the Lord, receiving from God, because of this, a
promise that his kingdom should endure for ever (1 Chron 17). Then, in
the third place, we have an account of how he, so favoured by the Lord,
extended the power of his kingdom by victorious wars over all the
enemies of Israel (1 Chron 18-20); and how even the ungodly enterprise
of the numbering of the people, to which Satan had tempted him, David,
had by the grace of God, and through his penitent submission to the will
of the Lord, such an issue, that the place where the Lord should be
thereafter worshipped in Israel was determined by the appearance of the
angel and by the word of the prophet Gad (1 Chron 21). And so the
grey-haired king was able to spend the latter part of his reign in
making preparations for the building of the temple, and in establishing
permanent ordinances for the public worship, and the protection of the
kingdom: gave over to his son Solomon, his divinely chosen successor on
the throne, a kingdom externally and internally well ordered and firmly
established, and closed his life at a good old age, after a reign of
forty years (1 Chron. 22-29).

[1 Chronicles 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 10:1</span></span>

In 1 Sam this narrative forms the conclusion of Saul's last war with the
Philistines. The battle was fought on the plain of Jezreel; and when the
Israelites were compelled to retire, they fell back upon Mount Gilboa,
but were hard pressed by the Philistines, so that many fell upon the
mountain. The Philistines pressed furiously after Saul and his sons, and
slew the latter (as to Saul's sons, see on [Ch1
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033)); and when the archers came upon
Saul he trembled before them (יחל from חוּל), and ordered his
armour-bearer to thrust him through. Between המּורים and בּקּשׁת the
superfluous אנשׁים is introduced in Samuel, and in the last clause מאד
is omitted; and instead of מהמּורים we have the unusual form מן־היּורים
(cf. [Ch2 35:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#023)). In Saul's request to
his armour-bearer that he would thrust him through with the sword,
וּדקרני ([Sa1 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#004)) is omitted in the
phrase which gives the reason for his request; and Bertheau thinks it
did not originally stand in the text, and has been repeated merely by an
oversight, since the only motive for the command, "Draw thy sword, and
thrust me through therewith," was that the Philistines might not insult
Saul when alive, and consequently the words, "that they may not thrust
me through," cannot express the reason. But that is scarcely a
conclusive reason for this belief; for although the Philistines might
seek out Saul after he had been slain by his armour-bearer, and
dishonour his dead body, yet the anxiety lest they should seek out his
corpse to wreak their vengeance upon it could not press so heavily upon
him as the fear that they would take vengeance upon him if he fell alive
into their hands. It is therefore a more probable supposition that the
author of the Chronicle has omitted the word וּדקרני only as not being
necessary to the sense of the passage, just as עמּו is omitted at the
end of [Ch1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#005). In [Ch1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#006) we have וכל־בּיתו instead of the
כּל־אנשׁיו גּם כליו ונשׂא of Samuel, and in [Ch1
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#007) ישׂראל אנשׁי is omitted after the
words נסוּ כּי (Samuel). From this Bertheau concludes that the author of
the Chronicle has designedly avoided speaking of the men of Saul's army
or of the Israelites who took part in the battle, because it was not his
purpose to describe the whole course of the conflict, but only to
narrate the death of Saul and of his sons, in order to point out how the
supreme power came to David. Thenius, on the contrary, deduces the
variation between the sixth verse of the Chronicles and the
corresponding verse in Samuel from "a text which had become illegible."
Both are incorrect; for כּל־אנשׁיו are not all the men of war who went
with him into the battle (Then.), or all the Israelites who took part in
the battle (Berth.), but only all those who were about the king, i.e.,
the whole of the king's attendants who had followed him to the war.
כּל־בּיתו is only another expression for כּל־אנשׁיו, in which the כּליו
נשׂא is included. The author of the Chronicle has merely abridged the
account, confining himself to a statement of the main points, and has
consequently both omitted ישׂראל אנשׁי in [Ch1
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#007), because he had already spoken of
the flight of the warriors of Israel in [Ch1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001), and it was here sufficient to
mention only the flight and death of Saul and of his sons, and has also
shortened the more exact statement as to the inhabitants of that
district, "those on the other side of the valley and on the other side
of Jordan" (Samuel), into בּאמק אשׁר. In this abridgement also Thenius
scents a "defective text." As the inhabitants of the district around
Gilboa abandoned their cities, they were taken possession of by the
Philistines.

[1 Chronicles 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch1 10:8</span></span>

On the following day the Philistines, in their search among the fallen,
found and plundered the bodies of Saul and of his sons, and sent the
head and the armour of Saul round about the land of the Philistines, to
proclaim the news of their victory to their people and their gods. That
for this purpose they cut off Saul's head from the trunk, is, as being a
matter of course, not specially mentioned. In regard to the other
discrepancies between the two texts, both in [Ch1
10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#008) and in the account of the
burial of Saul and of his sons by valiant men of Jabesh, [Ch1
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#011), [Ch1
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#012), cf. the commentary on [Sa1
31:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#008). In the reflection on Saul's
death, [Ch1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#013) and [Ch1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014), a double transgression against
the Lord on Saul's part is mentioned: first, the מעל (on the meaning of
this word, vide on [Lev 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015)) of not
observing the word of Jahve, which refers to the transgression of the
divine command made known to him by the prophet Samuel, [Sa1
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#008). (cf. with [Ch1
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#008)), and [Sa1
15:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#002), [Sa1
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011), cf. [Sa1
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#018); and second, his inquiring of
the אוב, the summoner of the dead (vide on [Lev
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031)), לדרושׁ, i.e., to receive an
oracle (cf. in reference to both word and thing, [Sa1
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007)).

[1 Chronicles 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 10:14</span></span>

And because he inquired not of the Lord, therefore He slew him.
According to [Sa1 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#006), Saul did
indeed inquire of Jahve, but received no answer, because Jahve had
departed from him ([Sa1 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015)); but
instead of seeking with all earnestness for the grace of Jahve, that he
might receive an answer, Saul turned to the sorceress of Endor, and
received his death-sentence through her from the mouth of Samuel, [Sa1
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#019).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 11](ch1011)

</div>
