<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](kg2025)  [Next](ch1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 0:0</span></span>

Introduction to the Hagiographic Historical Books of the Old Testament

Besides the prophetico-historic writings - Joshua, Judges, Samuel, and
Kings - which describe from a prophetic point of view the development of
the kingdom of God established by means of the mediatorial office of
Moses, from the time of the bringing of the tribes of Israel into the
land promised to the fathers till the Babylonian exile, the Old
Testament contains five historical books - Ruth, Chronicles, Ezra,
Nehemiah, and Esther. These latter stand in the Hebrew canon among the
כּתוּבים, i.e., in the hagiography, and are at once distinguished from
the above-mentioned prophetico-historic writings by this characteristic,
that they treat only of single parts of the history of the covenant
people from individual points of view. The book of Ruth gives a charming
historical picture from the life of the ancestors of King David. The
Chronicles, indeed, extend over a very long period of the historical
development of the Israelite kingdom of God, embrace the history from
the death of King Saul till the Babylonian exile, and go back in the
genealogies which precede the narrative of the history to Adam, the
father of the human race; yet neither in the genealogical part do they
give a perfect review of the genealogical ramifications of the twelve
tribes of the covenant people, nor in their historical portion contain
the history of the whole people from the death of Saul till the exile.
Besides the tables of the first progenitors of humanity and the tribal
ancestors of the people of Israel, borrowed from Genesis, the
genealogical part contains only a collection of genealogical and
topographical fragments differing in plan, execution, and extent,
relating to the chief families of the most prominent tribes and their
dwelling-places. The historical part contains, certainly, historical
sketches from the history of all Israel during the reigns of the kings
David and Solomon; but from the division of the kingdom, after the death
of Solomon, they contain only the history of the kingdom of Judah, with
special reference to the Levitical worship, to the exclusion of the
history of the kingdom of the ten tribes. From a comparison of the
manner of representing the history in the Chronicles with that in the
books of Samuel and the Kings, we can clearly see that the chronicler
did not purpose to portray the development of the Israelitic theocracy
in general, nor the facts and events which conditioned and constituted
that development objectively, according to their general course. He has,
on the contrary, so connected the historical facts with the attitude of
the kings and the people to the Lord, and to His law, that they teach
how the Lord rewarded fidelity to His covenant with blessing and success
both to people and kingdom, but punished with calamity and judgments
every faithless revolt from His covenant ordinances. Now since Israel,
as the people and congregation of Jahve, could openly show its adherence
to the covenant only by faithful observance of the covenant laws,
particularly of the ordinances for worship, the author of the Chronicles
has kept this side of the life of the people especially in view, in
order that he might hold up before his contemporaries as a mirror the
attitude of the fathers to the God-appointed dwelling-place of His
gracious presence in the holy place of the congregation. He does this,
that they might behold how the faithful maintenance of communion with
the covenant God in His temple would assure to them the fulfilment of
the gracious promises of the covenant, and how falling away into
idolatry, on the contrary, would bring misfortune and destruction. This
special reference to the worship meets us also in the books of Ezra and
Nehemiah, which describe the deliverance of the Jews from exile, and
their restoration as the covenant people in the land of their fathers.
The book of Ezra narrates, on the one hand, the return out of the
Babylonian exile into the land of their fathers of a great part of the
Jews who had been led away by Nebuchadnezzar, - partly in the first year
of the reign of Cyrus over Babylon, with Zerubbabel, a prince of the
royal race of David, and Joshua the high priest as leaders; partly at a
later period with the scribe Ezra, under Artaxerxes. On the other hand,
it relates the restoration of the altar of burnt-offering, and of the
divine service; together with the re-erection of the temple, and the
effort of Ezra to regulate the affairs of the community according to the
precepts of the Mosaic law, by doing away with the illegal marriages
with heathen women. And Nehemiah describes in his book what he had
accomplished in the direction of giving a firm foundation to the civil
welfare of the newly-founded community in Judah: in the first place, by
building the walls of Jerusalem so as to defend the city and holy place
against the attacks and surprises of the hostile peoples in the
neighbourhood; and secondly, by various measures for the strengthening
of the capital by increasing the number of its inhabitants, and for the
more exact modelling of the civil, moral, and religious life of the
community on the precepts of the law of Moses, in order to lay enduring
foundations for the prosperous development of the covenant people. In
the book of Esther, finally, it is recounted how the Jewish inhabitants
of the various parts of the great Persian kingdom were delivered by the
Jewess Esther (who had been raised to the position of queen by a
peculiar concatenation of circumstances) from the destruction which the
Grand Vizier Haman, in the reign of King Ahashverosh (i.e., Xerxes), had
determined upon, on account of the refusal of adoration by the Jew
Mordecai.

Now, if we look somewhat more narrowly at the relation of these five
historical books to the prophetico-historic writings, more especially in
the first place in reference to their contents, we see that the books of
Ruth and the Chronicles furnish us with not unimportant additions to the
books of Samuel and Kings. The book of Ruth introduces us into the
family life of the ancestors of King David, and shows the life-spring
from which proceeded the man after God's own heart, whom God called from
being a shepherd of sheep to be the shepherd of His people, that He
might deliver Israel out of the power of his enemies, and found a
kingdom, which received the promise of eternal duration, and which was
to be established to all eternity through Christ the Son of David and
the Son of God. The Chronicles supplement the history of the covenant
people, principally during the period of the kings, by detailed accounts
of the form of the public worship of the congregation; from which we see
how, in spite of the continual inclination of the people to idolatry,
and to the worship of heathen gods, the service in the temple, according
to the law, was the spiritual centre about which the pious in Israel
crowded, to worship the Lord their God, and to serve Him by sacrifice.
We see, too, how this holy place formed throughout a lengthened period a
mighty bulwark, which prevented moral and religious decay from gaining
the upper hand, until at length, through the godless conduct of the
kings Asa and Manasseh, the holy place itself was profaned by the
idolatrous abomination, and judgment broke in upon the incorrigible race
in the destruction of Jerusalem and the temple, and the driving out of
Judah from the presence of the Lord. But the books of Ezra, Nehemiah,
and Esther are the only historical writings we possess concerning the
times of the restoration of the covenant people after their emancipation
from the captivity, and their return into the promised land; and even in
this respect they are very valuable component parts of the Old Testament
canon. The first two show how God the Lord fulfilled His promise, that
He would again receive His people into favour, and collect them out of
their dispersion among the heathen, if they should, in their misery
under the oppression of the heathen, come to a knowledge of their sins,
and turn unto Him; and how, after the expiry of the seventy years of the
Babylonian exile which had been prophesied, He opened up to them,
through Cyrus the king of Persia, their return into the land of their
fathers, and restored Jerusalem and the temple, that He might preserve
inviolate, and thereafter perfect, by the appearance of the promised
David who was to come, that gracious covenant which He had entered into
with their fathers. But the providence of God ruled also over the
members of the covenant people who had remained behind in heathen lands,
to preserve them from the ruin which had been prepared for them by the
heathen, in order that from among them also a remnant might be saved,
and become partakers of the salvation promised in Christ. To show this
by a great historical example is the aim of the book of Esther, and the
meaning of its reception into the canon of the Holy Scriptures of the
old covenant.

If, finally, we consider the style of historical writing found in these
five books, we can scarcely characterize it in its relation to the
prophetic books by a fitting word. The manner of writing history which
is prevalent in the hagiography has been, it is true, called the
national (volksthmlich) or annalistic, but by this name the peculiarity
of it has in no respect been correctly expressed. The narrative bears a
national impress only in the book of Esther, and relatively also in the
book of Ruth; but even between these two writings a great difference
exists. The narrative in Ruth ends with the genealogy of the ancestors
of King David; whereas in the book of Esther all reference to the
theocratic relation, any, even the religious contemplation of the
events, is wholly wanting. But the books of the Chronicles, Ezra, and
Nehemiah, have no national impress; in them, on the contrary, the
Levitico-priestly manner of viewing history prevails. Still less can the
hagiographic histories be called annalistic. The books of Ruth and
Esther follow definite aims, which clearly appear towards the end.
Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah contain, it is true, in the genealogical,
geographical, and historical registers, a mass of annalistic material;
but we find this also in the prophetico-historic works, and even in the
books of Moses. The only thing which is common to and characteristic of
the whole of the hagiographic historical books, is that the prophetic
contemplation of the course of history according to the divine plan of
salvation which unfolds itself in the events, either falls into the
background or is wanting altogether; while in its place individual
points of view appear which show themselves in the pursuit of
paraenetico-didactic aims, which have acted as a determining influence
on the selection and treatment of the historical facts, as the
introduction to the individual writings will show.

The Book of 1 Chronicles

Introduction

1\. Name, Contents, Plan, and Aim of the Chronicles.

The two books of the Chronicles originally formed one work, as their
plan at once makes manifest, and were received into the Hebrew canon as
such. Not only were they reckoned as one in the enumeration of the books
of the Old Testament (cf. Joseph. c. Apion, i. 8; Origen, in Euseb.
Hist. eccl. vi. 25; and Hieronym. Prolog. galeat.), but they were also
regarded by the Masorites as one single work, as we learn from a remark
of the Masora at the end of the Chronicle, that the verse [Ch1
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#025) is the middle of the book. The
division into two books originated with the Alexandrian translators
(lxx), and has been transmitted by the Latin translation of Hieronymus
(Vulgata) not only to all the later translations of the Bible, but also,
along with the division into chapters, into our versions of the Hebrew
Bible. The first book closes, [Ch1
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029)., with the end of the reign of
David, which formed a fitting epoch for the division of the work into
two books. The Hebrew name of this book in our Bible, by which it was
known even by Hieronymus, is הימים דברי, verba, or more correctly res
gestae dierum, events of the days, before which ceper is to be supplied
(cf. e.g., [Kg1 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#019), [Kg1
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#029); [Kg1
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#007), [Kg1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#023)).

Its full title therefore is, Book of the Events of the Time
(Zeitereignisse), corresponding to the annalistic work so often quoted
in our canonical books of Kings and Chronicles, the Book of the Events
of the Time (Chronicle) of the Kings of Israel and Judah. Instead of
this the lxx have chosen the name Baraleipo'mena, in order to mark more
exactly the relation of our work to the earlier historical books of the
Old Testament, as containing much historical information which is not to
be found in them. But the name is not used in the sense of supplementa,
- "fragments of other historical works," as Movers, die Bibl. Chron. S.
95, interprets it, - but in the signification "praetermissa;" because,
according to the explanation in the Synopsis script. sacr. in Athanasii
Opera, ii. p. 84, παραλειφθέντα πολλὰ ἐν ταῖς βασιλειαῖς (i.e., in the
books of Samuel and Kings) περιέχεται ἐν τούτοις, "many things passed
over in the Kings are contained in these." Likewise Isidorus, lib. vi.
Origin. c. i. p. 45: Paralipomenon graece dicitur, quod praetermissorum
vel reliquorum nos dicere possumus, quia ea quae in lege vel in Regum
libris vel omissa vel non plene relata sunt, in isto summatim et
breviter explicantur. This interpretation of the word παραλειπόμενα is
confirmed by Hieronymus, who, in his Epist. ad Paulin. (Opp. ti. i. ed.
Vallars, p. 279), says: Paralipomenon liber, id est instrumenti veteris
epitome tantus et talis est, ut absque illo, si quis scientiam
scripturarum sibi voluerit arrogare, seipsum irrideat; per singula
quippe nomina juncturasque verborum et praetermissae in Regum libris
tanguntur historiae et innumerabiles explicantur Evangelii quaestones.
He himself, however, suggested the name Chronicon, in order more clearly
to characterize both the contents of the work and at the same its
relation to the historical books from Gen 1 to 2 Kings; as he says in
Prolog. galeat.: הימים דברי, i.e., verba dierum, quod significantius
chronicon totius divinae historiae possumus appellare, qui liber apud
nos Paralipomenon primus et secundus inscribitur. Through Hieronymus the
name Chronicles came into use, and became the prevailing title.

Contents. - The Chronicles begin with genealogical registers of primeval
times, and of the tribes of Israel (1 Chron 1-9); then follow the
history of the reign of King David (1 Chron 10-29) and of King Solomon
(2 Chron 1-9); the narrative of the revolt of the ten tribes from the
kingdom of the house of David (2 Chron 10); the history of the kingdom
of Judah from Rehoboam to the ruin of the kingdom, its inhabitants being
led away into exile to Babylon (2 Chron 11-36:21); and at the close we
find the edict of Cyrus, which allowed the Jews to return into their
country ([Ch2 36:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022)). Each of the
two books, therefore, falls into two, and the whole work into four
divisions. If we examine these divisions more minutely, six groups can
be without difficulty recognised in the genealogical part (1 Chron 1-9).
These are: (1) The families of primeval and ancient times, from Adam to
the patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and his sons Edom and Israel, together
with the posterity of Edom (1 Chron 1); (2) the sons of Israel and the
families of Judah, with the sons and posterity of David (1 Chron
2-4:23); (3) the families of the tribe of Simeon, whose inheritance lay
within the tribal domain of Judah, and those of the trans-Jordanic
tribes Reuben and Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh (1 Chron
4:24-5:26); (4) the families of Levi, or of the priests and Levites,
with an account of the dwelling-places assigned to them (1 Chron 5:27-
[Ch1 6:66](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#066)); (5) the families of the
remaining tribes, viz., Issachar, Benjamin, Naphtali, the half-tribe of
Manasseh, Ephraim, and Asher (only Dan and Zebulun being omitted), with
the genealogy of the house of Saul (7, 8); and (6) a register of the
former inhabitants of Jerusalem (9:1-34), and a second enumeration of
the family of Saul, preparing us for the transition to the history of
the kingdom of Israel ([Ch1 9:35-44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#035)).
The history of David's kingship which follows is introduced by an
account of the ruin of Saul and his house ([Ch1
10:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#001)), and then the narrative falls
into two sections. (1) In the first we have David's election to be king
over all Israel, and the taking of the Jebusite fort in Jerusalem, which
was built upon Mount Zion ([Ch1
11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)); then a list of David's
heroes, and the valiant men out of all the tribes who made him king
(11:10-12:40); the removal of the ark to Jerusalem, the founding of his
house, and the establishment of the Levitical worship before the ark in
Zion (13-16); David's design to build a temple to the Lord (17); then
his wars (18-20); the numbering of the people, the pestilence which
followed, and the fixing of the place for the future temple (21). (2) In
the second section are related David's preparations for the building of
the temple (22); the numbering of the Levites, and the arrangement of
their service (23-26); the arrangement of the military service (27);
David's surrender of the kingdom to his son, and the close of his life
(28 and 29). The history of the reign of Solomon begins with his solemn
sacrifice at Gibeon, and some remarks on his wealth (2 Chron 1); then
follows the building of the temple, with the consecration of the
completed holy place (2 Chron 2-7). To these are added short aphoristic
accounts of the cities which Solomon built, the statute labour which he
exacted, the arrangement of the public worship, the voyage to Ophir, the
visit of the queen of Sheba, and of the might and glory of his kingdom,
closing with remarks on the length of his reign, and an account of his
death (2 Chron 8-9). The history of the kingdom of Judah beings with the
narrative of the revolt of the ten tribes from Rehoboam (2 Chron 10),
and then in 2 Chron 11-36 it flows on according to the succession of the
kings of Judah from Rehoboam to Zedekiah, the reigns of the individual
kings forming the sections of the narrative.

Plan and Aim. - From this general sketch of the contents of our history,
it will be already apparent that the author had not in view a general
history of the covenant people from the time of David to the Babylonian
exile, but purposed only to give an outline of the history of the
kingship of David and his successors, Solomon and the kings of the
kingdom of Judah to its fall. If, whoever, in order to define more
clearly the plan and purpose of the historical parts of our book in the
first place, we compare them with the representation given us of the
history of Israel in those times in the books of Samuel and Kings, we
can see that the chronicler has passed over much of the history. (a) He
has omitted, in the history of David, not only his seven years' reign at
Hebron over the tribe of Judah, and his conduct to the fallen King Saul
and to his house, especially towards Ishbosheth, Saul's son, who had
been set up as rival king by Abner (2 Sam 1-4 and [Sa2
9:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)), but in general has passed
over all the events referring to and connected with David's family
relations. He makes no mention, for instance, of the scene between David
and Michal ([Sa2 6:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#020)); the
adultery with Bathsheba, with its immediate and more distant results
([Sa2 11:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#002)); Amnon's outrage upon
Tamar, the slaying of Amnon by Absalom and his flight to the king of
Geshur, his return to Jerusalem, his rising against David, with its
issues, and the tumult of Sheba (2 Sam 13-20); and, finally, also omits
the thanksgiving psalm and the last words of David (2 Sam 22:1-23:7).
Then (b) in the history of Solomon there have been left unrecorded the
attempt of Adonijah to usurp the throne, with the anointing of Solomon
at Gihon, which it brought about; David's last command in reference to
Joab and Shimei; the punishment of these men and of Adonijah; Solomon's
marriage with Pharaoh's daughter (1 Kings 1:1-3:3); his wise judgment,
the catalogue of his officials, the description of his royal
magnificence and glory, and of his wisdom (1 Kings 3:16-5:14); the
building of the royal palace ([Kg1
7:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#001)); and Solomon's polygamy and
idolatry, with their immediate results (1 Kings 11:1-40). Finally, (c)
there is no reference to the history of the kingdom of Israel founded by
Jeroboam, or to the lives of the prophets Elijah and Elisha, which are
related in such detail in the books of Kings, while mention is made of
the kings of the kingdom of the ten tribes only in so far as they came
into hostile struggle or friendly union with the kingdom of Judah. But,
in compensation for these omissions, the author of the Chronicle has
brought together in his work a considerable number of facts and events
which are omitted in the books of Samuel and the Kings.

For example, in the history of David, he gives us the list of the
valiant men out of all the tribes who, partly before and partly after
the death of Saul, went over to David to help him in his struggle with
Saul and his house, and to bring the royal honour to him (1 Chron 12);
the detailed account of the participation of the Levites in the transfer
of the ark of the covenant to Jerusalem, and of the arrangements made by
David for worship around this sanctuary (1 Chron 15 and 16); and the
whole section concerning David's preparations for the building of the
temple, his arrangements for public worship, the regulation of the army,
and his last commands (1 Chron 22-29). Further, the history of the
kingdom of Judah from Rehoboam to Joram is narrated throughout at
greater length than in the books of Kings, and is considerably
supplemented by detailed accounts, not only of the work of the prophets
in Judah, of Shemaiah under Rehoboam ([Ch2
12:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005)), of Azariah and Hanani under
Asa ([Ch2 15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001); [Ch2
16:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007)), of Jehu son of Hanani,
Jehaziel, and Ebenezer son of Dodava, under Jehoshaphat ([Ch2
19:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#001); [Ch2
20:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#014) and [Ch2
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#037)), and concerning Elijah's letter
under Joram ([Ch2 21:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012)); but also
of the efforts of Rehoboam ([Ch2
11:5-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005)), Asa ([Ch2
14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#005)), and Jehoshaphat ([Ch2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#002), [Ch2
17:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#012)) to fortify the kingdom of
Asa to raise and vivify the Jahve-worship ([Ch2
15:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009)), of Jehoshaphat to purify the
administration of justice and increase the knowledge of the law ([Ch2
17:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007) and [Ch2
19:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#005)), of the wars of Abijah
against Jeroboam, and his victories (13:3-20), of Asa's war against the
Cushite Zerah ([Ch2 14:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008)), of
Jehoshaphat's conquest of the Ammonites and Moabites (20:1-30), and,
finally, also of the family relations of Rehoboam ([Ch2
11:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#018)), the wives and children of
Abijah ([Ch2 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#021)), and Joram's
brothers and his sickness ([Ch2 21:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002)
and [Ch2 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#018).). Of the succeeding
kings also various undertakings are reported which are not found in the
books of Kings. In this way we are informed of Joash's defection from
the Lord, and his fall into idolatry after the death of the high priest
Jehoiada ([Ch2 24:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#015)); how Amaziah
increased his military power ([Ch2
25:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005)), and worshipped idols ([Ch2
25:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014)); of Uzziah's victorious wars
against the Philistines and Arabs, and his fortress-building, etc. ([Ch2
26:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006)); of Jotham's
fortress-building, and his victory over the Ammonites ([Ch2
27:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#004)); of the increase of Hezekiah's
riches ([Ch2 32:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#027)); of Manasseh's
capture and removal to Babylon, and his return out of captivity ([Ch2
33:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011)). But the history of Hezekiah
and Josiah more especially is rendered more complete by special accounts
of reforms in worship, and of celebrations of the passover (29:3-31,
[Ch2 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#021), and [Ch2
35:2-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#002)); while we have only summary
notices of the godless conduct of Ahaz (2 Chron 28) and Manasseh ([Ch2
33:3-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#003)), of the campaign of
Sennacherib against Jerusalem and Judah, of Hezekiah's sickness and the
reception of the Babylonian embassy in Jerusalem (2 Chron 32, cf. 2
Kings 28:13-20, 19); as also of the reigns of the last kings, Jehoiakim,
Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah. From all this, it is clear that the author of
the Chronicle, as Bertheau expresses it, "has turned his attention to
those times especially in which Israel's religion had showed itself to
be a power dominating the people and their leaders, and bringing them
prosperity; and to those men who had endeavoured to give a more enduring
form to the arrangements for the service of God, and to restore the true
worship of Jahve; and to those events in the history of the worship so
intimately bound up with Jerusalem, which had important bearings."

This purpose appears much more clearly when we take into consideration
the narratives which are common to the Chronicle and the books of Samuel
and Kings, and observe the difference which is perceptible in the mode
of conception and representation in those parallel sections. For our
present purpose, however, those narratives in which the chronicler
supplements and completes the accounts given in the books of Samuel and
Kings by more exact and detailed information, or shortens them by the
omission of unimportant details, come less into consideration.

(Note: Additions are to be found, e.g., in the list of David's heroes,
[Ch1 11:42-47](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#042); in the history of the
building and consecration of Solomon's temple; in the enumeration of the
candlesticks, tables, and courts, [Ch2
4:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#006); in the notice of the copper
platform on which Solomon kneeled at prayer, [Ch2
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#012); and of the fire which fell
from heaven upon the burnt-offering, [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001). Also in the histories of the wars
they are met with, [Ch1 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#006), [Ch1
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#008),[Ch1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#023), cf. [Sa2
5:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008); [Sa2
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#021); [Ch1
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#008), [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012), cf. [Sa2
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#008), [Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013), etc. More may be found in my
Handbook of Introd. 139, 5. Abridgments by the rejection of unimportant
details are very frequent; e.g., omission of the Jebusites' mockery of
David's attack on their fortress, [Ch1
11:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#005), cf. [Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006), [Sa2
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008); of the details of the storming of
Rabbah, [Ch1 20:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001), cf. [Sa2
12:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#027); and of many more, vide my
Handbook of Introduction, 139, 8.)

For both additions and abridgments show only that the chronicler has not
drawn his information from the canonical books of Samuel and Kings, but
from other more circumstantial original documents which he had at his
command, and has used these sources independently. Much more important
for a knowledge of the plan of the Chronicle are the variations in the
parallel places between it and the other narrative; for in them the
point of view from which the chronicler regarded, and has described, the
events clearly appears. In the number of such passages is to be reckoned
the narrative of the transfer of the ark ([Ch1
13:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#001) and 15, cf. 2 Sam 6), where
the chronicler presents the fact in its religious import as the
beginning of the restoration of the worship of Jahve according to the
law, which had fallen into decay; while the author of the books of
Samuel describes it only in its political import, in its bearing on the
Davidic kingship. Of this character also is the narrative of the raising
of Joash to the throne (2 Chron 23, cf. 2 Kings 11), where the share of
the Levites in the completion of the work begun by the high priest
Jehoiada is prominently brought forward, while in Kings it is not
expressly mentioned. The whole account also of the reign of Hezekiah, as
well as other passages, belong to this category. Now from these and
other descriptions of the part the Levites played in events, and the
share they took in assisting the efforts of the pious kings to revivify
and maintain the temple worship, the conclusion has been rightly drawn
that the chronicler describes with special interest the fostering of the
Levitic worship according to the precepts of the law of Moses, and hold
it up to his contemporaries for earnest imitation; yet this has been too
often done in such a way as to cause this one element in the plans of
the Chronicle to be looked upon as its main object, which has led to a
very onesided conception of the character of the book. The chronicler
does not desire to bring honour to the Levites and to the temple
worship: his object is rather to draw from the history of the kingship
in Israel a proof that faithful adherence to the covenant which the Lord
had made with Israel brings happiness and blessing; the forsaking of it,
on the contrary, ensures ruin and a curse. But Israel could show its
faithfulness to the covenant only by walking according to the ordinances
of the law given by Moses, and in worshipping Jahve, the God of their
fathers, in His holy place in that way which He had established by the
ceremonial ordinances. The author of the Chronicle attaches importance
to the Levitic worship only because the fidelity of Israel to the
covenant manifested itself in the careful maintenance of it.

This point of view appears clearly in the selection and treatment of the
material drawn by our historian from older histories and prophetic
writings. His history begins with the death of Saul and the anointing of
David to be king over the whole of Israel, and confines itself, after
the division of the kingdom, to the history of the kingdom of Judah. In
the time of the judges especially, the Levitic worship had fallen more
and more into decay; and even Samuel had done nothing for it, or perhaps
could do nothing, and the ark remained during that whole period at a
distance from the tabernacle. Still less was done under Saul for the
restoration of the worship in the tabernacle; for "Saul died," as we
read in [Ch1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#013)., "for his
transgression which he had transgressed against the Lord;...and because
he inquired not of the Lord, therefore He slew him, and turned the
kingdom unto David the son of Jesse." After the death of Saul the elders
of all Israel came to David with the confession, "Jahve thy God said
unto thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel; and thou shalt be ruler
over my people Israel" ([Ch1 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#002)).
David's first care, after he had as king over all Israel conquered the
Jebusite hold on Mount Zion, and made Jerusalem the capital of the
kingdom, was to bring the ark from its obscurity into the city of David,
and to establish the sacrificial worship according to the law near that
sanctuary ([Ch1 11:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#005)). Shortly
afterwards he formed the resolution of building for the Lord a permanent
house (a temple), that He might dwell among His people, for which he
received from the Lord the promise of the establishment of his kingdom
for ever, although the execution of his design was denied to him, and
was committed to his son (1 Chron 17). Only after all this has been
related do we find narratives of David's wars and his victories over all
hostile peoples (1 Chron 18-20), of the numbering of the people, and the
pestilence, which, in consequence of the repentant resignation of David
to the will of the Lord, gave occasion to the determination of the place
for the erection of the temple (1 Chron 21). The second section of the
history of the Davidic kingship contains the preparations for the
building of the temple, and the laying down of more permanent
regulations for the ordering of the worship; and that which David had
prepared for, and so earnestly impressed upon his son Solomon at the
transfer of the crown, Solomon carried out. Immediately after the throne
had been secured to him, he took in hand the building of the temple; and
the account of this work fills the greater part of the history of his
reign, while the description of his kingly power and splendour and
wisdom, and of all the other undertakings which he carried out, is of
the shortest. When ten tribes revolted from the house of David after his
death, Rehoboam's design of bringing the rebellious people again under
his dominion by force of arms was checked by the prophet Shemaiah with
the words, "Thus saith the Lord, Ye shall not go up, nor fight against
your brethren, for this thing is done of me" ([Ch2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#004)). But in their revolt from the
house of David, which Jeroboam sought to perpetuate by the establishment
of an idolatrous national worship, Israel of the ten tribes had departed
from the covenant communion with Jahve; and on this ground, and on this
account, the history of that kingdom is no further noticed by the
chronicler. The priests and Levites came out of the whole Israelite
dominion to Judah and Jerusalem, because Jeroboam and his sons expelled
them from the priesthood. After them, from all the tribes of Israel came
those who gave their hearts to seek Jahve the God of Israel to Jerusalem
to sacrifice to Jahve the God of their fathers ([Ch2
11:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#013)), for "Jerusalem is the city
which Jahve has chosen out of all the tribes of Israel to put His name
there" ([Ch2 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013)). The priests,
Levites, and pious people who went over from Israel made the kingdom of
Judah strong, and confirmed Rehoboam's power, for they walked in the
ways of David and Solomon ([Ch2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#017)).

But when the kingdom of Rehoboam had been firmly established, he forsook
the law of Jahve, and all Israel with him ([Ch2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)). Then the Egyptian king Shishak
came up against Jerusalem, "because they had transgressed against the
Lord" ([Ch2 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#002)). The prophet
Shemaiah proclaimed the word of the Lord: "Ye have forsaken me, and
therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak" ([Ch2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005)). Yet when Rehoboam and the
princes of Israel humbled themselves, the anger of the Lord turned from
him, that He would not destroy him altogether ([Ch2
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#006), [Ch2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#012)). King Abijah reproaches
Jeroboam in his speech with his defection from Jahve, and concludes with
the words, "O children of Israel, fight not ye against the Lord God of
your fathers, for ye shall not prosper" ([Ch2
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012)); and when the men of Judah
cried unto the Lord in the battle, and the priests blew the trumpets,
then did God smite Jeroboam and all Israel ([Ch2
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#015)). "Thus the children of Israel
were brought under at that time, and the children of Judah prevailed,
because they relied upon the Lord God of their fathers" ([Ch2
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#018)). King Asa commanded his
subjects to seek Jahve the God of their fathers, and to do the law and
the commandments ([Ch2 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#003)). In the
war against the Cushites, he cried unto Jahve his God, "Help us, for we
rest on Thee;" and Jahve smote the Cushites before Judah ([Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010)). After this victory Asa and
Judah sacrificed unto the Lord of their spoil, and entered into a
covenant to seek Jahve the God of their fathers with all their heart,
and with all their soul. And the Lord was found of them, and the Lord
gave them rest round about ([Ch2
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#011).). But when Asa afterwards, in
the war against Baasha of Israel, made an alliance with the Syrian king
Benhadad, the prophet Hanani censured this act in the words, "Because
thou hast relied on the king of Syria, and hast not relied on Jahve thy
God, therefore has the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thy
hand... Herein thou hast done foolishly," etc. ([Ch2
16:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007)). Jehoshaphat became mighty
against Israel, and Jahve was with him; for he walked in the ways of his
father David, and sought not unto the Baals, but sought the God of his
father, and walked in His commandments, and not after the doings of
Israel. And Jahve established his kingdom in his hand, and he attained
to riches and great splendour ([Ch2
17:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#001)).

After this fashion does the chronicler show how God blessed the reigns
and prospered all the undertakings of all the kings of Judah who sought
the Lord and walked in His commandments; but at the same time also, how
every defection from the Lord brought with it misfortune and
chastisement. Under Joram of Judah, Edom and Libnah freed themselves
from the supremacy of Judah, "because Joram had forsaken Jahve the God
of his fathers" ([Ch2 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#010)). Because
Joram had walked in the ways of the kings of Israel, and had seduced the
inhabitants of Jerusalem to whoredom (i.e., idolatry), and had slain his
brothers, God punished him in the invasion of Judah by the Philistines
and Arabs, who stormed Jerusalem, took away with them all the furniture
of the royal palace, and took captive his sons and wives, while He smote
him besides with incurable disease ([Ch2
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#011)., [Ch2
21:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016)). Because of the visit which
Ahaziah made to Joram of Israel, when he lay sick of his wound at
Jezreel, the judgment was ([Ch2 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#007))
pronounced: "The destruction of Ahaziah was of God by his coming to
Joram." When Amaziah, after his victory over the Edomites, brought back
the gods of Seir and set them up for himself as gods, before whom he
worshipped, the anger of Jahve was kindled against him. In spite of the
warning of the prophets, he sought a quarrel with King Joash of Israel,
who likewise advised him to abandon his design. "But Amaziah would not
hear; for it was of God, that He might deliver them over, because they
had sought the gods of Edom" ([Ch2
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#020)). With this compare [Ch2
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#027) : "After the time that Amaziah
turned away from the following Jahve, they made a conspiracy against him
in Jerusalem." Of Uzziah it is said ([Ch2
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#005)), so long as he sought the Lord,
God made him to prosper, so that he conquered his enemies and became
very mighty. But when he was strong his heart was lifted up, so that he
transgressed against Jahve his God, by forcing his way into the temple
to offer incense; and for this he was smitten with leprosy. Of Jotham it
is said, in [Ch2 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#006), "He became
mighty, because he established his ways before Jahve his God."

From these and similar passages, which might easily be multiplied, we
clearly see that the chronicler had in view not only the Levitic
worship, but also and mainly the attitude of the people and their
princes to the Lord and to His law; and that it is from this point of
view that he has regarded and written the history of his people before
the exile. But it is also not less clear, from the quotations we have
made, in so far as they contain practical remarks of the historian, that
it was his purpose to hold up to his contemporaries as a mirror the
history of the past, in which they might see the consequences of their
own conduct towards the God of their fathers. He does not wish, as the
author of the books of Kings does, to narrate the events and facts
objectively, according to the course of history; but he connects the
facts and events with the conduct of the kings and people towards the
Lord, and strives to put the historical facts in such a light as to
teach that God rewards fidelity to His covenant with happiness and
blessing, and avenges faithless defection from it with punitive
judgments. Owing to this peculiarity, the historical narrative acquires
a hortative character, which gives occasion for the employment of a
highly rhetorical style. The hortative-rhetorical character impressed
upon his narrative shows itself not only in many of the speeches of the
actors in the history which are interwoven with it, but also in many of
the historical parts. For example, the account given in [Ch2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016) of the punitive judgments which
broke in upon Joram for his wickedness is rhetorically arranged, so that
the judgments correspond to the threatenings contained in the letter of
Elijah, [Ch2 21:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012). But this may be
much more plainly seen in the description of the impious conduct of King
Ahaz, and of the punishments which were inflicted upon him and the
kingdom of Judah (2 Chron 28); as also in the descriptions of the crime
of Manasseh ([Ch2 33:3-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#003); cf.
especially [Ch2 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#007) and [Ch2
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#008)), and of the reign of Zedekiah,
and the ruin of the kingdom of Judah ([Ch2
36:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#012)). Now the greater part of the
differences between the chronicler's account and the parallel narrative
in the books of Samuel and Kings, together with the omission of
unimportant circumstances, and the careful manner in which the
descriptions of the arrangements for worship and the celebration of
feasts are wrought out, can be accounted for by this hortatory tendency
so manifest in his writings, and by his subjective, reflective manner of
regarding history. For all these peculiarities clearly have it for their
object to raise in the souls of the readers pleasure and delight in the
splendid worship of the Lord, and to confirm their hearts in fidelity to
the Lord and to His law.

With this plan and object, the first part of our history (1 Chron 1-9),
which contains genealogies, with geographical sketches and isolated
historical remarks, is in perfect harmony. The genealogies are intended
to exhibit, on the one hand, the connection of the people of Israel with
the whole human race; on the other, the descent and genealogical
ramifications of the tribes and families of Israel, with the extent to
which they had spread themselves abroad in the land received as a
heritage from the Lord. In both of these respects they are the necessary
foundation for the following history of the chosen people, which the
author designed to trace from the time of the foundation of the promised
kingdom till the people were driven away into exile because of their
revolt from their God. And it is not to be considered as a result of the
custom prevalent among the later Arabian historians, of beginning their
histories and chronicles ab ovo with Adam, that our author goes back in
this introduction to Adam and the beginnings of the human race; for not
only is this custom far too modern to allow of any inference being drawn
from it with reference to the Chronicle, but it has itself originated,
beyond a doubt, in an imitation of our history. The reason for going
back to the beginnings of the human race is to be sought in the
importance for the history of the world of the people of Israel, whose
progenitor Abraham had been chosen and separated from all the peoples of
the earth by God, that his posterity might become a blessing to all the
families of the earth. But in order to see more perfectly the plan and
object of the historian in his selection and treatment of the historical
material at his command, we must still keep in view the age in which he
lived, and for which he wrote. In respect to this, so much in general is
admitted, viz., that the Chronicle was composed after the Babylonian
exile. With their release from exile, and their return into the land of
their fathers, Israel did not receive again its former political
importance. That part of the nation which had returned remained under
Persian supremacy, and was ruled by Persian governors; and the
descendants of the royal race of David remained subject to this
governor, or at least to the kings of Persia. They were only allowed to
restore the temple, and to arrange the divine service according to the
precepts of the Mosaic law; and in this they were favoured by Cyrus and
his successors. In such circumstances, the efforts and struggles of the
returned Jews must have been mainly directed to the reestablishment and
permanent ordering of the worship, in order to maintain communion with
the Lord their God, and by that means to prove their fidelity to the God
of their fathers, so that the Lord might fulfil His covenant promises to
them, and complete the restoration of Judah and Jerusalem. By this fact,
therefore, may we account for the setting forth in our history of the
religious and ecclesiastical side of the life of the Israelitish
community in such relief, and for the author's supposed "fondness" for
the Levitic worship. If the author of the Chronicle wished to strengthen
his contemporaries in their fidelity to Jahve, and to encourage them to
fulfil their covenant duties by a description of the earlier history of
the covenant people, he could not hope to accomplish his purpose more
effectively than by so presenting the history as to bring accurately
before them the ordinances and arrangements of the worship, the
blessings of fidelity to the covenant, and the fatal fruits of defection
from the Lord.

The chronicler's supposed predilection for genealogical lists arose also
from the circumstances of his time. From [Ezr
2:60](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#060). we learn that some of the sons
of priests who returned with Zerubbabel sought their family registers,
but could not find them, and were consequently removed from the
priesthood; besides this, the inheritance of the land was bound up with
the families of Israel. On this account the family registers had, for
those who had returned from the exile, an increased importance, as the
means of again obtaining possession of the heritage of their fathers;
and perhaps it was the value thus given to the genealogical lists which
induced the author of the Chronicle to include in his book all the old
registers of this sort which had been received from antiquity.

2\. Age and Author of the Chronicles.

The Chronicle cannot have been composed before the time of Ezra, for it
closes with the intelligence that Cyrus, by an edict in the first year
of his reign, allowed the Jews to return to their country ([Ch2
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022).), and it brings down the
genealogical tree of Zerubbabel to his grandchildren ([Ch1
3:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#019)). The opinion brought into
acceptance by de Wette and Ewald, that the genealogy ([Ch1
3:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#019)) enumerates six or seven other
generations after Zerubbabel, and so reaches down to the times of
Alexander the Great or yet later, is founded on the undemonstrable
assumption that the twenty-one names which in this passage ([Ch1
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#021)) follow רפיה בני are the names of
direct descendants of Zerubbabel. But no exegetical justification can be
found for this assumption; since the list of names, "the sons of
Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah," etc. ([Ch1
3:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#021)), is connected neither in form
nor in subject-matter with the grandsons of Zerubbabel, who have been
already enumerated, but forms a genealogical fragment, the connection of
which with Zerubbabel's grandchildren is merely asserted, but can
neither be proved nor even rendered probable. (Vide the commentary on
these verses.) Other grounds for the acceptance of so late a date for
the composition of the Chronicle are entirely wanting; for the
orthography and language of the book point only in general to the
post-exilic age, and the mention of the Daric, a Persian coin, in [Ch1
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#007), does not bring us further down
than the period of the Persian rule over Judaea. On the other hand, the
use of the name בּירה ([Ch1 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001), [Ch1
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#019)) for the temple can scarcely be
reconciled with the composition of the book in the Macedonian or even
the Seleucidian age, since an author who lived after Nehemiah, when
Jerusalem, like other Persian cities, had received in the fortress built
by him ([Neh 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008); [Neh
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#002)), and afterwards called ba'ris and
Arx Antonia, its own בּירה, would scarcely have given this name to the
temple.

In reference to the question of the authorship of our book, the matter
which most demands consideration is the identity of the end of the
Chronicle with the beginning of the book of Ezra. The Chronicle closes
with the edict of Cyrus which summons the Jews to return to Jerusalem to
build the temple; the book of Ezra begins with this same edict, but
gives it more completely than the Chronicle, which stops somewhat
abruptly with the word ורעל dro, "and let him go up," although in this
ויעל everything is contained that we find in the remaining part of the
edict communicated in the book of Ezra. From this relation of the
Chronicle to the book of Ezra, many Rabbins, Fathers of the church, and
older exegetes, have drawn the conclusion that Ezra is also the author
of the Chronicle. But of course it is not a very strong proof, since it
can be accounted for on the supposition that the author of the book of
Ezra has taken over the conclusion of the Chronicle into his work, and
set it at the commencement so as to attach his book to the Chronicle as
a continuation. In support of this supposition, moreover, the further
fact may be adduced, that it was just as important for the Chronicle to
communicate the terms of Cyrus' edict as it was for the book of Ezra. It
was a fitting conclusion of the former, to show that the destruction of
Jerusalem and the leading away of the inhabitants of Judah to Babylon,
was not the final destiny of Judah and Jerusalem, but that, after the
dark night of exile, the day of the restoration of the people of God had
dawned under Cyrus; and for the latter it was an indispensable
foundation and point of departure for the history of the new immigration
of the exiles into Jerusalem and Judah. Yet it still remains more
probable that one author produced both writings, yet not as a single
book, which has been divided at some later time by another hand. For no
reason can be perceived for any such later division, especially such a
division as would make it necessary to repeat the edict of Cyrus.

(Note: What Bertheau (p. xxi.) says in this connection (following Ewald,
Gesch. des V. Isr. i. 8. S. 264, der 2 Aufl.), viz., that "perhaps at
first only that part of the great historical work which contains the
history of the new community itself, to the time of Ezra and Nehemiah,
and the history of these its two heroes, was added to the books of the
Old Testament, because it seemed unnecessary to add our present
Chronicle, on account of its agreement in great part with the contents
of the books of Samuel and Kings," is a supposition which merely evades
giving a reason for the division of the work into two, by holding the
division to have been made before the book came into the canon. But
unless the division had been made before, no one would ever have thought
of considering the first half of this book, i.e., our present Chronicle,
unworthy of a place in the canon, since it contains, in great part, new
information not found in the books of Samuel and Kings, and supplements
in a variety of ways even the narratives which are contained in these
books. And even supposing that the Chronicle was received into the canon
as a supplement, after the books of Ezra and Nehemiah had already
received a definite place in it, the verses [Ch2
36:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#022). could scarcely have been added
to the Chronicle from the book of Ezra, to call attention to the fact
that the Chronicle had received an unsuitable place in the canon, as it
ought to have stood before the book of Ezra.)

The introduction of this edict with the words, "And it came to pass in
the first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by
the mouth of Jeremiah might be accomplished," connects it so closely
with the end of the account of the destruction of Jerusalem, and the
carrying away into Babylon, contained in the words, "And they were
servants to him and his sons until the reign of the kingdom of Persia,
to fulfil the word of the Lord spoken by the mouth of Jeremiah, ... to
fulfil the seventy years" ([Ch2
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#020).), that it cannot be separated
from what precedes. Rather it is clear, that the author who wrote [Ch2
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#020), [Ch2
36:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#021), representing the seventy years'
exile as the fulfilment of the prophecy of Jeremiah, must be the same
who mentions the edict of Cyrus, and sets it forth in its connection
with the utterances of the same prophet. This connecting of the edict
with the prophecy gives us an irrefragable proof that the verses which
contain the edict form an integral part of the Chronicle. But, at the
same time, the way in which the edict is broken off in the Chronicle
with ורעל, makes it likely that the author of the Chronicle did not give
the contents of the edict in their entirety, only because he intended to
treat further of the edict, and the fulfilment of it by the return of
the Jews from Babylon, in a second work. A later editor would certainly
have given the entire edict in both writings (the Chronicle and the book
of Ezra), and would, moreover, hardly have altered בּפי (Chron.) into
מפּי (Ezra), and עמּו אלהיו יהוה into עמּו אלהיו יהי.

The remaining grounds which are usually urged for the original unity of
the two writings, prove nothing more than the possibility or probability
that both originated with one author; certainly they do not prove that
they originally formed one work. The long list of phenomena in
Bertheau's Commentary, pp. xvi. - xx., by which a certainty is supposed
to be arrived at that the Chronicle and Ezra originally was one great
historical work, compiled from various sources, greatly requires the
help of critical bias. 1. "The predilection of the author for
genealogical lists, for detailed descriptions of great feasts, which
occurred at the most various times, for exact representations of the
arrangement of the public worship, and the business of the Levites and
priests, which their classifications and ranks," cannot be proved to
exist in the book of Ezra. That book contains only one very much
abridged genealogy, that of Ezra ([Ezr
7:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)); only two lists-those, namely,
of the families who returned from Babylon with Zerubbabel and Ezra (Ezra
2 and 8); only one account of the celebration of a feast, the by no
means detailed description of the consecration of the temple ([Ezr
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016)); short remarks on the building
of the altar, the celebration of the feast of tabernacles, and the
laying of the foundation-stone of the temple, in [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001); and it contains nothing
whatever as to the divisions and ranks of the priests and Levites. That
in these lists and descriptions some expressions should recur, is to be
expected from the nature of the case. Yet all that is common to both
books is the word התיחשׂ, the use of כּמּשׁפּט in the signification,
"according to the Mosaic law" ([Ch1
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#031); [Ch2
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013); [Ezr
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#004), and [Neh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#018)), and the liturgical formulae
ליהוה הודוּ, which occurs also in [Isa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#004) and [Psa
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002), and וּלהלּל להודות with the
addition, "Jahve is God, and His mercy endureth for ever" ([Ch1
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#034), [Ch1
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#041); [Ch2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006); [Ezr
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011)). The other expressions
enumerated by Bertheau are met with also in other writings: בשׁמות
נקּבוּ in [Num 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017); ראשׁי בּית־אבות
and אבות ראשׁי, [Exo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014).; and the
formula (יהוה בּתורת) בּתּורה כּכּתוּב or לכל־הכּתוּב ([Ch1
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#040); [Ch2
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#012), [Ch2
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#026); [Ezr
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002), [Ezr
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#004)) is just as common in other
writings: cf. [Jos 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008); [Jos
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#031), [Jos
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#034); [Kg1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#003); [Kg2
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#006); [Kg2
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#013); [Kg2
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#021). Bertheau further remarks: "In
those sections in which the regulation of the public worship, the
duties, classification, and offices of the priests and Levites are
spoken of, the author seizes every opportunity to tell of the musicians
and doorkeepers, their duties at the celebration of the great festivals,
and their classification. He speaks of the musicians, [Ch1
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#016)., [Ch1
9:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#014), [Ch1
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#033); [Ch1
15:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#016), [Ch1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#027)., 16:4-42; [Ch1
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#005), [Ch1
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#025); [Ch2
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#012)., [Ch2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006); [Ch2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#014)., [Ch2
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#019), [Ch2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021); [Ch2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#013), [Ch2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#018); [Ch2
29:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#025), [Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030); [Ch2
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#021)., [Ch2
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#002), [Ch2
31:11-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#011); [Ch2
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#012); [Ch2
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#015); [Ezr
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010).; [Neh
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#017); [Neh
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#008), [Neh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024), [Neh
12:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027), [Neh
12:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#045); [Neh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#005). The doorkeepers are mentioned
nearly as often, and not seldom in company with the singers: [Ch1
9:17-29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#017); [Ch1
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#018), [Ch1
15:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#023); [Ch1
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#038); [Ch1
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#005); [Ch1
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#001), [Ch1
26:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#012); [Ch2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#014); [Ch2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#004), [Ch2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#019); [Ch2
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#014); [Ch2
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#013); [Ch2
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#015); [Ezr
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#042), [Ezr
2:70](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#070); [Ezr
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#007); [Ezr
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#024); [Neh
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#001), [Neh
7:45](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#045); [Neh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029); [Neh
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#019); [Neh
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#025), [Neh
12:45](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#045), [Neh
12:47](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#047); [Neh
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#005). Now if these passages be
compared, not only are the same expressions met with (e.g., מצלתּים only
in Chron., Ezra, and Neh.; המּשׁרר ;.heN and המּשׁררים likewise only in
these books, but here very frequently, some twenty-eight times), and
also very often in different places the same names (cf. [Ch1
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#017) with [Neh
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#025)); but everywhere also we can
easily trace the same view as to the importance of the musicians and
doorkeepers for the public worship, and see that all information
respecting them rests upon a very well-defined view of their duties and
their position." But does it follow from this "well-defined view" of the
business of the musicians and doorkeepers, that the Chronicle, Ezra, and
Nehemiah form a single book? Is this view an idea peculiar to the author
of this book? In all the historical books of the Old Testament, from
Exodus and Leviticus to Nehemiah, we find the idea that the laying of
the sacrifice upon the altar is the business of the priest; but does it
follow from that, that all those books were written by one man? But
besides this, the representation given by Bertheau is very one-sided.
The fact is, that in the Chronicle, and in the books of Ezra and
Nehemiah, mention is made of the priests just as often as of the
Levitical musicians, and oftener than the doorkeepers are spoken of, as
will be seen from the proofs brought forward in the following remarks;
nor can any trace be discovered of a "fondness" on the part of the
chronicler for the musicians and porters. They are mentioned only when
the subject demanded that they should be mentioned.

2\. As to the language. - Bertheau himself admits, after the enumeration
of a long list of linguistic peculiarities of the Chronicle and the
books of Ezra and Nehemiah, that all these phenomena are to be met with
separately in other books of the Old Testament, especially the later
ones; only their frequent use can be set down as the linguistic
peculiarity of one author. But does the mere numbering of the places
where a word or a grammatical construction occurs in this or that book
really serve as a valid proof for the unity of the authorship? When, for
example, the form בּזּה, [Ch2 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#013);
[Ch2 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#014), [Ezr
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#007), [Neh
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#004), occurs elsewhere only in Esther
and Daniel, or קבּל in [Ch1 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#018);
[Ch1 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#011); [Ch2
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#016), [Ch2
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#022), and [Ezr
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#030), is elsewhere found only in
Proverbs once, in Job once, and thrice in Esther, does it follow that
the Chronicle and the book of Ezra are the work of one author? The
greater number of the linguistic phenomena enumerated by Bertheau, such
as the use of האלהים for יהוה; the frequent use of ל, partly before the
infinitive to express shall or must, partly for subordinating or
introducing a word; the multiplication of prepositions, - e.g., in לאין
עד, [Ch2 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#016); למאד עד, [Ch2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014); למעלה עד ל, [Ch2
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#012); [Ch2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#012); [Ch2
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#008), - are characteristics not
arising from a peculiar use of language by our chronicler, but belonging
to the later or post-exilic Hebrew in general. The only words and
phrases which are characteristic of and common to the Chronicle and the
book of Ezra are: כּפור (bowl), [Ch1
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#017); [Ezr
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#010); [Ezr
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#027); the infinitive Hophal הוּסד,
used of the foundation of the temple, [Ch2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#003); [Ezr
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#011); פּלגּה, of the divisions of the
Levites, [Ch2 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#005) and [Ezr
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#018); התנדּב, of offerings, [Ch1
29:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#005), [Ch1
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#009),[Ch1
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#014), [Ch1
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#017); [Ezr
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#006); [Ezr
2:68](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#068); [Ezr
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#005); למרחוק עד (with three
prepositions), [Ch2 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#015); [Ezr
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#013); and לדרשׁ לבבו הכין, [Ch2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#014); [Ch2
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#003); [Ch2
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#019), and [Ezr
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#010). These few words and
constructions would per se not prove much; but in connection with the
fact that neither in the language nor in the ideas are any considerable
differences or variations to be observed, they may serve to strengthen
the probability, arising from the relation of the end of the Chronicle
to the beginning of the book of Ezra, that both writings were composed
by the priest and scribe Ezra.

(Note: The opinion first propounded by Ewald, and adopted by Bertheau,
Dillmann (art. "Chronik" in Herzog's Realencykl.), and others, that "the
author belonged to the guild of musicians settled at the temple in
Jerusalem" (Gesch. des. V. Isr. i. p. 235), has no tenable ground for
its support, and rests merely on the erroneous assumption that the
author has not the same sympathy with the priests as he shows in
speaking of the Levites, more especially of the signers and doorkeepers
(Berth.). If this assertion were true, the author might have been just
as well a Levitical doorkeeper as a musician. But it is quite erroneous,
as may be seen on a comparison of the passage adduced supra, p. 386,
from Bertheau's commentary. In all the passages in which the musicians
and doorkeepers are mentioned the priests are also spoken of, and in
such a way that to both priests and Levites that is ascribed which
belonged to their respective offices: to the priests, the sacrificial
service and the blowing of the trumpets; to the Levites, the external
business of the temple, and the execution of the instrumental music and
psalm-singing introduced by David. From this it is clear that there is
not reason why the priests and scribe Ezra might not have composed the
Chronicle. The passages supporting the assertion that where musicians
and doorkeepers are spoken of the priests are also mentioned, are: [Ch1
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#034)., [Ch1
9:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#010); [Ch1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#024); [Ch1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#006), [Ch1
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#039)., [Ch1
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#002), [Ch1
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#013), [Ch1
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#028), [Ch1
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#032); 24:1-19; [Ch2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#007), [Ch2
5:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#011); [Ch2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006); [Ch2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#014)., [Ch2
13:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#009); [Ch2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#008); [Ch2
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008), [Ch2
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#011); [Ch2
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#028); [Ch2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#004), [Ch2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#006), [Ch2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#018); [Ch2
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#017), [Ch2
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#020); [Ch2
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004), [Ch2
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#016), [Ch2
29:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021), [Ch2
29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034); [Ch2
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#003), [Ch2
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#015), [Ch2
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#021), [Ch2
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#025), [Ch2
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#027); [Ch2
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#002), [Ch2
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#017), [Ch2
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#019); [Ch2
34:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#030); [Ch2
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#002), [Ch2
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#008), [Ch2
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#010), [Ch2
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#014), [Ch2
35:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#018); [Ezr
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005); [Ezr
2:61](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#061), [Ezr
2:70](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#070); [Ezr
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002), [Ezr
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008), [Ezr
3:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#010); [Ezr
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016), [Ezr
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#018), [Ezr
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#020); [Ezr
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#007), [Ezr
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024); [Ezr
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015), [Ezr
8:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024), [Ezr
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#033); [Neh
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#016); [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001); [Neh
7:73](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#073); [Neh
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013); [Neh
10:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#001), [Neh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029), [Neh
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#035), [Neh
10:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#039)., [Ch2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#003), [Ch2
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#010)., [Ch2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)., 30, 35, 41, 44, 47, 13:30.)

3\. The Sources of the Chronicles.

The genealogical list in 1 Chron 1, which gives us the origin of the
human race and of the nations, and that which contains the names of the
sons of Jacob ([Ch1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#001) and [Ch1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#002)), are to be found in and have been
without doubt extracted from Genesis, to be placed together here. For it
is scarcely probable that genealogical lists belonging to primeval time
and the early days of Israel should have been preserved till the
post-exilic period. But all the genealogical registers which follow,
together with the geographical and historical remarks interwoven with
them (1 Chron 2:3-8:40), have not been derived from the older historical
books of the Old Testament: for they contain for the most part merely
the names of the originators of those genealogical lines, of the
grandsons and some of the great-grandsons of Jacob, and of the
ancestors, brothers, and sons of David; but nowhere do they contain the
whole lines. Moreover, in the parallel places the names often differ
greatly, so that all the variations cannot be ascribed to errors of
transcription. Compare the comparative table of these parallel places in
my apolog. Versuch ber die Chron. S. 159ff., and in the Handbook of
Introduction, 139, 1. All these catalogues, together with that of the
cities of the Levites (1 Chron 6:39-66), have been derived from other,
extra-biblical sources. But as Bertheau, S. xxxi., rightly remarks: "We
cannot hold the lists to be the result of historical investigation on
the part of the author of the Chronicle, in the sense of his having
culled the individual names carefully either out of historical works or
from traditions of the families, and then brought them into order: for
in reference to Gad ([Ch1 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#012)) we are
referred to a genealogical register prepared in the time of Jotham king
of Judah and Jeroboam king of Israel; while as to Issachar ([Ch1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#002)) the reference is to the numbering
of the people which took place in the time of David; and it is
incidentally (?) stated ([Ch1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001))
that registers had been prepared of all Israelites (i.e., the northern
tribes)." Besides this, in [Ch1 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#003),
[Ch1 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#027), and [Ch1
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#031), numberings of the Levites, and
in [Ch1 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#024) the numbering of the
people undertaken by Joab at David's command, are mentioned. With regard
to the latter, however, it is expressly stated that its results were not
incorporated in the היּמים דּברי, i.e., in the book of the chronicles of
King David, while it is said that the results of the genealogical
registration of the northern tribes of Israel were written in the book
of the kings of Israel. According to this, then, it might be thought
that the author had taken his genealogical lists from the great
historical work made use of by him, and often cited, in the history of
the kings of Judah - "the national annals of Israel and Judah." But this
can be accepted only with regard to the short lists of the tribes of the
northern kingdom in 1 Chron 5 and 7, which contain nothing further than
the names of families and fathers'-houses, with a statement of the
number of males in these fathers'-houses. It is possible that these
names and numbers were contained in the national annals; but it is not
likely that these registers, which are of a purely genealogical nature,
giving the descent of families or famous men in longer or shorter lines
of ancestors, were received into the national annals (Reichsannalen),
and it does not at all appear from the references to the annals that
this was the case. These genealogical lists were most probably in the
possession of the heads of the tribes and families and households, from
whom the author of the Chronicle would appear to have collected all he
could find, and preserved them from destruction by incorporating them in
his work.

In the historical part (1 Chr. 10:1-2 Chr. 36), at the death of almost
every king, the author refers to writings in which the events and acts
of his reign are described. Only in the case of Joram, Ahaziah,
Athaliah, and the later kings Jehoahaz, Jehoiachin, and Zedekiah, are
such references omitted. The books which are thus named are: (1) For
David's reign, Dibre of Samuel the seer, of the prophet Nathan, and of
Gad the seer ([Ch1 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029)); (2) as to
Solomon, the Dibre of the prophet Nathan, the prophecy (נבוּאת) of
Abijah the Shilonite, and the visions (הזות) of the seer Iddo against
Jeroboam the son of Nebat ([Ch2 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029));
(3) for Rehoboam, Dibre of the prophet Shemaiah and the seer Iddo ([Ch2
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022)); (5) for Asa, the book of the
kings of Judah and Israel ([Ch2
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#011)); (6) as to Jehoshaphat, Dibre
of Jehu the son of Hanani, which had been incorporated with the book of
the kings of Israel ([Ch2 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#034)); (7)
for the reign of Joash, Midrash-Sepher of the kings ([Ch2
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#027)); (8) for the reign of Amaziah,
the book of the kings of Judah and Israel ([Ch2
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#026)); (9) in reference to Uzziah, a
writing (כּתב) of the prophet Isaiah ([Ch2
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#022)); (10) as to Jotham, the book of
the kings of Israel and Judah ([Ch2
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#007)); (11) for the reign of Ahaz, the
book of the kings of Judah and Israel ([Ch2
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#026)); (12) for Hezekiah, the vision
(הזון) of the prophet Isaiah, in the book of the kings of Judah and
Israel ([Ch2 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032)); (13) as to
Manasseh, Dibre of the kings of Israel, and Dibre of Hozai ([Ch2
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#018) and [Ch2
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#019)); (14) for the reign of Josiah,
the book of the kings of Israel and Judah ([Ch2
35:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#027)); and (15) for Jehoiakim, the
book of the kings of Israel and Judah ([Ch2
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#008)).

From this summary, it appears that two classes of writings, of
historical and prophetic contents respectively, are quoted. The book of
the kings of Judah and Israel (No. 5, 8, 11), the book of the kings of
Israel and Judah (10, 14, 15), the histories (דּברי) of the kings of
Israel (13), and the Midrash-book of kings (7), are all historical. The
first three titles are, as is now generally admitted, only variations in
the designation of one and the same work, whose complete title, "Book of
the Kings of Judah and Israel" (or Israel and Judah), is here and there
altered into "Book of the Events (or History) of the Kings of Israel,"
i.e., of the whole Israelitish people. This work contained the history
of the kings of both kingdoms, and must have been essentially the same
as to contents with the two annalistic writings cited in the canonical
books of Kings: the book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Israel, and
the book of the Chronicles of the Kings of Judah. This conclusion is
forced upon us by the fact that the extracts from them contained in our
canonical books of Kings, coincide with the extracts from the books of
the kings of Israel and Judah contained in our Chronicle where they
narrate the same events, either verbally, or at least in so far that the
identity of the sources from which they have been derived cannot but be
recognised. The only difference is, that the author of the Chronicle had
the two writings which the author of the book of Kings quotes as two
separate works, before him as one work, narrating the history of both
kingdoms in a single composition. For he cites the book of the Kings of
Israel even for the history of those kings of Judah who, like Jotham and
Hezekiah, had nothing to do with the kingdom of Israel (i.e., the ten
tribes), and even after the kingdom of the ten tribes had been already
destroyed, for the reigns of Manasseh, Josiah, and Jehoiakim. But we are
entirely without any means of answering with certainty the question, in
how far the merging of the annals of the two kingdoms into one book of
the kings of Israel was accompanied by remoulding and revision. The
reasons which Bertheau, in his commentary on Chronicles, p. 41ff.,
brings forward, after the example of Thenius and Ewald, for thinking
that it underwent so thorough a revision as to become a different book,
are without force. The difference in the title is not sufficient, since
it is quite plain, from the different names under which the chronicler
quotes the work which is used by him, that he did not give much
attention to literal accuracy. The character of the parallel places in
our books of Kings and the Chronicle, as Bertheau himself admits, forms
no decisive criterion for an accurate determination of the relation of
the chronicler to his original documents, which is now in question,
since neither the author of the books of Samuel and Kings nor the author
of the Chronicle intended to copy with verbal exactness: they all, on
the contrary, treated the historical material which they had before them
with a certain freedom, and wrought it up in their own writings in
accordance with their various aims.

It is questionable if the work quoted for the reign of Joash, המּלכים
ספר מדרשׁ (No. 7), is identical with the book of the kings of Israel and
Judah, or whether it be not a commentary on it, or perhaps a revision of
that book, or of a section of the history of the kings for purposes of
edification. The narrative in the Chronicle of the chief events in the
reign of Joash, his accession, with the fall of Athaliah, and the
repairing of the temple (2 Chron 23 and 24), agrees with the account of
these events in 2 Kings 11 and 12 where the annals of the kings of Judah
are quoted, to such an extent, that both the authors seem to have
derived their accounts from the same source, each making extracts
according to his peculiar point of view. But the Chronicle recounts,
besides this, the fall of Joash into idolatry, the censure of this
defection by the prophet Zechariah, and the defeat of the numerous army
of the Jews by a small Syrian host ([Ch1
24:15-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#015)); from which, in Bertheau's
opinion, we may come, without much hesitation, to the conclusion that
the connection of these events had been already very clearly brought
forward in a Midrash of that book of Israel and Judah which is quoted
elsewhere. This is certainly possible, but it cannot be shown to be more
than a possibility; for the further remark of Bertheau, that in the
references which occur elsewhere it is not so exactly stated as in [Ch2
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#027) what the contents of the book
referred to are, is shown to be erroneous by the citation in [Ch2
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#018), [Ch2
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#019). It cannot, moreover, be denied
that the title ספר מדרשׁ instead of the simple ספר is surprising, even
if, with Ewald, we take מדרשׁ in the sense of "composition" or
"writing," and translate it "writing-book" (Schriftbuch), which gives
ground for supposing that an expository writing is here meant. Even
taking the title in this sense, it does not follow with any certainty
that the Midrash extended over the whole history of the kings, and still
less is it proved that this expository writing may have been used by the
chronicler here and there in places where it is not quoted.

So much, however, is certain, that we must not, with Jahn, Movers,
Staehelin, and others, hold these annals of the kings of Israel and
Judah, which are quoted in the canonical books of Kings and the
Chronicle, to be the official records of the acts and undertakings of
the kings prepared by the מזכּירים.

(Note: Against this idea Bhr also has very justly declared (die Bcher
der Knige, in J. P. Lange's theol. homilet. Bibelwerke, S. x.f.), and
among other things has rightly remarked, that in the separated kingdom
of Israel there is no trace whatever of court or national historians.
But he goes much too far when he denies the existence of national annals
in general, even in the kingdom of Judah, and under David and Solomon.
For even granting that the מזכּיר derives his name from this, "that his
duty was, as μνήμων, to bring to the recollection of the king all the
state affairs which were to be cared for, and give advice in reference
to them;" yet this function is so intimately connected wit the recording
and preserving of the national documents of the kingdom and of all royal
ordinances, that from it the composition of official annals of the
kingdom follows almost as a matter of course. The existence of such
national annals, or official year-books of the kingdom, is placed by
[Ch1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001) and [Ch1
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#024) beyond all doubt. According to
[Ch1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001), a genealogical record of the
whole of Israel was prepared and inserted in the book of the kings of
Israel; and according to [Ch1 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#024),
the result of the numbering of the people, carried out by Joab under
David, was not inserted in the book of the "Chronicles of King David."
Bhr's objections to the supposition of the existence of national annals,
rest upon the erroneous presupposition that all judgments concerning the
kings and their religious conduct which we find in our canonical
histories, would have also been contained in the annals of the kingdom,
and that thus the authors of our books of Kings and Chronicles would
have been mere copyists giving us some excerpts from the original
documents.)

They are rather annalistic national histories composed by prophets,
partly from the archives of the kingdom and other public documents,
partly from prophetic monographs containing prophecy and history, either
composed and continued by various prophets in succession during the
existence of both kingdoms, or brought together in a connected form
shortly before the ruin of the kingdom out of the then existing
contemporary historical documents and prophetic records. Two
circumstances are strongly in favour of the latter supposition. On the
one hand, the references to these annals in both kingdoms do not extend
to the last kings, but end in the kingdom of Israel with Pekah ([Kg2
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#031)), in the kingdom of Judah with
Jehoiakim ([Kg2 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#005) and [Ch2
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#008)). On the other hand, the formula
"until this day" occurs in reference to various events; and since it for
the most part refers not to the time of the exile, but to times when the
kingdom still existed (cf. [Kg1 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#008)
with [Ch2 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#009); [Kg1
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#013), [Kg1
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#021), with [Ch2
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#008); [Kg1
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#019) with [Ch2
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#019); [Kg2
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#022) with [Ch2
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#010); [Kg2
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#022); [Kg2
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#027); [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007), and [Kg2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006)), it cannot be from the hand of
the authors of our canonical books of Kings and Chronicles, but must
have come down to us from the original documents, and is in them
possible only if they were written at some shorter or longer period
after the events. When Bhr, in the place already quoted, says, on the
contrary, that the time shortly before the fall of the kingdom, the time
of complete uprooting, would appear to be the time least of all suited
for the collection and editing of national year-books, this arises from
his not having fully weighed the fact, that at that very time prophets
like Jeremiah lived and worked, and, as is clear from the prophecies of
Jeremiah, gave much time to the accurate study of the older holy
writings.

The book composed by the prophet Isaiah concerning the reign of King
Uzziah (9) was a historical work; as was also probably the Midrash of
the prophet Iddo (4). But, on the other hand, we cannot believe, as do
Ewald, Bertheau, Bhr, and others, that the other prophetical writings
enumerated under 1, 2, 3, 6, 12, and 13, were merely parts of the books
of the kings of Israel and Judah; for the grounds which are brought
forward in support of this view do not appear to us to be tenable, or
rather, tend to show that those writings were independent books of
prophecy, to which some historical information was appended. 1. The
circumstance that it is said of two of those writings, the Dibre of Jehu
and the חזון of Isaiah (6 and 12), that they were incorporated or
received into the books of the Kings, does not justify the conclusion
"that, since two of the above-named writings are expressly said to be
parts of the larger historical work, probably by the others also only
parts of this work are meant" (Ew., Berth. S. 34). For in the citations,
those writings are not called parts of the book of Kings, but are only
said to have been received into it as component parts; and from that it
by no means follows that the others, whose reception is not mentioned,
were parts of that work. The admission of one writing into another book
can only then be spoken of when the book is different from the writing
which is received into it. 2. Since some of the writings are denominated
דּברי of a prophet, from the double meaning of the word דברים, verba and
res, this title might be taken in the sense of "events of the prophets,"
to denote historical writings. But it is much more natural to think,
after the analogy of the superscriptions in [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001); [Jer
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001), of books of prophecies like the
books of Amos and Jeremiah, which contained prophecies and prophetic
speeches along with historical information, just as the sections [Amo
7:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010), Jer. 40-45 do, and which
differed from our canonical books of prophecies, in which the historical
relations are mentioned only in exceptional cases, only by containing
more detailed and minute accounts of the historical events which gave
occasion to the prophetic utterances. On account of this fulness of
historical detail, such prophetic writings, without being properly
histories, would yet be for many periods of the history of the kings
very abundant sources of history. The above-mentioned difference between
our canonical books of prophecy and the books now under discussion is
very closely connected with the historical development of a theocracy,
which showed itself in general in this, that the action of the older
prophets was specially directed to the present, and to viv voce
speaking, while that of those of a later time was more turned towards
the future, and the consummation of the kingdom of God by the Messiah
(cf. Kper, das Prophetenthum des A. Bundes, 1870, S. 93ff.). This
signification of the word דּברי is, in the present case, placed beyond
all doubt by the fact that the writings of other prophets which are
mentioned along with these are called נבוּאה, חזות, and חזון, - words
which never denote historical writings, but always only prophecies and
visions of the prophets. In accordance with this, the חזון of Isaiah
(12) is clearly distinguished from the writings of the same prophet
concerning Uzziah, for which כּתב is used; while in the reign of
Manasseh, the speeches of Hozai are named along with the events, i.e.,
the history of the kings of Israel ([Ch2
33:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#018)), and a more exact account of
what was related about Manasseh in each of these two books is given.
From this we learn that the historical book of Kings contained the words
which prophets had spoken against Manasseh; while in the writing of the
prophet Hozai, of whom we know nothing further, information as to the
places where his idolatry was practised, and the images which were the
objects of it, was to be found. After all these facts, which speak
decidedly against the identification of the prophetic writings cited in
the book of Kings with that book itself, the enigmatic להתיחשׂ, after
the formula of quotation, "They are written in the words (speeches) of
the prophet Shemaiah and of the seer Iddo" ([Ch2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015)), can naturally not be looked
upon as a proof that here prophetic writings are denominated parts of a
larger historical work. 3. Nor can we consider it, with Bertheau,
decisive, "that for the whole history of David (והאחרנים הראשׁנים המּלך
דויד דּברי), Solomon, Rehoboam, and Jehoshaphat, prophetic writings are
referred to; while for the whole history of Asa, Amaziah, Jotham, Ahaz,
and Josiah, the references are to the book of the kings of Israel and
Judah." From this fact no further conclusion can be drawn than that, in
reference to the reigns of some kings the prophetic writings, and in
reference to those of others the history of the kingdom, contained all
that was important, and that the history of the kingdom contained also
information as to the work of the prophets in the kingdom, while the
prophetic writings contained likewise information as to the undertakings
of the kings. The latter might contain more detailed accounts in
reference to some kings, the former in reference to others; and this
very circumstance, or some other reason which cannot now be ascertained
by us, may have caused the writer of the Chronicle to refer to the
former in reference to one king, and to the latter in reference to
another.

Finally, 4. Bhr remarks, S. viii.f.: "Quite a number of sections of our
books (of Kings) are found in the Chronicle, where the words are
identical, and yet the reference there is to the writings of single
definite persons, and not to the three original documents from which the
Kings is compiled. Thus, in the first place, in the history of Solomon,
in which the sections 2 Chron 6:1-40 and 1 Kings 8:12-50; 2 Chron 7:7-22
and 1 Kings 8:64-9:9; 2 Chron 8:2-10:17 and 1 Kings 9:17-12:17; 2 Chr.
9:1-28 and 1 Kings 10:1-28, etc., are identical, the Chronicle refers
not to the book of the history of Solomon (as [Kg1
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#041)), but to the דּברי of the
prophet Nathan, etc. ([Ch2 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029));
consequently the book of the history of Solomon must either have been
compiled from those three prophetic writings, or at least have contained
considerable portions of them. The case is identical with the second of
the original documents, the book of the history of the kings of Judah
([Kg1 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#029) and elsewhere). The
narrative as to Rehoboam is identical in 2 Chron 10 and 1 Kings 12:1-19,
as also in [Ch2 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001) and [Kg1
12:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020); further, in [Ch2
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013). as compared with [Kg1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021).; but the history of the kings
of Judah is not mentioned as an authority, as is the case in [Kg1
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#029), but the דּברי of the prophet
Shemaiah and the seer Iddo ([Ch2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015)). In the history of King Abijah
we are referred, in the very short account, [Kg1
15:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#001), for further information to the
book of the history of the kings of Judah; while the Chronicle, on the
contrary, which gives further information, quotes from the מדרשׁ of the
prophet Iddo ([Ch2 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022)). The case is
similar in the history of the kings Uzziah and Manasseh: our author
refers in reference to both to the book of the kings of Judah ([Kg2
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#006); [Kg2
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#017)); the chronicler quotes, for the
first the כּתב of the prophet Isaiah the son of Amoz ([Ch2
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#022)), for the latter חוזי דּברי
([Ch2 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#019)). By all these quotations
it is satisfactorily shown that the book of the kings of Judah is
compiled from the historical writings of various prophets or seers." But
this conclusion is neither valid nor necessary. It is not valid, for
this reason, that the Chronicle, besides the narratives concerning the
reigns of Rehoboam, Abijah, Uzziah, and Manasseh, which it has in common
with the books of Kings, and which are in some cases identical, contains
a whole series of narratives peculiar to itself, which perhaps were not
contained at all in the larger historical work on the kings of Judah, or
at least were not there so complete as in the special prophetic writings
cited by the chronicler. As to Solomon also, the Chronicle has something
peculiar to itself which is not found in the book of Kings. Nor is the
conclusion necessary; for from a number of identical passages in our
canonical books of Kings and Chronicles, the only certain conclusion
which can be drawn is, that these narratives were contained in the
authorities quoted by both writers, but not that the variously named
authorities form one and the same work.

By all this we are justified in maintaining the view, that the writings
quoted by the author of the Chronicle under the titles, Words, Prophecy,
Visions of this and that prophet, with the exception of the two whose
incorporation with the book of Kings is specially mentioned, lay before
him as writings separate and distinct from the "Books of the Kings of
Israel and Judah," that these writings were also in the hands of many of
his contemporaries, and that he could refer his readers to them. On this
supposition, we can comprehend the change in the titles of the works
quoted; while on the contrary supposition, that the special prophetic
writings quoted were parts of the larger history of the kings of Israel
and Judah, it remains inexplicable. But the references of the chronicler
are not to be understood as if all he relates, for example, of the reign
of David was contained in the words of the seer Samuel, of the prophet
Nathan, and of the seer Gad, the writings he quotes for that reign. He
may, as Berth. S. xxxviii. has already remarked, "have made use also of
authorities which he did not feel called upon to name," - as, for
example, the lists of David's heroes, 1 Chron 11:10-47, and of those who
gave in their adherence to David before the death of Saul, and who
anointed him king in Hebron, 1 Chron 12. Such also are the catalogues of
the leaders of the host, of the princes of the tribes, and the stewards
of the royal domains, 1 Chron 27; of the fathers'-houses of the Levites,
and the divisions of the priests, Levites, and singers, etc., 1 Chron
23-26. These lists contain records to whose sources he did not need to
refer, even if he had extracted them from the public annals of the
kingdom during the reign of David, because he has embodied them in their
integrity in his book.

But our canonical books of Samuel and Kings are by no means to be
reckoned among the sources possibly used besides the writings which are
quoted. It cannot well be denied that the author of the Chronicle knew
these books; but that he has used them as authorities, as de Wette,
Movers, Ewald, and others think, we must, with Bertheau and Dillmann,
deny. The single plausible ground which is usually brought forward to
prove the use of these writings, is the circumstance that the Chronicle
contains many narratives corresponding to those found in the books of
Samuel and Kings, and often verbally identical with them. But that is
fully accounted for by the fact that the chronicler used the same more
detailed writings as the authors of the books of Samuel and Kings, and
has extracted the narratives in question, partly with verbal accuracy,
partly with some small alterations, from them. Against the supposition
that the above-named canonical books were used by the chronicler, we may
adduce the facts that the chronicle, even in those corresponding
passages, differs in many ways as to names and events from the account
in those books, and that it contains, on an average, more than they do,
as will be readily seen on an exact comparison of the parallel sections.
Other and much weaker grounds for believing that the books of Samuel and
Kings were used by the chronicler, are refuted in my Handbook of
Introduction, 141, 2; and in it, at 139, is to be found a synoptical
arrangement of the parallel sections.

4\. The Historical Character of the Chronicles.

The historic truth or credibility of the books of the Chronicle, which
de Wette, in the Beitrr. zur Einleit. 1806, violently attacked, in order
to get rid of the evidence of the Chronicle for the Mosaic origin of the
Sinaitic legislation, is now again in the main generally recognised.

(Note: Cf. Bertheau, Com. S. xliii, and Dillmann, loc cit. The decision
of the latter is as follows, S. 693: "This work has a great part of its
narratives and information in common with the older canonical historical
books, and very often corresponds verbally, or almost verbally, with
them; but another and equally important part is peculiar to itself. This
relationship was, formerly, in the time of the specially negative
criticism, explained by the supposition that the chronicler had derived
the information which he has in common with these books from them, and
that every difference and peculiarity arose from misunderstanding,
misinterpretation, a desire to ornament, intentional misrepresentation,
and pure invention (so especially de Wette in his Beitrr., and Gramberg,
die Chronik nach ihrem geschichtl. Karakter, 1823). The historic
credibility of the Chronicle has, however, been long ago delivered from
such measureless suspicions, and recognised (principally by the efforts
of Keil, apologet. Versuch, 1833; Movers, die bibl. Chronik, 1834;
Haevernick, in the Einleitung, 1839; and Ewald, in the Geschichte
Israels). It is now again acknowledged that the chronicler has written
everywhere from authorities, and that intentional fabrications or
misrepresentations of the history can no more be spoken of in connection
with him." Only K. H. Graf has remained so far behind the present stage
of Old Testament inquiry as to seek to revive the views of de Wette and
Gramberg as to the Chronicle and the Pentateuch. For further information
as to the attacks of de Wette and Gramberg, and their refutation, see my
apologet. Versuche ber die BB. der Chronik, 1833, and in the Handbook of
Introduction, 143 and 144.)

The care with which the chronicler has used his authorities may be seen,
on a comparison of the narratives common to the Chronicle with the books
of Samuel and Kings, not only from the fact that in these parallel
sections the story of the chronicler agrees in all essential points with
the accounts of these books, but also from the variations which are to
be met with. For these variations, in respect to their matter, give us
in many ways more accurate and fuller information, and in every other
respect are of a purely formal kind, in great part affecting only the
language and style of expression, or arising from the hortatory-didactic
aim of the narrative. But this hortatory aim has nowhere had a
prejudicial effect on the objective truth of the statement of historical
facts, as appears on every hand on deeper and more attentive
observation, but has only imparted to the history a more subjective
impress, as compared with the objective style of the books of Kings.

Now, since the parallel places are of such a character, we are, as
Bertheau and Dillmann frankly acknowledge, justified in believing that
the author of the Chronicle, in the communication of narratives not
elsewhere to be found in the Old Testament, has followed his authorities
very closely, and that not only the many registers which we find in his
work-the lists in 1 Chron 12; 23:1-27:34; the catalogue of cities
fortified by Rehoboam, [Ch2 11:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#006);
the family intelligence, [Ch2
11:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#018); [Ch2
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002), and such matters-have been
communicated in exact accordance with his authorities, but also the
accounts of the wars of Rehoboam, Abijah, Jehoshaphat ([Ch1
20:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)), Amaziah, etc. Only here and
there, Bertheau thinks, has he used the opportunity offered to him to
treat the history in a freer way, so as to represent the course of the
more weighty events, and such as specially attracted his attention,
according to his own view. This appears especially, he says (1) in the
account of the speeches of David, [Ch1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#002)., [Ch1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#012)., [Ch1
28:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002), [Ch1
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#020)., [Ch1
29:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001), [Ch1
29:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010), where, too, there occur
statements of the value of the precious metals destined for the building
of the temple ([Ch1 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#004), [Ch1
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#007)), which clearly do not rest upon
truthful historical recollection, and can by no means have been derived
from a trustworthy source; as also in the reports of those of Abijah
([Ch2 13:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#005)) and of Asa ([Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010), etc.); then (2) in the
description of the religious ceremonies and feasts (1 Chron 15 and 16; 2
Chron 5:1-7:10, 2 Chron 29-31, 2 Chron 35): for in both speeches and
descriptions expressions and phrases constantly recur which may be
called current expressions with the chronicler. Yet these speeches stand
quite on a level with those of Solomon, [Ch2
1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#008); [Ch2
6:4-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#004), 12-42, which are also to be
found in the books of Kings ([Kg1
3:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#006); 8:14-53), from which it is to
be inferred that the author here has not acted quite independently, but
that in this respect also older histories may have served him as a
model. But even in these descriptions information is not lacking which
must rest upon a more accurate historical recollection, e.g., the names
in [Ch1 15:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#005), [Ch1
15:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#017); the statement as to the
small number of priests, and the help given to them by the Levites, in
[Ch2 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#014)., [Ch2
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#017). Yet we must, beyond doubt,
believe that the author of the Chronicle "has in these descriptions
transferred that which had become established custom in his own time,
and which according to general tradition rested upon ancient ordinance,
without hesitation, to an earlier period."

Of these two objections so much is certainly correct, that in the
speeches of the persons acting in the history, and in the descriptions
of the religious feasts, the freer handling of the authorities appears
most strongly; but no alterations of the historical circumstances, nor
additions in which the circumstances of the older time have been
unhistorically represented according to the ideas or the taste of the
post-exilic age, can, even here, be anywhere pointed out. With regard,
first of all, to the speeches in the Chronicle, they are certainly not
given according to the sketches or written reports of the hearers, but
sketched and composed by the historian according to a truthful tradition
of the fundamental thoughts. For although, in all the speeches of the
Chronicle, certain current and characteristic expressions and phrases of
the author of this book plainly occur, yet it is just as little doubtful
that the speeches of the various persons are essentially different from
one another in their thoughts, and characteristic images and words. By
this fact it is placed beyond doubt that they have not been put into the
mouths of the historical persons either by the chronicler or by the
authors of the original documents upon which he relies, but have been
composed according to the reports or written records of the
ear-witnesses. For if we leave out of consideration the short sayings or
words of the various persons, such as [Ch1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#001)., [Ch1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#012)., [Ch1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#012)., etc., which contain nothing
characteristic, there are in the Chronicle only three longer speeches of
King David ([Ch1 22:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#007); [Ch1
28:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002), [Ch1
28:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#019), and [Ch1
29:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001)), all of which have reference
to the transfer of the kingdom to his son Solomon, and in great part
treat, on the basis of the divine promise (2 Sam 7 and 1 Chron 17), of
the building of the temple, and the preparations for this work. In these
speeches the peculiarities of the chronicler come so strongly into view,
in contents and form, in thought and language, that we must believe them
to be free representations of the thoughts which in those days moved the
soul of the grey-haired king. But if we compare with these David's
prayer ([Ch1 29:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010)), we find in it
not only that multiplication of the predicates of God which is so
characteristic of David (cf. Ps 18), but also, in [Ch1
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#011), [Ch1
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#015), definite echoes of the Davidic
psalms. The speech of Abijah, again, against the apostate Israel ([Ch2
13:4-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#004)), moves, on the whole, within
the circle of thought usual with the chronicler, but contains in [Ch2
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#007) expressions such as רקים אנשׁים
and בליּעל בּני, which are quite foreign to the language of the
Chronicle, and belong to the times of David and Solomon, and
consequently point to sources contemporaneous with the events. The same
thing is true of Hezekiah's speech ([Ch2
32:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#007)), in which the expression בּשׂר
זרוע, "the arm of flesh," recalls the intimacy of this king with the
prophet Isaiah (cf. [Isa 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)). The
sayings and speeches of the prophets, on the contrary, are related much
more in their original form. Take, for instance, the remarkable speech
of Azariah ben Oded to King Asa ([Ch2
15:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#001)), which, on account of its
obscurity, has been very variously explained, and which, as is well
known, is the foundation of the announcement made by Christ of the
destruction of Jerusalem and the last judgment ([Mat
24:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006); [Luk
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#019)). As C. p. Caspari (der
syrisch-ephraimit. Krieg., Christiania 1849, S. 54) has already
remarked, it is so peculiar, and bears so little of the impress of the
Chronicle, that it is impossible that it can have been produced by the
chronicler himself: it must have been taken over by him from his
authorities almost without alteration. From this one speech, whose
contents he could hardly have reproduced accurately in his own words,
and which he has consequently left almost unaltered, we can see clearly
enough that the chronicler has taken over the speeches he communicates
with fidelity, so far as their contents are concerned, and has only
clothed them formally, more or less, in his own language. This treatment
of the speeches in the Chronicle is, however, not a thing peculiar and
confined to the author of this book, but is, as Delitzsch has shown
(Isaiah, p. 17ff. tr.), common to all the biblical historians; for even
in the prophecies in the books of Samuel and Kings distinct traces are
observable throughout of the influence of the narrator, and they bear
more or less visibly upon them in impress of the writer who reproduces
them, without their historical kernel being thereby affected.

Now the historical truth of the events is just as little interfered with
by the circumstance that the author of the Chronicle works out
rhetorically the descriptions of the celebration of the holy feasts,
represents in detail the offering of the sacrifices, and has spoken in
almost all of these descriptions of the musical performances of the
Levites and priests. The conclusion which has been drawn from this, that
he has here without hesitation transferred to an earlier time that which
had become established custom in his own time, would only then be
correct if the restoration of the sacrificial worship according to the
ordinance of Leviticus, or the introduction of instrumental music and
the singing of psalms, dated only from the time of the exile, as de
Wette, Gramberg, and others have maintained. If, on the contrary, these
arrangements and regulations be of Mosaic, and in a secondary sense of
Davidic origin, then the chronicler has not transferred the customs and
usages of his own time to the times of David, Asa, Hezekiah, and others,
but has related what actually occurred under these circumstances, only
giving to the description an individual colouring. Take, for example,
the hymn (1 Chron 16:8-36) which David caused to be sung by Asaph and
his brethren in praise of the Lord, after the transfer of the ark to
Jerusalem into the tabernacle prepared for it ([Ch1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#007)). If it was not composed by David
for this ceremony, but has been substituted by the chronicler, in his
endeavour to represent the matter in a vivid way, from among the psalms
sung in his own time on such solemn occasions, for the psalm which was
then sung, but which was not communicated by his authority, nothing
would be altered in the historical fact that then for the first time, by
Asaph and his brethren, God was praised in psalms; for the psalm given
adequately expresses the sentiments and feelings which animated the king
and the assembled congregation at that solemn festival. To give another
example: the historical details of the last assembly of princes which
David held (1 Chron 28) are not altered if David did not go over with
his son Solomon, one by one, all the matters regarding the temple
enumerated in [Ch1 28:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#011).

There now remains, therefore, only some records of numbers in the
Chronicle which are decidedly too large to be considered either accurate
or credible. Such are the sums of gold mentioned in [Ch1
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#014) and [Ch1
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#004), [Ch1
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#007), which David had collected for
the building of the temple, and which the princes of the tribes expended
for this purpose; the statements as to the greatness of the armies of
Abijah and Jeroboam, of the number of the Israelites who fell in battle
([Ch2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#003), [Ch2
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#017)), of the number of King Asa's
army and that of the Cushites ([Ch2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007).), of the military force of
Jehoshaphat ([Ch2 17:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#014)), and of
the women and children who were led away captive under Ahaz ([Ch2
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#008)). But these numbers cannot shake
the historical credibility of the Chronicle in general, because they are
too isolated, and differ too greatly from statements of the Chronicle in
other places which are in accordance with fact. To estimate
provisionally and in general these surprising statements, the more exact
discussion of which belongs to the Commentary, we must consider, (1)
that they all contain round numbers, in which thousands only are taken
into account, and are consequently not founded upon any exact
enumeration, but only upon an approximate estimate of contemporaries,
and attest nothing more than that the greatness of the armies, and the
multitude of those who had fallen in battle or were taken prisoner, was
estimated at so high a number; (2) that the actual amount of the mass of
gold and silver which had been collected by David for the building of
the temple cannot with certainty be reckoned, because we are ignorant of
the weight of the shekel of that time; and (3) that the correctness of
the numbers given is very doubtful, since it is indubitably shown, by a
great number of passages of the Old Testament, that the Hebrews have
from the earliest times expressed their numbers not by words, but by
letters, and consequently omissions might very easily occur, or errors
arise, in copying or writing out in words the sums originally written in
letters. Such textual errors are so manifest in not a few place, that
their existence cannot be doubted; and that not merely in the books of
the Chronicle, but in all the historical books of the Old Testament. The
Philistines, according to [Sa1 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005),
for example, brought 30,000 chariots and 6000 horsemen into the field;
and according to [Sa1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#019), God smote
of the people at Beth-shemesh 50,070 men. With respect to these
statements, all commentators are now agreed that the numbers 30,000 and
50,000 are incorrect, and have come into the text by errors of the
copyists; and that instead of 30,000 chariots there were originally only
1000, or at most 3000, spoken of, and that the 50,000 in the second
passage is an ancient gloss. There is, moreover, at present no doubt
among investigators of Scripture, that in [Kg1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006) (in English version, [Kg1
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#026)) the number 40,000 (stalls) is
incorrect, and that instead of it, according to [Ch2
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#025), 4000 should be read; and
further, that the statement of the age of King Ahaziah at 42 years ([Ch2
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#002)), instead of 22 years ([Kg2
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#026)), has arisen by an interchange of
the numeral signs מ and ב. A similar case is to be found in [Ezr
2:69](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#069), compared with [Neh
7:70-72](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#070), where, according to Ezra, the
chiefs of the people gave 61,000 darics for the restoration of the
temple, and according to Nehemiah only 41,000 (viz., 1000 + 20,000 +
20,000). In both of these chapters a multitude of differences is to be
found in reference to the number of the exiled families who returned
from Babylon, which can only be explained on the supposition of the
numeral letters having been confounded. But almost all these different
statements of numbers are to be found in the oldest translation of the
Old Testament, that of the lxx, from which it appears that they had made
their way into the MSS before the settlement of the Hebrew text by the
Masoretes, and that consequently the use of letters as numeral signs was
customary in the pre-Masoretic times. This use of the letters is
attested and presupposed as generally known by both Hieronymus and the
rabbins, and is confirmed by the Maccabean coins. That it is a primeval
custom, and reaches back into the times of the composition of the
biblical books, is clear from this fact, that the employment of the
alphabet as numeral signs among the Greeks coincides with the Hebrew
alphabet. This presupposes that the Greeks received, along with the
alphabet, at the same time the use of the letters as numeral signs from
the Semites (Phoenicians or Hebrews). The custom of writing the numbers
in words, which prevails in the Masoretic text of the Bible, was
probably first introduced by the Masoretes in settling the rules for the
writing of the sacred books of the canon, or at least then became law.

After all these facts, we may conclude the Introduction to the books of
the Chronicle, feeling assured of our result, that the books, in regard
to their historical contents, notwithstanding the hortatory-didactic aim
of the author in bringing the history before us, have been composed with
care and fidelity according to the authorities, and are fully deserving
of belief.

As to the exegetical literature, see my Handbook of Introduction, 138.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 1](ch1001)

</div>
