<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1023)  [Next](ch1025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 24:1</span></span>

The division of the priests and Levites into classes. - Vv. 1-19. The
twenty-four classes of priests. After the statement as to the
fathers'-houses of the Levites (1 Chron 23), we have next the
arrangements of the priests for the performance of the service in the
sanctuary; the priestly families descended from Aaron's sons Eleazar and
Ithamar being divided into twenty-four classes, the order of whose
service was settled by lot.

[Ch1 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#001) contains the superscription,
"As for the sons of Aaron, their divisions (were these)." To make the
division clear, we have an introductory notice of Aaron's descendants,
to the effect that of his four sons, the two elder, Nadab and Abihu,
died before their father, leaving no sons, so that only Eleazar and
Ithamar became priests (יכהנוּ), i.e., entered upon the priesthood. The
four sons of Aaron, [Ch1 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#001), as in
[Ch1 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#003), [Exo
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#023).

[1 Chronicles 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 24:2</span></span>

Cf. [Lev 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)., [Num
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#004). These priestly families David
caused ([Ch1 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003)) to be divided,
along with the two high priests (see on 13:16), "according to their
service." פּקדּה, office, official class, as in [Ch1
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#011).

[1 Chronicles 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 24:4</span></span>

As the sons of Eleazar proved to be more numerous in respect of the
heads of the men than the sons of Ithamar, they (David, Zadok, and
Ahimelech) divided them thus: "For the sons of Eleazar, heads of
fathers'-houses, sixteen; and for the sons of Ithamar, (heads) of
fathers'-houses, eight." הגּברים לראשׁי means neither in respect to the
number of the men by the head (cf. [Ch1
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#003)), nor with respect to the chiefs
of the men, divided according to their fathers'-houses (Berth.). The
supplying of the words, "divided according to their fathers'-houses," is
perfectly arbitrary. The expression הגּברים ראשׁי is rather to be
explained by the fact that, according to the natural articulations of
the people, the fathers'-houses, i.e., the groups of related families
comprehended under the name בּית־אבות, divided themselves further into
individual households, whose heads were called גּברים, as is clear from
[Jos 7:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016), because each household
had in the man, הגּבר, its natural head. הגּברים ראשׁי are therefore the
heads, not of the fathers'-houses, but of the individual households,
considered in their relation to the men as heads of households. Just as
בּית־אב sa tsuJ .s is a technical designation of the larger groups of
households into which the great families fell, so הגּבר is the technical
expression for the individual households into which the fathers'-houses
fell.

[1 Chronicles 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch1 24:5</span></span>

They divided them by lot, עם־אלּה אלּה, these with these, i.e., the one
as the other (cf. [Ch1 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#008)), so that
the classes of both were determined by lot, as both drew lots mutually.
"For holy princes and princes of God were of the sons of Eleazar, and
among the sons of Ithamar;" i.e., of both lines of priests holy princes
had come, men who had held the highest priestly dignity. The
high-priesthood, as is well known, went over entirely to Eleazar and his
descendants, but had been held for a considerable period in the time of
the judges by the descendants of Ithamar; see above, pp. 444f. In the
settlement of the classes of priests for the service, therefore, neither
of the lines was to have an advantage, but the order was to be
determined by lot for both. קדשׁ שׂרי, cf. [Isa
43:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#028), = הכּהנים שׂרי, [Ch2
36:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#014), are the high priests and the
heads of the priestly families, the highest officers among the priests,
but can hardly be the same as the ἀρχιερεῖς of the gospel history; for
the view that these ἀρχιερεῖς were the heads of the twenty-four classes
of priests cannot be made good: cf. Wichelhaus, Comment. zur
Leidensgesch. (Halle, 1855), S. 32ff. האלהים שׂרי would seem to denote
the same, and to be added as synonymous; but if there be a distinction
between the two designations, we would take the princes of God to denote
only the regular high priests, who could enter in before God into the
most holy place.

[1 Chronicles 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 24:6</span></span>

"He set them down," viz., the classes, as the lot had determined them.
מן־הלּוי, of the tribe of Levi. ול לכּהנים belongs to האבות ראשׁי, heads
of the fathers'-houses of the priests and of the Levites. The second
hemistich of [Ch1 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006) gives a more
detailed account of the drawing of the lots: "One father's-house was
drawn for Eleazar, and drawn for Ithamar." The last words are obscure.
אחוּז, to lay hold of, to draw forth ([Num
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#030), [Num
31:47](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#047)), here used of drawing lots,
signifies plucked forth or drawn from the urn. The father's-house was
plucked forth from the urn, the lot bearing its name being drawn. זאז
ואהז, which is the only well-attested reading, only some few MSS
containing the reading אהז ואחד, is very difficult. Although this
various reading is a mere conjecture, yet Gesen. (Thes. p. 68), with
Cappell and Grotius, prefers it. The repetition of the same word
expresses sometimes totality, multitude, sometimes a distributive
division; and here can only be taken in this last signification: one
father's-house drawn for Eleazar, and then always drawn (or always one
drawn) for Ithamar. So much at least is clear, that the lots of the two
priestly families were not placed in one urn, but were kept apart in
different urns, so that the lots might be drawn alternately for Eleazar
and Ithamar. Had the lot for Eleazar been first drawn, and thereafter
that for Ithamar, since Eleazar's family was the more numerous, they
would have had an advantage over the Ithamarites. But it was not to be
allowed that one family should have an advantage over the other, and the
lots were consequently drawn alternately, one for the one, and another
for the other. But as the Eleazarites were divided into sixteen
fathers'-houses, and the Ithamarites into eight, Bertheau thinks that it
was settled, in order to bring about an equality in the numbers sixteen
and eight, in so far as the drawing of the lots was concerned, that each
house of Ithamar should represent two lots, or, which is the same thing,
that after every two houses of Eleazarites one house of Ithamarites
should follow, and that the order of succession of the single houses was
fixed according to this arrangement. To this or some similar conception
of the manner of settling the order of succession we are brought, he
says, by the relation of the number eight to sixteen, and by the words
אהז and אהז ואהז. But even though this conception be readily suggested
by the relation of the number sixteen to eight, yet we cannot see how
the words אהז and אהז ואהז indicate it. These words would much rather
suggest that a lot for Eleazar alternated with the drawing of one for
Ithamar, until the eight heads of Ithamar's family had been drawn, when,
of course, the remaining eight lots of Eleazar must be drawn one after
the other. We cannot, however, come to any certain judgment on the
matter, for the words are so obscure as to be unintelligible even to the
old translators. In [Ch1 24:7-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#007) we
have the names of the fathers'-houses in the order of succession which
had been determined by the lot. יצא, of the lot coming forth from the
urn, as in [Jos 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001); [Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001). The names Jehoiarib and Jedaiah
occur together also in [Ch1 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#010); and
Jedaiah is met with, besides, in [Ezr
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036) and [Neh
7:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#039). The priest Mattathias, 1 Macc.
2:1, came of the class of Jehoiarib. Of the succeeding names, שׂערים
([Ch1 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#008)), ישׁבאב ([Ch1
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#013)), and הפּצּץ ([Ch1
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#015)) do not elsewhere occur; others,
such as חפּה ([Ch1 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#013)), גּמוּל
([Ch1 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#017)), do not recur among the
names of priests. The sixteenth class, Immer, on the contrary, and the
twenty-first, Jachin, are often mentioned; cf. [Ch1
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#010), [Ch1
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#012). Zacharias, the father of John
the Baptist, belonged to the eighth, Abiah ([Luk
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005)).

[1 Chronicles 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch1 24:19</span></span>

These are their official classes for their service (cf. [Ch1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003)), לבוא, so that they came
(according to the arrangement thus determined) into the house of Jahve,
according to their law, through Aaron their father (ancestor), i.e.,
according to the lawful arrangement which was made by Aaron for their
official service, as Jahve the God of Israel had commanded. This last
clause refers to the fact that the priestly service in all its parts was
prescribed by Jahve in the law.

(Note: Of these twenty-four classes, each one had to perform the service
during a week in order, and, as may be gathered with certainty from [Kg2
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#009) and [Ch2
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#009), from Sabbath to Sabbath.
Josephus bears witness to this division in Antt. vii. 14. 7: διέμεινεν
οὗτος ὁ μερισμὸς ἄχρι τῆς σήμερον ἡμέρας. Herzfeld, on the contrary
(Geschichte des Volks Israel von der Zerstrung des ersten Tempels, Bd.
i. S. 381ff.), following de Wette and Bramb., has declared the reference
of this organization of the priests to David to be an invention of the
chronicler, and maintains that the twenty-four classes of priests were
formed only after the exile, from the twenty-two families of priests who
returned out of exile with Zerubbabel. But this baseless hypothesis is
sufficiently refuted by the evidence adduced by Movers, die bibl. Chron.
S. 279ff., for the historical character of the arrangements attributed
to David, and described in our chapters; but the remarks of Oehler in
Herzog's Realenc. xii. S. 185f. may also be compared. An unimpeachable
witness for the prae-exilic origin of the division of the priests into
twenty-four orders is the vision of Ezekiel ([Eze
8:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016)), where the twenty-five men
who worship the sun in the priests' court represent the twenty-four
classes of priests, with the high priest at their head. In [Neh
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#001) and [Neh
12:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#012) also unimpeachable evidence
for the Davidic origin of the division of the priests into twenty-four
classes is to be found, as we shall show in treating of these passages.)

[1 Chronicles 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch1 24:20</span></span>

The classes of the Levites. - The superscription, "As to the other
Levites" ([Ch1 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#020)), when compared
with the subscription, "And they also cast lots, like to their brethren
the sons of Aaron" ([Ch1 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#031)), leads
us to expect a catalogue of these classes of Levites, which performed
the service in the house of God at the hand of, i.e., as assistants to,
the priests. הנּותרים are the Levites still remaining after the
enumeration of the priests. We might certainly regard the expression as
including all the Levites except the Aaronites (or priests); but the
statement of the subscription that they cast lots like the sons of
Aaron, and the circumstance that in 1 Chron 25 the twenty-four orders of
singers and musicians, in 1 Chron 26:1-19 the class of the doorkeepers,
and in [Ch1 26:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#020) the overseers of
the treasures, and the scribes and judges, are specially enumerated,
prove that our passage treats only of the classes of the Levites who
were employed about the worship. Bertheau has overlooked these
circumstances, and, misled by false ideas as to the catalogue in 1 Chron
23:6-23, has moreover drawn the false conclusion that the catalogue in
our verses is imperfect, from the circumstance that a part of the names
of the fathers'-houses named in 23:6-23 recur here in [Ch1
23:20-29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#020), and that we find a
considerable number of the names which are contained in 1 Chron 23:6-23
to be omitted from them. In [Ch1
23:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#020), for example, we find only
names of Kohathithes, and in [Ch1
23:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#026) of Merarites, and no
Gershonites. But it by no means follows from that, that the classes of
the Gershonites have been dropped out, or even omitted by the author of
the Chronicle as an unnecessary repetition. This conclusion would only
be warrantable if it were otherwise demonstrated, or demonstrable, that
the Levites who were at the hand of the priests in carrying on the
worship had been taken from all the three Levite families, and that
consequently Gershonites also must have been included. But no such thing
can be proved. Several fathers'-houses of the Gershonites were,
according to [Ch1 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#020)., entrusted
with the oversight of the treasures of the sanctuary. We have indeed no
further accounts as to the employment of the other Gershonites; but the
statements about the management of the treasures, and the scribes and
judges, in [Ch1 26:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#020), are
everywhere imperfect. David had appointed 6000 men to be scribes and
judges: those mentioned in [Ch1
26:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#029) amounted to only 1700 and
2700, consequently only 4400 persons in all; so that it is quite
possible the remaining 1600 were taken from among the Gershonites. Thus,
therefore, from the fact that the Gershonites are omitted from our
section, we cannot conclude that our catalogue is mutilated. In it all
the chief branches of the Kohathites are named, viz., the two lines
descended from Moses' sons ([Ch1
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#020), [Ch1
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#021)); then the Izharites,
Hebronites, and Uzzielites ([Ch1
24:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#023)), and the main branches of
the Merarites ([Ch1 24:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#026)).

[Ch1 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#020) is to be taken thus: Of the
sons of Amram, i.e., of the Kohathite Amram, from whom Moses descended
([Ch1 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#013)), that is, of the chief
Shubael, descended from Moses' son Gershon ([Ch1
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#016)), his son Jehdeiah, who as head
and representative of the class made up of his sons, and perhaps also of
his brothers, is alone mentioned.

[Ch1 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#021)

Of the father's-house Rehabiah, connected with Eliezer the second son of
Moses ([Ch1 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#016)); of the sons of
this Rehabiah, Isshiah was the head.

[Ch1 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#022)

Of the Izharites, namely of the father's-house Shelomoth ([Ch1
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#018)), his sons were under the head
Jahath. The heads of the class formed by David mentioned in [Ch1
24:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#020), Jehdeiah, Isshiah, and
Jahath, are not met with in 1 Chron 23 - a clear proof that 1 Chron 23
treats of the fathers'-houses; our section, on the contrary, of the
official classes of the Levites.

[Ch1 24:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#023)

[Ch1 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#023) treats of the Hebronites,
as is clear from [Ch1 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#019); but here
the text is imperfect. Instead of enumerating the names of the chiefs of
the classes into which David divided the four fathers'-houses into which
Hebron's descendants fell for the temple service, we find only the four
names of the heads of the fathers'-houses repeated, just as in [Ch1
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#019), - introduced, too, by וּבני as
sons of...Bertheau would therefore interpolate the name חברון after
וּבני (according to [Ch1 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#019)). This
interpolation is probably correct, but is not quite beyond doubt, for
possibly only the בּני of the four sons of Hebron named could be
mentioned as being busied about the service of the sanctuary according
to their divisions. In any case, the names of the heads of the classes
formed by the Hebronites are wanting; but it is impossible to ascertain
whether they have been dropped out only by a later copyist, or were not
contained in the authority made use of by our historian, for even the
lxx had our text.

[Ch1 24:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#026)

The classes of the Merarites. As to Jaaziah and his sons, see the
remarks on [Ch1 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#031). As Mahli's son
Eleazar had no sons, only Jerahmeel from his second son Kish, as head of
the class formed by Mahli's sons, is named. Of Mushi's sons only the
names of the four fathers'-houses into which they fell are mentioned,
the chiefs of the classes not being noticed. The heads mentioned in our
section are fifteen in all; and supposing that in the cases of the
fathers'-houses of the Hebronites and of the Merarite branch of the
Mushes, where the heads of the classes are not named, each
father's-house formed only one class, we would have only fifteen
classes. It is, however, quite conceivable that many of the
fathers'-houses of the Hebronites and Mushes were so numerous as to form
more than one class; and so out of the Levite families mentioned in [Ch1
24:20-29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#020) twenty-four classes could be
formed. The subscription, that they cast the lot like their brethren,
makes this probable; and the analogy of the division of the musicians
into twenty-four classes (1 Chron 25) turns the probability that the
Levites who were appointed to perform service for the priests, were
divided into the same number of classes, into a certainty, although we
have no express statement to that effect, and in the whole Old Testament
no information as to the order of succession of the Levites is anywhere
to be found.

[Ch1 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#031)

וגו דויד לפני, as in [Ch1 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006). In the
last clause אבות is used for בּית־אבות, as אבות ראשׁי stands frequently
for בּית־אבות ראשׁי in these catalogues. הראשׁ stands in apposition to
בּית־אבות, the father's-house; the head even as his younger brother,
i.e., he who was the head of the father's-house as etc., i.e., the
oldest among the brethren as his younger brethren. The Vulgate gives the
meaning correctly: tam majores quam minores; omnes sors aequaliter
dividebat.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 25](ch1025)

</div>
