<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1011)  [Next](ch1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 12:0</span></span>

Registers of the Valiant Men Who Helped David to the Kingdom - 1
Chronicles 12

This chapter contains two somewhat long registers, viz.: (1) a register
of the valiant men who before Saul's death went over to David, vv. 1-22;
and (2) a register of the fighting men who anointed him king in Hebron.
The first is divided into three smaller registers: (a) that of the
valiant Benjamites who came to David during his stay in Ziklag ([Ch1
12:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001)); (b) that of the Gadites and
the men of Judah and Benjamin who went over to him while he remained in
the mountain fastnesses; and (c) that of the Manassites who, on his
return to Ziklag before Saul's last battle with the Philistines, joined
themselves to him ([Ch1 12:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#019)).

[1 Chronicles 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 12:1</span></span>

The Benjamites who came to David to Ziklag. - [Ch1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001). Ziklag was originally allotted
to the Simeonites by Joshua ([Jos
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#005); [Ch1
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#030)), but at a later time came into
possession of the Philistines, and was assigned and presented by king
Achish to David, who had fled for refuge to him, as a dwelling-place for
himself and his followers; see [Sa1
27:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001). As to its situation, which has
not yet been with certainty ascertained, see the discussion on [Jos
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#031). In it David dwelt for a year
and four months, until he went to Hebron on the death of Saul. During
this time it was that the warriors of the tribe of Benjamin mentioned in
the succeeding register went over to him, as we learn from the words
עצוּר עוד, "he was still held back before Saul," a concise expression
for "while he was still held back before Saul." This last expression,
however, does not signify, "hindered from coming before Saul" (Berth.),
but inter Israelitas publice versari prohibitus (J. H. Mich.), or
rather, "before Saul, imprisoned as it were, without being able to
appear in a manner corresponding to his divine election to be ruler over
Israel." בגב והמּה, and they were among the heroes, i.e., belonged to
the heroes, the helpers of the war, i.e., to those who helped him in his
former wars; cf. [Ch1 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#017)., 21f.

[Ch1 12:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002)

קשׁת נשׁקי, "those preparing bows," i.e., those armed with bows,
synonymous with קשׁת דּרכי ([Ch1
8:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#040)); cf. [Ch2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#017); [Psa
78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009). "With the right and left hand
practised upon stones," i.e., to hurl stones, cf. [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016); "and in arrows on the bow,"
i.e., to shoot therewith. שׁאוּל מאחי, of Saul's brethren, i.e., of the
men of the tribe, not "of his nearer relatives," and consequently of
Benjamin, has been added as an explanation; cf. [Ch1
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#029), where בנימן בּני and שׁאוּל אחי
are synonyms. - In [Ch1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#003). we have
the names. הראשׁ, the head, i.e., the leader of this host of warriors;
compare [Ch1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#007), [Ch1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#012). הגּבעתי, cf. Gibeah of Saul or
Benjamin, cf. [Ch1 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#031); and for its
situation, see on [Jos 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028). הענתתי,
from the priests' city Anathoth, now Anata; see on [Jos
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024). In [Ch1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#004) the Gibeonite Ismaiah is called
"hero among the thirty, and over the thirty," - words which can hardly
have any other sense than that Ismaiah belonged also to David's corps of
thirty heroes (1 Chron 11), and was (temporarily) their leader, although
his name does not occur in 1 Chron 11. It is probable that the reason of
the omission was, that at the time when the list was prepared he was no
longer alive. הגּדרתי, of Gedera, a city of the tribe of Judah in the
Shephelah, which, according to Van de Velde (Reise, ii. S. 166), was
probably identical with the village Ghedera, which lies to the left of
the road Tel-es-Safieh to Akir, about an hour to the south-west of
Jabne. In any case, it corresponds well with the statements of the Onom.
As to Gedrus, or Gaedur, see on [Jos
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#036). Immediately afterwards in [Ch1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#007) Gedor is mentioned, a city in the
mountains of Judah, to the westward of the road which leads from Hebron
to Jerusalem (see on [Jos 15:58](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#058)); and
from that fact Bertheau imagines we must conclude that the men of Judah
are enumerated as well as the Benjamites. But this conclusion is not
valid; for from the very beginning, when the domains and cities were
assigned to the individual tribes under Joshua, they were not the
exclusive possession of the individual tribes, and at a later period
they were still less so. In course of time the respective tribal domains
underwent (in consequence of wars and other events) many alterations,
not only in extent, but also in regard to their inhabitants, so that in
Saul's time single Benjamite families may quite well have had their home
in the cities of Judah.

[Ch1 12:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#005)

החרוּפי (Keri החריפי) is a patronymic, which denotes either one
descended from Haruph, or belonging to the חריף בּני mentioned in [Neh
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#034) along with the Gibeonites. The
קרחים, Korahites, in [Ch1 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#006) are,
without doubt (cf. Delitzsch, Ps. S. 300), descendants of the Levite
Korah, one division of whom David made guardian of the thresholds of the
tent erected for the ark of the covenant on Zion, because their fathers
had been watchers of the entrance of the camp of Jahve, i.e., had in
that earlier time held the office of watchers by the tabernacle; see on
[Ch1 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#018). The names Elkanah and
Azareel are thoroughly Levitic names, and their service in the porter's
office in the holy place may have roused in them the desire to fight for
David, the chosen of the Lord. But there is no reason why we should,
with Bertheau, interpret the words as denoting descendants of the almost
unknown Korah of the tribe of Judah ([Ch1
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#043)), or, with the older
commentators, refer it to some other unmentioned Benjamite who bore this
name. The explanation of the connection existing between these Levitic
Korahites and the Benjamites, which is presupposed by the mention of
them among the Benjamites, may be found in the fact that the Levites
received no tribal domain of their own, and possessed only cities for
dwelling in in the domains of the other tribes, with whom they were
consequently civilly incorporated, so that those who dwelt in the cities
of Benjamin were properly reckoned among the Benjamites. At the
partition of the land under Joshua, it is true, only the priests
received their cities in Judah, Simeon, and Benjamin; while, on the
contrary, the Kohathites, who were not priests, among whom the Korahites
were, received their cities in the tribal domain of Ephraim, Dan, and
half-Manasseh (Josh 21:9-26). But when the tabernacle was transferred
from Shiloh to Nob, and afterwards to Gibeon, the Korahite doorkeepers
must, without doubt, have migrated to one of the Levitic cities of
Benjamin, probably for the most part to Gibeon, and who were reckoned
among the Benjamites. As to הגּדור מן, vide [Ch1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#004). If this be so, there remains no
cogent reason for supposing that in our register, besides the
Benjamites, men out of other tribes are also introduced. With that there
falls away at once Bertheau's further conclusion, that the author of the
Chronicle has considerably abridged the register, and that from [Ch1
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#004) onwards men of Judah also are
named, the list of whom must certainly (?) have been originally
introduced by special superscription similar to those in [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008), [Ch1
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#016), [Ch1
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#019). His further reason for his
conjecture - namely, that our register makes use of the qualificative
epithets, "the Gibeathite," "the Anathothite," etc., only in a few
special cases-is of no force whatever; for we are not justified in
assuming that we may expect to find here, as in the register in 1 Chron
11:26-47, such qualificatives after every individual name. The character
of our register cannot be arrived at by a comparison with the list of
David's heroes in 1 Chron 11; it should rather be sought for by
comparing it with the succeeding list, whose contents are of a similar
kind with its own. David's chosen corps of thirty heroes was much more
important for the history of his reign, than the lists of the men who
joined themselves to him and fought on his behalf before he ascended the
throne. For that reason the thirty heroes are not only mentioned by
name, but their descent also is told us, while that more detailed
information is not given with regard to the others just mentioned. Only
the names of the Gadites and Manassites are mentioned; of the Benjamites
and men of Judah, who came to him in the mountain fastness ([Ch1
12:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#016)), the name of only one,
Amasai, is given; while of the Benjamites who came to Ziklag, [Ch1
12:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#003), such qualificative statements
are made in reference to only a few individuals, and in these cases the
object probably was to distinguish them from other well-known persons of
the same name.

[1 Chronicles 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch1 12:8</span></span>

The Gadites, Benjamites, and men of Judah who joined themselves to David
during his sojourn in the mountain fastness. - [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008). David's sojourn in the mountain
hold falls in the first years of his flight from Saul, [Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001). מצד, pointed with Pathach
instead of with Kamets (מצד, cf. [Ch1
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#016)), on account of its intimate
connection with מדבּרה, is synonymous with מצוּדה ([Sa1
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#022), etc.). The addition מדבּרה,
"towards the wilderness," shows that מצד denotes a mountain-top or
mountain-fortress in the wilderness of Judah. If we compare the account
in 1 Sam 22-24, we learn that David at that time did not hide himself in
one single definite mountain-fortress, but sought and found
resting-places, now here, now there, in the wilderness, on the summits
of the hills (cf. בּמּצדות בּמּדבּר, [Sa1
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014); [Sa1
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001)); so that מצד here is to be
understood, as המּצוּדה, [Sa1 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003),
also is, generally of the fastnesses in the mountains of Judah. At that
time there gathered round David a great company of discontented and
oppressed men, to the number of about 400, - men dissatisfied with
Saul's rule, whose leader he became, and who soon amounted to 600 men
([Sa1 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002) and [Sa1
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#013)). To these belong the Gadites,
and the men out of Benjamin and Judah, whose adhesion to David is
noticed in our verses. נבדּלוּ, they separated themselves from the other
Gadites who were on Saul's side, "strong heroes," as in [Jos
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003); cf. חיל גּבּורי, [Ch1
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#024); [Ch1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#002), [Ch1
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#009), etc. למּלחמה צבא אנשׁי, men for
service in the host for the war, i.e., combatants practised in war. ורמח
צנּה ערכי, preparing shield and spear, i.e., wielding shield and spear,
practised in their use: the preparing of these weapons includes the
handling of them. Instead of ורמח, Veneta and many of the older copies
have וּמגן; but it is not supported by MS authority, and moreover is not
congruous with the passage. Lions' faces their faces, i.e., lion-like in
appearance, thoroughly warlike figures; cf. [Sa2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#023). "As roes running swiftly on the
mountains;" cf. [Sa2 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#018). This
description of the strength and swiftness of these warriors recalls, as
Bertheau remarks, the similar expressions used in the historical books
concerning heroes of David's time. It has manifestly been drawn from the
original documents, not added by the chronicler. In [Ch1
12:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#009) the names are enumerated
individually. עשׂר עשׁתּי, at the end of a series of ordinal numbers,
denotes the eleventh; cf. [Ch1 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#012).

[1 Chronicles 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 12:14</span></span>

הצּבא ראשׁי, heads of the war-host, i.e., chief warriors, not leaders of
the host. וגו למאה אחד, "one for a hundred, (viz.) the small and the
greater for a thousand," i.e., the smaller (weaker) could cope with a
hundred, the stronger with a thousand men; cf. [Lev
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#008). This, which is the only correct
interpretation, is that received by Bertheau and the older Jewish
commentators. The Vulgate, on the contrary, translates, novissimus
centum militibus praeerat et maximus mille, which is inadmissible, for
in that case על must have been used instead of ל. The אחד belongs to
both the clauses which it precedes, to הקּטן and to הגּדול, and is
placed immediately before למאה to emphasize the contrast between one and
a hundred. In [Ch1 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#015) we have a
proof of their valour, in an account of a bold exploit performed by
them. In the first month of the year, that is, in spring, when the
Jordan overflows all its banks, they crossed the river and put to flight
all the dwellers in the valleys towards the east and towards the west.
This happened, probably, when they separated themselves from their
brethren and went over to David, when they must have had to cut their
way through the adherents of Saul (Berth.). The Piel מלּא with על
denotes to make full, to make to run over, in the signification to
overflow. The Kethibh גּדיתיו comes from גּדיה elsewhere only the plural
גּדתיו, so also here in the Keri. In the dry summer season the Jordan
may be crossed by wading at various points (fords); while in spring, on
the contrary, when it is so swollen by the melting snows of Lebanon,
that in some parts it overflows its banks, it is very dangerous to
attempt to cross. See on [Jos 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015).
העמקים, "the valleys," for the inhabitants of the valleys.

[1 Chronicles 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch1 12:16</span></span>

There came to David in the mountain-fastness also men of Benjamin and
Judah (cf. [Ch1 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008)). Their names are
not in the lists, possibly because they were not handed down in the
historical works made use of by the chronicler. At their head, as we
learn from [Ch1 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#018), stood Amasai,
chief of the thirty, i.e., of the corps formed of the thirty heroes (see
[Ch1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#011)), although his name does
not occur in the catalogue, 1 Chron 11. According to this, Amasai must
have occupied a very important position under David; but since the name
עמשׂי is not elsewhere mentioned in the history of David, the older
commentators have conjectured that עמשׂי may have been the same person
as עמשׂא, son of Abigail ([Ch1 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#017)),
whom Absalom made captain in Joab's place, and whom David, after the
victory over the rebels, wished to make commander-in-chief in the room
of Joab, and whom for that reason Joab afterwards murdered ([Sa2
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025); [Sa2
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#014); [Sa2
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#004), [Sa2
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#008).); or identical with אבשׁי the
son of Zeruiah, [Ch1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#016) and [Ch1
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#020). Of these conjectures the first
is much more probable than the second. To meet these men, David went
forth from his fastness, and asked them with what purpose they came to
him. "If for peace," to stand by him, "then shall there be to me towards
you a heart for union," i.e., I will be with you of one heart, be true
to you. ליחד לבב is plainer than אחד לב, [Ch1
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038). "But if לרמּותני, to practise
deceit against me (to be guilty of a מרמה) for mine enemies (to deliver
me to them), although there be no wrong in my hands, the God of our
fathers look thereon and punish;" cf. [Ch2
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#022). The God of our fathers, i.e.,
of the patriarchs (cf. [Ezr 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027); [Ch2
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#006), and [Exo
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#013).), who rules in and over Israel,
who shields the innocent and punishes the guilty.

[1 Chronicles 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 12:18</span></span>

Then came the Spirit upon Amasai, so that he proclaimed himself
enthusiastic for David and his cause. With לבשׁה רוּח cf. [Jdg
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#034). Usually יהוה or אלהים is found
with this expression ([Ch2 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020)), and
here also the Spirit of God is meant; and אלהים is omitted only because
all that was of importance here was to show that the resolution
announced by Amasai was an effect of higher spiritual influence. לך, to
thee, David (do we belong), thine are we. עמּך, "with thee," sc. will we
remain and fight. "Peace be to thee, and peace be to thy helpers; for
thy God helpeth thee." עזרך, He has helped thee in the fortunate combats
in which you have heretofore been engaged ([Sa1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#012).), and He will help still
further. David thereupon received them and made them captains of his
band. הגּדוּד, the warrior-band, which had gathered round David, and
were still gathering round him, [Sa1
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002); [Sa1
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008), cf. also [Ch1
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021); [Sa1
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#008), [Sa1
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#015), [Sa1
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#023), etc.

[1 Chronicles 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch1 12:19</span></span>

The Manassites who went over to David before the last battle of the
Philistines against Saul. - על גפל, to fall to one, is used specially of
deserters in war who desert their lord and go over to the enemy: cf.
[Kg2 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#011); [Sa1
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#003). אל יפּול, in the last clause of
the verse, is a synonymous expression. The Manassites went over "when
David went with the Philistines against Israel to the war, and (yet)
helped them not; for upon advisement (בּעצה, cf. [Pro
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#018)), the lords of the Philistines
had sent him away, saying, 'For our heads, he will fall away to his
master Saul.' " [Sa1 29:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#002) contains
the historical commentary on this event. When the lords of the
Philistines collected their forces to march against Saul, David, who had
found refuge with King Achish, was compelled to join the host of that
prince with his band. But when the other Philistine princes saw the
Hebrews, they demanded that they should be sent out of the army, as they
feared that David might turn upon them during the battle, and so win
favour by his treachery with Saul his lord. See the commentary on [Sa1
29:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#001). בּראשׁנוּ, for our heads,
i.e., for the price of them, giving them as a price to obtain a friendly
reception from Saul (cf. [Sa1 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#004)).
In consequence of this remonstrance, Achish requested David to return
with his warriors to Ziklag. On this return march ("as he went to
Ziklag," cf. with בּלכתּו the ללכת of [Sa1
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#011)), and consequently before the
battle in which Saul lost his life (Berth.), and not after Saul's great
misfortune, as Ewald thinks, the Manassites whose names follow went over
to David. The seven named in [Ch1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#020) were "heads of the thousands of
Manasseh," i.e., of the great families into which the tribe of Manasseh
was divided, and as such were leaders of the Manassite forces in war:
cf. [Num 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014) with [Exo
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#025), and the commentary on the
latter passage.

[1 Chronicles 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch1 12:21</span></span>

These

(Note: We take והמּה to refer to the Manassites named in [Ch1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#020), like the והמּה of [Ch1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001) and the הם אלּה הם eht of [Ch1
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#015). Bertheau, on the contrary,
thinks on various grounds that המּה refers to all the heroes who have
been spoken of in vv. 1-20. In the first place, it was not the
Manassites alone who took part in the conflict with Amalek, for David
won the victory with his whole force of 600 men ([Sa1
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#009)), among whom, without doubt,
those named in vv. 1-18 were included. Then, secondly, a clear
distinction is made between those who gave in their adhesion to and
helped David at an earlier period ([Ch1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001), [Ch1
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#007), [Ch1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022)), and those who came to him in
Hebron ([Ch1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#023)). And finally, the
general remark in [Ch1 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022) is
connected with [Ch1 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021) by the
grounding כּי, so that we must regard [Ch1
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021) and [Ch1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022) as a subscription closing the
preceding catalogues. but none of these arguments are very effective.
The grounding כי in [Ch1 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022) does
not refer to the whole of [Ch1 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021),
but only to the last clause, or, to be more accurate, only to בּצּבא,
showing that David had an army. The second proves nothing, and in the
first only so much is correct, that not merely the seven Manassites
named in [Ch1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#020) took, part in the
battle with Amalek, but also the warriors who had formerly gone over to
David; but from that there is not the slightest reason to conclude that
this is expressed by והמּה. It is manifest from the context and the plan
of the register, that וגו עזרוּ והמּה can only refer to those of whom it
is said in [Ch1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#020) that they went
over to David as he was returning to Ziklag. If [Ch1
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021) and [Ch1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022) were a subscription to all the
preceding registers, instead of והמּה another expression which would
separate the verse somewhat more from that immediately preceding would
have been employed, perhaps כּל־אלה.)

helped David הגּדוּד על, against the detachment of Amalekites, who
during David's absence had surprised and burnt Ziklag, and led captive
the women and children ([Sa1 30:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001)).
This interpretation, which Rashi also has (contra turmam Amalekitarum),
and which the Vulgate hints at in its adversus latrunculos, rests upon
the fact that in [Sa1 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#008), [Sa1
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#015), the word הגּדוּד, which in
general only denotes single detachments or predatory bands, is used of
the Amalekite band; whence the word can only refer to the march of David
against the Amalekites, of which we have an account in [Sa1
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#009)., and not to the combats which he
had with Saul. "For they were all valiant heroes, and were שׂרים,
captains in the army," sc. which gathered round David.

[1 Chronicles 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch1 12:22</span></span>

"For every day" (בּיום יום לעת, at the time of each day) "came (people)
to David to help him, until to a great host, like a host of God," i.e.,
until his band grew to a camp like to a host of God. אלהים מחנה, a host
which God has formed, and in which the power of God shows itself; cf.
hills and cedars of God, [Psa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007);
[Psa 80:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#011). In these concluding
remarks to the enumeration by name of the valiant men who during Saul's
lifetime went over to David, there is no exaggeration which would betray
an idealizing historian (Movers, S. 270). The greatness of a host of God
is to be estimated according to the power and the spirit, not according
to the number, of the warriors, so that we need not take the words to
mean a host of thousands and tens of thousands. David had at first 400,
afterwards 600, valiant warriors, against whom Saul with his thousands
could accomplish nothing. The increase in their number from 400 to 600
shows that the host increased from day to day, especially when we keep
in mind the fact that after Saul's defeat considerable bands of
fugitives must certainly have gone over to David before he was anointed
in Hebron to be king over Judah. The expression is only rhetorical, not
idealizing or exaggerating.

[1 Chronicles 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch1 12:23</span></span>

List of the warriors who made David king in Hebron. - The superscription
([Ch1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#023)) runs: "These are the
numbers of the bands of the men equipped for war, who came," etc. החלוּץ
is a collective noun, denoting the equipped manhood. ראשׁי signifies
here, not principes exercitus, as the Vulgate renders it, heads, i.e.,
leaders of the army (Berth.), but literally denotes sums, i.e.,
companies, bands of soldiers, as in [Jdg
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016), [Jdg
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#020); [Jdg
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#034), [Jdg
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#037), [Jdg
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#044); [Sa1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001); or it may perhaps also be heads
for individuals, as ראשׁ in [Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030).
Both these meanings are linguistically certain; so that we cannot say,
with Bertheau, that ראשׁי before החלוּץ denotes, according to the
well-ascertained use of language, leaders of the army, and that גלגלת
would have been used had it been wished to express the number by heads,
e.g., 1 Chron 23:3-24. That use of the word is indeed also found, but it
cannot be proved to be the only proper one. If we take ראשׁי here to
denote leaders, we bring the superscription into irreconcilable
contradiction with the contents of the following catalogue, which gives
the names of the heads and the number of the warriors ([Ch1
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#027).) only in the case of the
families of Aaron, and in that of Issachar the number of the princes;
while in the case of the other tribes we have only the numbers of the
bands or detachments. This contradiction cannot be got rid of, as
Bertheau imagines, by the hypothesis that the superscription referred
originally to a catalogue which was throughout similar in plan to that
which we find in [Ch1 12:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#026), and
that the author of the Chronicle has very considerably abridged the more
detailed statements of the original documents which he used. This
hypothesis is a mere makeshift, in which we have the less need "to take
refuge," as the catalogue has neither the appearance of having been
abridged or revised by the author of our Chronicle. It is shown to be a
faithful copy of a more ancient authority, both by the characteristic
remarks which it contains on the individual tribes, and by the
inequality in the numbers. Bertheau, indeed, derives support for his
hypothesis "from the inequality of the statements of number, and their
relation to each other," and upon that ground throws doubt upon the
accuracy and correctness of the numbers, but in both cases without
sufficient warrant. If we place the respective statements together
synoptically, we see that there came to David to Hebron -

Of the tribe of: Judah 6,800 men Of the tribe of: Simeon 7,100 men Of
the tribe of: Levi 4,600 men With Jehoiada the prince of Aaron 3,700 men
With Zadok and his father's-house 22 שׂרים (captains) Of the tribe of:
Benjamin 3,000 men Of the tribe of: Ephraim 20,800 men Of the half-tribe
of: Manasseh 18,000 men Of the tribe of: Issachar 200 chiefs and all
their brethren Of the tribe of: Zebulun 50,000 men Of the tribe of:
Naphtali 37,000 men with 1000 שׂרים Of the tribe of: Dan 28,000 men Of
the tribe of: Asher 40,000 men Of two and a half trans-Jordanic tribes
120,000 men Total 336,600 men with 1222 heads and captains

The total is not objected to by Bertheau, and its correctness is placed
beyond a doubt by the recollection that we have here to do not with the
representation of the various estates of the kingdom, but with a
declaration of the will of the whole nation, who wished to make David
their king. We must, if we are to estimate these statements, endeavour
to go back in imagination to the circumstances of that time when Israel,
although settled in the land, had not quite laid aside the character of
a nation of warriors, in which every man capable of bearing arms marched
to battle with, and for, his king. Now if the total number of fighting
men in Israel was 600,000 in the time of Moses, and if, when the people
were numbered in the last year of David's reign, there were in Israel
800,000, and in Judah 500,000 ([Sa2
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009)), - the Levites being excluded in
both cases - the 340,000 men of all the tribes, except Issachar, in
reference to which no number is given, or after subtracting Judah and
Levi, the 324,500 men out of the remaining tribes, is not much more than
a half of the men capable of bearing arms in Moses' time, and about a
fourth part of the fighting population towards the end of David's reign.
But the relation of the numbers in the respective tribes, on the
contrary, is somewhat surprising, and calls forth from Bertheau the
following remarks: "To Judah, David's tribe, which from the earliest
time had been famous for its numbers and its powers, 6800 are assigned;
to Zebulun, on the contrary, 50,000; to Naphtali, 1000 princes at the
head of 37,000 warriors; to the two and a half East-Jordanic tribes,
120,000 men, etc. How does it happen that Zebulun and Naphtali, for
example, two tribes that play no great part in Israel's history, are so
strongly represented, while Judah sends only a relatively small number
of warriors?" To this question we answer, that Judah's being represented
by a number of warriors relatively so small, is accounted for simply by
the fact that David had already been king over Judah for seven years,
and consequently that tribe did not need to make him king by coming with
the whole of its warriors, or the majority of them, when the other
tribes were doing homage to David, but sent only a small number of its
male population to this solemn act, who were witnesses in the name of
the whole tribe to the homage proffered by the others. The same remark
applies to the tribe of Simeon, whose domain was enclosed by that of
Judah, and which had consequently recognised David as king at the same
time as the larger tribe. In regard to the numbers of the other tribes,
Levi had in the last year of David's reign 38,000 men from thirty years
old and upwards ([Ch1 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#003)); and when
here only 4600 Levites, besides the priestly families, are spoken of,
the question arises, whether this number is to be understood to refer to
the Levites in all the tribes, or only to those dwelling outside of
Judah and Simeon, in the cities assigned to them by Moses and Joshua.
The smallness of the number (3000) from the tribe of Benjamin is
explained by the remark that the majority of this tribe still held to
the house of Saul ([Ch1 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#029)). The
only thing which is at all remarkable about the other numbers is, that
the Ephraimites are so few (20,800 men) in contrast to the 180,000 men
brought into the field by the half-tribe of Manasseh. But if we consider
that Ephraim, which at the first census under Moses at Sinai had 40,500
men, had decreased to 32,500 at the second census in the wilderness of
Moab, it is not improbable that at the time now treated of that tribe
may not have been very strong in fighting men. For in Saul's last war
with the Philistines, when they had pressed forward so far as Mount
Gilboa, and also in Abner's struggle on behalf of King Ishbosheth for
the re-conquest of the territory occupied by them, it probably suffered
more, and was more weakened, than any of the other tribes. Perhaps also
we may add that Ephraim, owing to its jealousy of Judah, which dates
from the time of the judges, was not very much disposed to make David
king over all Israel. That Zebulun and Naphtali are here so numerously
represented, although they do not otherwise play an important part, is
no reason for suspecting that the numbers given are incorrect. Since
Zebulun under Moses numbered 57,400 men, and at a later time 60,500, and
Naphtali 53,400 and 45,400 men capable of bearing arms respectively on
the same occasions (see t. i. 2, S. 192); the first named tribe may
easily have sent 50,000, the other 37,000 men to David, as the tribes
dwelling in the north had been least affected by the wars which Israel
carried on in the second half of the period of the judges and under
Saul. Both of these tribes, too, are praised in the song of Deborah as a
people ready to risk their lives for their fatherland ([Jdg
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018)), and may have very much
increased in the succeeding time. And besides all this, the tribes
Asher, Reuben, Gad, and the half-tribe of Manasseh are indeed more
feebly represented than Zebulun, but more strongly than Naphtali. There
therefore remains no reason for doubting the historical accuracy of the
numbers given; but it is of course to be understood that the numbers,
which are stated only in hundreds, are not the result of an enumeration
of the individual persons, but only of an estimate of the various
detachments according to the military partition of the tribes.

In regard to להסב מ, cf. [Ch1 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014);
and as to יהוה כּפי, see the remark on יהוה כּדבר, [Ch1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#003), [Ch1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#010).

[Ch1 12:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#024)

For ורמח צנּה נשׂאי, cf. [Ch1 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008),
[Ch1 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#018). לצבא חיל גּבּורי, valiant
men for the war service.

[Ch1 12:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#026)

Jehoiada is thought by Rashi, Kimchi, and others, to be the father of
Benaiah, [Ch1 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#022). He was נגיד for
Aaron, i.e., prince of the house of Aaron, head of the family of the
Aaronites, not princeps sacerdotum, which was a title appertaining to
the high-priesthood, an office held at that time by Abiathar ([Sa1
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009)).

[Ch1 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#028)

Zadok, a youth, i.e., then still a youth, may be the same who was made
high priest in place of Abiathar ([Kg1
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#026), but see on [Kg1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#008)). "And his father's-house,
twenty-two princes." The father's-house of Zadok is the Aaronite family
descended from Eleazar, which was at that time so numerous that it could
muster twenty-two שׂרים, family chiefs, who went with Zadok to Hebron.

[Ch1 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#029)

From the tribe of Benjamin, to which Saul belonged (שׁאוּל אחי, see on
[Ch1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002)), only 3000 men came, for
until that time (הנּה ועד, cf. [Ch1
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#018)) the greater number of them were
keeping the guard of the house of Saul, i.e., were devoted to the
interests of the fallen house. For משׁמרת שׁמר, see on [Gen
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005) and [Lev
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035). From this we learn that the
attachment of the Benjamites to Saul continued even after the death of
his son Ishbosheth, and that it was with difficulty that they could
bring themselves to recognise David as king.

[Ch1 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#030)

Of Ephraim 20,800 famous men (שׁמות אנשׁי, see on [Gen
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004)); לבית־אב, "in their
fathers'-houses."

[Ch1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#031)

Of half Manasseh, this side Jordan (cf. [Ch1
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#037)), 18,000, who were appointed by
name, i.e., chosen as famous men to go thither and make David king.
בשׁמות נקּבוּ, as in [Num 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017), vide
on [Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016). The tribe of Manasseh
had consequently held a general consultation on the matter, and
determined upon sending their representatives.

[Ch1 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#032)

From Issachar came "men of understanding in reference to the times, to
know (i.e., who knew) what Israel should do." בּינה יודע, knowing in
insight (cf. [Ch2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#012)), i.e.,
experienced in a thing, having understanding of it. From this remark
some of the older commentators (Chald., various Rabbins, and Cleric.)
concluded that the tribe of Issachar had distinguished itself beyond the
other tribes by astronomical and physical knowledge, by which it was
qualified to ascertain and make choice of proper times for political
action. But the words do not suggest astronomical or astrological
knowledge, but merely state, as Salomo ben-Melech in the Miclol Yophi
long ago interpreted them, noverant tempora ad omnem rem et quodque
negotium, sicut sapiens dixit: Suum cuique tempus est et opportunitas
cuique rei, Koh. iii. 1. The words refer not to the whole tribe, but
only to the two hundred heads, who, as Lavater expresses it, are
designated prudentes viri, as being men qui quid, quando et quomodo
agendum esset, varia lectione et usu rerum cognoscebant. The only thing
to be objected to in his statement is the varia lectione, since a sound
and correct judgment in political matters does not necessarily
presuppose scientific training and a wide acquaintance with books. The
statement in question, therefore, affirms nothing more than that the
tribe of Issachar (in deciding to raise David to the throne) followed
the judgment of its princes, who rightly estimated the circumstances of
the time. For all their brethren, i.e., all the men of this tribe, went
with the two hundred chiefs. על־פּיהם, according to their mouth, i.e.,
followed their judgment; cf. [Num
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#027); [Deu
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#005).

[Ch1 12:33-38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#033)

מלחמה ערכי, preparing war with all manner of warlike weapons, i.e.,
practice in the use of all kinds of weapons for war; cf. [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008). The infinitive לעדר is
substantially a continuation of the preceding participles, but
grammatically is dependent on בּאוּ understood (cf. [Ch1
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#023), [Ch1
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038)). Cf. as to this free use of the
infinitive with ל, Ew. 351, c. The signification of the verb עדר, which
occurs only here ([Ch1 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#033), [Ch1
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038)), is doubtful. According to the
lxx and the Vulg. (βοηθῆσαι, venerunt in auxilium), and nine MSS, which
read לעזר, we would be inclined to take עדר for the Aramaic form of the
Hebrew עזר (cf. Arabic ‛dr), to help; but that meaning does not suit
מערכה עדר, [Ch1 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038). Its connection
there demands that עדר should signify "to close up together," to set in
order the battle array; and so here, closing up together with not double
heart, i.e., with whole or stedfast heart (שׁלם בּלבב שׁלם, [Ch1
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038)), animo integro et firmo atque
concordi; cf. [Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003) (Mich.). - In
[Ch1 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038) we have a comprehensive
statement; כּל־אלּה, which refers to all the bodies of men enumerated in
[Ch1 12:24-37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#024). שׁרית is שׁארית
defectively written; and as it occurs only here, it may be perhaps a
mere orthographical error. The whole of the remainder of Israel who did
not go to Hebron were אחד לב אחד er, of one, i.e., of united heart ([Ch2
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#012)): they had a unanimous wish to
make David king.

[Ch1 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#039)

Those gathered together were there three days eating and drinking,
holding festive meals (cf. [Sa1 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#016);
[Kg1 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#045), etc.), for their brethren
had prepared them for them. The object of הכינוּ, sc. the eating and
drinking, may easily be supplied from the context. אחיהם are the
inhabitants of Hebron and the neighbourhood; the tribe of Judah in
general, who had already recognised David as king.

[Ch1 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#040)

But it was not only these who performed this service, but also those of
the remaining tribes dwelling near them; and indeed the men of Issachar,
Zebulun, and Naphtali, those on the northern frontier of Canaan as well
as those who bordered upon Judah, had sent provisions upon beasts of
burden, "for joy was in Israel." This joy moved those who remained at
home to show their sympathy with the national festival solemnized at
Hebron by sending the provisions. For דּבלים, masses of dried figs, and
צמּוּקים, masses of raisins or cakes, see on [Sa1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 13](ch1013)

</div>
