<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2020)  [Next](ch2022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 21:0</span></span>

Jehoshaphat's Death, and the Reign of His Son Joram - 2 Chronicles 21

The account of the death and burial of Jehoshaphat is carried over to 2
Chron 21, because Joram's first act after Jehoshaphat's death, [Ch2
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002)., stands in essential connection
with that event, since Joram began his reign with the murder of all his
brothers, the sons of Jehoshaphat ([Ch2
21:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002)). The further account of Joram
([Ch2 21:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#005)) agrees almost verbally
with the account in [Kg2 8:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#017); then
in [Ch2 21:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012) there follows further
information as to the divine chastisements inflicted upon Joram for his
crime, which is not found in 2 Kings; and in [Ch2
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#020) we have remarks on his end,
which correspond to the statements in [Kg2
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#024).

[2 Chronicles 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 21:1</span></span>

[Ch2 21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#001)

Jehoshaphat's death, and the slaughter of his sons by Joram. - [Ch2
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002), [Ch2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#003). Joram had six brothers, whom
their father had plentifully supplied with means of subsistence -
presents in silver, gold, and precious things - "in the fenced cities of
Judah;" i.e., he had made them, as Rehoboam also had made his sons,
commandants of fortresses, with ample revenues; but the kingdom he gave
to Joram as the first-born. Among the six names two Azariah's occur, -
the one written Azarjah, the other Azarjahu. Jehoshaphat is called king
of Israel instead of king of Judah, because he as king walked in the
footsteps of Israel, Jacob the wrestler with God, and was a true king of
God's people.

[Ch2 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#004)

Now when Joram ascended (raised himself to) the throne of his father,
and attained to power (יתחזּק as in [Ch2
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)), he slew all his brethren with
the sword, and also some of the princes of Israel, i.e., the tribal
princes of his kingdom. It could hardly be from avarice that he slew his
brothers, merely to get possession of their property; probably it was
because they did not sympathize with the political course which he was
entering upon, and disapproved of the idolatrous conduct of Joram and
his wife Athaliah. This may be gathered from the fact that in [Ch2
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#013) they are called better than
Joram. The princes probably drew down upon themselves the wrath of
Joram, or of his heathen consort, by disapproving of the slaughter of
the royal princes, or by giving other signs of discontent with the
spirit of their reign.

[2 Chronicles 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 21:5</span></span>

Duration and spirit of Joram's reign. - These verses agree with [Kg2
8:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#017), with the exception of some
immaterial divergences, and have been commented upon in the remarks on
that passage. - In [Ch2 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#007) the
thought is somewhat otherwise expressed than in [Kg2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#019) : "Jahve would not destroy the
house of David, because of the covenant that He had made with David;"
instead of, "He would not destroy Judah because of David His servant, as
He had said." Instead of לבניו ניר לו לתת we have in the Chronicle
וּלבניו ניר לו לתת, to give him a lamp, and that in respect of his sons,
w being inserted before לבניו to bring the idea more prominently
forward. In regard to שׂריו עם, [Ch2
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#009), instead of צעירה, [Kg2
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#021), see on 2 Kings loc. cit. At the
end of [Ch2 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#009) the words, "and the
people fled to their tents" ([Kg2
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#021)), whereby the notice of Joram's
attempt to bring Edom again under his sway, which is in itself obscure
enough, becomes yet more obscure.

[2 Chronicles 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 21:10</span></span>

The chronicler concludes the account of the revolt of Edom and of the
city of Libnah against Judah's dominion with the reflection: "For he
(Joram) had forsaken Jahve the God of the fathers," and consequently had
brought this revolt upon himself, the Lord punishing him thereby for his
sin. "Yea, even high places did he make." The גּם placed at the
beginning may be connected with בּמות (cf. [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)), while the subject is
emphasized by הוּא: The same who had forsaken the God of the fathers,
made also high places, which Asa and Jehoshaphat had removed, [Ch2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#002), [Ch2
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#004); [Ch2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#006). "And he caused the inhabitants
of Jerusalem to commit fornication," i.e., seduced them into the
idolatrous worship of Baal. That the Hiph. ויּזן is to be understood of
the spiritual whoredom of Baal-worship we learn from [Ch2
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#013) : "as the house of Ahab caused
to commit fornication." וידּח, "and misled Judah," i.e., drew them away
by violence from the right way. ידּח is to be interpreted in accordance
with [Deu 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006), [Deu
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#011).

[2 Chronicles 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 21:12</span></span>

The prophet Elijah's letter against Joram, and the infliction of the
punishments as announced. - [Ch2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#012). There came to him a writing
from the prophet Elijah to this effect: "Thus saith Jahve, the God of
thy father David, Because thou hast not walked in the ways of
Jehoshaphat, ... but hast walked in the way of the kings of Israel, ...
and also hast slain thy brethren, the house of thy father, who were
better than thyself; behold, Jahve will send a great plague upon thy
people, and upon thy sons, and thy wives, and upon all thy goods; and
thou shalt have great sickness, by disease of thy bowels, until thy
bowels fall out by reason of the sickness day by day." מכתב, writing, is
a written prophetic threatening, in which his sins are pointed out to
Joram, and the divine punishment for them announced. In regard to this
statement, we need not be surprised that nothing is elsewhere told us of
any written prophecies of Elijah; for we have no circumstantial accounts
of his prophetic activity, by which we might estimate the circumstances
which may have induced him in this particular instance to commit his
prophecy to writing. But, on the other hand, it is very questionable if
Elijah was still alive in the reign of Joram of Judah. His translation
to heaven is narrated in 2 Kings 2, between the reign of Ahaziah and
Joram of Israel, but the year of the event is nowhere stated in
Scripture. In the Jewish Chronicle Seder olam, 2 Chr 17:45, it is indeed
placed in the second year of Ahaziah of Israel; but this statement is
not founded upon historical tradition, but is a mere deduction from the
fact that his translation is narrated in 2 Kings 2 immediately after
Ahaziah's death; and the last act of Elijah of which we have any record
(2 Kings 1) falls in the second year of that king. Lightfoot, indeed
(Opp. i. p. 85), Ramb., and Dereser have concluded from [Kg2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011) that Elijah was taken away from
the earth in the reign of Jehoshaphat, because according to that
passage, in the campaign against the Moabites, undertaken in company
with Joram of Israel, Jehoshaphat inquired for a prophet, and received
the answer that Elisha was there, who had poured water upon the hands of
Elijah. But the only conclusion to be drawn from that is, that in the
camp, or near it, was Elisha, Elijah's servant, not that Elijah was no
longer upon earth. The perfect יצק אשׁר seems indeed to imply this; but
it is questionable if we may so press the perfect, i.e., whether the
speaker made use of it, or whether it was employed only by the later
historian. The words are merely a periphrasis to express the
relationship of master and servant in which Elijah stood to Elisha, and
tell us only that the latter was Elijah's attendant. But Elisha had
entered upon this relationship to Elijah long before Elijah's departure
from the earth ([Kg1 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#019).). Elijah
may therefore have still been alive under Joram of Judah; and Berth.
accordingly thinks it "antecedently probable that he spoke of Joram's
sins, and threatened him with punishment. But the letter," so he further
says, "is couched in quite general terms, and gives, moreover, merely a
prophetic explanation of the misfortunes with which Joram was visited;"
whence we may conclude that in its present form it is the work of a
historian living at a later time, who describes the relation of Elijah
to Joram in few words, and according to his conception of it as a whole.
This judgment rests on dogmatic grounds, and flows from a principle
which refuses to recognise any supernatural prediction in the prophetic
utterances. The contents of the letter can be regarded as a prophetic
exposition of the misfortunes which broke in, as it were, upon Joram,
only by those who deny priori that there is any special prediction in
the speeches of the prophets, and hold all prophecies which contain such
to be vaticinia post eventum. Somewhat more weighty is the objection
raised against the view that Elijah was still upon earth, to the effect
that the divine threatenings would make a much deeper impression upon
Joram by the very fact that the letter came from a prophet who was no
longer in life, and would thus more easily bring him to the knowledge
that the Lord is the living God, who had in His hand his breath and all
his ways, and who knew all his acts. Thus the writing would smite the
conscience of Joram like a voice from the other world (Dchsel). But this
whole remark is founded only upon subjective conjectures and
presumptions, for which actual analogies are wanting.

For the same reason we cannot regard the remark of Menken as very much
to the point, when he says: "If a man like Elias were to speak again
upon earth, after he had been taken from it, he must do it from the
clouds: this would harmonize with the whole splendour of his course in
life; and, in my opinion, that is what actually occurred." For although
we do not venture "to mark the limits to which the power and sphere of
activity of the perfected saints is extended," yet we are not only
justified, but also bound in duty, to judge of those facts of revelation
which are susceptible of different interpretations, according to the
analogy of the whole Scripture. But the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments know nothing of any communications by writings between the
perfected saints in heaven and men; indeed, they rather teach the
contrary in the parable of the rich man

(Note: "Neque enim," says Ramb., "ulla ratione credibile est, Deum in
gratiam impii regis ejusmodi quid fecisse, cujus nullum alias exemplum
exstat; immo quod nec necessarium erat, quum plures aliae essent
rationes, quibus Deus voluntatem suam ei manifestare poterat; coll. Luc.
16:27, 29." And, still more conclusively, Calov. declares: "Non enim
triumphantium in coelis est erudire aut ad poenitentiam revocare
mortales in terra. Habent Mosen et prophetas, si illos non audiant,
neque si quis ex mortius resurrexerit, nedum si quis ex coelis literas
perscripserit, credent Luc. 16:31.")

([Luk 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031))

There are consequently no sufficient grounds for believing that the
glorified Elijah either sent a letter to Joram from heaven by an angel,
or commissioned any living person to write the letter. The statement of
the narrative, "there came to him a writing from Elijah the prophet,"
cannot well be understood to mean anything else than that Elijah wrote
the threatening prophecy which follows; but we have no certain proof
that Elijah was then no longer alive, but had been already received into
heaven. The time of his translation cannot be exactly fixed. He was
still alive in the second year of Ahaziah of Israel; for he announced to
this king upon his sick-bed that he would die of his fall (2 Kings 1).
Most probably he was still alive also at the commencement of the reign
of Joram of Israel, who ascended the throne twenty-three years after
Ahab. Jehoshaphat died six or seven years later; and after his death,
his successor Joram slew his brothers, the other sons of Jehoshaphat.
Elijah may have lived to see the perpetration of this crime, and may
consequently also have sent the threatening prophecy which is under
discussion to Joram. As he first appeared under Ahab, on the above
supposition, he would have filled the office of prophet for about thirty
years; while his servant Elisha, whom he chose to be his successor as
early as in the reign of Ahab ([Kg1
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016)), died only under Joash of
Israel ([Kg2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014).), who became king
fifty-seven years after Ahab's death, and must consequently have
discharged the prophetic functions for at least sixty years. But even if
we suppose that Elijah had been taken away from the earth before
Jehoshaphat's death, we may, with Buddaeus, Ramb., and other
commentators, accept this explanation: that the Lord had revealed to him
Joram's wickedness before his translation, and had commissioned him to
announce to Joram in writing the divine punishment which would follow,
and to send this writing to him at the proper time. This would entirely
harmonize with the mode of action of this great man of God. To him God
had revealed the elevation of Jehu to the throne of Israel, and the
extirpation of the house of Ahab by him, together with the accession of
Hazael, and the great oppressions which he would inflict upon Israel, -
all events which took place only after the death of Joram of Judah. Him,
too, God had commissioned even under Ahab to anoint Jehu to be king over
Israel ([Kg1 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016)), which Elisha
caused to be accomplished by a prophetic scholar fourteen years later
([Kg2 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001).); and to him the Lord may
also have revealed the iniquity of Joram, Jehoshaphat's successor, even
as early as the second year of Ahaziah of Israel, when he announced to
this king his death seven years before Jehoshaphat's death, and may have
then commissioned him to announce the divine punishment of his sin. But
if Elijah committed the anointing of both Hazael and Jehu to his servant
Elisha, why may he not also have committed to him the delivery of this
threatening prophecy which he had drawn up in writing? Without bringing
forward in support of this such hypotheses as that the contents of the
letter would have all the greater effect, since it would seem as if the
man of God were speaking to him from beyond the grave (O. v. Gerlach),
we have yet a perfect right to suppose that a written word from the
terrible man whom the Lord had accredited as His prophet by fire from
heaven, in his struggle against Baal-worship under Ahab and Ahaziah,
would be much better fitted to make an impression upon Joram and his
consort Athaliah, who was walking in the footsteps of her mother
Jezebel, than a word of Elisha, or any other prophet who was not endowed
with the spirit and power of Elijah.

Elijah's writing pointed out to Joram two great transgressions: (1) his
forsaking the Lord for the idolatrous worship of the house of Ahab, and
also his seducing the people into this sin; and (2) the murder of his
brothers. For the punishment of the first transgression he announced to
him a great smiting which God would inflict upon his people, his family,
and his property; for the second crime he foretold heavy bodily
chastisements, by a dreadful disease which would terminate fatally. ימים
על ימים, [Ch2 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#015), is accus. of
duration: days on days, i.e., continuing for days added to days; cf.
שׁנה על שׁנה ספוּ, [Isa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001). ימים
Berth. takes to mean a period of a year, so that by this statement of
time a period of two years is fixed for the duration of the disease
before death. But the words in themselves cannot have this
signification; it can only be a deduction from [Ch2
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#018). These two threats of punishment
were fulfilled. The fulfilment of the first is recorded in [Ch2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016). God stirred up the spirit of
the Philistines and the Arabians (רוּח את העיר, as in [Ch1
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#026)), so that they came up against
Judah, and broke it, i.e., violently pressed into the land as conquerors
(בּקע, so split, then to conquer cities by breaking through their walls;
cf. [Kg2 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004), etc.), and carried away
all the goods that were found in the king's house, with the wives and
sons of Joram, except Jehoahaz the youngest ([Ch2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001)). Movers (Chron. S. 122),
Credner, Hitz., and others on [Joe
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#005), Berth., etc., conclude from this
that these enemies captured Jerusalem and plundered it. But this can
hardly be the case; for although Jerusalem belonged to Judah, and might
be included in בּיהוּדה, yet as a rule Jerusalem is specially named
along with Judah as being the chief city; and neither the conquest of
Judah, nor the carrying away of the goods from the king's house, and of
the king's elder sons, with certainty involves the capture of the
capital. The opinion that by the "substance which was found in the
king's house" we are to understand the treasures of the royal palace, is
certainly incorrect. רכוּשׁ denotes property of any sort; and what the
property of the king or of the king's house might include, we may gather
from the catalogue of the אוצרות of David, in the country, in the
cities, villages, and castles, [Ch1
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#025)., where they consist in
vineyards, forests, and herds of cattle, and together with the המּלך
אוצרות formed the property (הרכוּשׁ) of King David. All this property
the conquering Philistines and Arabians who had pressed into Judah might
carry away without having captured Jerusalem. But המּלך בּית denotes
here, not the royal palace, but the king's family; for המּלך לבית הנּמצא
does not denote what was found in the palace, but what of the
possessions of the king's house they found. נמצא with ל is not
synonymous with בּ נמצא, but denotes to be attained, possessed by; cf.
[Jos 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016) and [Deu
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017). Had Jerusalem been plundered,
the treasures of the palace and of the temple would also have been
mentioned: [Ch2 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#024); [Ch2
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#009); [Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013). and [Kg1
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#026); cf. Kuhlmey, alttestl. Studien
in der Luther. Ztschr. 1844, iii. S. 82ff. Nor does the carrying away of
the wives and children of King Joram presuppose the capture of
Jerusalem, as we learn from the more exact account of the matter in [Ch2
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001).

[2 Chronicles 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 21:18</span></span>

The second punishment fell upon the body and life of the king. The Lord
smote him in his bowels to (with) disease, for which there was no
healing. מרפּא לאין is in apposition to לחלי, literally, "to not being
healing."

[2 Chronicles 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 21:19</span></span>

And it came to pass in days after days (i.e., when a number of days had
passed), and that at the time (וּכעת( emit eh) of the expiration of the
end in two days, then his bowels went out during his sickness, and he
died in sore pains (תּחלאים, phenomena of disease, i.e., pains). The
words שׁנים לימים הקּץ צאת וּכעת are generally translated as if שׁנים
לימים were a mere periphrasis of the stat. constr. Vatabl. and Cler.,
for example, translate: et secundum tempus egrediendi finis annorum
duorum, i.e., postquam advenit finis a. d., or cum exacti essent duo
anni; similarly Berth.: "at the time of the approach of the end of two
times." But against this we have not only the circumstance that no
satisfactory reason for the use of this periphrasis for the genitive can
be perceived, and that no analogies can be found for the expression
שׁנים לימים הקּץ, the end of two years, instead of שׁנים היּמים קץ; but
also the more decisive linguistic reason that הקּץ צאת cannot denote the
approach of the end, but only the expiry, the running out of the end;
and finally, that the supposition that ימים here and in [Ch2
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#015) denotes a year is without
foundation. Schmidt and Rabm. have already given a better explanation:
quumque esset tempus, quo exiit finis s. quum exiret ac compleretur
terminus ille, in epistola Eliae [Ch2
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#015) praefixus; but in this case also
we should expect היּמים קץ, since שׁנים לימים should point back to ימים
על ימים, and contain a more exact definition of the terms employed in
[Ch2 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#015), which are not definite
enough. We therefore take הקּץ צאת by itself, and translate: At the time
of the end, i.e., when the end, sc. of life or of the disease, had come
about two days, i.e., about two days before the issue of the end of the
disease, then the bowels went out of the body-they flowed out from the
body as devoured by the disease. חליו עם, in, during the sickness,
consequently before the decease (cf. for עם in this signification, [Psa
72:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#005), Dan. 3:33). Trusen (Sitten,
Gebr. und Krankh. der alten Hebrer, S. 212f.) holds this disease to have
been a violent dysentery (diarrhoea), "being an inflammation of the
nervous tissue (Nervenhaut) of the whole great intestine, which causes
the overlying mucous membrane to decay and peel off, which then falls
out often in tube-shape, so that the intestines appear to fall from the
body." His people did not make a burning for him like the burning of his
fathers, cf. [Ch2 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014); that is,
denied him the honours usual at burial, because of their discontent with
his evil reign.

[2 Chronicles 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 21:20</span></span>

The repetition of his age and the length of his reign (cf. [Ch2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#006)) is accounted for by the fact
that the last section of this chapter is derived from a special source,
wherein these notes likewise were contained. The peculiarity of the
language and the want of the current expressions of our historian also
favour the idea that some special authority has been used here. "And he
departed, mourned by none." Luther erroneously translates, "and walked
in a way which was not right" (und wandelt das nicht fein war), after
the "ambulavit non recte" of the Vulg.; for חמדּה denotes, not a good
walk, but desiderium, חמדּה בּלא, sine desiderio, i.e., a nemine
desideratus. הלך, to depart, i.e., die, as [Gen
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002). Moreover, though he was buried
in the city of David, yet he was not laid in the graves of the kings, by
which act also a judgment was pronounced upon his reign; cf. [Ch2
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#025) and [Ch2
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#023).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 22](ch2022)

</div>
