<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2005)  [Next](ch2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 6:1</span></span>

The words with which Solomon celebrates this wondrous evidence of the
divine favour, entirely coincide with the narrative in [Kg1
8:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012), except that in [Ch2
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#005). the actual words of Solomon's
speech are more completely given than in [Kg1
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#016), where the words, "and I have not
chosen a man to be prince over my people Israel, and I have chosen
Jerusalem that my name might be there," are omitted. For the commentary
on this address, see on [Kg1 8:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012).

[2 Chronicles 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 6:12</span></span>

Solomon's dedicatory prayer likewise corresponds exactly with the
account of it given in 1 Kings 8:22-53 till near the end ([Ch2
6:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#040)), where it takes quite a
different turn. Besides this, in the introduction ([Ch2
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#013)) Solomon's position during the
prayer is more accurately described, it being there stated that Solomon
had caused a high stage (כּיּור, a basin-like elevation) to be erected,
which he ascended, and kneeling, spoke the prayer which follows. This
fact is not stated in [Kg1 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022), and
Then. and Berth. conjecture that it has been dropped out of our text
only by mistake. Perhaps so, but it may have been passed over by the
author of the books of Kings as a point of subordinate importance. On
the contents of the prayer, which begins with the joyful confession that
the Lord had fulfilled His promise to David in reference to the building
of the temple, and proceeds with a request for a further bestowment of
the blessing promised to His people, and a supplication that all prayers
made to the Lord in the temple may be heard, see the Com. on [Kg1
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#022). The conclusion of the prayer in
the Chronicle is different from that in 1 Kings 8. There the last
supplication, that the prayers might be heard, is followed by the
thought: for they (the Israelites) are Thy people and inheritance; and
in the further amplification of this thought the prayer returns to the
idea with which it commenced. In the narrative of the Chronicle, on the
other hand, the supplications conclude with the general thought ([Ch2
6:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#040)): "Now, my God, let, I beseech
Thee, Thine eyes be open, and Thine ears attend unto the prayer of this
place" (i.e., unto the prayer spoken in this place). There follows,
then, the conclusion of the whole prayer - a summons to the Lord ([Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041).): "And now, Lord God, arise into
Thy rest, Thou and the ark of Thy strength; let Thy priests, Lord God,
clothe themselves in salvation, and Thy saints rejoice in good! Lord
God, turn not away the face of Thine anointed: remember the pious deeds
of Thy servant David." הסדים as in [Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032); [Ch2
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#026), and [Neh
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#014). On this Thenius remarks, to
[Kg1 8:53](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#053) : "This conclusion is
probably authentic, for there is in the text of the prayer, 1 Kings 8,
no special expression of dedication, and this the summons to enter into
possession of the temple very fittingly supplies. The whole contents of
the conclusion are in perfect correspondence with the situation, and, as
to form, nothing better could be desired. It can scarcely be thought an
arbitrary addition made by the chronicler for no other reason than that
the summons spoken of, if taken literally, is irreconcilable with the
entrance of the cloud into the temple, of which he has already given us
an account." Berth. indeed thinks that it does not thence follow that
our conclusion is authentic, and considers it more probable that it was
introduced because it appeared more suitable, in place of the somewhat
obscure words in [Kg1 8:51-53](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#051), though
not by the author of the Chronicle, and scarcely at an earlier time. The
decision on this question can only be arrived at in connection with the
question as to the origin of the statements peculiar to the Chronicle
contained in [Ch2 7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001).

If we consider, in the first place, our verses in themselves, they
contain no thought which Solomon might not have spoken, and consequently
nothing which would tend to show that they are not authentic. It is true
that the phrase קשּׁבות אזניך occurs only here and in [Ch2
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#015), and again in [Psa
130:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#002), and the noun נוּח instead of
מנוּחה is found only in [Est 9:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#016)
in the form נוח; but even if these two expressions be peculiar to the
later time, no further conclusion can be drawn from that, than that the
author of the Chronicle has here, as often elsewhere, given the thoughts
of his authority in the language of his own time. Nor is the relation in
which [Ch2 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041), [Ch2
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042) stand to [Psa
132:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008) a valid proof of the later
composition of the conclusion of our prayer. For (a) it is still a
question whether our verses have been borrowed from Ps 132, or the
verses of the psalm from our passage; and (b) the period when [Psa
138:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001) was written is so doubtful,
that some regard it as a Solomonic psalm, while others place it in the
post-exilic period. Neither the one nor the other of these questions can
be determined on convincing grounds. The appeal to the fact that the
chronicler has compounded the hymn in 1 Chron 15 also out of post-exilic
psalms proves nothing, for even in that case it is at least doubtful if
that be a correct account of the matter. But the further assertion, that
the conclusion ([Ch2 6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042)) resembles
[Isa 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003), and that recollections of
this passage may have had some effect also on the conclusion ([Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041)), is undoubtedly erroneous, for
דויד חסדי in [Ch2 6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042) has quite a
different meaning from that which it has in [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003). There דּוד חסדי are the favours
granted to David by the Lord; in [Ch2
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042), on the contrary, they are the
pious deeds of David, - all that he had done for the raising and
advancement of the public worship (see above). The phrase וגו קוּמה,
"Arise, O Lord God, into Thy rest," is modelled on the formula which was
spoken when the ark was lifted and when it was set down on the journey
through the wilderness, which explains both קוּמה and the use of לנוּחך,
which is formed after בּנוּחה, [Num
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#036). The call to arise into rest is
not inconsistent with the fact that the ark had already been brought
into the most holy place, for קוּמה has merely the general
signification, "to set oneself to anything." The idea is, that God would
now take the rest to which the throne of His glory had attained, show
Himself to His people from this His throne to be the God of salvation,
endue His priests, the guardians of His sanctuary, with salvation, and
cause the pious to rejoice in His goodness. בטּוב ישׂמחוּ is generalized
in [Psa 132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009) into ירנּנוּ. פּני פ
השׁב, to turn away the face of any one, i.e., to deny the request, cf.
[Kg1 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 7](ch2007)

</div>
