<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2006)  [Next](ch2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 7:1</span></span>

The divine confirmation of the dedication of the temple. - [Ch2
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001). The consecration of the
sacrificial service by fire from heaven ([Ch2
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)), and the sacrifices and
festival of the people ([Ch2 7:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#004)).

[Ch2 7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)

At the conclusion of Solomon's prayer there fell fire from heaven, which
devoured the burnt-offering and the thank-offering, and the glory of the
Lord filled the house, so that the priests could not enter the house of
Jahve. The assembled congregation, when they saw the fire and the glory
of the Lord descend, bowed themselves with their faces to the ground
upon the pavement, and worshipped God to praise. Now since this
narrative is not found in [Kg1 8:54](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054).,
and there a speech of Solomon to the whole congregation, in which he
thanks God for the fulfilment of His promise, and expresses the desire
that the Lord would hear his prayers at all times, and bestow the
promised salvation on the people, is communicated, modern criticism has
rejected this narrative of the Chronicle as a later unhistorical
embellishment of the temple dedication. "If we turn our attention," says
Berth. in agreement with Then., "to [Ch2
5:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#011), and compare [Ch2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#014) with our second verse, we must
maintain that our historian found that there existed two different
narratives of the proceedings at the dedication of the temple, and
received both into his work. According to the one narrative, the clouds
filled the house ([Kg1 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#010), cf. [Ch2
5:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#011)); and after this was done
Solomon uttered the prayer, with the conclusion which we find in 1 Kings
8; according to the other narrative, Solomon uttered the prayer, with
the conclusion which we find in Chron., and God thereafter gave the
confirmatory signs. Now we can hardly imagine that the course of events
was, that the glory of Jahve filled the house ([Ch2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#014)); that then Solomon spoke the
words and the prayer in 2 Chron 6; that while he uttered the prayer the
glory of Jahve again left the house, and then came down in a way
manifest to all the people ([Ch2 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003)),
in order to fill the house for a second time." Certainly it was not so;
but the narrative itself gives no ground for any such representation.
Not a word is said in the text of the glory of Jahve having left the
temple during Solomon's prayer. The supposed contradiction between [Ch2
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#014) and the account in [Ch2
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001) is founded entirely on a
misinterpretation of our verse. The course of events described here was,
as the words run, this: Fire came down from heaven upon the sacrifices
and devoured them, and the glory of the Lord filled the house; and this
is in [Ch2 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003) more exactly and
precisely repeated by the statement that the people saw the fire and the
glory of Jahve descend upon the house. According to these plain words,
the glory of Jahve descended upon the temple in the fire which came down
from heaven. In the heavenly fire which devoured the sacrifices, the
assembled congregation saw the glory of the Lord descend upon the temple
and fill it. But the filling of the temple by the cloud when the ark was
brought in and set in its place ([Ch2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#013)) can be without difficulty
reconciled with this manifestation of the divine glory in the fire. Just
as the manifestation of the gracious divine presence in the temple by a
cloud, as its visible vehicle, does not exclude the omnipresence of God
or His sitting enthroned in heaven, God's essence not being so confined
to the visible vehicle of His gracious presence among His people that He
ceases thereby to be enthroned in heaven, and to manifest Himself
therefrom; so the revelation of the same God from heaven by a descending
fire is not excluded or set aside by the presence of the cloud in the
holy place of the temple, and in the most holy. We may consequently
quite well represent to ourselves the course of events, by supposing,
that while the gracious presence of God enthroned above the cherubim on
the ark made itself known in the cloud which filled the temple, or while
the cloud filled the interior of the temple, God revealed His glory from
heaven, before the eyes of the assembled congregation, in the fire which
descended upon the sacrifices, so that the temple was covered or
overshadowed by His glory. The parts of this double manifestation of the
divine glory are clearly distinguished even in our narrative; for in
[Ch2 5:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#013) the cloud which filled
the house, as vehicle of the manifestation of the divine glory, and
which hindered the priests from standing and serving (in the house,
i.e., in the holy place and the most holy), is spoken of; while in our
verses, again, it is the glory of God which descended upon the temple in
the fire coming down from heaven on the sacrifices, and so filled it
that the priests could not enter it, which is noticed.

Since, therefore, the two passages involve no contradiction, the
hypothesis of a compounding together of discrepant narratives loses all
standing ground; and it only remains to determine the mutual relations
of the two narratives, and to answer the question, why the author of the
book of Kings has omitted the account of the fire which came down from
heaven upon the sacrifices, and the author of the Chronicle the blessing
of the congregation ([Kg1 8:54-61](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054)).
From the whole plan and character of the two histories, there can be no
doubt that in these accounts we have not a perfect enumeration of all
the different occurrences, but only a record of the chief things which
were done. The authority made use of by both, however, doubtless
contained both the blessing of the congregation ([Kg1
8:55-61](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#055)) and the account of the fire
which devoured the sacrifices ([Ch2
7:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#002)); and probably the latter
preceded the blessing spoken by Solomon to the congregation (Kings). In
all probability, the fire dame down from heaven immediately after the
conclusion of the dedicatory prayer, and devoured the sacrifices lying
upon the altar of burnt-offering; and after this had happened, Solomon
turned towards the assembled congregation and praised the Lord, because
He had given rest to His people, of which the completion of the temple,
and the filling of it with the cloud of the divine glory, was a pledge.
To record this speech of Solomon to the congregation, falls wholly in
with the plan of the book of Kings, in which the prophetic interest, the
realization of the divine purpose of grace by the acts and omissions of
the kings, is the prominent one; while it did not lie within the scope
of his purpose to enter upon a detailed history of the public worship.
We should be justified in expecting the fire which devoured the
sacrifices to be mentioned in the book of Kings, only if the temple had
been first consecrated by this divine act to be the dwelling-place of
the gracious presence of God, or a sanctuary of the Lord; but such
significance the devouring of the sacrifices by fire coming forth from
God did not possess. Jahve consecrated the temple to be the
dwelling-place of His name, and the abode of His gracious presence, in
proclaiming His presence by the cloud which filled the sanctuary, when
the ark was brought into the most holy place. The devouring of the
sacrifices upon the altar by fire from heaven was merely the
confirmatory sign that the Lord, enthroned above the ark in the temple,
accepted, well pleased, the sacrificial service carried on on the altar
of this temple; and since the people could draw near to the Lord only
with sacrifices before the altar, it was a confirmatory sign that He
from His throne would bestow His covenant grace upon those who appeared
before him with sacrifices; cf. [Lev
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#023). Implicitly, this grace was
already secured to the people by God's consecrating the sanctuary to be
the throne of His grace by the cloud which filled the temple; and the
author of the book of Kings thought it sufficient to mention this sign,
and passed over the second, which only served as a confirmation of the
first. With the chronicler the case was different; for his plan to
portray in detail the glory of the worship of the former time, the
divine confirmation of the sacrificial worship, which was to be carried
on continually in the temple as the only legitimate place of worship, by
fire from heaven, was so important that he could not leave it
unmentioned; while the words of blessing spoken by Solomon to the
congregation, as being already implicitly contained in the dedicatory
prayer, did not appear important enough to be received into his book.
For the rest, the sacrifices which the fire from heaven devoured are the
sacrifices mentioned in [Ch2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#006),
which the king and the congregation had offered when the ark was borne
into the temple. As there was an immense number of these sacrifices,
they cannot all have been offered on the altar of burnt-offering, but,
like the thank-offerings afterwards brought by Solomon and the
congregation, must have been offered on the whole space which had been
consecrated in the court for this purpose ([Ch2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007)). This is expressly attested by
[Ch2 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007), for the העלות can only be
the sacrifices in [Ch2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#006), since the
sacrifices in [Ch2 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#005) of our chapter
were only שׁלמים; cf. [Kg1 8:62](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062).

[Ch2 7:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#004)

The sacrifices and the festival. After fire from heaven had devoured the
sacrifices, and Solomon had praised the Lord for the fulfilment of His
word, and sought for the congregation the further bestowal of the divine
blessing ([Kg1 8:54-61](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#054)), the
dedication of the temple was concluded by a great thank-offering, of
which we have in [Ch2 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#005), [Ch2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006) an account which completely agrees
with [Kg1 8:62-63](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062). - In [Ch2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006) the author of the Chr. again makes
express mention of the singing and playing of the Levites when these
offerings were presented. In the performance of this sacrificial act the
priests stood על־משׁמרותם, in their stations; but that does not signify
separated according to their divisions (Berth.), but in officiis suis
(Vulg.), i.e., ordines suos et functiones suas a Davide 1 Chron. [Ch2
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#007). institutas servarunt (Ramb.);
see on [Num 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026). The Levites with the
instruments of song of Jahve, which David had made, i.e., with the
instruments invented and appointed by David for song to the praise of
the Lord. בּידם דויד בּהלּל, not hymnos David canentes per manus suas
(Vulg.), taking דויד הלּל for the praising appointed by David, which by
the hands of the Levites, i.e., was performed by the hands of the
Levites (Berth.), but literally: when David sang praise by their hand
(i.e., their service). This clause seems to be added to the relative
clause, "which king David had made," for nearer definition, and to
signify that the Levites used the same instruments which David had
introduced when he praised God by the playing of the Levites. The form
מחצצרים as in [Ch1 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#024).

[Ch2 7:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007)

[Ch2 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#007) contains a supplementary
remark, and the ו relat. expresses only the connection of the thought,
and the verb is to be translated in English by the pluperfect. For the
rest, compare on [Ch2 7:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#004) the
commentary on [Kg1 8:62-66](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#062).

[Ch2 7:11-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#011)

The Lord's answer to Solomon's dedicatory prayer. Cf. [Kg1
9:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#001). The general contents, and the
order of the thoughts in the divine answer in the two texts, agree, but
in the Chronicle individual thoughts are further expounded than in the
book of Kings, and expressions are here and there made clear. The second
clause of [Ch2 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#011) is an instance of
this, where "and all the desire of Solomon, which he was pleased to do,"
is represented by "and all that came into Solomon's heart, to make in
the house of the Lord and in his own house, he prosperously effected."
Everything else is explained in the Com. on 1 Kings 9.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 8](ch2008)

</div>
