<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2032)  [Next](ch2034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 33:1</span></span>

The reign of Manasseh; cf. 2 Kings 21:1-18. - The characteristics of
this king's reign, and of the idolatry which he again introduced, and
increased in a measure surpassing all his predecessors ([Ch2
33:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#001)), agrees almost verbally with
[Kg2 21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001). Here and there an
expression is rhetorically generalized and intensified, e.g., by the
plurals לבּעלים and אשׁרות ([Ch2 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#003))
instead of the sing. לבּעל and אשׁרה (Kings), and בּנין ([Ch2
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006)) instead of בּנו (see on [Ch2
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#003)); by the addition of וכשּׁף to
ונחשׁ עונן, and of the name the Vale of Hinnom, [Ch2
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006) (see on [Jos
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018), גּי for גּיא); by heaping up
words for the law and its commandments ([Ch2
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#008)); and other small deviations, of
which הסּמל פּסל ([Ch2 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#007)) instead
of האשׁרה פּסל (Kings) is the most important. The word סמל, sculpture or
statue, is derived from [Deu 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016), but
has perhaps been taken by the author of the Chronicle from [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003), where סמל probably denotes the
statue of Asherah. The form עילום for עולם ([Ch2
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#007)) is not elsewhere met with.

[2 Chronicles 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 33:10</span></span>

At [Ch2 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#010), the account in the
Chronicle diverges from that in 2 Kings. In [Kg2
21:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#010) it is related how the Lord
caused it to be proclaimed by the prophets, that in punishment of
Manasseh's sins Jerusalem would be destroyed, and the people given into
the power of their enemies, and how Manasseh filled Jerusalem with the
shedding of innocent blood. Instead of this, in [Ch2
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#010) of the Chronicle it is only
briefly said that the Lord spake to Manasseh and to his people, but they
would not hearken; and then in [Ch2
33:11-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011) it is narrated that Manasseh
was led away to Babylon by the king of Assyria's captains of the host;
in his trouble turned to the Lord his God, and prayed; was thereupon
brought by God back to Jerusalem; after his return, fortified Jerusalem
with a new wall; set commanders over all the fenced cities of Judah;
abolished the idolatry in the temple and the city, and restored the
worship of Jahve.

[2 Chronicles 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 33:11</span></span>

As Manasseh would not hear the words of the prophets, the Lord brought
upon him the captains of the host of the king of Assyria. These "took
him with hooks, and bound him with double chains of brass, and brought
him to Babylon." בחוחים ילכּדוּ signifies neither, they took him
prisoner in thorns (hid in the thorns), nor in a place called Chochim
(which is not elsewhere found), but they took him with hooks. חוח
denotes the hook or ring which was drawn through the gills of large fish
when taken ([Job 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#002)), and is
synonymous with חח ([Kg2 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#028); [Eze
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#004)), a ring which was passed through
the noses of wild beasts to subdue and lead them. The expression is
figurative, as in the passages quoted from the prophets. Manasseh is
represented as an unmanageable beast, which the Assyrian generals took
and subdued by a ring in the nose. The figurative expression is
explained by the succeeding clause: they bound him with double chains.
נחשׁתּים are double fetters of brass, with which the feet of prisoners
were bound ([Sa2 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#034); [Jdg
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021); [Ch2
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006), etc.).

[2 Chronicles 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 33:12</span></span>

לו וּכהצר = לו הצר וּבעת, [Ch2 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#022).
In this his affliction he bowed himself before the Lord God of his
fathers, and besought Him; and the Lord was entreated of him, and
brought him again to Jerusalem, into his kingdom. The prayer which
Manasseh prayed in his need was contained, according to [Ch2
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#018)., in the histories of the kings
of Israel, and in the sayings of the prophet Hozai, but has not come
down to our day. The "prayer of Manasseh" given by the lxx is an
apocryphal production, composed in Greek; cf. my Introduction to the Old
Testament, 247.

[2 Chronicles 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 33:14</span></span>

After his return, Manasseh took measures to secure his kingdom, and
especially the capital, against hostile attacks. "He built an outer wall
of the city of David westward towards Gihon in the valley, and in the
direction of the fish-gate; and he surrounded the Ophel, and made it
very high." The words היצונה חומה (without the article) point to the
building of a new wall. But since it has been already recorded of
Hezekiah, in [Ch2 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005), that he built
"the other wall without," all modern expositors, even Arnold in Herz.'s
Realenc. xviii. S. 634, assume the identity of the two walls, and
understand ויּבן of the completion and heightening of that "other wall"
of which it is said מאד ויּגבּיהה, and which shut in Zion from the lower
city to the north. In that case, of course, we must make the correction
החומה. The words "westward towards Gihon in the valley, and לבוא ב, in
the direction to (towards) the fish-gate," are then to be taken as
describing the course of this wall from its centre, first towards the
west, and then towards the east. For the valley of Gihon lay, in all
probability, outside of the western city gate, which occupied the place
of the present Jaffa gate. But the fish-gate was, according to [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003), at the east end of this wall, at
no great distance from the tower on the north-east corner. The valley
(הנּהל) is a hollow between the upper city (Zion) and the lower (Acra),
probably the beginning of the valley, which at its south-eastern
opening, between Zion and Moriah, is called Tyropoion in Josephus. The
words, "he surrounded the Ophel," sc. with a wall, are not to be
connected with the preceding clauses, as Berth. connects them,
translating, "he carried the wall from the north-east corner farther to
the south, and then round the Ophel;" for "between the north-east corner
and the Ophel wall lay the whole east wall of the city, as far as to the
south-east corner of the temple area, which yet cannot be regarded as a
continuation of the wall to the Ophel wall" (Arnold, loc. cit.). Jotham
had already built a great deal at the Ophel wall ([Ch2
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003)). Manasseh must therefore only
have strengthened it, and increased its height. On the words שׂ ויּשׂם
cf. [Ch2 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#006) and [Ch2
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#002).

[2 Chronicles 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 33:15</span></span>

And he also removed the idols and the statues from the house of the
Lord, i.e., out of the two courts of the temple ([Ch2
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#005)), and caused the idolatrous
altars which he had built upon the temple hill and in Jerusalem to be
cast forth from the city. In [Ch2
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#016), instead of the Keth. ויבן, he
built (restored) the altar of Jahve, many manuscripts and ancient
editions read ויכן, he prepared the altar of Jahve. This variation has
perhaps originated in an orthographical error, and it is difficult to
decide which reading is the original. The Vulg. translates יבן
restauravit. That Manasseh first removed the altar of Jahve from the
court, and then restored it, as Ewald thinks, is not very probable; for
in that case its removal would certainly have been mentioned in [Ch2
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#003). Upon the altar thus restored
Manasseh then offered thank-offerings and peace-offerings, and also
commanded his subjects to worship Jahve the God of Israel. But the
people still sacrificed on the high places, yet unto Jahve their God.

"As to the carrying away of Manasseh," says Bertheau, "we have no
further information in the Old Testament, which is not surprising,
seeing that in the books of Kings there is only a very short notice as
to the long period embraced by Manasseh's reign and that of Amon." He
therefore, with Ew., Mov., Then., and others, does not scruple to
recognise this fact as historical, and to place his captivity in the
time of the Assyrian king Esarhaddon. He however believes, with Ew. and
Mov., that the statements as to the removal of idols and altars from the
temple and Jerusalem ([Ch2 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015)) is
inconsistent with the older account in [Kg2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006) and [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012), the clear statements of which,
moreover, our historian does not communicate in [Ch2
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#003). For even if the Astarte removed
by Josiah need not have been the הסּמל of our chapter, yet it is
expressly said that only by Josiah were the altars built by Manasseh
broken down; yet we would scarcely be justified in supposing that
Manasseh removed them, perhaps only laid them aside, that Amon again set
them up in the courts, and that Josiah at length destroyed them. It does
not thence follow, of course, that the narrative of the repentance and
conversion of Manasseh rests upon no historic foundation; rather it is
just such a narrative as would be supplemented by accounts of the
destruction of the idolatrous altars and the statue of Astarte: for that
might be regarded as the necessary result of the conversion, without any
definite statement being made.

(Note: From this supposed contradiction, R. H. Graf, "die Gefangenschaft
u. Bekehrung Manasse's, 2 Chron 33," in the Theol. Studien u. Kritiken,
1859, iii. S. 467ff., and in the book, die geschichtl. Literatur A.
Test. 1866, 2 Abhdl., following Gramberg, and with the concurrence of H.
Nldeke, die alttestl. Literatur in einer Reihe von Aufstzen dargestellt
(1868), S. 59f., has drawn the conclusion that the accounts given in the
Chronicle, not only of Manasseh's conversion, but also of his being led
captive to Babylon, are merely fictions, or inventions - poetical
popular myths. On the other hand, E. Gerlach, in the Theol. Stud. u.
Krit. 1861, iii. S. 503ff., has shown the superficiality of Graf's
essay, and defended effectively the historical character of both
narratives.)

Against this we have the following objections to make: Can we well
imagine repentance and conversion on Manasseh's part without the removal
of the abominations of idolatry, at least from the temple of the Lord?
And why should we not suppose that Manasseh removed the idol altars from
the temple and Jerusalem, but that Amon, who did evil as did his father
Manasseh, and sacrificed to all the images which he had made ([Kg2
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#021).; [Ch2
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#022)), again set them up in the
courts of the temple, and placed the statue again in the temple, and
that only by Josiah were they destroyed? In [Kg2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#006) it is indeed said, Josiah removed
the Asherah from the house of Jahve, took it forth from Jerusalem, and
burnt it, and ground it to dust in the valley of Kidron; and in [Ch2
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#012), that Josiah beat down and brake
the altars which Manasseh had made in both courts of the house of Jahve,
and threw the dust of them into Kidron. But where do we find it written
in the Chronicle that Manasseh, after his return from Babylon, beat
down, and brake, and ground to powder the סמל in the house of Jahve, and
the altars on the temple mount and in Jerusalem? In [Ch2
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015) we only find it stated that he
cast these things forth from the city (לעיר חוּצה ישׁלך). Is casting out
of the city identical with breaking down and crushing, as Bertheau and
others assume? The author of the Chronicle, at least, can distinguish
between removing (הסיר) and breaking down and crushing. Cf. [Ch2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#016), where הסיר is sharply
distinguished from כּרת and הדק; further, [Ch2
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001) and [Ch2
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#004), where the verbs שׁבּר, גּדּע,
and הדק are used of the breaking in pieces and destroying of images and
altars by Hezekiah and Josiah. He uses none of these verbs of the
removal of the images and altars by Manasseh, but only ויסר and לעיר
חוּצה וישׁלך ([Ch2 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015)). If we take
the words exactly as they stand in the text of the Bible, every
appearance of contradiction disappears.

(Note: In this matter Movers too has gone very superficially to work,
remarking in support of the contradiction (bibl. Chron. S. 328): "If
Manasseh was so zealous a penitent, it may be asked, Would he not have
destroyed all idolatrous images, according to the Mosaic law, as the
Chronicle itself, [Ch2 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015) (cf. [Ch2
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017); [Ch2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#016); [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012)), sufficiently shows? Had
idolatry ceased in all Judah in the last year of Manasseh's reign, as is
stated in [Ch2 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#017), could it, during
the two years' reign of his son Amon, have spread abroad in a manner
hitherto unheard of in Jewish history, as it is portrayed under Josiah,
[Kg2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004).?" But where is it stated in
the Chronicle that Manasseh was so zealous a penitent as to have
destroyed the images according to the Mosaic law? Not even the
restoration of the Jahve-worship according to the provisions of the law
is once spoken of, as it is in the case of Hezekiah and of Josiah (cf.
[Ch2 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#005) and [Ch2
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#016), [Ch2
34:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#021); [Ch2
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#026)); and does it follow from the
fact that Judah, in consequence of Manasseh's command to serve Jahve,
still sacrificed in the high places, yet to Jahve, that under Manasseh
idolatry ceased throughout Judah?)

From what is said in the Chronicle of Manasseh's deeds, we cannot
conclude that he was fully converted to the Lord. That Manasseh prayed
to Jahve in his imprisonment, and by his deliverance from it and his
restoration to Jerusalem came to see that Jahve was God (האלהים), who
must be worshipped in His temple at Jerusalem, and that he consequently
removed the images and the idolatrous altars from the temple and the
city, and cast them forth-these facts do not prove a thorough
conversion, much less "that he made amends for his sin by repentance and
improvement" (Mov.), but merely attest the restoration of the
Jahve-worship in the temple, which had previously been completely
suspended. But the idolatry in Jerusalem and Judah was not thereby
extirpated; it was only in so far repressed that it could not longer be
publicly practised in the temple. Still less was idolatry rooted out of
the hearts of the people by the command that the people were to worship
Jahve, the God of Israel. There is not a single word of Manasseh's
conversion to Jahve, the God of the fathers, with all his heart (שׁלם
בּלב). Can it then surprise us, that after Manasseh's death, under his
son Amon, walking as he did in the sins of his father, these external
barriers fell straightway, and idolatry again publicly appeared in all
its proportions and extent, and that the images and altars of the idols
which had been cast out of Jerusalem were again set up in the temple and
its courts? If even the pious Josiah, with all his efforts for the
extirpation of idolatry and the revivification of the legal worship,
could not accomplish more than the restoration, during his reign, of the
temple service according to the law, while after his death idolatry
again prevailed under Jehoiakim, what could Manasseh's half-measures
effect? If this be the true state of the case in regard to Manasseh's
conversion, the passages [Kg2 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#003);
[Kg2 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#026); [Jer
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004), where it is said that the Lord
had cast out Judah from His presence because of the sins of Manasseh,
cease to give any support to the opposite view. Manasseh is here named
as the person who by his godlessness made the punishment of Judah and
Jerusalem unavoidable, because he so corrupted Judah by his sins, that
it could not now thoroughly turn to the Lord, but always fell back into
the sins of Manasseh. Similarly, in [Kg2
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#021) and [Kg2
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#022), it is said of the ten tribes
that the Lord cast them out from His presence because they walked in all
the sins of Jeroboam, and departed not from them.

With the removal of the supposed inconsistency between the statement in
the Chronicle as to Manasseh's change of sentiment, and the account of
his godlessness in 2 Kings 21, every reason for suspecting the account
of Manasseh's removal to Babylon as a prisoner disappears; for even Graf
admits that the mere silence of the book of Kings can prove nothing,
since the books of Kings do not record many other events which are
recorded in the Chronicle and are proved to be historical. This
statement, however, is thoroughly confirmed, both by its own contents
and by its connection with other well-attested historical facts.
According to [Ch2 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014), Manasseh
fortified Jerusalem still more strongly after his return to the throne
by building a new wall. This statement, which has as yet been called in
question by no judicious critic, is so intimately connected with the
statements in the Chronicle as to his being taken prisoner, and the
removal of the images from the temple, that by it these latter are
attested as historical. From this we learn that the author of the
Chronicle had at his command authorities which contained more
information as to Manasseh's reign than is to be found in our books of
Kings, and so the references to these special authorities which follow
in [Ch2 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#018), [Ch2
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#019) are corroborated. Moreover, the
fortifying of Jerusalem after his return from his imprisonment
presupposes that he had had such an experience as impelled him to take
measures to secure himself against a repetition of hostile surprises. To
this we must add the statement that Manasseh was led away by the
generals of the Assyrian king to Babylon. The Assyrian kings
Tiglath-pileser and Shalmaneser (or Sargon) did not carry away the
Israelites to Babylon, but to Assyria; and the arrival of ambassadors
from the Babylonian king Merodach-Baladan in Jerusalem, in the time of
Hezekiah ([Kg2 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012); [Isa
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001)), shows that at that time Babylon
was independent of Assyria. The poetic popular legend would without
doubt have made Manasseh also to be carried away to Assyria by the
troops of the Assyrian king, not to Babylon. The statement that he was
carried away to Babylon by Assyrian warriors rests upon the certainty
that Babylon was then a province of the Assyrian empire; and this is
corroborated by history. According to the accounts of Abydenus and
Alexander Polyhistor, borrowed from Berosus, which have been preserved
in Euseb. Chr. arm. i. p. 42f., Sennacherib brought Babylon, the
government of which had been usurped by Belibus, again into subjection,
and made his son Esarhaddon king over it, as his representative. The
subjection of the Babylonians is confirmed by the Assyrian monuments,
which state that Sennacherib had to march against the rebels in Babylon
at the very beginning of his reign; and then again, in the fourth year
of it, that he subdued them, and set over them a new viceroy (see M.
Duncker, Gesch. des Alterth. i. S. 697f. and 707f. and ii. S. 592f., der
3 Aufl.). Afterwards, when Sennacherib met his death at the hand of his
sons ([Kg2 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037); [Isa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038)), his oldest son Esarhaddon, the
viceroy of Babylon, advanced with his army, pursued the flying
parricides, and after slaying them ascended the throne of Assyria, 680
b.c.

(Note: So Jul. Oppert, "die biblische Chronologie festgestellt nach den
Assyrischen Keilschriften," in d. Ztschr. der deutsch. morgenl.
Gesellsch. (xxiii. S. 134), 1869, S. 144; while Duncker, loc. cit. i. S.
709, on the ground of the divergent statement of Berosus as to the reign
of Esarhaddon, and according to other chronological combinations, gives
the year 693 b.c., - a date which harmonizes neither with Sennacherib's
inscriptions, so far as these have yet been deciphered, nor with the
statements of the Kanon Ptol., nor with biblical chronology. It,
moreover, makes it necessary to shorten the fifty-five years of
Manasseh's reign to thirty-five, which is all the more arbitrary as the
chronological data of the Kanon Ptol. harmonize with the biblical
chronology and establish their accuracy, as I have already pointed out
in my apolog. Vers. ber die Chron. S. 429f.)

Of Esarhaddon, who reigned thirteen years (from 680 to 667), we learn
from [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002), col. with [Kg2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017), that he brought colonists to
Samaria from Babylon, Cutha, and other districts of his kingdom; and
Abydenus relates of him, according to Berosus (in Euseb. Chron. i. p.
54), that Axerdis (i.e., without doubt Esarhaddon) subdued Lower Syria,
i.e., the districts of Syria bordering on the sea, to himself anew. From
these we may, I think, conclude that not only the transporting of the
colonists into the depopulated kingdom of the ten tribes is connected
with this expedition against Syria, but that on this occasion also
Assyrian generals took King Manasseh prisoner, and carried him away to
Babylon, as Ewald (Gesch. iii. S. 678), and Duncker, S. 715, with older
chronologists and expositors (Usher, des Vignoles, Calmet, Ramb., J. D.
Mich., and others), suppose. The transport of Babylonian colonists to
Samaria is said in Seder Olam rab. p. 67, ed. Meyer, and by D. Kimchi,
according to Talmudic tradition, to have taken place in the
twenty-second year of Manasseh's reign; and this statement gains
confirmation from the fact - as was remarked by Jac. Cappell. and Usher
- that the period of sixty-five years after which, according to the
prophecy in [Isa 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008), Ephraim was to
be destroyed so that it should no more be a people, came to an end with
the twenty-second year of Manasseh, and Ephraim, i.e., Israel of the ten
tribes, did indeed cease to be a people only with the immigration of
heathen colonists into its land (cf. Del. on [Isa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008)). But the twenty-second year of
Manasseh corresponds to the year 776 b.c. and the fourth year of
Esarhaddon.

By this agreement with extra-biblical narratives in its statement of
facts and in its chronology, the narrative in the Chronicle of
Manasseh's captivity in Babylon is raised above every doubt, and is
corroborated even by the Assyrian monuments. "We now know," remarks
Duncker (ii. S. 92) in this connection, "that Esarhaddon says in his
inscriptions that twenty-two kings of Syria hearkened to him: he numbers
among them Minasi (Manasseh of Judah) and the kings of Cyprus." As to
the details both of his capture and his liberation, we cannot make even
probable conjectures, since we have only a few bare notices of
Esarhaddon's reign; and even his building works, which might have given
us some further information, were under the influence of a peculiarly
unlucky star, for the palace built by him at Kalah or Nimrod remained
unfinished, and was then destroyed by a great fire (cf. Spiegel in
Herz.'s Realencykl. xx. S. 225). Yet, from the fact that in [Ch2
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#001), as in [Kg2
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001), the duration of Manasseh's reign
is stated to have been fifty-five years, without any mention being made
of an interruption, we may probably draw this conclusion at least, that
the captivity did not last long, and that he received his liberty upon a
promise to pay tribute, although he appears not to have kept this
promise, or only for a short period. For that, in the period between
Hezekiah and Josiah, Judah must have come into a certain position of
dependence upon Assyria, cannot be concluded from [Kg2
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#019) (cf. [Ch2
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#015) with 17:28) and 2 Chr 23:29, as
E. Gerlach thinks.

[2 Chronicles 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 33:18</span></span>

Conclusion of Manasseh's history. His other acts, his prayer, and words
of the prophets of the Lord against him, were recorded in the history of
the kings of Israel; while special accounts of his prayer, and how it
was heard (העתר־לו, the letting Himself be entreated, i.e., how God
heard him), of his sons, and the high places, altars, and images which
he erected before his humiliation, were contained in the sayings of
Hozai (see the Introduction).

[2 Chronicles 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 33:20</span></span>

Manasseh was buried in his house, or, according to the more exact
statement in [Kg2 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#018), in the garden
of his house - in the garden of Uzza; see on that passage.

[2 Chronicles 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 33:21</span></span>

The reign of Amon. Cf. [Kg2 21:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#019).
- Both accounts agree; only in the Chronicle, as is also the case with
Manasseh and Ahaz, the name of his mother is omitted, and the
description of his godless deeds is somewhat more brief than in Kings,
while the remark is added that he did not humble himself like Manasseh,
but increased the guilt. In the account of his death there is nothing
said of his funeral, nor is there any reference to the sources of his
history. See the commentary on [Kg2
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#019).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 34](ch2034)

</div>
