<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2028)  [Next](ch2030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 29:0</span></span>

The Reign of Hezekiah - 2 Chronicles 29-32

Hezekiah, the pious son of the godless Ahaz, recognised that it was to
be the business of his reign to bring the kingdom out of the utterly
ruinous condition into which Ahaz had brought it by his idolatry and his
heathen policy, and to elevate the state again, both in respect to
religion and morals, and also in political affairs. He consequently
endeavoured, in the first place, to do away with the idolatry, and to
restore the Jahve-worship according to the law, and then to throw off
the yoke of subjection to the Assyrian. These two undertakings, on the
success of which God bestowed His blessing, form the contents of the
history of his reign both in the books of Kings and in the Chronicle;
but they are differently treated by the authors of these books. In the
book of Kings, the extirpation of idolatry, and Hezekiah's faithfulness
in cleaving to the Lord his God, are very briefly recorded ([Kg2
17:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003)); while the throwing off of the
Assyrian yoke, which brought on Sennacherib's invasion, and ended with
the destruction of the Assyrian army before Jerusalem, and the further
results of that memorable event (the sickness and recovery of Hezekiah,
the arrival of a Babylonian embassy in Jerusalem, and Hezekiah's
reception of them), are very fully narrated in 2 Kings 18:8-20:19. The
author of the Chronicle, on the contrary, enlarges upon Hezekiah's
reform of the cultus, the purification of the temple from all idolatrous
abominations, the restoration of the Jahve-worship, and a solemn
celebration of the passover, to which the king invited not only his own
subjects, but also the remainder of the ten tribes (2 Chron 29-31); and
gives merely a brief summary of the chief points in Sennacherib's
invasion, and the events connected with it (2 Chron 32).

[2 Chronicles 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 29:1</span></span>

The beginning of his reign ([Ch2 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001),
[Ch2 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#002)). Purification and
consecration of the temple (vv. 3-36). - [Ch2
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001) and [Ch2
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#002). Age of Hezekiah, duration and
spirit of his reign, as in [Kg2
18:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001). With [Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003) the account of the restoration of
the Jahve-worship begins. In the first year of his reign, in the first
month, Hezekiah caused the temple doors to be opened, and the priests
and Levites to assemble, in order that he might rouse them by an
energetic address to purify the house of God from all the uncleannesses
of idolatry ([Ch2 29:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)). They,
vigorously commencing the work, completed the purification of the temple
with its courts and vessels in sixteen days, and reported to the king
what had been done ([Ch2 29:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#012));
and then the king and the chiefs of the city offered a great sacrifice
to consecrate the purified sanctuary, upon which followed
burnt-offerings, and sacrifices, and thankofferings of the whole
assembly (vv. 20-36).

[2 Chronicles 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 29:3</span></span>

The purification of the temple by the priests and Levites. - [Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003). In the first year of his reign,
in the first month, he caused the doors of the house of Jahve to be
opened and repaired (הזּק as in [Ch2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#012), where it alternates with
הדּשׁ). Cf. herewith the remark in [Kg2
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#016), that Hezekiah caused the doors
of the היכל to be covered with leaf-gold. The date, in the first month,
in the first year of his reign, is variously interpreted. As the
Levites, according to [Ch2 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017),
began the purification on the first day of the first month, in eight
days had reached the porch, and on the sixteenth day of the first month
had completed the work, while the king had, according to [Ch2
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004), before called upon the priests
and Levites to sanctify themselves for the work, and those summoned then
assembled their brethren for this purpose, and after they had
consecrated themselves, began the cleansing ([Ch2
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#015)), it would seem as if the
summons of the king and the calling together of the remaining Levites
had occurred before the first day of the first month, when they began
the purification of the house of God. On that account Caspari (Beitrge
z. Einleit. in d. B. Jesaiah, S. 111) thinks that the first month ([Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)) is not the first month of the
year (Nisan), but the first month of the reign of Hezekiah, who probably
became king shortly before Nisan, towards the end of the year. But it is
not at all likely that הראשׁון החדר is used in a different sense in [Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003) from that in which it is used in
[Ch2 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017). We therefore hold, with
Berth. and others, the first month, both in [Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003) and in [Ch2
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017), to be the first month of the
ecclesiastical year Nisan, without, however, accepting the supposition
of Gumpach and Bertheau that the years of Hezekiah's reign began with
the first of Tishri, for for that way of reckoning there are no certain
data in the historical books of the Old Testament. The statement, "in
the first year of his reign, in the first month" (not in the first year,
in the first month of his reign), is sufficiently explained if Hezekiah
ascended the throne in one of the last months of the calendar year,
which began with Nisan. In that case, on the first of Nisan of the new
year, so few months, or perhaps only weeks, would have elapsed since his
accession, that what he did in Nisan could not rightly have been dated
otherwise than "in the first year of his reign." The other difficulty,
that the purification of the temple began on the first day of the first
month ([Ch2 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#007)), while the
preparations for it which preceded were yet, according to [Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003), made also in the first month, is
removed if we take [Ch2 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003) to be a
comprehensive summary of what is described in the following verses, and
regard the connection between [Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003) and [Ch2
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004). as only logical, not
chronological, the ו consec. (ויּבא) expressing, not succession in time,
but connection in thought. The opening of the doors of the house of God,
and the repairing of them ([Ch2 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)),
did not precede in time the summons to the priests ([Ch2
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004)), but is placed at the
commencement of the account of the reopening and restoration of the
temple as a contrast to the closing and devastation of the sanctuary by
Ahaz. Hezekiah commenced this work in the first year of his reign, in
the first month of the calendar year, and accomplished it as is
described in [Ch2 29:4-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004). If we take
[Ch2 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003) as a statement of the
contents of the succeeding section, - as are e.g., ([Kg1
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#014); [Kg1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#001)) the statements, "he built the
house, and completed it," where in both passages the completion of the
building is described only in the succeeding verses, - we need not
confine the preparations spoken of in [Ch2
29:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004) to the first day of the first
month, but may quite well suppose that these preparations preceded the
first day of the month, and that only the accomplishment of that which
had been resolved upon and commanded by the king fell in the first
month, as is more accurately stated in [Ch2
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017).

[Ch2 29:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#004)

Hezekiah gathered the priests and Levites together "into the open space
of the east," i.e., in the eastern open space before the temple, not "in
the inner court" (Berth.), - see on [Ezr
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#009) -and called upon them ([Ch2
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#005)) to sanctify themselves, and then
to sanctify the house of the Lord. To purify the temple they must first
sanctify themselves (cf. [Ch2 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#015)),
in order to proceed to the work of sanctifying the house of God in a
state of Levitical purity. The work was to remove all that was unclean
from the sanctuary. הנּדּה is Levitical uncleanness, for which in [Ch2
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#016) we have הטּמאה; here the
abominations of idolatry. The king gave the reason of his summons in a
reference to the devastation which Ahaz and his contemporaries had
wrought in the house of God ([Ch2
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#006), [Ch2
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#007)), and to the wrath of God which
had on that account come upon them ([Ch2
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#008), [Ch2
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#009)). "Our fathers" ([Ch2
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#006)), that is, Ahaz and his
contemporaries, for only these had been guilty of displeasing God in the
ways mentioned in [Ch2 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#006) and [Ch2
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#007), "have turned away their face
from the dwelling of Jahve, and turned their back (upon it)." These
words are a symbolical expression for: they have ceased to worship Jahve
in His temple, and exchanged it for idolatry.

[Ch2 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#007)

Even (גּם) the doors of the porch have they shut, and caused the service
in the sanctuary, the lighting of the lamps, and the sacrifices of
incense, to cease; see on [Ch2 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024).
The words, "and they brought not burnt-offerings in the sanctuary to the
God of Israel," do not imply the complete cessation of the legal
sacrificial worship, but only that no burnt-offerings were brought to
the God of Israel. Sacrifices offered upon the altar of burnt-offering
built after a heathen pattern by Ahaz were not, in the eyes of the
author of the Chronicle, sacrifices which were offered to the God of
Israel; and it is also possible that even this sacrificial worship may
have more and more decayed. קדשׁ, [Ch2
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#007), is the whole sanctuary, with the
court of the priests.

[Ch2 29:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#008)

Wherefore the wrath of the Lord came upon Judah and Jerusalem. Cf. for
the expression, [Ch2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#018); [Ch2
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#025); on [Ch2
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#008), cf. [Deu
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025), [Deu
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037); [Jer
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009); [Jer
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009), etc. "As ye see with your eyes."
The shameful defeats which Judah had sustained under Ahaz from the
Syrians, Ephraimites, Philistines, and Edomites, and the oppression by
the Syrian king ([Ch2 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005)., [Ch2
28:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#017)), are here referred to, as we
learn from [Ch2 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#009).

[Ch2 29:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#010)

To turn away this anger of God, Hezekiah wishes to make a covenant with
the Lord, i.e., to renew the covenant with Jahve by restoring His
worship (לבבי עם as in [Ch2 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#007); [Ch2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#001); [Ch1
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002), etc.), and therefore calls upon
the Levites not to neglect the performance of their duty. בּני he calls
the Levites, addressing them in kindly language; cf. [Pro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008), etc. תּשּׁלוּ in Niph. occurs
only here, and denotes to avoid a thing from carelessness or laziness, -
from שׁלה, to draw forth; [Job 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#008).
On [Ch2 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#011), cf. [Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008); [Ch1
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#013).

[Ch2 29:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#012)

This address was heard with gladness. The Levites present assembled
their brethren, and set to work, after they had all sanctified
themselves, to purify the temple. In [Ch2
29:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#012) fourteen names are mentioned
as those of the audience, viz.: two Levites of each of the great
families of Kohath, Merari, and Gershon; two of the family of Elizaphan,
i.e., Elzaphan the son of Uzziel, the son of Kohath, [Exo
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#018), who in the time of Moses was
prince of the family of Kohath, [Num
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#030); and then two Levites of the
descendants of Asaph (of the family of Gershon); two of Heman's
descendants (of the family of Kohath); and two of Jeduthun's (of the
family of Merari): see on [Ch1
6:18-32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#018). Of these names, Mahath, Eden,
and Jehiel occur again in [Ch2
31:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#013); several others, Joah ben
Zimmah and Kish ben Abdi, have occurred already in the genealogy, [Ch1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#005). and [Ch2
29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#029), for in the various families the
same name often repeats itself.

[Ch2 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#015)

These fourteen heads of the various families and branches of Levi
assembled their brethren (the other Levites who dwelt in Jerusalem);
then they all sanctified themselves, and went forward, according to the
command of the king, with the work of cleansing the temple. יהוה בּדברי
belongs to הם כּמצות, according to the command of the king, which was
founded upon the words of Jahve, i.e., upon the commands of Moses' law;
cf. [Ch2 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#012).

[Ch2 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#016)

The priests went into the inner part of the house of the Lord (into the
holy place, probably also into the most holy place) to cleanse it, and
removed all the uncleanness which was there into the court, whence the
Levites carried it out into the valley of the brook Kidron (חוּצה, out
of the precincts of the temple). The Levites were forbidden by the law
to enter the holy place, and this command was strictly observed. Of what
nature the uncleannesses were which the priests found in the holy place
(היכל) cannot be accurately ascertained. Owing to the prevalence of
idolatry under Ahaz, vessels, e.g., sacrificial bowls, which were used
in the worship, may have come into the holy place; and besides, all
vessels of the holy place would require to be cleaned, and their filth
removed. The closing of the temple doors ([Ch2
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024)) occurred only in the last year
of Ahaz, while idolatry had been practised from the beginning of his
reign. On the Kidron, see on [Kg2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004).

[Ch2 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#017)

The duration of the purification. On the first day of the first month
they commenced with the purification of the courts; on the eighth day of
the same month they came to the porch of Jahve, and with it began the
purification of the temple building. This lasted eight days more, so
that the work was finished on the sixteenth day of the first month.

[Ch2 29:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#018)

At the end of this business they made their report to the king. "All the
vessels which King Ahaz had thrown away, i.e., made worthy of
rejection," are the copper altar of burnt-offering, the brazen sea, and
the lavers upon the bases ([Kg2 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#014),
[Kg2 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#017)). הכנּוּ, we have prepared,
is a shorter form of הכיונוּ; cf. Gesen. Gramm. 72. 5, and J. Olshausen,
hebr. Grammat. S. 565. The altar of Jahve is the altar of
burnt-offering; cf. [Ch2 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021).

[2 Chronicles 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 29:20</span></span>

The re-dedication of the temple by offering sacrifices. - [Ch2
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#020). Probably on the very next
morning Hezekiah went with the princes (heads) of the city into the
house of the Lord, and brought seven bullocks, seven rams, and seven
lambs for a burnt-offering, and seven he-goats for a sin-offering, "for
the kingdom, for the sanctuary, and for Judah," i.e., as expiation for
and consecration of the kingdom, sanctuary, and people. These sacrifices
were offered by the priests according to the prescription of the law of
Moses, [Ch2 29:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#022). The
burnt-offerings are first named, as in the sacrificial Torah in Lev 1-6,
although the offering of the sin-offering preceded that of the
burnt-offering. The laying on of hands, too, is mentioned only with the
sin-offering, [Ch2 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#023), although
according to [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004) the same
ceremony was gone through with the burnt-offerings; but that is not
because a confession of sin was probably made during the laying on of
hands, as Bertheau conjectures, adducing [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021), for from that passage no such
conclusion can be drawn. The ceremony is mentioned only in the one case
to emphasize the fact that the king and the assembly (the latter, of
course, by their representatives) laid their hands upon the sacrificial
beasts, because the atonement was, according to the king's words, to be
for all Israel. "All Israel" are probably not only all the inhabitants
of the kingdom of Judah, but Israelites in general (the twelve tribes),
for whom the temple in Jerusalem was the only lawful sanctuary. דּם את
חטּא signifies to bring the blood to the altar for an atonement, in the
manner prescribed in [Lev 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#030), [Lev
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#034).

[2 Chronicles 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ch2 29:25</span></span>

Hezekiah, moreover, restored again the music with which the Levites were
wont to accompany the sacrificial act, and which David, with the
prophets Gad and Nathan, had arranged. The ו consec. with ויּעמד
expresses the secution of thought, and [Ch2
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#025) corresponds to the [Ch2
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021). First, the beasts to be
sacrificed were prepared for the sacrifice, and then to the Levites was
committed the performance of instrumental and vocal music during the
sacrificial act. In reference to the musical instruments, see on [Ch1
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#016). The Levites were appointed to
sing, "according to the command of David;" but this command was בּיד, by
interposition of Jahve, viz., given by His prophets. David had
consequently made this arrangement at the divine suggestion, coming to
him through the prophets. With המּלך הזה cf. [Ch1
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#009). נביאיו בּיד is in explanatory
apposition to יהוה בּיד, and נביאיו is not to be referred to David,
although David is called in [Ch2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#014)
"man of God."

[2 Chronicles 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ch2 29:26</span></span>

דויד כּלי are the musical instruments the use of which David introduced
into the public worship; see [Ch1
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#005). - The first clause, [Ch2
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#027), "And Hezekiah commanded to
offer the burnt-offering upon the altar," is repeated from [Ch2
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#021) to form a connection for what
follows: "At the time when the sacrificial act began, the song of Jahve
commenced," i.e., the praising of Jahve by song and instrumental music
(יהוה שׁיר = ליהוה שׁיר, [Ch1 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#007)),
and (the blowing) of trumpets, "and that under the leading (ידי על) of
the instruments of David." This is to be understood as denoting that the
blowing of the trumpets regulated itself by the playing of the stringed
instruments-suited itself to the song and the music of the stringed
instruments.

[2 Chronicles 29:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ch2 29:28</span></span>

During the offering of the burnt-offering, until it was ended, the whole
congregation stood worshipping; and the song of the Levites, accompanied
by the music of the stringed instruments and the trumpet-blowing of the
priests, continued. משׁורר השּׁיר, "the song was singing," stands for
"the body of singers sang;" and the trumpets also stand for the
trumpeters.

[2 Chronicles 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">ch2 29:29</span></span>

At the conclusion of the sacrificial act (להעלות is a contraction for
העולה להעלות, [Ch2 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#027)) the king and
all who were present knelt and worshipped.

[2 Chronicles 29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">ch2 29:30</span></span>

The king and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praise unto the
Lord with the words (psalms) of David and of Asaph; and they sang praise
with joy, and bowed themselves and worshipped. This verse does not mean
that the Levites began to sing psalms at the king's command only after
the sacrificial act and the instrumental music ([Ch2
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#027).) had been finished, but it
forms a comprehensive conclusion of the description of the sacrificial
solemnities. The author of the Chronicle considered it necessary to make
express mention of the praising of God in psalms, already implicite
involved in the משׁורר השּׁיר, [Ch2
29:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#028), and to remark that the Levites
also, at the conclusion of the song of praise, knelt and worshipped.
Asaph is here called חזה, as Jeduthun (Ethan) is in [Ch2
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#015), and Heman, [Ch1
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#005).

[2 Chronicles 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ch2 29:31</span></span>

The sacrifice of thank-offerings and praise-offerings and voluntary
burnt-offering. - Hezekiah introduces this, the concluding act of this
religious festival, with the words, "Now have ye filled your hand to the
Lord," i.e., you have again consecrated yourselves to the service of the
Lord (cf. [Exo 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#029) and the
commentary on [Lev 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#037).); "come near,
and bring sacrifices and thank-offerings into the house of the Lord."
The words "Now have ye filled" are regarded by the commentators
(Clericus, Ramb., Bertheau, etc.) as addressed to the priests; while the
following וגו גּשׁוּ are supposed to be directed to the congregation,
and Clericus and Ramb. consequently supply before גּשׁוּ, vos vero,
Israelitae. The summons והביאוּ גּשׁוּ can certainly only be addressed
to the congregation, as is shown by the words הקּהל ויּביאוּ, and the
congregation brought, which correspond to the summons. But the supplying
of vos vero before גּשׁוּ is quite arbitrary. If in גּשׁוּ other persons
are addressed than those to whom the king formerly said, "Now have ye
filled your hands," the change in the persons addressed would have been
intimated by mention of the person, or at least by ואתּם, "but ye." As
the two clauses at present stand, they must be spoken to the same
persons, viz., the whole assembled congregation, including the priests
and Levites. We must therefore suppose that the phrase לי יד מלּא, which
in its narrower sense denotes only the consecration of the priests for
service at the altar (see on [Lev
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#037)), is here used in a wider sense,
and transferred to the whole congregation. They, by their participation
in the consecratory offerings, by laying on of hands and worship during
the sacrificial act, had consecrated themselves anew to the service of
the Lord as their God, and had anew made a covenant with the Lord ([Ch2
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#010)); so that only the sacrificial
meal was wanting to the completion of this celebration of the covenant,
and for this the offering of sacrifices was requisite. The collocation
ותודות זבהים is strange. זבהים are שׁלמים זבהים, sacrifices of
peace-offering, also called briefly שׁלמים. Of these, in the law, three
species - praise-offerings (תּודות), vowed offerings, and voluntary
offerings - are distinguished ([Lev
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011), [Lev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016)). תּודות therefore denotes a
species of the sacrifices or peace-offerings, the praise or
thank-offerings in the stricter sense; and ותודות must be taken as
explicative: sacrifices, and that (or namely) praise-offerings. לב
וכל־נדיב, and every one who was heartily willing, (brought)
burnt-offerings; i.e., all who felt inwardly impelled to do so, brought
of their own accord burnt-offerings.

[Ch2 29:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#032)

The number of the burnt-offerings brought spontaneously by the
congregation was very large: 70 bullocks, 100 rams, and 200 lambs.

[Ch2 29:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#033)

והקּדשׁים, and the consecrated, i.e., the beasts brought as
thank-offering (cf. [Ch2 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013); [Neh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#034)), were 600 bullocks and 3000
small cattle (sheep and goats). - In [Ch2
29:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034) the account closes with some
remarks upon these sacrifices and the festal solemnity. [Ch2
29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034). But there were too few priests,
and they were not able (so that they were not able) to flay all the
burnt-offerings; and their brethren the Levites helped them till the
work was ended (i.e., the flaying), and until the priests had sanctified
themselves. In the case of private burnt-offerings the flaying of the
beast was the business of the sacrificer ([Lev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006)); while in the case of those
offered on solemn occasions in the name of the congregation it was the
priest's duty, and in it, as the work was not of a specifically priestly
character, the Levites might assist. The burnt-offerings which are
spoken of in [Ch2 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034) are not merely
those voluntarily offered ([Ch2
29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034)), but also the consecratory
burnt-offerings ([Ch2 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#022), [Ch2
29:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#027)). Only [Ch2
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#035) refers to the voluntary
offerings alone. "For the Levites had been more upright to sanctify
themselves than the priests." לב ישׁרי, rectiores animo, had endeavoured
more honestly. Perhaps the priests had taken more part in the idolatrous
worship of Ahaz than the Levites, which would be quite accounted for, as
Kueper, das Priesterth. des A. Bundes (1870), S. 216, remarks, by their
relation to the court of the king, and their dependence upon it. They
consequently showed themselves more slack even in the purification than
the Levites, who forte etiam idololatricis sacris minus contaminati et
impediti erant (Ramb.).

[Ch2 29:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#035)

[Ch2 29:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#035) gives yet another reason
why the Levites had to help the priests: "And also the burnt-offerings
were in abundance, with the fat of the peace-offerings, and the
drink-offerings for every burnt-offering." The priests could not
accomplish the flaying for this reason also, that they had, besides, to
see to the proper altar service (sprinkling of the blood, and burning of
the sacrifices upon the altar), which taxed their strength, since,
besides the consecratory burnt-offerings, there were the voluntary
burnt-offerings ([Ch2 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#031)), which
were offered along with the thank-offerings and the drink-offerings,
which belonged to the burnt-offerings of [Num
15:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001). Thus the service of the house
of Jahve was arranged. עבודה is not the purification and dedication of
the temple (Berth.), but only the sacrificial service, or rather all
that concerned the regular temple worship, which had decayed under Ahaz,
and had at length wholly ceased.

[Ch2 29:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#036)

Hezekiah and the whole people rejoiced because of it. ההכין על, over
that which God had prepared for the people (by the purification of the
temple and the restoration of the Jahve worship), not "because God had
made the people ready" (Ramb., Berth.). The article with הכין represents
the relative pronoun אשׁר; see on [Ch1
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#028). The joy was heightened by the
fact that the thing was done suddenly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 30](ch2030)

</div>
