<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2009)  [Next](ch2011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 10:0</span></span>

IV\. The History of the Kingdom of Judah Until Its Fall - 2 Chronicles
10-36.

After giving an account of the revolt of the ten tribes of Israel from
the divinely chosen royal house of David (2 Chron 10), the author of the
Chronicle narrates the history of the kingdom of Judah - to which he
confines himself, to the exclusion of the history of the kingdom of the
ten tribes - at much greater length than the author of the books of
Kings has done. This latter portrays the development of both kingdoms,
but treats only very briefly of the history of the kingdom of Judah,
especially under its first rulers, and characterizes the attitude of the
kings and people of Judah to the kingdom of Israel and to the Lord only
in the most general way. The author of the Chronicle, on the other hand,
depicts the development of Judah under Rehoboam, Abijah, Asa, and
Jehoshaphat much more thoroughly, by communicating a considerable number
of events which are omitted in the book of Kings. As we have already
proved, the purpose of the chronicler was to show, according to the
varying attitude of the kings of the house of David to the Lord and to
His law, how, on the one hand, God rewarded the fidelity of the kings
and of the people to His covenant with prosperity and blessing, and
furnished to the kingdom of Judah, in war with its enemies, power which
secured the victory; and how, on the other, He took vengeance for every
revolt of the kings and people, and for every fall into idolatry and
superstition, by humiliations and awful judgments. And more especially
from the times of the godless kings Ahaz and Manasseh does our author do
this, pointing out how God suffered the people to fall ever deeper into
feebleness, and dependence upon the heathen world powers, until finally,
when the efforts of the pious kings Hezekiah and Josiah to bring back
the people, sunk as they were in idolatry and moral corruption, to the
God of their fathers and to His service failed to bring about any
permanent repentance and reformation, He cast forth Judah also from His
presence, and gave over Jerusalem and the temple to destruction by the
Chaldeans, and caused the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judah to be led
away into exile to Babylon.

[2 Chronicles 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 10:1</span></span>

This event is narrated in our chapter, except in so far as a few
unessential differences in form are concerned, exactly as we have it in
1 Kings 12:1-19; so that we may refer for the exposition of it to the
commentary on 1 Kings 12, where we have both treated the contents of
this chapter, and have also discussed the deeper and more latent causes
of this event, so important in its consequences.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 11](ch2011.md)

</div>
