<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2022)  [Next](ch2024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 23:0</span></span>

The Fall of Athaliah, and the Coronation and Reign of Joash - 2
Chronicles 23-24

After Joash had been kept in hiding for six years, the high priest
Jehoiada came to the resolution to make an end of the tyranny of
Athaliah, and to raise the young prince to the throne. The carrying out
of this resolution is narrated in 2 Chron 23, and thereafter in 2 Chron
24. All that is important as to the reign of Joash is communicated.

[2 Chronicles 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 23:1</span></span>

Joash raised to the throne, and Athaliah slain. - In 2 Kings 11:4-20 we
have another account of these events, in which the matter is in several
points more briefly narrated, and apparently differently represented.
According to both narratives, the thing was undertaken and carried out
by the high priest Jehoiada; but according to 2 Kings 11, the high
priest would appear to have mainly availed himself of the co-operation
of the royal body-guard in the execution of his plan, while according to
the Chronicle it is the Levites and the heads of the fathers'-houses who
are made use of. Thereupon De Wette, Movers, Thenius, and Bertheau
consequently maintain that the author of the Chronicle, proceeding on
the view that the high priest, the chief of so many priests and Levites,
would not have recourse to the assistance of the royal body-guard, has
altered the statements in the second book of Kings accordingly, and
wishes to represent the matter in a different way. But this assertion
can be made with an appearance of truth only on the presupposition,
already repeatedly shown to be erroneous, that the author of the
Chronicle has made the account in 2 Kings 11 the basis of his narrative,
and designedly altered it, and can scarcely be upheld even by the
incorrect interpretation of various words. That 2 Kings 11 is not the
source from which our account has been derived, nor the basis on which
it is founded, is manifest from the very first verses of the
chronicler's narrative, where the names of the five princes over
hundreds, with whose co-operation Jehoiada elaborated his plan and
carried it into execution, are individually enumerated; while in 2 Kings
11, where the preparations for the accomplishment of the work are very
briefly treated of, they will be sought for in vain. But if, on the
contrary, the two accounts be recognised to be extracts confining
themselves to the main points, excerpted from a more detailed narrative
of the event from different points of view, the discrepancies may be at
once reconciled. Instead of the short statement, [Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004), that the high priest Jehoiada
ordered the centurions of the royal body-guard to come to him in the
temple (ויּבא...יקּח), made a covenant with them, caused them to swear,
and showed them the king's son, we read in the Chronicle ([Ch2
23:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001)), that the high priest Jehoiada
took five centurions, whose names are stated with historical exactitude,
into covenant with him, i.e., sent for them and made a covenant with
them, and that these men then went throughout Judah, and summoned the
Levites from all the cities of Judah, and the heads of the
fathers'-houses of Israel, to Jerusalem; whereupon Jehoiada with the
whole assembly made a covenant with the king in the house of God, and
Jehoiada said to the people, "The king's son shall be king, as Jahve
hath said of the sons of David." That this more expanded narrative can
without difficulty be reconciled with the summary statement in [Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004), is perfectly manifest. By
various devices, however, Berth. tries to bring out some discrepancies.
In the first place, in the words, "Jehoiada sent and brought the princes
of hundreds" ([Kg2 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004)), he presses
the שׁלח, which is not found in the Chronicle, translates it by "he sent
out," and interprets it with [Ch2 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#002)
of the Chronicle; in the second, he takes כּל־הקּהל in [Ch2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#003) of the Chronicle to mean "the
whole congregation," whereas it denotes only the assembly of the men
named in [Ch2 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#001) and [Ch2
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#002); and, thirdly, he opposes the
expression, "they made a covenant with the king" ([Ch2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#003), Chron.), to the statement ([Kg2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#002)) that Jehoiada made a covenant to
the princes, by making this latter statement mean that Jehoiada made a
covenant with the princes, but not with the king, as if this covenant
concerning the coronation of Joash as king might not be called, by a
shorter mode of expression, a covenant with the king, especially when
the declaration, "the son of the king shall reign," follows immediately.

[2 Chronicles 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 23:4</span></span>

The case is similar with the contradictions in the account of the
carrying out of the arrangements agreed upon. In Bertheau's view, this
is the state of the case: According to [Kg2
11:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#005), the one part of the
body-guard, which on Sabbath mounted guard in the royal palace, were to
divide themselves into three bands: one third was to keep the guard of
the royal house, which was certainly in the neighbourhood of the main
entrance; the second third was to stand at the gate Sur, probably a
side-gate of the palace; the third was to stand behind the door of the
runners. The other part of the body-guard, on the other hand - all those
who were relieved on the Sabbath - were to occupy the temple, so as to
defend the young king. But according to the representation of the
Chronicle, (1) the priests and the Levites were to divide themselves
into three parts: the first third, those of the priests and Levites, who
entered upon their duties on the Sabbath, were to be watchers of the
thresholds (cf. on [Ch1 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#019).), i.e.,
were to mount guard in the temple as usual; the second third was to be
in the house of the king (i.e., where the first third was to keep watch,
according to 2 Kings); the third was to be at the gate Jesod. Then (2)
the whole people were to stand in the courts of the temple, and,
according to [Ch2 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#006), were to
observe the ordinance of Jahve ([Ch2
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#011)), by which they were forbidden
to enter the temple. From this Bertheau then concludes: "The guarding of
the house of Jahve for the protection of the king ([Kg2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#007)) has here become a יהוה משׁמרת."
But in opposition to this, we have to remark that in [Kg2
11:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#005) is it not said that the royal
body-guard was to be posted as guards in the royal palace and in the
temple; that is only a conclusion from the fact that Jehoiada conferred
on the matter with the המּאות שׂרי of the executioners and runners,
i.e., of the royal satellites, and instructed these centurions, that
those entering upon the service on Sabbath were to keep watch in three
divisions, and those retiring from the service in two divisions, in the
following places, which are then more accurately designated. The one
division of those entering upon the service were to stand, according to
2 Kings, by the gate Sur; according to the Chronicle, by the gate Jesod.
The second, according to 2 Kings, was to keep the guard of the king's
house; according to the Chronicle, it was to be in or by the king's
house. The third was, according to 2 Kings, to be by (in) the gate
behind the runners, and to keep the guard of the house Massach;
according to the Chronicle, they were to serve as watchers of the
thresholds. If, as is acknowledged by all, the gate סוּר is identical
with the gate היסוד, - although it can neither be ascertained whether
the difference in name has resulted merely from an orthographical error,
or rests upon a double designation of one gate; nor yet can it be
pointed out what the position of this gate, which is nowhere else
mentioned, was, - then the Chronicle and 2 Kings agree as to the posts
which were to occupy this door. The position also of the third part,
המּלך בּבית (Chron.), will not be different from that of the third part,
to which was committed the guarding of the king's house (Kings). The
place where this third part took up its position is not exactly pointed
out in either narrative, yet the statement, "to keep the watch of the
house (temple) for warding off" (Kings), agrees with the appointment "to
be guards of the thresholds" (Chron.), since the guarding of the
thresholds has no other aim than to prevent unauthorized persons from
entering. Now, since the young king, not merely according to the Chron.,
but also according to [Kg2 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004), -
where we are told that Jehoiada showed the son of the king to the chief
men whom he had summoned to the house of Jahve, - was in the temple, and
only after his coronation and Athaliah's death was led solemnly into the
royal palace, we might take the king's house, the guard of which the one
third of those entering upon the service were to keep ([Kg2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#007)), to be the temple building in
which the young king was, and interpret המּלך בּבית in accordance with
that idea. In that case, there would be no reference to the settling of
guards in the palace; and that view would seem to be favoured by the
circumstance that the other third part of those entering upon their
service on the Sabbath were to post themselves at the gate, behind the
runners, and keep the guard of the house מסּח. That מסּח is not a nom.
propr., but appellat., from נסח, to ward off, signifying warding off, is
unanimously acknowledged by modern commentators; only Thenius would
alter מסּח into וּנסח, "and shall ward off." Gesenius, on the contrary,
in his Thesaurus, takes the word to be a substantive, cum משׁמרת per
appositionem conjunctum, in the signification, the guard for warding
off, and translates, et vos agetis custodiam templi ad depellendum sc.
populum (to ward off). If this interpretation be correct, then these
words also do not treat of a palace guard; and to take הבּית to signify
the temple is so evidently suggested by the context, according to which
the high priest conducted the whole transaction in the temple, that we
must have better grounds for referring the words to the royal palace
than the mere presumption that, because the high priest discussed the
plan with the captains of the royal body-guard, it must be the
occupation of the royal palace which is spoken of.

But quite apart from the Chronicle, even the further account of the
matter in 2 Kings 11 is unfavourable to the placing of guards in the
royal palace. According to [Ch2 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#009),
the captains did exactly as Jehoiada commanded. They took each of them
their men - those coming on the Sabbath, and those departing - and went
to the priest Jehoiada, who gave them David's weapons out of the house
of God ([Ch2 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#010)), and the
satellites stationed themselves in the court of the temple, and there
the king was crowned. The unambiguous statement, [Ch2
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#009), that the captains, each with his
men - i.e., those coming on Sabbath (entering upon the service), and
those departing - came to the high priest in the temple, and there took
up their position in the court, decisively excludes the idea that "those
coming on the Sabbath" had occupied the guard-posts in the royal palace,
and demands that the divisions mentioned in [Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005) and [Ch2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#006) should be posted at different
parts and gates of the temple. That one third part had assigned to it a
place behind the gate of the runners is not at all inconsistent with the
above idea; for even if the gate behind the runners be identical with
the gate of the runners ([Kg2 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#019)),
it by no means follows from that that it was a gate of the palace, and
not of the outer court of the temple. In accordance with this view,
then, [Kg2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#005), [Kg2
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#006) do not treat of an occupation of
the royal palace, but of a provision for the security of the temple by
the posting of guards. It is, moreover, against the supposition that the
entrances to the palace were occupied by guards, that Athaliah, when she
heard from her palace the noise of the people in the temple, came
immediately into the temple, and was dragged forth and slain by the
captains there in command. For what purpose can they have placed guards
by the palace gates, if they did not desire to put any hindrance in the
way of the queen's going forth into the temple? The hypotheses of
Thenius, that it was done to keep away those who were devoted to
Athaliah, to make themselves masters of the palace, and to hinder
Athaliah from taking any measures in opposition to them, and to guard
the place of the throne, are nothing but expedients resulting from
embarrassment. If there was no intention to put any hindrance in the way
of the queen leaving the palace, there could have been none to prevent
her taking opposing measures. For the rest, the result obtained by
careful consideration of the account in 2 Kings 11, that in [Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005), [Ch2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#006) an occupation by guards, not of
the royal palace, but of the temple, is spoken of, does not stand or
fall with the supposition that המּלך בּית was the dwelling of the young
king in the temple building, and not the palace. The expression המּלך
בּית משׁמרת שׁמר, to guard the guard of the king's house, i.e., to have
regard to whatever is to be regarded in reference to the king's house,
is so indefinite and elastic, that it may have been used of a post which
watched from the outer court of the temple what was going on in the
palace, which was over against the temple. With this also the
corresponding המּלך בּבית, in the short account of the distribution of
the guards given by the chronicler ([Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005)), may be reconciled, if we
translate it "at the house of the king," and call to mind that,
according to [Kg2 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#018) and [Kg1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#005), there was a special approach
from the palace to the temple for the king, which this division may have
had to guard. But notwithstanding the guarding of this way, Athaliah
could come from the palace into the court of the temple by another way,
or perhaps the guards were less watchful at their posts during the
solemnity of the young king's coronation.

And not less groundless is the assertion that the priest Jehoiada
availed himself in the execution of his plan, according to 2 Kings 11,
mainly of the co-operation of the royal body-guard, according to the
Chronicle mainly of that of the Levites; or that the chronicler, as
Thenius expresses it, "has made the body-guards of 2 Kings into Levites,
in order to diver to the priesthood the honour which belonged to the
Praetorians." The המּאות שׂרי, mentioned by name in the Chronicle, with
whom Jehoiada discussed his plan, and who had command of the guards when
it was carried out, are not called Levites, and may consequently have
been captains of the executioners and runners, i.e., of the royal
body-guard, as they are designated in [Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004). But the men who occupied the
various posts are called in both texts השּׁבּת בּאי ([Kg2
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#005); [Ch2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#004)): in [Kg2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#007) and [Kg2
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#009), the corresponding השּׁבּת יצאי
is added; while in the Chronicle the השׁבת באי are expressly called
Levites, the words וללויּם לכּהנים being added. But we know from [Luk
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#005), compared with 1 Chron 24, that
the priests and Levites performed the service in the temple in courses
from one Sabbath to another, while we have no record of any such
arrangement as to the service of the Praetorians; so that we must
understand the words "coming on the Sabbath" (entering upon the
service), and "going on the Sabbath" (those relieved from it), of the
Levites in the first place. Had it been intended that by these words in
2 Kings 11 we should understand Praetorians, it must necessarily have
been clearly said. From the words spoken to the centurions of the
body-guard, "the third part of you," etc., it does not follow at all as
a matter of course that they were so, any more than from the fact that
in [Kg2 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#011), the posts set are
called הרצים, the runners = satellites. If we suppose that in this
extraordinary case the Levitic temple servants were placed under the
command of centurions of the royal body-guard, who were in league with
the high priest, the designation of the men they commanded by the name
רצים, satellites, is fully explained; the men having been previously
more accurately described as those who were entering upon and being
relieved from service on the Sabbath. In this way I have explained the
matter in my apologet. Versuch ber die Chron. S. 362ff., but this
explanation of it has neither been regarded nor confuted by Thenius and
Bertheau. Even the mention of כּרי and רצים along with the captains and
the whole people, in [Kg2 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#019), is
not inconsistent with it; for we may without difficulty suppose, as has
been said in my commentary on that verse, that the royal body-guard,
immediately after the slaughter of Athaliah, went over to the young king
just crowned, in order that they, along with the remainder of the people
who were assembled in the court, might lead him thence to the royal
palace. There is only one statement in the two texts which can scarcely
be reconciled with this conjecture, - namely, the mention of the רצים
and of the people in the temple before Athaliah was slain ([Ch2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#012) and [Kg2
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#013) Kings), since it follows from
that that runners or satellites belonging to the body-guard were either
posted, or had assembled with the others, in the court of the temple. To
meet this statement, we must suppose that the centurions of the
body-guard employed not merely the Levitic temple guard, but also some
of the royal satellites, upon whose fidelity they could rely, to occupy
the posts mentioned in [Kg2 11:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#005) and
[Ch2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#004), [Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005) ; so that the company under the
command of the centurions who occupied the various posts in the temple
consisted partly of Levitic temple guards, and partly of royal
body-guards. But even on this view, the suspicion that the chronicler
has mentioned the Levites instead of the body-guard is shown to be
groundless and unjust, since the רצים also are mentioned in the
Chronicle.

According to this exposition, the true relation between the account in
the Chronicle and that in the book of Kings would seem to be something
like this: Both accounts mention merely the main points of the
proceedings, - the author of the book of Kings emphasizing the part
played in the affair by the royal body-guard; the author of the
Chronicle, on the other hand, emphasizing that played by the Levites: so
that both accounts mutually supplement each other, and only when taken
together give a full view of the circumstances. We have still to make
the following remarks on the narrative of the Chronicle in detail. The
statement ([Kg2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#005)) that all those
relived on the Sabbath were to keep guard of the house of Jahve, in
reference to the king, in two divisions, is in [Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005), thus generalized: "all the
people were in the courts of the house of Jahve." כּל־העם is all the
people except the before-mentioned bodies of men with their captains,
and comprehends not only the remainder of the people mentioned in [Kg2
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#013) and [Kg2
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#019), who came to the temple without
any special invitation, but also the body of guards who were relieved
from service on Sabbath. This is clear from [Ch2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#008) of the Chronicle, where we have
the supplementary remark, that those departing on the Sabbath also, as
well as those coming, did what Jehoiada commanded. In addition to this,
in [Ch2 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#006) this further command of
Jehoiada is communicated: Let no one enter the house of Jahve (יהוה בּית
is the temple building, i.e., the holy place and the most holy, as
distinguished from the courts), save the priests, and they that minister
of the Levites, i.e., of those Levites who perform the service, who are
consecrated thereto; but all the people shall keep the watch of the
Lord, i.e., keep what is to be observed in reference to Jahve, i.e.,
here, to keep without the limits appointed in the law to the people in
drawing near to the sanctuaries. The whole verse, therefore, contains
only an elucidation of the command that all the people were to remain in
the courts, and not to press farther into the sanctuary.

[2 Chronicles 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 23:7</span></span>

"And the Levites shall compass the king round about, each with his
weapons in his hand." The Levites are the bodies of guards mentioned in
[Ch2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#004), [Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005). If we keep that in view, then
the following words, "every one who cometh into the house shall be put
to death," say the same as the words, "every one who cometh within the
ranks" ([Kg2 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#008)). A contradiction
arises only if we misinterpret הקּיפוּ, and understand it of the forming
of a circle around the king; whereas הקּיפוּ, like הקּפתּם (Kings), is
to be understood, according to the context, of the setting of the guards
both at the temple gate and in the courts, so that whoever entered the
court of the temple came within the ranks of the guards thus placed.

[2 Chronicles 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 23:8</span></span>

The account of the occupation of the temple thus arranged agrees with
[Kg2 11:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#009). Instead of המּאות שׂרי
(Kings), in [Ch2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#008) are very
fittingly named "the Levites (as in [Ch2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#005)) and all Judah," viz., in its
chiefs, since the high priest had assured himself of the support of the
heads of the fathers'-houses of Israel ([Ch2
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#002)). Further, to the statement that
those who were departing from the service also took part in the affair,
it is added, "for Jehoiada had not dismissed the courses." המּחלקות are
the divisions which, according to the arrangement made by David (1 Chron
24-26), had charge of the temple service at that time. To the captains
Jehoiada gave the spears and shields which had been presented to the
temple by David as offerings, because they had come into the temple
without weapons; see on [Kg2 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#010).
ויּעמד, "and he caused the whole people to take position," is connected
formally with ויּתּן, [Ch2 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#009); while
in [Kg2 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#011), we have simply
ויּעמדוּ.

[2 Chronicles 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 23:11</span></span>

The coronation of Joash, as in [Kg2
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#012). The subject of ויּוציאוּ and
ויּתּנוּ is those present, while in ויּוציא and ויּתּן (Kings), Jehoiada
as leader of the whole is referred to. In the Chronicle, Jehoiada and
his sons, i.e., the high priest with the priests assisting him, are
expressly named as subject to ימליכוּ and ויּמשׁצהוּ, where in Kings
also the plural is used; while, on the contrary, "the clapping of the
hands" as a sign of joyful acclamation (Kings) is omitted, as being
unimportant.

[2 Chronicles 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 23:12</span></span>

Slaughter of Athaliah, as in [Kg2
11:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#013). In [Ch2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#013) of the Chronicle, the statement
that the assembled people played on instruments is expanded by the
addition, "and singing with instruments of song, and proclaiming aloud
to praise," i.e., and praising. ויּוצא, [Ch2
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#014), is an orthographical error for
ויצו (Kings).

[2 Chronicles 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 23:16</span></span>

The renewal of the covenant, extirpation of Baal-worship, and the solemn
entry of the king into his palace, as in [Kg2
11:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#017), and already commented on in
that place. The remark as to the renewal of the covenant is in [Ch2
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#016) (Chron.) somewhat more brief
than in [Kg2 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#017); and בּינו, between
himself, the same as between himself, the high priest, as representative
of Jehovah. In [Kg2 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#017), the matter
is more clearly expressed. In [Kg2
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#018)., the statement, "the priest set
overseers over the house of Jahve," is expanded by the addition of the
words, "by means of the Levitic priests whom David had distributed for
the house of Jahve to offer sacrifices;...and he placed doorkeepers at
the doors of the house of Jahve," etc. The meaning is: Jehoiada again
introduced the old arrangement of the public worship in the temple as
David had settled it, it having either fallen into decay or wholly
ceased under the rule of the idolatrous Athaliah. As to the remainder,
see on [Kg2 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#019) and [Kg2
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#020).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 24](ch2024)

</div>
