<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan001)  [Next](dan003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 2:0</span></span>

Part First - The Development of the World-Power - Daniel 2-7

This Part contains in six chapters as many reports regarding the
successive forms and the natural character of the world-power. It begins
(Daniel 2) and ends (Daniel 7) with a revelation from God regarding its
historical unfolding in four great world-kingdoms following each other,
and their final overthrow by the kingdom of God, which shall continue
for ever. Between these chapters (Daniel 2 and 7) there are inserted
four events belonging to the times of the first and second
world-kingdom, which partly reveal the attempts of the rulers of the
world to compel the worshippers of the true God to pray to their idols
and their gods, together with the failure of this attempt (Daniel 3 and
6), and partly the humiliations of the rulers of the world, who were
boastful of their power, under the judgments of God (Daniel 4 and 5),
and bring under our consideration the relation of the rulers of this
world to the Almighty God of heaven and earth and to the true fearers of
His name. The narratives of these four events follow each other in
chronological order, because they are in actual relation bound together,
and therefore also the occurrences (Daniel 5 and 6) which belong to the
time subsequent to the vision in Daniel 7 are placed before his vision,
so that the two revelations regarding the development of the world-power
form the frame within which is contained the historical section which
describes the character of that world-power.

Nebuchadnezzar's Vision of the World-Monarchies, and Its Interpretation
by Daniel - Daniel 2

When Daniel and his three friends, after the completion of their
education, had entered on the service of the Chaldean king,
Nebuchadnezzar dreamed a dream which so greatly moved him, that he
called all the wise men of Babylon that they might make known to him the
dream and give the interpretation of it; and when they were not able to
do this, he gave forth the command ([Dan
2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)) that they should all be
destroyed. But Daniel interceded with the king and obtained a respite,
at the expiry of which he promised ([Dan
2:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014)) to comply with his demand. In
answer to his prayers and those of his friends, God revealed the secret
to Daniel in a vision ([Dan 2:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#019)),
so that he was not only able to tell the king his dream ([Dan
2:24-36](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024)), but also to give him its
interpretation ([Dan 2:37-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037));
whereupon Nebuchadnezzar praised the God of Daniel as the true God, and
raised him to high honours and dignities (vv. 46-49). It has justly been
regarded as a significant thing, that it was Nebuchadnezzar, the founder
of the world-power, who first saw in a dream the whole future
development of the world-power. "The world-power," as Auberlen properly
remarks, "must itself learn in its first representative, who had put an
end to the kingdom of God the theocracy, what its own final destiny
would be, that, in its turn overthrown, it would be for ever subject to
the kingdom of God." This circumstance also is worthy of notice, that
Nebuchadnezzar did not himself understand the revelation which he
received, but the prophet Daniel, enlightened by God, must interpret it
to him.

(Note: According to Bleek, Lengerke, Hitz., Ew., and others, the whole
narrative is to be regarded as a pure invention, as to its plan formed
in imitation of the several statements of the narrative in Gen 41 of
Pharaoh's dream and its interpretation by Joseph the Hebrew, when the
Egyptian wise men were unable to do so. Nebuchadnezzar is the copy of
Pharaoh, and at the same time the type of Antiochus Epiphanes, who was
certainly a half-mad despot, as Nebuchadnezzar is here described to be,
although he was not so in reality. But the resemblance between Pharaoh's
dream and that of Nebuchadnezzar consists only in that (1) both kings
had significant dreams which their won wise men could not interpret to
them, but which were interpreted by Israelites by the help of God; (2)
Joseph and Daniel in a similar manner, but not in the same words,
directed the kings to God (cf. [Gen
41:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#016); [Dan
2:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#027)); and (3) that in both
narratives the word פּעם \[was disquieted\] is used ([Gen
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008); [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001), [Dan
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003)). In all other respects the
narratives are entirely different. But "the resemblance," as Hengst. has
already well remarked (Beitr. i. p. 82), "is explained partly from the
great significance which in ancient times was universally attached to
dreams and their interpretation, partly from the dispensations of divine
providence, which at different times has made use of this means for the
deliverance of the chosen people." In addition to this, Kran., p. 70,
has not less appropriately said: "But that only one belonging to the
people of God should in both cases have had communicated to him the
interpretation of the dream, is not more to be wondered at than that
there is a true God who morally and spiritually supports and raises
those who know and acknowledge Him, according to psychological laws,
even in a peculiar way." Moreover, if the word פצם was really borrowed
from [Gen 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008), that would prove
nothing more than that Daniel had read the books of Moses. But the
grounds on which the above-named critics wish to prove the unhistorical
character of this narrative are formed partly from a superficial
consideration of the whole narrative and a manifestly false
interpretation of separate parts of it, and partly from the dogmatic
prejudice that "a particular foretelling of a remote future is not the
nature of Hebrew prophecy," i.e., in other words, that there is no
prediction arising from a supernatural revelation. Against the other
grounds Kran. has already very truly remarked: "That the narrative of
the actual circumstances wants (cf. Hitz. p. 17) proportion and unity,
is not corroborated by a just view of the situation; the whole statement
rather leaves the impression of a lively, fresh immediateness, in which
a careful consideration of the circumstances easily furnishes the means
for filling up the details of the brief sketch." Hence it follows that
the contents of the dream show not the least resemblance to Pharaoh's
dream, and in the whole story there is no trace seen of a hostile
relation of Nebuchadnezzar and his courtiers to Judaism; nay rather
Nebuchadnezzar' relation to the God of Daniel presents a decided
contrast to the mad rage of Antiochus Epiphanes against the Jewish
religion.)

[Daniel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 2:1</span></span>

The dream of Nebuchadnezzar and the inability of the Chaldean wise men
to interpret it. - By the ו copulative standing at the commencement of
this chapter the following narrative is connected with c. [Dan
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021). "We shall now discover what the
youthful Daniel became, and what he continued to be to the end of the
exile" (Klief.). The plur. חלמות (dreams, [Dan
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001) and [Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002)), the singular of which occurs in
[Dan 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003), is not the plur. of definite
universality (Hv., Maur., Klief.), but of intensive fulness, implying
that the dream in its parts contained a plurality of subjects.
M('p@ft;hi (from פּעם, to thrust, to stroke, as פּעם, an anvil, teaches,
to be tossed hither and thither) marks great internal disquietude. In
[Dan 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003) and in [Gen
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008), as in [Psa
77:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#005), it is in the Niphal form, but in
[Dan 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001) it is in Hithp., on which
Kran. finely remarks: "The Hithpael heightens the conception of internal
unquiet lying in the Niphal to the idea that it makes itself outwardly
manifest." His sleep was gone. This is evidenced without doubt by the
last clause of [Dan 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#001), עליו נהיתה.
These interpretations are altogether wrong: - "His sleep came upon him,
i.e., he began again to sleep" (Calvin); or "his sleep was against him,"
i.e., was an aversion to him, was troublesome (L. de Dieu); or, as Hv.
also interprets it, "his sleep offended him, or was like a burden heavy
upon him;" for נהיה does not mean to fall, and thus does not agree with
the thought expressed. The Niph. נהיה means to have become, been,
happened. The meaning has already been rightly expressed by Theodoret in
the words ἐγένετο ἀπ ̓αὐτου, and in the Vulgate by the words "fugit ab
illo;" and Berth., Ges., and others have with equal propriety remarked,
that נהיתה שׁנתו corresponds in meaning with נדּת שׁנתּהּ, [Dan
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#019) (18), and שׁנת נדדה, [Est
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001). This sense, to have been,
however, does not conduct to the meaning given by Klief.: his sleep had
been upon him; it was therefore no more, it had gone; for "to have been"
is not "to be no more," but "to be finished," past, gone. This meaning
is confirmed by נהייתי, [Dan 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027) : it
was done with me, I was gone. The עליו stands not for the dative, but
retains the meaning, over, upon, expressing the influence on the mind,
as e.g., [Jer 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018), [Hos
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#008), [Psa
42:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006), 12; [Psa
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#005), etc., which in German we express
by the word bei or fr.

The reason of so great disquietude we may not seek in the circumstance
that on awaking he could not remember the dream. This follows neither
from [Dan 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003), nor is it
psychologically probable that so impressive a dream, which on awaking he
had forgotten, should have yet sorely disquieted his spirit during his
waking hours. "The disquiet was created in him, as in Pharaoh (Gen 41),
by the specially striking incidents of the dream, and the fearful,
alarming apprehensions with reference to his future fate connected
therewith" (Kran.).

[Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002)

In the disquietude of his spirit the king commanded all his astrologers
and wise men to come to him, four classes of whom are mentioned in this
verse. 1. The חרטמּים, who were found also in Egypt ([Gen
41:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#024)). They are so named from חרט, a
"stylus" - those who went about with the stylus, the priestly class of
the ἱερογραμματεῖς, those learned in the sacred writings and in
literature. 2. The אשּׁפים, conjurers, from שׁאף or נשׁף, to breathe, to
blow, to whisper; for they practised their incantations by movements of
the breath, as is shown by the Arabic nft, flavit ut praestigiator in
nexos a se nodos, incantavit, with which it is compared by Hitz. and
Kran. 3. The מכשּׁפים, magicians, found also in Egypt ([Exo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011)), and, according to [Isa
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009), [Isa
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012), a powerful body in Babylon. 4.
The כּשׂדּים, the priest caste of the Chaldeans, who are named, [Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004), [Dan
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010), and [Dan
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004), instar omnium as the most
distinguished class among the Babylonian wise men. According to Herod.
i. 171, and Diod. Sic. ii. 24, the Chaldeans appear to have formed the
priesthood in a special sense, or to have attended to the duties
specially devolving on the priests. This circumstance, that amongst an
Aramaic people the priests in a stricter sense were called Chaldeans, is
explained, as at p. 78, from the fact of the ancient supremacy of the
Chaldean people in Babylonia.

Besides these four classes there is also a fifth, [Dan
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#027); Daniel 4:4 ([Dan
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007)), [Dan
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#007), [Dan
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011), called the גּזרין, the
astrologers, not haruspices, from גּזר, "to cut flesh to pieces," but
the determiners of the גּזרה, the fatum or the fata, who announced
events by the appearances of the heavens (cf. [Isa
47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013)), the forecasters of nativities,
horoscopes, who determined the fate of men from the position and the
movement of the stars at the time of their birth. These different
classes of the priests and the learned are comprehended, [Dan
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#012)., under the general designation
of חכּימין (cf. also [Isa 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025); [Jer
50:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#035)), and they formed a σύστημα,
i.e., collegium (Diod. Sic. ii. 31), under a president (סגנין רב, [Dan
2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048)), who occupied a high place in
the state; see at [Dan 2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048). These
separate classes busied themselves, without doubt, with distinct
branches of the Babylonian wisdom. While each class cultivated a
separate department, yet it was not exclusively, but in such a manner
that the activities of the several classes intermingled in many ways.
This is clearly seen from what is said of Daniel and his companions,
that they were trained in all the wisdom of the Chaldeans ([Dan
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#017)), and is confirmed by the
testimony of Diod. Sic. (ii. 29), that the Chaldeans, who held almost
the same place in the state that the priests in Egypt did, while
applying themselves to the service of the gods, sought their greatest
glory in the study of astrology, and also devoted themselves much to
prophecy, foretelling future things, and by means of lustrations,
sacrifices, and incantations seeking to turn away evil and to secure
that which was good. They possessed the knowledge of divination from
omens, of expounding of dreams and prodigies, and of skilfully casting
horoscopes.

That he might receive an explanation of his dream, Nebuchadnezzar
commanded all the classes of the priests and men skilled in wisdom to be
brought before him, because in an event which was to him so weighty he
must not only ascertain the facts of the case, but should the dream
announce some misfortune, he must also adopt the means for averting it.
In order that the correctness of the explanation of the dream might be
ascertained, the stars must be examined, and perhaps other means of
divination must be resorted to. The proper priests could by means of
sacrifices make the gods favourable, and the conjurers and magicians by
their arts endeavour to avert the threatened misfortune.

[Dan 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003)

As to the king's demand, it is uncertain whether he wished to know the
dream itself or its import. The wise men ([Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004)) understood his words as if he
desired only to know the meaning of it; but the king replied ([Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005).) that they must tell him both the
dream and its interpretation. But this request on the part of the king
does not quite prove that he had forgotten the dream, as Bleek, v.
Leng., and others maintain, founding thereon the objection against the
historical veracity of the narrative, that Nebuchadnezzar's demand that
the dream should be told to him was madness, and that there was no
sufficient reason for his rage ([Dan
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#012)). On the contrary, that the king
had not forgotten his dream, and that there remained only some
oppressive recollection that he had dreamed, is made clear from [Dan
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009), where the king says to the
Chaldeans, "If ye cannot declare to me the dream, ye have taken in hand
to utter deceitful words before me; therefore tell me the dream, that I
may know that ye will give to me also the interpretation." According to
this, Nebuchadnezzar wished to hear the dream from the wise men that he
might thus have a guarantee for the correctness of the interpretation
which they might give. He could not thus have spoken to them if he had
wholly forgotten the dream, and had only a dark apprehension remaining
in his mind that he had dreamed. In this case he would neither have
offered a great reward for the announcement of the dream, nor have
threatened severe punishment, or even death, for failure in announcing
it. For then he would only have given the Chaldeans the opportunity, at
the cost of truth, of declaring any dream with an interpretation. But as
threatening and promise on the part of the king in that case would have
been unwise, so also on the side of the wise men their helplessness in
complying with the demand of the king would have been incomprehensible.
If the king had truly forgotten the dream, they had no reason to be
afraid of their lives if they had given some self-conceived dream with
an interpretation of it; for in that case he could not have accused them
of falsehood and deceit, and punished them on that account. If, on the
contrary, he still knew the dream which so troubled him, and the
contents of which he desired to hear from the Chaldeans, so that he
might put them to the proof whether he might trust in their
interpretation, then neither his demand nor the severity of his
proceeding was irrational. "The magi boasted that by the help of the
gods they could reveal deep and hidden things. If this pretence is well
founded - so concluded Nebuchadnezzar - then it must be as easy for them
to make known to me my dream as its interpretation; and since they could
not do the former, he as rightly held them to be deceivers, as the
people did the priests of Baal (1 Kings 18) because their gods answered
not by fire." Hengst.

[Dan 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004)

The Chaldeans, as speaking for the whole company, understand the word of
the king in the sense most favourable for themselves, and they ask the
king to tell them the dream. וידבּרוּ for ויּאמרוּ, which as a rule
stands before a quotation, is occasioned by the addition of ארמית, and
the words which follow are zeugmatically joined to it. Aramaic, i.e., in
the native language of Babylonia, where, according to Xenoph. (Cyrop.
vii. 5), the Syriac, i.e., the Eastern Aramaic dialect, was spoken. From
the statement here, that the Chaldeans spoke to the king in Aramaic, one
must not certainly conclude that Nebuchadnezzar spoke the Aryan-Chaldaic
language of his race. The remark refers to the circumstance that the
following words are recorded in the Aramaic, as [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007). Daniel wrote this and the
following chapters in Aramaic, that he might give the prophecy regarding
the world-power in the language of the world-power, which under the
Chaldean dynasty was native in Babylon, the Eastern Aramaic. The
formula, "O king, live for ever," was the usual salutation when the king
was addressed, both at the Chaldean and the Persian court (cf. [Dan
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#009); [Dan
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010); [Dan
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#007), [Dan
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#022) \[6, 21\]; [Neh
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#003)). In regard to the Persian court,
see Aelian, var. hist. i. 32. With the kings of Israel this form of
salutation was but rarely used: [Sa1
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024); [Kg1
1:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#031). The Kethiv (text) לעבדיך, with
Jod before the suffix, supposes an original form לעבדיך here, as at [Dan
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#026); [Dan
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016), [Dan
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#022), but it is perhaps only the
etymological mode of writing for the form with ā long, analogous to the
Hebr. suffix form עיו for עו, since the Jod is often wanting; cf. [Dan
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#024); [Dan
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010), etc. A form ־איא lies at the
foundation of the form כשׂדּיא; the Keri (margin) substitutes the usual
Chaldee form כשׂדּאי from כּשׂדּאא, with the insertion of the litera
quiescib. י, homog. to the quies. ē, while in the Kethiv the original
Jod of the sing. כּשׂדּי is retained instead of the substituted ,א thus
כשׂדּיא. This reading is perfectly warranted (cf. [Dan
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002), [Dan
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#008),[Dan
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#024); [Ezr
4:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012)) by the analogous method of
formation of the stat. emphat. plur. in existing nouns in ־י in biblical
Chaldee.

[Dan 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005)

The meaning of the king's answer shapes itself differently according to
the different explanations given of the words אזדּא מנּי מלּתה. The word
אזדּא drow eh, which occurs only again in the same phrase in [Dan
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008), is regarded, in accordance with
the translations of Theodot., ὁ λόγος ἀπ ̓ἐμοῦ ἀπέστη, and of the Vulg.,
"sermo recessit a me," as a verb, and as of like meaning with עזל, "to
go away or depart," and is therefore rendered by M. Geier, Berth., and
others in the sense, "the dream has escaped from me;" but Ges. Hv., and
many older interpreters translate it, on the contrary, "the command is
gone out from me." But without taking into account that the punctuation
of the word אזדּא is not at all that of a verb, for this form can
neither be a particip. nor the 3rd pers. pret. fem., no acknowledgment
of the dream's having escaped from him is made; for such a statement
would contradict what was said at [Dan
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#003), and would not altogether agree
with the statement of [Dan 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008). מלּתה
is not the dream. Besides, the supposition that אזד is equivalent to
אזל, to go away, depart, is not tenable. The change of the לinto דis
extremely rare in the Semitic, and is not to be assumed in the word אזל,
since Daniel himself uses אזל אזל, [Dan
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017), [Dan
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024); [Dan
6:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#019), and also Ezra; [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023); [Ezr
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008), [Ezr
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#015). Moreover אזל has not the meaning
of יצא, to go out, to take one's departure, but corresponds with the
Hebr. הלך .rbe, to go. Therefore Winer, Hengst., Ibn Esr. Aben Ezra,
Saad., and other rabbis interpret the word as meaning firmus: "the word
stands firm;" cf. [Dan 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#013) (12),
מלּתא יצּיבה ("the thing is true"). This interpretation is justified by
the actual import of the words, as it also agrees with [Dan
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008); but it does not accord with [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005). Here (in [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005)) the declaration of the certainty
of the king's word was superfluous, because all the royal commands were
unchangeable. For this reason also the meaning σπουδαιῶς, studiously,
earnestly, as Hitz., by a fanciful reference to the Persian, whence he
has derived it, has explained it, is to be rejected. Much more
satisfactory is the derivation from the Old Persian word found on
inscriptions, âzanda, "science," "that which is known," given by
Delitzsch (Herz.'s Realenc. iii. p. 274), and adopted by Kran. and
Klief.

(Note: In regard to the explanation of the word אזדּא as given above, it
is, however, to be remarked that it is not confirmed, and Delitzsch has
for the present given it up, because-as he has informed me-the word
azdâ, which appears once in the large inscription of Behistan (Bisutun)
and twice in the inscription of Nakhschi-Rustam, is of uncertain reading
and meaning. Spiegel explains it "unknown," from zan, to know, and a
privativum.)

Accordingly Klief. thus interprets the phrase: "let the word from me be
known," "be it known to you;" which is more suitable obviously than that
of Kran.: "the command is, so far as regards me, made public." For the
king now for the first time distinctly and definitely says that he
wishes not only to hear from the wise men the interpretation, but also
the dream itself, and declares the punishment that shall visit them in
the event of their not being able to comply. הדּמין עבד, μέλη ποιεῖν, 2
Macc. 1:16, lxx in Daniel 3:39, διαμελίζεσθαι, to cut in pieces, a
punishment that was common among the Babylonians (Daniel 3:39, cf. [Eze
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040)), and also among the Israelites
in the case of prisoners of war (cf. [Sa1
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#033)). It is not, however, to be
confounded with the barbarous custom which was common among the
Persians, of mangling particular limbs. נולי, in [Ezr
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#011) נולוּ, dunghill, sink. The
changing of their houses into dunghills is not to be regarded as meaning
that the house built of clay would be torn down, and then dissolved by
the rain and storm into a heap of mud, but is to be interpreted
according to [Kg2 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#027), where the
temple of Baal is spoken of as having been broken down and converted
into private closets; cf. Hv. in loco. The Keri תּתעבּדוּן without the
Dagesh in בmight stand as the Kethiv for Ithpaal, but is apparently the
Ithpeal, as at [Dan 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#029); [Ezr
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#011). As to בּתּיכון, it is to be
remarked that Daniel uses only the suffix forms כון and הון, while with
Ezra כם and כן are interchanged (see above, p. 515), which are found in
the language of the Targums and might be regarded as Hebraisms, while
the forms כון and הון are peculiar to the Syriac and the Samaritan
dialects. This distinction does not prove that the Aramaic of Daniel
belongs to a period later than that of Ezra (Hitz., v. Leng.), but only
that Daniel preserves more faithfully the familiar Babylonian form of
the Aramaic than does the Jewish scribe Ezra.

[Dan 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#006)

The rigorous severity of this edict accords with the character of
Oriental despots and of Nebuchadnezzar, particularly in his dealings
with the Jews ([Kg2 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#007), [Kg2
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#018).; [Jer
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#006)., [Jer
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010)., 24-27). In the promise of
rewards the explanation of נבזבּה (in the plural נבזבּין, [Dan
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#017)) is disputed; its rendering by
"money," "gold" (by Eichh. and Berth.), has been long ago abandoned as
incorrect. The meaning gift, present, is agreeable to the context and to
the ancient versions; but its derivation formed from the Chald. בזבז,
Pealp. of בּזז, erogavit, expendit, by the substitution of נfor מand the
excision of the second זfrom מבזבּזה, in the meaning largitio amplior,
the Jod in the plural form being explained from the affinity of verbs
ע'ע and ל'ה (Ges. Thes. p. 842, and Kran.), is highly improbable. The
derivation from the Persian nuvâzan, nuvâzisch, to caress, to flatter,
then to make a present to (P. v. Bohlen), or from the Sanscr. namas,
present, gift (Hitz.), or from the Vedish bag̀, to give, to distribute,
and the related New Persian bâj (bash), a present (Haug), are also very
questionable. להן, on that account, therefore (cf. [Dan
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009) and [Dan
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#024)), formed from the prepos. ל and
the demonstrative adverb הן, has in negative sentences (as the Hebr. כּי
and להן) the meaning but, rather ([Dan
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030)), and in a pregnant sense, only
([Dan 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#011); [Dan
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#028); [Dan
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#008)), without להן being derived in
such instances from לא and הן = לא אם.

[Dan 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#007)

The wise men repeat their request, but the king persists that they only
justify his suspicion of them by pressing such a demand, and that he saw
that they wished to deceive him with a self-conceived interpretation of
the dream. וּפשׁרה is not, as Hitz. proposes, to be changed into
וּפשׁרה. The form is a Hebr. stat. emphat. for וּפשׁרא, as e.g., מלּתה,
[Dan 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005), is changed into מלּתא in
[Dan 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008) and [Dan
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#011), and in biblical Chaldee, in
final syllables הis often found instead of .א fo

[Dan 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008)

יצּיב מן, an adverbial expression, to be sure, certainly, as קשׁט מן,
truly, [Dan 2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047), and other adverbial
forms. The words זבנין אנתּוּן עדּנא דּי do not mean either "that ye
wish to use or seize the favourable time" (Hv., Kran.), or "that ye wish
to buy up the present perilous moment," i.e., bring it within your
power, become masters of the time (Hitz.), but simply, that ye buy, that
is wish to gain time (Ges., Maur., etc.). עדּן זבן = tempus emere in
Cicero. Nothing can be here said of a favourable moment, for there was
not such a time for the wise men, either in the fact that Nebuchadnezzar
had forgotten his dream (Hv.), or in the curiosity of the king with
reference to the interpretation of the dream, on which they could
speculate, expecting that the king might be induced thereby to give a
full communication of the dream (Kran.). But for the wise men, in
consequence of the threatening of the king, the crisis was indeed fully
of danger; but it is not to be overlooked that they appeared to think
that they could control the crisis, bringing it under their own power,
by their willingness to interpret the dream if it were reported to them.
Their repeated request that the dream should be told to them shows only
their purpose to gain time and have their lives, if they now truly
believed either that the king could not now distinctly remember his
dream, or that by not repeating it he wished to put them to the test.
Thus the king says to them: I see from your hesitation that ye are not
sure of your case; and since ye at the same time think that I have
forgotten the dream, therefore ye wish me, by your repeated requests to
relate the dream, only to gain time, to extend the case, because ye fear
the threatened punishment (Klief.). דּי כּל־קבל, wholly because; not,
withstanding that (Hitz.). As to the last words of [Dan
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008), see under [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005).

[Dan 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009)

הן דּי is equivalent to אם אשׁר, quodsi. "The דּי supposes the fact of
the foregoing passage, and brings it into express relation to the
conditional clause" (Kran.). דּתכון does not mean, your design or
opinion, or your lot (Mich., Hitz., Maur.), but dat is law, decree,
sentence; דּתכון, the sentence that is going forth or has gone forth
against you, i.e., according to [Dan
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#005), the sentence of death. חדה, one,
or the one and no other. This judgment is founded on the following
passage, in which the cop. וis to be explained as equivalent to namely.
וּשׁחיתה כּדבה, lies and pernicious words, are united together for the
purpose of strengthening the idea, in the sense of wicked lies (Hitz.).
הזמנתון is not to be read, as Hv., v. Leng., Maur., and Kran. do, as the
Aphel הזמנתּוּן: ye have prepared or resolved to say; for in the Aphel
this word (זמן) means to appoint or summon a person, but not to prepare
or appoint a thing (see Buxt. Lex. Tal. s. v.). And the supposition that
the king addressed the Chaldeans as the speakers appointed by the whole
company of the wise men (Kran.) has no place in the text. The Kethiv
הזּמּנתּוּן is to be read as Ithpa. for הזדּמּנתּוּן according to the
Keri (cf. hizakuw הזּכּוּ for הזדּכּוּ, [Isa
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#016)), meaning inter se convenire, as
the old interpreters rendered it. "Till the time be changed," i.e., till
the king either drop the matter, or till they learn something more
particular about the dream through some circumstances that may arise.
The lies which Nebuchadnezzar charged the wise men with, consisted in
the explanation which they promised if he would tell them the dream,
while their desire to hear the dream contained a proof that they had not
the faculty of revealing secrets. The words of the king clearly show
that he knew the dream, for otherwise he would not have been able to
know whether the wise men spoke the truth in telling him the dream
(Klief.).

[Dan 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010)

Since the king persisted in his demand, the Chaldeans were compelled to
confess that they could not tell the dream. This confession, however,
they seek to conceal under the explanation that compliance with the
king's request was beyond human power, - a request which no great or
mighty king had ever before made of any magician or astrologer, and
which was possible only with the gods, who however do not dwell among
mortals. דּי כּל־קבל does not mean quam ob rem, wherefore, as a particle
expressive of a consequence (Ges.), but is here used in the sense of
because, assigning a reason. The thought expressed is not: because the
matter is impossible for men, therefore no king has ever asked any such
thing; but it is this: because it has come into the mind of no great and
mighty king to demand any such thing, therefore it is impossible for men
to comply with it. They presented before the king the fact that no king
had ever made such a request as a proof that the fulfilling of it was
beyond human ability. The epithets great and mighty are here not mere
titles of the Oriental kings (Hv.), but are chosen as significant. The
mightier the king, so much the greater the demand, he believed, he might
easily make upon a subject.

[Dan 2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#011)

להן, but only, see under [Dan 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#006). In
the words, whose dwelling is not with flesh, there lies neither the idea
of higher and of inferior gods, nor the thought that the gods only act
among men in certain events (Hv.), but only the simple thought of the
essential distinction between gods and men, so that one may not demand
anything from weak mortals which could be granted only by the gods as
celestial beings. בּשׂרא, flesh, in opposition to רוּח, marks the human
nature according to its weakness and infirmity; cf. [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003); [Psa
56:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#005). The king, however, does not
admit this excuse, but falls into a violent passion, and gives a formal
command that the wise men, in whom he sees deceivers abandoned by the
gods, should be put to death. This was a dreadful command; but there are
illustrations of even greater cruelty perpetrated by Oriental despots
benore him as well as after him. The edict (דּתא) is carried out, but
not fully. Not "all the wise men," according to the terms of the decree,
were put to death, but מתקטּלין חכּימיּא, i.e., The wise men were put to
death.

[Dan 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#013)

While it is manifest that the decree was not carried fully out, it is
yet clearer from what follows that the participle מתקטּלין does not
stand for the preterite, but has the meaning: the work of putting to
death was begun. The participle also does not stand as the gerund: they
were to be put to death, i.e., were condemned (Kran.), for the use of
the passive participle as the gerund is not made good by a reference to
מהימן, [Dan 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045), and דחיל, [Dan
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031). Even the command to kill all the
wise men of Babylon is scarcely to be understood of all the wise men of
the whole kingdom. The word Babylon may represent the Babylonian empire,
or the province of Babylonia, or the city of Babylon only. In the city
of Babylon a college of the Babylonian wise men or Chaldeans was
established, who, according to Strabo (xv. 1. 6), occupied a particular
quarter of the city as their own; but besides this, there were also
colleges in the province of Babylon at Hipparenum, Orchae, which Plin.
hist. nat. vi. 26 (30) designates as tertia Chaldaeorum doctrina, at
Borsippa, and other places. The wise men who were called ([Dan
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002)) into the presence of the king,
were naturally those who resided in the city of Babylon, for
Nebuchadnezzar was at that time in his palace. Yet of those who had
their residence there, Daniel and his companions were not summoned,
because they had just ended their noviciate, and because, obviously,
only the presidents or the older members of the several classes were
sent for. But since Daniel and his companions belonged to the whole body
of the wise men, they also were sought out that they might be put to
death.

[Daniel 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 2:14</span></span>

Daniel's willingness to declare his dream to the king; his prayer for a
revelation of the secret, and the answer to his prayer; his explanation
before the king.

[Dan 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014)

Through Daniel's judicious interview of Arioch, the further execution of
the royal edict was interrupted. וּטעם עטא התיב, he answered, replied,
counsel and understanding, i.e., the words of counsel and understanding;
cf. [Pro 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#016). The name Arioch
appears in [Gen 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001) as the name of
the king of Ellasar, along with the kings of Elam and Shinar. It is
derived not from the Sanscr. ârjaka, venerabilis, but is probably formed
from ארי, a lion, as נסרך from nisr = נשׁר. רב־טבּחיּא is the chief of
the bodyguard, which was regarded as the highest office of the kingdom
(cf. [Jer 39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009), [Jer
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#011); [Jer
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001).). It was his business to see to
the execution of the king's commands; see [Kg1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#025); [Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008).

[Dan 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#015)

The partic. Aph. מהחצפה standing after the noun in the stat. absol. is
not predicative: "on what account is the command so hostile on the part
of the king?" (Kran.), but it stands in apposition to the noun; for with
participles, particularly when further definitions follow, the article,
even in union with substantives defined by the article, may be and often
is omitted; cf. [Sol 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005), and Ew.
335a. חצף, to be hard, sharp, hence to be severe. Daniel showed
understanding and counsel in the question he put as to the cause of so
severe a command, inasmuch as he thereby gave Arioch to understand that
there was a possibility of obtaining a fulfilment of the royal wish.
When Arioch informed him of the state of the matter, Daniel went in to
the king - i.e., as is expressly mentioned in [Dan
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024), was introduced or brought in by
Arioch - and presented to the king the request that time should be
granted, promising that he would show to the king the interpretation of
the dream.

[Dan 2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#016)

With להחויה וּפשׁרא the construction is changed. This passage does not
depend on דּי, time, namely, to show the interpretation (Hitz.), but is
co-ordinate with the foregoing relative clause, and like it is dependent
on וּבעא. The change of the construction is caused by the circumstance
that in the last passage another subject needed to be introduced: The
king should give him time, and Daniel will show the interpretation. The
copulative וbefore פשׁרא (interpretation) is used neither explicatively,
namely, and indeed, nor is it to be taken as meaning also; the simple
and is sufficient, although the second part of the request contains the
explanation and reason of the first; i.e., Daniel asks for the granting
of a space, not that he might live longer, but that he might be able to
interpret the dream to the king. Besides, that he merely speaks of the
meaning of the dream, and not also of the dream itself, is, as [Dan
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#025). show, to be here explained (as
in [Dan 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024)) as arising from the
brevity of the narrative. For the same reason it is not said that the
king granted the quest, but [Dan 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017).
immediately shows what Daniel did after the granting of his request. He
went into his own house and showed the matter to his companions, that
they might entreat God of His mercy for this secret, so that they might
not perish along with the rest of the wise men of Babylon.

[Dan 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#018)

The final clause depends on הודע ([Dan
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017)). The ו is to be interpreted as
explicative: and indeed, or namely. Against this interpretation it
cannot be objected, with Hitz., that Daniel also prayed. He and his
friends thus prayed to God that He would grant a revelation of the
secret, i.e., of the mysterious dream and its interpretation. The
designation "God of heaven" occurs in [Gen
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#007), where it is used of Jehovah; but
it was first commonly used as the designation of the almighty and true
God in the time of the exile (cf. [Dan
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#019), [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044); [Ezr
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#002); [Ezr
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#010); [Ezr
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012), [Ezr
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#021); [Neh
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#005); [Neh
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#004); [Psa
136:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#026)), who, as Daniel names Him
([Dan 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#023)), is the Lord of heaven;
i.e., the whole heavens, with all the stars, which the heathen
worshipped as gods, are under His dominion.

[Dan 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#019)

In answer to these supplications, the secret was revealed to Daniel in a
night-vision. A vision of the night is not necessarily to be identified
with a dream. In the case before us, Daniel does not speak of a dream;
and the idea that he had dreamed precisely the same dream as
Nebuchadnezzar is arbitrarily imported into the text by Hitz. in order
to gain a "psychological impossibility," and to be able to cast
suspicion on the historical character of the narrative. It is possible,
indeed, that dreams may be, as the means of a divine revelation,
dream-visions, and as such may be called visions of the night (cf. [Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001), [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)); but in itself a vision of the
night is a vision simply which any one receives during the night whilst
he is awake.

(Note: "Dream and vision do not constitute two separate categories. The
dream-image is a vision, the vision while awake is a dreaming - only
that in the latter case the consciousness of the relation between the
inner and the outer maintains itself more easily. Intermediate between
the two stand the night-visions, which, as in [Job
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013), either having risen up before
the spirit, fade away from the mind in after-thought, or, as in the case
of Nebuchadnezzar ([Dan 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#029)), are an
image before the imagination into which the thoughts of the night run
out. Zechariah saw a number of visions in one night, [Dan
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#007); [Dan
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#015). Also these which, according to
[Dan 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008), are called visions of the
night are not, as Ew. and Hitz. suppose, dream-images, but are waking
perceptions in the night. Just because the prophet did not sleep, he
says, Daniel 4, 'The angel awaked me as one is awaked out of sleep.'" -
Tholuck's Die Propheten, u.s.w., p. 52.)

[Dan 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#020)

On receiving the divine revelation, Daniel answered (ענה) with a prayer
of thanksgiving. The word ענה retains its proper meaning. The revelation
is of the character of an address from God, which Daniel answers with
praise and thanks to God. The forms להוא, and in the plur. להון and
להוין, which are peculiar to the biblical Chaldee, we regard, with
Maur., Hitz., Kran., and others, as the imperfect or future forms, 3rd
pers. sing. and plur., in which the ל instead of the י is to be
explained perhaps from the Syriac praeform. נ, which is frequently found
also in the Chaldee Targums (cf. Dietrich, de sermonis chald.
proprietate, p. 43), while the Hebrew exiles in the word הוא used ל
instead of נ as more easy of utterance. The doxology in this verse
reminds us of [Job 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021). The
expression "for ever and ever" occurs here in the O.T. for the first
time, so that the solemn liturgical Beracha (Blessing) of the second
temple, [Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005); [Ch1
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#036), with which also the first ([Psa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#014)) and the fourth ([Psa
106:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#048)) books of the Psalter conclude,
appears to have been composed after this form of praise used by Daniel.
"The name of God" will be praised, i.e., the manifestation of the
existence of God in the world; thus, God so far as He has anew given
manifestation of His glorious existence, and continually bears witness
that He it is who possesses wisdom and strength (cf. [Job
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#013)). The דּי before the להּ is the
emphatic re-assumption of the preceding confirmatory דּי, for.

[Dan 2:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021)

The evidence of the wisdom and power of God is here unfolded; and firs
the manifestation of His power. He changes times and seasons. lxx,
Theodot. καιροὺς καὶ χρόνους, would be more accurately χρόνους καὶ
καιρούς, as in [Act 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#007); [Th1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001); for the Peschito in these N. T.
passages renders χρόνοι by the Syriac word which is equivalent to
זמניּא, according to which עדּן is the more general expression for time
= circumstance of time, זמן for measured time, the definite point of
time. The uniting together of the synonymous words gives expression to
the thought: ex arbitrio Dei pendere revolutiones omnium omnino
temporum, quaecunque et qualia-cunque illa fuerint. C. B. Mich. God's
unlimited control over seasons and times is seen in this, that He sets
up and casts down kings. Thus Daniel explains the revelation regarding
the dream of Nebuchadnezzar made to him as announcing great changes in
the kingdoms of the world, and revealing God as the Lord of time and of
the world in their developments. All wisdom also comes from God. He
gives to men disclosures regarding His hidden counsels. This Daniel had
just experienced. Illumination dwells with God as it were a person, as
Wisdom, [Pro 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#030). The Kethiv נהירא is
maintained against the Keri by נהירוּ, [Dan
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011), [Dan
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#014). With the perf. שׁרא the
participial construction passes over into the temp. fin.; the perfect
stands in the sense of the completed act. Therefore ([Dan
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#023)) praise and thanksgiving belong
to God. Through the revelation of the secret hidden to the wise men of
this world He has proved Himself to Daniel as the God of the fathers, as
the true God in opposition to the gods of the heathen. וּכען = ועתּה,
and now.

[Dan 2:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024)

Hereupon Daniel announced to the king that he was prepared to make known
to him the dream with its interpretation. דּנה כּל־קבל, for that very
reason, viz., because God had revealed to him the king's matter, Daniel
was brought in by Arioch before the king; for no one had free access to
the king except his immediate servants. אזל, he went, takes up
inconsequenter the על (intravit), which is separated by a long sentence,
so as to connect it with what follows. Arioch introduced ([Dan
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#025)) Daniel to the king as a man from
among the captive Jews who could make known to him the interpretation of
his dream. Arioch did not need to take any special notice of the fact
that Daniel had already ([Dan 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#016))
spoken with the king concerning it, even if he had knowledge of it. In
the form הנעל, [Dan 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#025), also [Dan
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#003) (6) and [Dan
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#019) (18), the Dagesch lying in העל,
[Dan 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#024), is compensated by an
epenthetic n: cf. Winer, Chald. Gram. 19, 1. בּהתבּהלה, in haste, for
the matter concerned the further execution of the king's command, which
Arioch had suspended on account of Daniel's interference, and his offer
to make known the dream and its interpretation. השׁכּחת for אשׁכּחת, cf.
Winer, 15, 3. The relative דּי, which many Codd. insert after גּבר, is
the circumstantially fuller form of expression before prepositional
passages. Cf. [Dan 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#013); [Dan
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#014); Winer, 41, 5.

[Dan 2:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#026)

To the question of the king, whether he was able to show the dream with
its interpretation, Daniel replies by directing him from man, who is
unable to accomplish such a thing, to the living God in heaven, who
alone reveals secrets. The expression, whose name was Belteshazzar ([Dan
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#026)), intimates in this connection
that he who was known among the Jews by the name Daniel was known to the
Chaldean king only under the name given to him by the conqueror - that
Nebuchadnezzar knew of no Daniel, but only of Belteshazzar. The
question, "art thou able?" i.e., has thou ability? does not express the
king's ignorance of the person of Daniel, but only his amazement at his
ability to make known the dream, in the sense, "art thou really able?"
This amazement Daniel acknowledges as justified, for he replies that no
wise man was able to do this thing. In the enumeration of the several
classes of magicians the word חכּימין is the general designation of them
all. "But there is a God in heaven." Daniel "declares in the presence of
the heathen the existence of God, before he speaks to him of His works."
Klief. But when he testifies of a God in heaven as One who is able to
reveal hidden things, he denies this ability eo ipso to all the
so-called gods of the heathen. Thereby he not only assigns the reason of
the inability of the heathen wise men, who knew not the living God in
heaven, to show the divine mysteries, but he refers also all the
revelations which the heathen at any time receive to the one true God.
The וin והודע introduces the development of the general thought. That
there is a God in heaven who reveals secrets, Daniel declares to the
king by this, that he explains his dream as an inspiration of this God,
and shows to him its particular circumstances. God made known to him in
a dream "what would happen in the end of the days." אחרית יומיּא = הימים
אחרית designates here not the future generally (Hv.), and still less
"that which comes after the days, a time which follows after another
time, comprehended under the הימים" (Klief.), but the concluding future
or the Messianic period of the world's time; see [Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001).

From דּנה אחרי in [Dan 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#029) that
general interpretation of the expression is not proved. The expression
יומיּא בּאחרית of [Dan 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028) is not
explained by the דּנה אחרי להוא דּי מה of [Dan
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#029), but this אחרי relates to
Nebuchadnezzar's thoughts of a future in the history of the world, to
which God, the revealer of secrets, unites His Messianic revelations;
moreover, every Messianic future event is also an דּנה אחרי (cf. [Dan
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)), without, however, every דּנה
אחרי being also Messianic, though it may become so when at the same time
it is a constituent part of the future experience and the history of
Israel, the people of the Messianic promise (Kran.). "The visions of thy
head" (cf. [Dan 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#002) \[5\], [Dan
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#007) \[10\], [Dan
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010) \[13\], [Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)) are not dream-visions because
they formed themselves in the head or brains (v. Leng., Maur., Hitz.),
which would thus be only phantoms or fancies. The words are not a poetic
expression for dreams hovering about the head (Hv.); nor yet can we say,
with Klief., that "the visions of thy head upon thy bed, the vision
which thou sawest as thy head lay on thy pillow," mean only
dream-visions. Against the former interpretation this may be stated,
that dreams from God do not hover about the head; and against the
latter, that the mention of the head would in that case be superfluous.
The expression, peculiar to Daniel, designates much rather the divinely
ordered visions as such, "as were perfectly consistent with a
thoughtfulness of the head actively engaged" (Kran.). The singular הוּא
דּנה goes back to חלמך (thy dream) as a fundamental idea, and is
governed by ראשׁך וחזוי in the sense: "thy dream with the visions of thy
head;" cf. Winer, 49, 6. The plur. חזוי is used, because the revelation
comprehends a series of visions of future events.

[Dan 2:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#029)

The pronoun אנתּה (as for thee), as Daniel everywhere writes it, while
the Keri substitutes for it the later Targ. form אנתּ, is absolute, and
forms the contrast to the ואנה (as for me) of [Dan
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030). The thoughts of the king are not
his dream (Hitz.), but thoughts about the future of his kingdom which
filled his mind as he lay upon his bed, and to which God gave him an
answer in the dream (v. Leng., Maur., Kran., Klief.). Therefore they are
to be distinguished from the thoughts of thy heart, [Dan
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030), for these are the thoughts that
troubled the king, which arose from the revelations of the dream to him.
The contrast in [Dan 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030) and [Dan
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030) is not this: "not for my wisdom
before all that live to show," but "for the sake of the king to explain
the dream;" for בis not the preposition of the object, but of the means,
thus: "not by the wisdom which might be in me." The supernatural
revelation (לי (&lt;) גּלי) forms the contrast, and the object to which
דּי על־דּברת points is comprehended implicite in מן־כּל־חיּיּא, for in
the words, "the wisdom which may be in me before all living," lies the
unexpressed thought: that I should be enlightened by such superhuman
wisdom. יהודצוּן, "that they might make it known:" the plur. of
undefined generality, cf. Winer, 49, 3. The impersonal form of
expression is chosen in order that his own person might not be brought
into view. The idea of Aben Ezra, Vatke, and others, that angels are the
subject of the verb, is altogether untenable.

[Dan 2:31-45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031)

The Dream and Its Interpretation. - Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream a
great metallic image which was terrible to look upon. אלוּ (behold),
which Daniel interchanges with ארו, corresponds with the Hebrew words
ראה, ראוּ, or הנּה. צלם is not an idol-image (Hitz.), but a statue, and,
as is manifest from the following description, a statue in human form.
חד is not the indefinite article (Ges., Win., Maur.), but the numeral.
"The world-power is in all its phases one, therefore all these phases
are united in the vision in one image" (Klief.). The words from צלמא to
יתּיר contain two parenthetical expressions, introduced for the purpose
of explaining the conception of שׁגיא (great). קאם is to be united with
ואלוּ. דּכּן here and at [Dan 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020). is
used by Daniel as a peculiar form of the demonstrative pronoun, for
which Ezra uses דּך. The appearance of the colossal image was terrible,
not only on account of its greatness and its metallic splendour, but
because it represented the world-power of fearful import to the people
of God (Klief.).

[Dan 2:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#032)

The description of the image according to its several parts is
introduced with the absolute צלמא הוּא, concerning this image, not:
"this was the image." The pronoun הוּא is made prominent, as דּנה, [Dan
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#015), and the Hebr. זה more
frequently, e.g., [Isa 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013). חדוהי,
plural חדין - its singular occurs only in the Targums - corresponding
with the Hebr. חזה, the breast. מצין, the bowels, here the abdomen
enclosing the bowels, the belly. ירכה, the thighs (hfte) and upper part
of the loins. [Dan 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033). שׁק, the leg,
including the upper part of the thigh. מנהון is partitive: part of it of
iron. Instead of מנהון the Keri prefers the fem. מנהן here and at [Dan
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041) and [Dan
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042), with reference to this, that
רגליו is usually the gen. fem., after the custom of nouns denoting
members of the body that are double. The Kethiv unconditionally deserves
the preference, although, as the apparently anomalous form, which
appears with this suffix also in [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008), [Dan
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020), after substantives of seemingly
feminine meaning, where the choice of the masculine form is to be
explained from the undefined conception of the subjective idea apart
from the sex; cf. Ewald's Lehr. d. hebr. Sp. 319.

The image appears divided as to its material into four or five parts -
the head, the breast with the arms, the belly with the thighs, and the
legs and feet. "Only the first part, the head, constitutes in itself a
united whole; the second, with the arms, represents a division; the
third runs into a division in the thighs; the fourth, bound into one at
the top, divides itself in the two legs, but has also the power of
moving in itself; the fifth is from the first divided in the legs, and
finally in the ten toes runs out into a wider division. The material
becomes inferior from the head downward - gold, silver, copper, iron,
clay; so that, though on the whole metallic, it becomes inferior, and
finally terminates in clay, losing itself in common earthly matter.
Notwithstanding that the material becomes always the harder, till it is
iron, yet then suddenly and at last it becomes weak and brittle clay." -
Klief. The fourth and fifth parts, the legs and the feet, are, it is
true, externally separate from each other, but inwardly, through the
unity of the material, iron, are bound together; so that we are to
reckon only four parts, as afterwards is done in the interpretation.
This image Nebuchadnezzar was contemplating ([Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)), i.e., reflected upon with a
look directed toward it, until a stone moved without human hands broke
loose from a mountain, struck against the lowest part of the image,
broke the whole of it into pieces, and ground to powder all its material
from the head even to the feet, so that it was scattered like chaff of
the summer thrashing-floor. בידין לא דּי does not mean: "which was not
in the hands of any one" (Klief.), but the words are a prepositional
expression for without; ב לא, not with = without, and דּי expressing the
dependence of the word on the foregoing noun. Without hands, without
human help, is a litotes for: by a higher, a divine providence; cf. [Dan
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#025); [Job
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#020); [Lam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006). כּחדה, as one = at once, with one
stroke. דּקוּ for דּקּוּ is not intransitive or passive, but with an
indefinite plur. subject: they crushed, referring to the supernatural
power by which the crushing was effected. The destruction of the statue
is so described, that the image passes over into the matter of it. It is
not said of the parts of the image, the head, the breast, the belly, and
the thighs, that they were broken to pieces by the stone, "for the forms
of the world-power represented by these parts had long ago passed away,
when the stone strikes against the last form of the world-power
represented by the feet," but only of the materials of which these parts
consist, the silver and the gold, is the destruction replicated; "for
the material, the combinations of the peoples, of which these earlier
forms of the world-power consist, pass into the later forms of it, and
thus are all destroyed when the stone destroys the last form of the
world-power" (Klief.). But the stone which brought this destruction
itself became a great mountain which filled the whole earth. To this
Daniel added the interpretation which he announces in [Dan
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#036). נאמר, we will tell, is "a
generalizing form of expression" (Kran.) in harmony with [Dan
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#030). Daniel associates himself with
his companions in the faith, who worshipped the same God of revelation;
cf. [Dan 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#023).

[Dan 2:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037)

The interpretation begins with the golden head. מלכיּא מלך, the usual
title of the monarchs of the Oriental world-kingdoms (vid., [Eze
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007)), is not the predicate to אנתּה,
but stands in apposition to מלכּא. The following relative passages, [Dan
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037) and [Dan
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038), are only further explications of
the address King of Kings, in which אנתּה is again taken up to bring
back the predicate. בּכל־דּי, wherever, everywhere. As to the form
דּארין, see the remarks under קאמין at [Dan
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#003). The description of
Nebuchadnezzar's dominion over men, beasts, and birds, is formed after
the words of [Jer 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006) and [Jer
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#014); the mention of the breasts
serves only for the strengthening of the thought that his dominion was
that of a world-kingdom, and that God had subjected all things to him.
Nebuchadnezzar' dominion did not, it is true, extend over the whole
earth, but perhaps over the whole civilised world of Asia, over all the
historical nations of his time; and in this sense it was a
world-kingdom, and as such, "the prototype and pattern, the beginning
and primary representative of all world-powers" (Klief.). ראשׁה, stat.
emphat. for ראשׁא; the reading ראשׁהּ defended by Hitz. is senseless. If
Daniel called him (Nebuchadnezzar) the golden head, the designation
cannot refer to his person, but to the world-kingdom founded by him and
represented in his person, having all things placed under his sway by
God. Hitzig's idea, that Nebuchadnezzar is the golden head as
distinguished from his successors in the Babylonian kingdom, is opposed
by [Dan 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039), where it is said that
after him (not another king, but) "another kingdom" would arise. That
"Daniel, in the words, 'Thou art the golden head,' speaks of the
Babylonian kingdom as of Nebuchadnezzar personally, while on the
contrary he speaks of the other world-kingdoms impersonally only as of
kingdoms, has its foundation in this, that the Babylonian kingdom
personified in Nebuchadnezzar stood before him, and therefore could be
addressed by the word thou, while the other kingdoms could not"
(Klief.).

[Dan 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039)

In this verse the second and third parts of the image are interpreted of
the second and third world-kingdoms. Little is said of these kingdoms
here, because they are more fully described in Daniel 7, 8 and 10. That
the first clause of [Dan 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039) refers
to the second, the silver part of the image, is apparent from the fact
that [Dan 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#038) refers to the golden
head, and the second clause of [Dan
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039) to the belly of brass. According
to this, the breast and arms of silver represent another kingdom which
would arise after Nebuchadnezzar, i.e., after the Babylonian kingdom.
This kingdom will be מנּך ארעא, inferior to thee, i.e., to the kingdom
of which thou art the representative. Instead of the adjective ארעא,
here used adverbially, the Masoretes have substituted the adverbial form
ארץ, in common use in later times, which Hitz. incorrectly interprets by
the phrase "downwards from thee." Since the other, i.e., the second
kingdom, as we shall afterwards prove, is the Medo-Persian
world-kingdom, the question arises, in how far was it inferior to the
Babylonian? In outward extent it was not less, but even greater than it.
With reference to the circumstance that the parts of the image
representing it were silver, and not gold as the head was, Calv., Aub.,
Kran., and others, are inclined to the opinion that the word "inferior"
points to the moral condition of the kingdom. But if the successive
deterioration of the inner moral condition of the four world-kingdoms is
denoted by the succession of the metals, this cannot be expressed by
מנּך ארעא, because in regard to the following world-kingdoms,
represented by copper and iron, such an intimation or declaration does
not find a place, notwithstanding that copper and iron are far inferior
to silver and gold. Klief., on the contrary, thinks that the
Medo-Persian kingdom stands inferior to, or is smaller than, the
Babylonian kingdom in respect of universality; for this element is
exclusively referred to in the text, being not only attributed to the
Babylonian kingdom, [Dan 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037), in the
widest extent, but also to the third kingdom, [Dan
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039), and not less to the fourth, [Dan
2:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040). The universality belonging to a
world-kingdom does not, however, require that it should rule over all
the nations of the earth to its very end, nor that its territory should
have a defined extent, but only that such a kingdom should unite in
itself the οἰκουμένη, i.e., the civilised world, the whole of the
historical nations of its time. And this was truly the case with the
Babylonian, the Macedonia, and the Roman world-monarchies, but it was
not so with the Medo-Persian, although perhaps it was more powerful and
embraced a more extensive territory than the Babylonian, since Greece,
which at the time of the Medo-Persia monarchy had already decidedly
passed into the rank of the historical nations, as yet stood outside of
the Medo-Persian rule. But if this view is correct, then would
universality be wanting to the third, i.e., to the Graeco-Macedonian
world-monarchy, which is predicated of it in the words "That shall bear
rule over the whole earth," since at the time of this monarchy Rome had
certainly passed into the rank of historical nations, and yet it was not
incorporated with the Macedonian empire.

The Medo-Persian world-kingdom is spoken of as "inferior" to the
Babylonian perhaps only in this respect, that from its commencement it
wanted inner unity, since the Medians and Persians did not form a united
people, but contended with each other for the supremacy, which is
intimated in the expression, [Dan 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005),
that the bear "raised itself up on one side:" see under that passage. In
the want of inward unity lay the weakness or the inferiority in strength
of this kingdom, its inferiority as compared with the Babylonian. This
originally divided or separated character of this kingdom appears in the
image in the circumstance that it is represented by the breast and the
arms. "Medes and Persians," as Hofm. (Weiss. u. Ef. i. S. 279) well
remarks, "are the two sides of the breast. The government of the Persian
kingdom was not one and united as was that of the Chaldean nation and
king, but it was twofold. The Magi belonged to a different race from
Cyrus, and the Medes were regarded abroad as the people ruling with and
beside the Persians." This two-sidedness is plainly denoted in the two
horns of the ram, Daniel 8.

[Dan 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039)

[Dan 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039) treats of the third
world-kingdom, which by the expression אחרי, "another," is plainly
distinguished from the preceding; as to its quality, it is characterized
by the predicate "of copper, brazen." In this chapter it is said only of
this kingdom that "it shall rule over the whole earth," and thus be
superior in point of extent and power to the preceding kingdoms. Cf.
[Dan 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006), where it is distinctly
mentioned that "power was given unto it." Fuller particulars are
communicated regarding the second and third world-kingdoms in Daniel 8
and [Dan 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001).

[Dan 2:40-43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040)

The interpretation of the fourth component part of the image, the legs
and feet, which represent a fourth world-kingdom, is more extended. That
kingdom, corresponding to the legs of iron, shall be hard, firm like
iron. Because iron breaks all things in pieces, so shall this kingdom,
which is like to iron, break in pieces and destroy all these kingdoms.

[Dan 2:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#040)

Instead of רביציא, which is formed after the analogy of the Syriac
language, the Keri has the usual Chaldee form רביעאה, which shall
correspond to the preceding תליתאה, [Dan
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#039). See the same Keri [Dan
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#025); [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), [Dan
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023). דּי כּל־קבל does not mean just
as (Ges., v. Leng., Maur., Hitz.), but because, and the passage
introduced by this particle contains the ground on which this kingdom is
designated as hard like iron. חשׁל, breaks in pieces, in Syriac to
forge, i.e., to break by the hammer, cf. חוּשׁלא, bruised grain, and
thus separated from the husks. כּל־אלּין is referred by Kran., in
conformity with the accents, to the relative clause, "because by its
union with the following verbal idea a blending of the image with the
thing indicated must first be assumed; also nowhere else, neither here
nor in Daniel 7, does the non-natural meaning appear, e.g., that by the
fourth kingdom only the first and second kingdoms shall be destroyed;
and finally, in the similar expression, [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), [Dan
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019), the הדּק stands likewise without
an object." But all the three reasons do not prove much. A mixing of the
figure with the thing signified does not lie in the passage: "the fourth
(kingdom) shall, like crushing iron, crush to pieces all these"
(kingdoms). But the "non-natural meaning," that by the fourth kingdom
not only the third, but also the second and the first, would be
destroyed, is not set aside by our referring כּל־אלּין to the
before-named metals, because the metals indeed characterize and
represent kingdoms. Finally, the expressions in [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), [Dan
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019) are not analogous to those before
us. The words in question cannot indeed be so understood as if the
fourth kingdom would find the three previous kingdoms existing together,
and would dash them one against another; for, according to the text, the
first kingdom is destroyed by the second, and the second by the third;
but the materials of the first two kingdoms were comprehended in the
third. "The elements out of which the Babylonian world-kingdom was
constituted, the countries, people, and civilisation comprehended in it,
as its external form, would be destroyed by the Medo-Persia kingdom, and
carried forward with it, so as to be constituted into a new external
form. Such, too, was the relation between the Medo-Persian and the
Macedonian world-kingdom, that the latter assumed the elements and
component parts not only of the Medo-Persian, but also therewith at the
same time of the Babylonian kingdom" (Klief.). In such a way shall the
fourth world-kingdom crush "all these" past kingdoms as iron, i.e., will
not assume the nations and civilisations comprehended in the earlier
world-kingdoms as organized formations, but will destroy and break them
to atoms with iron strength. Yet will this world-kingdom not throughout
possess and manifest the iron hardness. Only the legs of the image are
of iron ([Dan 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#041)), but the feet and
toes which grow out of the legs are partly of clay and partly of iron.

Regarding מנהון, see under [Dan 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033).
חסף means clay, a piece of clay, then an earthly vessel, [Sa2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020). פּחר in the Targums means
potter, also potter's earth, potsherds. The פּחר דּי serves to
strengthen the חסף, as in the following the addition of טינא, clay, in
order the more to heighten the idea of brittleness. This twofold
material denotes that it will be a divided or severed kingdom, not
because it separates into several (two to ten) kingdoms, for this is
denoted by the duality of the feet and by the number of the toes of the
feet, but inwardly divided; for פּלג always in Hebr., and often in
Chald., signifies the unnatural or violent division arising from inner
disharmony or discord; cf. [Gen 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025);
[Psa 55:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#010); [Job
38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025); and Levy, chald. Worterb. s. v.
Notwithstanding this inner division, there will yet be in it the
firmness of iron. נצבּא, firmness, related to יצב, Pa. to make fast, but
in Chald. generally plantatio, properly a slip, a plant.

[Dan 2:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042)

In [Dan 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042) the same is aid of the
toes of the feet, and in [Dan 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043) the
comparison to iron and clay is defined as the mixture of these two
component parts. As the iron denotes the firmness of the kingdom, so the
clay denotes its brittleness. The mixing of iron with clay represents
the attempt to bind the two distinct and separate materials into one
combined whole as fruitless, and altogether in vain. The mixing of
themselves with the seed of men ([Dan
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043)), most interpreters refer to the
marriage politics of the princes. They who understand by the four
kingdoms the monarchy of Alexander and his followers, think it refers to
the marriages between the Seleucidae and the Ptolemies, of which indeed
there is mention made in [Dan 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#006) and
[Dan 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#017), but not here; while Hofm.
thinks it relates to marriages, such as those of the German Kaiser Otto
II and the Russian Grand-Duke Wladimir with the daughters of the Kaiser
of Eastern Rome. But this interpretation is rightly rejected by Klief.,
as on all points inconsistent with the text. The subject to מתערבין is
not the kings, of whom mention is made neither in [Dan
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#043) nor previously. For the two feet
as well as the ten toes denote not kings, but parts of the fourth
kingdom; and even in [Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044), by
מלכיּא, not kings in contradistinction to the kingdoms, but the
representatives of the parts of the kingdom denoted by the feet and the
toes as existing contemporaneously, are to be understood, from which it
cannot rightly be concluded in any way that kings is the subject to
מתערבין (shall mingle themselves).

As, in the three preceding kingdoms, gold, silver, and brass represent
the material of these kingdoms, i.e., their peoples and their culture,
so also in the fourth kingdom iron and clay represent the material of
the kingdoms arising out of the division of this kingdom, i.e., the
national elements out of which they are constituted, and which will and
must mingle together in them. If, then, the "mixing themselves with the
seed of men" points to marriages, it is only of the mixing of different
tribes brought together by external force in the kingdom by marriages as
a means of amalgamating the diversified nationalities. But the
expression is not to be limited to this, although התערב, [Ezr
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002), occurs of the mixing of the holy
nation with the heathen by marriage. The peculiar expression אנששׁא זרע,
the seed of men, is not of the same import as זרע שׁכבת, but is
obviously chosen with reference to the following contrast to the divine
Ruler, [Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)., so as to place
(Kran.) the vain human endeavour of the heathen rulers in contrast with
the doings of the God of heaven; as in [Jer
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027) אדם זרע is occasioned by the
contrast of בּהמה זרע. The figure of mixing by seed is derived from the
sowing of the field with mingled seed, and denotes all the means
employed by the rulers to combine the different nationalities, among
which the connubium is only spoken of as the most important and
successful means.

But this mixing together will succeed just as little as will the effort
to bind together into one firm coherent mass iron and clay. The parts
mixed together will not cleave to each other. Regarding להון, see under
[Dan 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#020).

[Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)

The world-kingdom will be broken to pieces by the kingdom which the God
of heaven will set up. "In the days of these kings," i.e., of the kings
of the world-kingdoms last described; at the time of the kingdoms
denoted by the ten toes of the feet of the image into which the fourth
world-monarchy extends itself; for the stone ([Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034)) rolling against the feet of the
image, or rather against the toes of the feet, breaks and destroys it.
This kingdom is not founded by the hands of man, but is erected by the
God of heaven, and shall for ever remain immoveable, in contrast to the
world-kingdoms, the one of which will be annihilated by the other. Its
dominion will not be given to another people. מלכוּתהּ, his dominion,
i.e., of the kingdom. This word needs not to be changed into מלכוּתהּ,
which is less suitable, since the mere status absol. would not be here
in place. Among the world-kingdoms the dominion goes from one people to
another, from the Babylonians to the Persians, etc. On the contrary, the
kingdom of God comprehends always the same people, i.e., the people of
Israel, chosen by God to be His own, only not the Israel κατὰ σάρκα, but
the Israel of God ([Gal 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016)). But the
kingdom of God will not merely exist eternally without change of its
dominion, along with the world-kingdoms, which are always changing and
bringing one another to dissolution, it will also break in pieces and
destroy all these kingdoms (תסף, from סוּף, to bring to an end, to make
an end to them), but itself shall exist for ever. This is the meaning of
the stone setting itself free without the hands of man, and breaking the
image in pieces.

[Dan 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)

The מטּוּרא before אתגּזרת, which is wanting in [Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034), and without doubt is here used
significantly, is to be observed, as in [Dan
2:42](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#042) "the toes of the feet," which in
[Dan 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033) were also not mentioned. As
it is evident that a stone, in order to its rolling without the movement
of the human hand, must be set free from a mountain, so in the express
mention of the mountain there can be only a reference to Mount Zion,
where the God of heaven has founded His kingdom, which shall from thence
spread out over the earth and shall destroy all the world-kingdoms. Cf.
[Psa 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002); [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); [Mic
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002).

The first half of the 45th verse (down to ודהבּא) gives the confirmation
of that which Daniel in [Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044) said
to the king regarding the setting up and the continuance of the kingdom
of God, and essentially belongs to this verse. On the other hand, Hitz.
(and Kran. follows him) wishes to unite this confirmatory passage with
the following: "because thou hast been that the stone, setting itself
free from the mountain, breaks in pieces the iron, etc., thus has God
permitted thee a glimpse behind the veil that hides the future," - in
order that he may conclude from it that the writer, since he notes only
the vision of the stone setting itself free as an announcement of the
future, betrayed his real standpoint, i.e., the standpoint of the
Maccabean Jew, for whom only this last catastrophe was as yet future,
while all the rest was already past. This conclusion Kran. has rejected,
but with the untenable argument that the expression, "what shall come to
pass hereafter," is to be taken in agreement with the words, "what
should come to pass," [Dan 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#029), which
occur at the beginning of the address. Though this may in itself be
right, yet it cannot be maintained if the passage [Dan
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045) forms the antecedent to [Dan
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045). In this case דּנה (this), in the
phrase "after this" (= hereafter, [Dan
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)), can be referred only to the
setting loose of the stone. But the reasons which Hitz. adduces for the
uniting together of the passages as adopted by him are without any
importance. Why the long combined passage cannot suitably conclude with
ורהבּא there is no reason which can be understood; and that it does not
round itself is also no proof, but merely a matter of taste, the
baselessness of which is evident from [Dan
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#010), where an altogether similar long
passage, beginning with דּי כּל־קבל (forasmuch as), ends in a similar
manner, without formally rounding itself off. The further remark also,
that the following new passage could not so unconnectedly and baldly
begin with רב אלהּ, is no proof, but a mere assertion, which is set
aside as groundless by many passages in Daniel where the connection is
wanting; cf. e.g., [Dan 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016), [Dan
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027)&gt;. The want of the copula
before this passage is to be explained on the same ground on which
Daniel uses רב אלהּ (stat. absol., i.e., without the article) instead of
אלהא רבּא, [Ezr 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008). For that רב אלהּ
means, not "a (undefined) great God," but the great God in heaven, whom
Daniel had already ([Dan 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028))
announced to the king as the revealer of secrets, is obvious. Kran. has
rightly remarked, that רב אלהּ may stand "in elevated discourse without
the article, instead of the prosaic אלה רב, [Ezr
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008)." The elevated discourse has
occasioned also the absence of the copula, which will not be missed if
one only takes a pause at the end of the interpretation, after which
Daniel then in conclusion further says to the king, "The great God has
showed to the king what will be hereafter." דּנה אחרי, after this which
is now, does not mean "at some future time" (Hitz.), but after that
which is at present, and it embraces the future denoted in the dream,
from the time of Nebuchadnezzar till the setting up of the kingdom of
God in the time of the Messiah.

[Dan 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045)

The word with which Daniel concludes his address, יצּיב, firm, sure, is
the dream, and certain its interpretation, is not intended to assure the
king of the truth of the dream, because the particulars of the dream had
escaped him, and to certify to him the correctness of the interpretation
(Kran.), but the importance of the dream should put him in mind to lay
the matter to heart, and give honour to God who imparted to him these
revelations; but at the same time also the word assures the readers of
the book of the certainty of the fulfilment, since it lay far remote,
and the visible course of things in the present and in the proximate
future gave no indication or only a very faint prospect of the
fulfilment. For other such assurances see [Dan
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026); [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021), [Rev
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#009); [Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005); [Rev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#006).

We shall defer a fuller consideration of the fulfilment of this dream or
the historical references of the four world-kingdoms, in order to avoid
repetition, till we have expounded the vision which Daniel received
regarding it in Daniel 7.

[Daniel 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">dan 2:46</span></span>

The impression which this interpretation of the dream made upon
Nebuchadnezzar, and the consequences which thence arose for Daniel.

The announcement and the interpretation of the remarkable dream made so
powerful an impression on Nebuchadnezzar, that he fell down in
supplication before Daniel and ordered sacrifice to be offered to him.
Falling prostrate to the earth is found as a mark of honour to men, it
is true ([Sa1 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041); [Sa1
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#028); [Sa2
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#004)), but סגד is used only of divine
homage ([Isa 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015), [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017), [Isa
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#019); [Isa
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006), and [Dan
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005).). To the Chaldean king, Daniel
appeared as a man in whom the gods manifested themselves; therefore he
shows to him divine honour, such as was shown by Cornelius to the
Apostle Peter, and at Lystra was shown to Paul and Barnabas, [Act
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#025); [Act
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#013). מנחה, an unbloody sacrifice,
and ניחחין, are not burnt sacrifices or offerings of pieces of fat
(Hitz.), but incensings, the offering of incense; cf. [Exo
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#009), where the קטרת is particularly
mentioned along with the עלה and the מנחה. נסּך is, with Hitz., to be
taken after the Arabic in the general signification sacrificare, but is
transferred zeugmatically from the pouring out of a drink-offering to
the offering of a sacrifice. [Dan
2:47](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#047), where Nebuchadnezzar praises the
God of the Jews as the God of gods, does not stand in contradiction to
the rendering of divine honour to Daniel in such a way that, with Hitz.,
in the conduct of the king we miss consistency and propriety, and find
it improbable. For Nebuchadnezzar did not pray to the man Daniel, but in
the person of Daniel to his God, i.e., to the God of the Jews; and he
did this because this God had manifested Himself to him through Daniel
as the supreme God, who rules over kings, and reveals hidden things
which the gods of the Chaldean wise men were not able to reveal.
Moreover, in this, Nebuchadnezzar did not abandon his heathen
standpoint. He did not recognise the God of the Jews as the only, or the
alone true God, but only as God of gods, as the highest or the most
exalted of the gods, who excelled the other gods in might and in wisdom,
and was a Lord of kings, and as such must be honoured along with the
gods of his own country. מן־קשׁט דּי, of truth (it is) that, stands
adverbially for truly.

[Daniel 2:48](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">dan 2:48</span></span>

After Nebuchadnezzar had given honour to the God of the Jews, he
rewarded Daniel, the servant of this God, with gifts, and by elevating
him to high offices of state. רבּי, to make great, is more fully defined
by the following passages. השׁלטהּ, he made him a man of power, ruler
over the province of Babylon, i.e., vicegerent, governor of this
province. According to [Dan 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002), the
Chaldean kingdom consisted of several מדינתא, each of which had its own
שׁלטון. The following סגנין ורב depends zeugmatically, however, on
השׁלטהּ: and (made him) president over all the wise men. סגנין, Hebr.
סגנים, vicegerent, prefect, is an Aryan word incorporated into the
Hebrew, ζωγάνης in Athen., but not yet certainly authenticated in Old
Persian; vide (Spiegel in Delitzsch on [Isa
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025). The wise men of Babylon were
divided into classes according to their principal functions, under
סגנין, chiefs, whose president (= רב־מג, [Jer
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003)) Daniel was.

[Daniel 2:49](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">dan 2:49</span></span>

At Daniel's request the king made his three friends governors of the
province. וּמנּי is not, with Hv. and other older writers, to be
translated that he should ordain; this sense must be expressed by the
imperfect. The matter of the prayer is not specially given, but is to be
inferred from the granting of it. But this prayer is not, with Hitz. and
older interpreters, to be understood as implying that Daniel entreated
the king to release him from the office of vicegerent, and that the king
entrusted that office to his three friends; for if Daniel wished to
retain this dignity, but to transfer the duty to his friends, there was
no need, as Hitz. thinks, for this purpose, for the express appointment
of the king; his mere permission was enough. But whence did Hitz. obtain
this special information regarding the state arrangements of Babylon?
and how does he know that מנּי, to decree, means an express appointment
in contradistinction to a royal permission? The true state of the matter
Hv. has clearly explained. The chief ruler of the province had a number
of ὕπαρχοι, under-officers, in the province for the various branches of
the government. To such offices the king appointed Daniel's three
friends at his request, so that he might be able as chief ruler to
reside continually at the court of the king. עבידתּא, rendering of
service = המּלך עבדת, service of the king, [Ch1
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#030), according as the matter may be:
the management of business. מלכּא בּתרע, near the gate, i.e., at the
court of the king, for the gate, the door, is named for the building to
which it formed the entrance; cf. המּלך שׁער, [Est
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#019), [Est
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#021); [Est
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#002). Gesenius is in error when he
explains the words there as meaning that Daniel was made prefect of the
palace.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 3](dan003)

</div>
