<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan009)  [Next](dan011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 10:0</span></span>

The Revelation Regarding the Affliction of the People of God on the Part
of the Rulers of the World Till the Consummation of the Kingdom of God -
Daniel 10-12

In the third year of the reign of Cyrus, Daniel received the last
revelation regarding the future of his people, which gives a fuller
unfolding of the hostile attitude of the world-power toward the people
and the kingdom of God from the time of the Persian dominion to the end
of the days, as well as regarding the powerful protection which the
covenant people shall experience amid the severe oppressions they would
be exposed to for their purification. This revelation connects itself,
both as to its contents and form, so closely with Daniel 8, that it is
to be viewed as a further unfolding of that prophecy, and serves for the
illustration and confirmation of that which was announced to the prophet
shortly before the destruction of the Chaldean world-kingdom regarding
the world-kingdoms that were to follow, and their relation to the
theocracy. It consists of three parts: - (1.) There is the description
of the appearance of God as to its nature, the impression it produced on
the prophet, and its object (Daniel 10:1-11:2a). (2.) The unveiling of
the future, in brief statements regarding the relation of the Persian
and the Javanic world-kingdoms to Israel, and in more comprehensive
descriptions of the wars of the kings of the north and the south for the
supremacy, with the hostilities thence arising against the kingdom of
God - hostilities which aim at its destruction, but which, because of
the powerful succour which is rendered to Israel by Michael the
angel-prince, shall come to an end in the destruction of the enemy of
God and the final salvation of the people of God (Daniel 11:2b-12:3).
(3.) This revelation concludes with the definition of the duration of
the time of oppression, and with the command given to Daniel to seal up
the words, together with the prophecy, till the time of the end, and to
rest till the end come: "For thou shalt rest and stand in thy lot at the
end of the days" ([Dan 12:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004)).

If we attentively examine first of all the form of this revelation,
namely, the manifestation of God, by which there is given to Daniel the
understanding of the events of the future ([Dan
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014), cf. Daniel 11 and [Dan
12:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)), this revelation will be
found to be distinguished from all the others in this, that it is
communicated partly by supernatural illumination for the interpretation
of the dream-vision, partly by visions, partly by the appearance of
angels. Auberlen (d. Proph. Daniel p. 91f.) has already referred to this
distinction, and therein has found a beautiful and noteworthy
progression, namely, that the one revelation always prepares the way, in
a material and formal respect, for that which follows, from which we may
see how God gradually prepared the prophet for the reception of still
more definite disclosures. "First Nebuchadnezzar dreams, and Daniel
simply interprets (Daniel 2 and 4); afterwards Daniel himself has a
dream, but as yet it is only as a vision in a dream of the night ([Dan
7:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)); then follows a vision in a
waking state ([Dan 8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#001)); and
finally, in the last two revelations (Daniel 9 and 10-12), when Daniel,
now a feeble, trembling (?) old man ([Dan
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008).), is already almost transplanted
out of this world - now the ecstatic state seems to be no longer
necessary for him. Now in his usual state he sees and hears angels speak
like men, while his companions do not see the appearances from the
higher world, and are only overwhelmed with terror, like those who
accompanied Paul to Damascus ([Dan
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#020)., [Dan
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004)., cf. Acts of Ap. [Act
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#007))." It is true, indeed, that, as
Aub. remarks, there is a progression from interpreting of dreams to the
receiving of visions in dreams and in the waking state, but by this
reference neither are the actual contents of the revelation given in
different forms perfectly comprehended, nor still less is the meaning of
the difference made clear. Auberlen, in thus representing the
distinction, has left out of view the circumstance, that the visions in
Daniel 7 and 8 are also interpreted to Daniel by an angel; moreover,
that the revelation in Daniel 8 does not merely consist of a vision, in
which Daniel sees the destruction of the Persian world-kingdom by the
Javanic under the figure of a he-goat casting down the ram, but that
Daniel, after this vision, also hears an angel speak, and a voice comes
to him from above the waters of the Ulai which commands the angel
Gabriel to explain the vision to the seer ([Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013).), and that this second part of
that revelation has a great likeness to that in Daniel 10-12; finally,
that the same angel Gabriel again appears in Daniel 9, and brings to
Daniel the revelation regarding the seventy weeks ([Dan
9:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)). But as to the interpretation
of these revelations given in different forms, this difference is
conditioned partly by the subjective relations sustained by the
recipients to God, while, on the other hand, the form is in the most
intimate manner connected with the contents of the revelation, and
indeed in a way wholly different and much deeper than Auberlen thinks,
if he therein sees only the material progression to greater speciality
in the prophecy.

To comprehend the meaning of the divine revelation in Daniel 10-12, we
must examine more closely the resemblance which it presents to [Dan
8:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013). As in the vision Daniel 8,
which points to the oppression of the time of the end ([Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019)), Daniel heard a voice from the
Ulai ([Dan 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016)), so in Daniel 10 and
[Dan 12:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001) the personage from whom
that voice proceeded appears within the circle of Daniel's vision, and
announces to him what shall happen to his people הימים בּאחרית ([Dan
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)). This celestial person appears
to him in such awful divine majesty, that he falls to the ground on
hearing his voice, as already in [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017). on hearing his voice and
message, so that he feared he should perish; and it was only by repeated
supernatural consolation and strengthening that he was able to stand
erect again, and was made capable of hearing the revelation. The
heavenly being who appears to him resembles in appearance the glory of
Jehovah which Ezekiel had seen by the river Chaboras (Chebar); and this
appearance of the man clothed in linen prepared the contents of his
revelation, for God so manifested Himself to Daniel (as He will approve
Himself to His people in the times of the future great tribulation) as
He who in judgment and in righteousness rules the affairs of the
world-kingdoms and of the kingdom of God, and conducts them to the
issues foreseen; so that the effect of His appearance on Daniel formed a
pre-intimation and a pledge of that which would happen to the people of
Daniel in the future. As Daniel was thrown to the ground by the divine
majesty of the man clothed in linen, but was raised up again by a
supernatural hand, so shall the people of God be thrown to the ground by
the fearful judgments that shall pass over them, but shall again be
raised up by the all-powerful help of their God and His angel-prince
Michael, and shall be strengthened to endure the tribulation. According
to this, the very appearance of God has prophetic significance; and the
reason why this last vision is communicated to Daniel neither by a
vision nor by angels, but by a majestic Theophany, does not lie in the
more definite disclosures which should be given to him regarding the
future, but only in this, that the revelation, as is mentioned in the
superscription, [Dan 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001), places in
view the גּדול וצבא אמת ([Dan 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)).

Of this oppression, that spoken of in Daniel 8, which should come upon
the people of God from the fierce and cunning king seen as a little
horn, forms a type; therefore Daniel hears the voice from the waters of
the Ulai. That which is there briefly indicated, is in Daniel 10-12
further extended and completed. In regard to the definiteness of the
prediction, the revelation in Daniel 10-12 does not go beyond that in
Daniel 8; but it does so with respect to the detailed description found
in it of the wars of the world-rulers against one another and against
the people of God, as well as in this, that it opens a glimpse into the
spirit-world, and gives disclosures regarding the unseen spiritual
powers who mingle in the history of nations. But over these powers God
the Lord exercises dominion, and helps His people to obtain a victory
over all their enemies. To reveal this, and in actual fact to attest it
to the prophet, and through him to the church of God of all times, is
the object of the Theophany, which is circumstantially described in
Daniel 10 for the sake of its prophetical character.

[Daniel 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 10:1</span></span>

The Theophany - Daniel 10-11:2a

The Introduction to the Following Manifestation of God - [Dan
10:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001)

This verse is to be regarded as an inscription or general statement of
the substance of it. Therefore Daniel speaks of himself in the third
person, as in [Dan 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001), and in the
historical portions Daniel 1-6. The definition of the time, "In the
first year of Cores (Cyrus) king of Persia," refers us back to [Dan
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#021), but it does not, as has been
there already remarked, stand in contradiction to the first year of
Cyrus named there. דּבר is the following revelation, which was
communicated to the prophet not by a vision (חזון), but by a
manifestation of God (מראה), and was given in the form of simple human
discourse. The remark regarding Daniel, "whose name was Belteshazzar,"
is designed only to make it obvious that the Daniel of the third year of
Cyrus was the same who was carried by Babylon in the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar (seventy-two years before). To the question why Daniel
did not return to his native land in the first year of Cyrus, which
Hitzig has thus formulated for the purpose of framing an argument
against the genuineness of this prophecy - "How could he, who was a
pattern of piety ([Dan 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008); [Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)), so disregard the opportunity
that was offered and the summons of Isaiah ([Isa
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020); [Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011).) as if he stood on the side of
those who forgot the holy mountain?" ([Isa
65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)) - the supposition of his
advanced old age (Hv.) is no sufficient answer. For, on the contrary,
Hitzig has rightly replied that old men also, such as had even seen the
former temple, had returned home ([Ezr
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#012)), and Daniel was not so infirm as
to be unable for the journey. The correct answer is rather this, that
Daniel, because divine revelations had been communicated to him, had
obtained a position at the court of the world-rulers in which he was
able to do much for the good of his people, and might not, without a
special divine injunction, leave this place; that he thus, not from
indifference toward the holy mountain or from neglect of the injunctions
to flee from Babylon ([Isa 48:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#020); [Isa
52:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#011).), but from obedience to God,
and for the furtherance of the cause of His kingdom, remained at his
post till the Lord His God should call him away from it.

In the second hemistich the contents of this new divine revelation are
characterized. הדּבר with the article points back to דּבר in the first
half of the verse. Of this "word" Daniel says that it contains אמת and
גּדול צבא. In the statement that "the thing was true," Hitzig finds an
intimation that thereby the author betrays his standpoint, namely, the
time when "the thing" was realized, for Daniel could not say this before
it happened. But this objection supposes that the author was a lying
prophet, who spoke from his own heart ([Jer
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#008), [Jer
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#015)). But if Daniel had actually
received a "word" from God, he could before its fulfilment testify its
truth. The testimony to the truth of the word here indicates, as it does
in [Dan 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#026) in the mouth of the
angel, that the word of God now communicated to the prophet contained
things which it would be difficult for the human heart to believe. The
second predicate גּדול צבא shows in what respect this is so. For that
these words do not, with the lxx and Aquil., refer to what follows is
obvious, as is acknowledged by all modern interpreters. צבא, warfare,
military service, then the difficulty of this service, and figuratively
difficulty, afflictions of life, [Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001); [Job
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#017), and also here. "The word is,
i.e., concerns, has as its contents, great afflictions" \[E.V. "the time
appointed was long"\].

In the last clause of this verse בּין and בינה are not the imperative
(v. Lengerke), because a summons to give heed, or understand, would not
be here in place. בינה is a substantive, and the throwing of the accent
on the penultima is occasioned by the accented לו which follows. בּין is
the 3rd pers. perf., not the infinitive (Hv.). Understanding was to him
בּמּראה, by that which was seen, i.e., by the appearance described in
[Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005). בּמּראה cannot at all be
referred (Klief.) to the earlier prophecies of [Dan
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#007), [Dan
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#009). The statement in these two
passages serves for the confirmation of that which was said regarding
the contents of the word from God, and stands in relation to [Dan
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#027), where Daniel was troubled
because no one understood the vision. He was helped out of this state of
non-understanding by the following revelation, cf. [Dan
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014). But the objection that it
cannot be here said that Daniel understood the word, because he himself,
[Dan 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#008), says that he did not
understand it, has been disposed of by Kliefoth, who justly remarks that
the non-understanding in [Dan 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#008)
regards a single point, namely, the duration of the affliction,
regarding which, however, disclosures are given to the prophet in [Dan
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#010). The translation: "he heard the
word, and understood the vision" (Kran.), is set aside by this
circumstance, that it takes בּין in a different sense from בינה,
contrary to the parallelism of the passages.

[Daniel 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 10:2</span></span>

[Dan 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002), [Dan
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003) introduce the following
revelation by a statement of the occasion of it. ההם בּימים refers back
to the date named in [Dan 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001). The
ימים after שׁבעים does not serve to designate the three weeks as common
day-weeks, in contrast to the שׁבעים of [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024)., but is an accusative
subordinated to the definition of time which expresses the idea of
continuance: three weeks long, or three whole weeks, as [Gen
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001); cf. Gesen. Gramm. 118, 3. For
three weeks Daniel mourned and fasted, i.e., abstained from the usual
food. חמות לחם, precious food, delicacies; but Hv., v. Leng., Maur.,
Hitz., and Kran. interpret it of leavened bread, so called in contrast
to the unleavened paschal bread, the bread of affliction ([Deu
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003)). But this contrast is not well
founded, for the מצּות (unleavened cakes) of the passover was not
(notwithstanding [Deu 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003)) bread of
sorrow, but pure, holy bread, which Daniel did not eat, in opposition to
the law, for three weeks. לחם is not to be limited to bread in its
narrower sense, but denotes food generally. Flesh and wine are festival
food, [Isa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013); [Gen
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#025), which is not had every day. The
anointing with oil was the sign of joy and of a joyous frame of mind, as
with guests at a banquet, [Amo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006),
and was intermitted in the time of sorrow; cf. [Sa2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002). Fasting, as an abstaining from
the better sustenance of common life, was the outward sign of sorrow of
soul.

According to [Dan 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004), Daniel mourned
and fasted in the first month of the year, the month in the middle of
which the paschal feast was kept, in which Israel celebrated their
deliverance from their state of slavery in Egypt and their advancement
to be the people of God, and were joyful before their God. On the 24th
day of this month occurred the Theophany ([Dan
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004).), with which, however, his
fasting came to an end. According to this, it appears that he fasted
from the third to the twenty-third of the month Nisan; thus it began
immediately after the feast of the new moon, which was kept for two days
(cf. [Sa1 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#018)., 27, 34 with 6:29;
[Dan 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#019)). Thus Hv. and Hitzig
conclude; while v. Leng. and Maurer argue, from [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), that between the time of
fasting and the appearance of the angel an interval elapsed,
consequently that Daniel fasted from the first to the twenty-first of
the month Nisan. But from [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)
nothing further follows than that the angel was detained twenty-one
days; so that the question as to the beginning and the end of the fast
is not certainly answered from the text, and, as being irrelevant to the
matter, it can remain undecided. More important is the question as to
the cause of such long-continued great sorrow, which is not answered by
the remark that he was thus prepared for receiving a divine revelation.
According to [Dan 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012), Daniel sought
הבּין, i.e., understanding as to the state of the matter, or regarding
the future of his people, which filled him with concern. The word about
the restoration of Jerusalem which he had received through the angel
Gabriel in the first year of Darius (Daniel 9) had come to pass since
that revelation in the first year of Cyrus, but had had only little
effect on the religious lukewarmness of the majority of the people. Of
the whole people only a very small portion had returned to the land of
their fathers, and had begun, after restoring the altar of
burnt-offering, to build the house of God in Jerusalem. But while the
foundation of the new temple was laid, there mingled with the joyful
shoutings of the people also the loud wailings of the old men who had
seen the former temple in its glory, when they beheld this building
undertaken amid circumstances so depressing and sorrowful ([Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001)). In addition to this, the
Samaritans immediately, when the Jewish rulers refused for conscience
sake to permit them to take part with them in the building, sought, by
means of influences used at the Persian court, to prevent the carrying
on of the building ([Ezr 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)). This
sad state of matters could not but, at the beginning of the new year,
fill the heart of Daniel with deep sorrow, and move him at the return of
the time of the passover to mourn in fasting and prayer over the delay
of the salvation promised to his people, and to supplicate in behalf of
Israel the pardon of their sins, and their deliverance out of the hand
of their enemies. Therefore he mourned and fasted before and during the
paschal days for three weeks, until on the twenty-fourth day of the
month he received a revelation from God.

[Daniel 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 10:4</span></span>

The Theophany. - On the day named Daniel found himself on the side
(banks) of the river Hiddekel, i.e., the Tigris (see under [Gen
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#014)), along with some who accompanied
him ([Dan 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007)); thus he was there in
reality, and not merely in vision as at the Ulai, [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002). For what purpose he was there is
not said. Here he saw a celestial being, whose form is described, [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006). It was a man (אחד, one, not
several) clothed in בּדּים, i.e., in a talar of shining white linen
(regarding בּדּים, see under [Eze
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002)), and his loins girt about with
gold of Uphaz. אוּפז occurs nowhere else, except in [Jer
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#009) : gold of Uphaz and silver of
Tarshish, from which we must conclude that Uphaz is the name of a
region, a country, probably only a dialectically different form for
אופיר; the combination with the Sanscr. vipa - Hyphasis is, on the other
hand, very far-fetched.

[Daniel 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 10:6</span></span>

His body shone like תּרשׁישׁ, i.e., the chrysolite of the Old and the
topaz of the New Testament (see under [Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016)); his countenance had the
appearance of lightning, his eyes as lamps of fire, his arms and the
place of his feet like the sight of polished brass (קלל, see under [Eze
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#007)).מרגּלות, place of the feet, does
not stand for feet, but denotes that part of the human frame where the
feet are; and the word indicates that not the feet alone, but the under
parts of the body shone like burnished brass. The voice of his words,
i.e., the sound of his speaking, was like המון קול, for which in [Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024) המלּה קול (the voice of noise),
and by מחנה קול ([Eze 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024)) the noise
of a host is denoted.

This heavenly form has thus, it is true, the shining white talar common
to the angel, [Eze 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009), but all the
other features, as here described - the shining of his body, the
brightness of his countenance, his eyes like a lamp of fire, arms and
feet like glistering brass, the sound of his speaking-all these point to
the revelation of the יהוה כּבוד, the glorious appearance of the Lord,
Ezekiel 1, and teach us that the אישׁ seen by Daniel was no common
angel-prince, but a manifestation of Jehovah, i.e., the Logos. This is
placed beyond a doubt by a comparison with [Rev
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013), where the form of the Son of
man whom John saw walking in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks
is described like the glorious appearance seen by Ezekiel and Daniel.

The place where this heavenly being was, is not here specially stated.
In [Dan 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006) he appears hovering over
the waters of the river, the Tigris. This agrees also with the verse
before us, according to which Daniel, while standing on the banks of the
river, on lifting up his eyes beheld the vision. Hence it further
follows, that the אישׁ seen here by Daniel is the same heavenly being
whose voice he heard, [Dan 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016), from
the waters of the Ulai, without seeing his form.

When now he whose voice Daniel heard from thence presents himself before
him here on the Tigris in a majesty which human nature is not able to
endure, and announces to him the future, and finally, [Dan
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006)., with a solemn oath attests the
completion of the divine counsel, he thereby shows himself, as C. B.
Michaelis ad Daniel p. 372, Schmieder in Gerlach's Bibelw., and Oehler
(Art. Messias in Herz.'s Realenc. ix. p. 417) have acknowledged, to be
the Angel of Jehovah κατ ̓ἐξοχὴν, as the "Angel of His presence." The
combination of this angel with that in the form of a son of man
appearing in the clouds ([Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)) is
natural; and this combination is placed beyond a doubt by the comparison
with [Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013), where John sees the
glorified Christ, who is described by a name definitely referring to
[Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), as ὅμοιον υἱῷ ἀνθρώπου.

On the other hand, the opinion maintained to some extent among the
Rabbis, which even Hengstenberg has in modern times advocated (Beitr. i.
p. 165ff.; Christol. iii. 2, p. 50ff.), namely, that the angel of the
Lord who here appears to Daniel in divine majesty is identical with the
angel-prince Michael, has no support in Scripture, and stands in
contradiction to [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021), where he who speaks is
certainly distinguished from Michael, for here there is ascribed to
Michael a position with reference to the people of God which is not
appropriate to the Angel of the Lord or the Logos. It is true, indeed,
that Hengstenberg holds, with many old interpreters, that he who speaks
with Daniel, [Dan 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011), and reveals
to him the future, is different from him who appears to him, [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), and is identical with the angel
Gabriel. But the reasons advanced in support of this are not sufficient.
The latter supposition is grounded partly on the similarity of the
address to Daniel, חמות אישׁ, [Dan
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011), [Dan
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019), cf. with [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023), partly on the similarity of the
circumstances, [Dan 8:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017), cf. with
[Dan 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#010) and [Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005). But the address to Daniel חמות
אישׁ proves nothing, because it does not express to Daniel the relation
of the angel to him, but of the Lord who sent the angel; and Gabriel in
[Dan 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023) does not address the prophet
thus, but only says that he is המדות, i.e., a man greatly beloved of
God. The similarity of circumstances with [Dan
8:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017) proves nothing further than
that he who appeared was a heavenly being. More noticeable is the
similarity of [Dan 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013) with [Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005), so far as in both cases two
angels appear along with him who hovers over the waters, and the voice
from above the waters in [Dan 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016)
directs the angel Gabriel to explain the vision to the prophet. But from
the circumstance that in Daniel 8 and also in Daniel 9 Gabriel gives to
the prophet disclosures regarding the future, it by no means follows,
even on the supposition that he who is represented in the chapter before
us as speaking is different from him who appears in [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), that the angel who speaks is
Gabriel. If he were Gabriel, he would have been named here, according to
the analogy of [Dan 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#009), [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021).

To this is to be added, that the assumed difference between him who
speaks, [Dan 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011), and him who
appears, [Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), is not made out, nor yet is it
on the whole demonstrable. It is true that in favour of this difference,
he who speaks is on the banks of the river where Daniel stands, while he
who appears, vv. 5, 6, and also at the end of the vision, [Dan
12:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001), is in the midst of the
Tigris, and in [Dan 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005) of this
chapter ([Dan 12:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)) two other
persons are standing on the two banks of the river, one of whom asks him
who is clothed with linen, as if in the name of Daniel, when the things
announced shall happen. Now if we assume that he who is clothed in linen
is no other than he who speaks to Daniel, v. 11, then one of these two
persons becomes a κωφὸν πρόσωπον, and it cannot be at all seen for what
purpose he appears. If, on the contrary, the difference of the two is
assumed, then each has his own function. The Angel of the Lord is
present in silent majesty, and only by a brief sentence confirms the
words of his messenger ([Dan 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007)).
The one of those standing on the banks is he who, as the messenger and
interpreter of the Angel of the Lord, had communicated all disclosures
regarding the future to Daniel as he stood by the banks. The third, the
angel standing on the farther bank, directs the question regarding the
duration of the time to the Angel of the Lord. Thus Hengstenberg is in
harmony with C. B. Michaelis and others.

But however important these reasons for the difference appears, yet we
cannot regard them as conclusive. From the circumstance that, [Dan
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#010), a hand touched Daniel as he was
sinking down in weakness and set him on his knees, it does not with
certainty follow that this was the hand of the angel (Gabriel) who stood
by Daniel, who spoke to him, [Dan
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011). The words of the text, "a hand
touched me," leave the person whose hand it was altogether undefined;
and also in [Dan 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016), [Dan
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#018), where Daniel is again touched,
so that he was able to open his mouth and was made capable of hearing
the words that were addressed to him, the person from whom the touch
proceeded is altogether indefinite. The designations, אדם בּני כּדּמוּת,
like the similitude of the sons of men, [Dan
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016), and אדם כּמראה, like the
appearance of a man, [Dan 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#018), do
not point to a definite angel who appears speaking in the sequel. But
the circumstance that in [Dan 12:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001),
besides the form that hovered over the water, other two angels appear on
the banks, does not warrant us to assume that these two angels were
already present or visible in [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005). The words, "Then I looked and
saw other two, the one," etc., [Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005), much rather indicate that the
scene was changed, that Daniel now for the first time saw the two angels
on the banks. In Daniel 10 he only sees him who is clothed with linen,
and was so terrified by this "great sight" that he fell powerless to the
ground on hearing his voice, and was only able to stand up after a hand
had touched him and a comforting word had been spoken to him. Nothing is
here, as in [Dan 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#015), said of the
coming of the angel. If thus, after mention being made of the hand which
by touching him set him on his knees, it is further said, "and he spake
to me ... " ([Dan 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)), the context
only leads to this conclusion, that he who spake to him was the man
whose appearance and words had so overwhelmed him. To suppose another
person, or an angel different from the one who was clothed with linen,
as speaking, could only be justified if the contents of that which was
spoken demanded such a supposition.

He who spake said, among other things, that he was sent to Daniel ([Dan
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)); that the prince of the kingdom
of Persia had withstood him one and twenty days; and that Michael, one
of the chief angel-princes, had come to his help ([Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)). These statements do not
indicate that he was an inferior angel, but they are suitable to the
Angel of the Lord; for he also says ([Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013), 15; [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009)) that he is sent by Jehovah; cf.
also [Isa 48:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#016) and [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001). The coming to his help by the
angel-prince Michael, also, does not denote that he who speaks was an
angel subordinated to the archangel Michael. In [Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015) עזר denotes help which men render
to God; and in [Ch1 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021). it is
related that Israelites of different tribes came to David to help him
against his enemies, i.e., under his leadership to fight for him.
Similarly we may suppose that the angel Michael gave help to the Angel
of the Lord against the prince of the kingdom of Persia.

There thus remains only the objection, that if we take the angel clothed
with linen and him who speaks as the same, then in [Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005) one of the angels who stood on
the two banks of the Tigris becomes a κωφὸν πρόσωπον; but if we are not
able to declare the object for which two angels appear there, yet the
one of those two angels cannot certainly be the same as he who
announced, Daniel 10 and 11, the future to the prophet, because these
angels are expressly designated as two others (אהרים שׁנים), and the
אהרים excludes the identifying of these with angels that previously
appeared to Daniel. This argument is not set aside by the reply that the
angels standing on the two banks of the river are spoken of as אהרים
with reference to the Angel of the Lord, [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), for the reference of the אהרים
to that which follows is inconsistent with the context; see under [Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005).

Thus every argument utterly fails that has been adduced in favour of the
supposition that he who speaks, [Dan
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011), is different from him who is
clothed in linen; and we are warranted to abide by the words of the
narrative, which in Daniel 10 names no other angel than the man clothed
with linen, who must on that account be the same as he who speaks and
announces the future to the prophet. The hand which again set him up by
touching him, is, it is true, to be thought of as proceeding from an
angel; but it is not more definitely described, because this angel is
not further noticed. But after the man clothed with linen has announced
the future to the prophet, the scene changes ([Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005)). Daniel sees the same angels
over the waters of the Tigris, and standing on the two banks of the
river. Where he who was clothed in linen stands, is left indefinite in
the narrative. If from the first it is he who hovers over the water of
the river, he could yet talk with the prophet standing on its banks. But
it is also possible that at first he was visible close beside the banks.

[Daniel 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 10:7</span></span>

According to this verse, the form described in [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005) and [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006) was visible to Daniel alone. His
companions saw not the appearance, but they were so alarmed by the
invisible nearness of the heavenly being that they fled and hid
themselves. What is here said resembles [Act
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#003)., where Christ, after His
exaltation, appeared to Paul and spoke to him - Paul's companions
hearing only the voice, but seeing no one. In order to account for the
flight of Daniel's companions, it is not necessary to suppose the
existence of thunder and lightning, of which the text makes no mention.
The supposition also of Theodor. and Hitzig, that the men indeed saw not
the angel, but that they heard his voice, is incorrect; for the voice
was not heard till after his companions had fled. המּראה, pointed as
fem., that which was seen, the appearance, seems to be a more limited
conception than מראה, visio. בּהחבא יברחוּ: they fled, for they hid
themselves; so that the hiding is not to be regarded as the object of
the fleeing, but the fleeing is made known in their hiding themselves.

[Daniel 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 10:8</span></span>

Daniel here calls the appearance great with reference to the majesty
displayed, such as had never hitherto been known to him. Its influence
upon him is, therefore, also greater than that of the appearance of
Gabriel, [Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017). There remained in
him no strength, i.e., he felt himself overwhelmed, and as if about to
perish. His הוד, splendour - the same as the Chald. זיו, [Dan
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028); [Dan
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006), [Dan
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#009) - i.e., the fresh colour of life
which marked his countenance, was changed למשׁחית, properly, to
destruction, to entire disfigurement, to corruption. The last clause,
"and I retained no strength," gives greater force to the preceding
statement.

[Daniel 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 10:9</span></span>

When Daniel heard the voice, which according to v. 6 was like the noise
of a multitude, he was stunned, and fell on his face to the ground, as
[Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017). Yet the expression here,
נרדּם הייתי, is stronger than נבעתּי, [Dan
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017). [Dan
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#010) shows how great was his
amazement in the further description it gives. The touching of him by an
unseen hand raised him up and caused him to reel on his knees and hands
(תּניעני, vacillare me fecit), but did not enable him to stand erect.
This he was first able to do after he heard the comfortable words, and
was directed to mark the communication of the heavenly messenger.
Regarding חמות אישׁ see under [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023), and for עמדך על עמד see at [Dan
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#018). He now raises himself up, but
still trembling (מרעיד). The עתּה now am I sent to thee, points to the
delay of his coming spoken of in [Dan
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012).

[Daniel 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 10:12</span></span>

According to this verse, the words of Daniel, i.e., his prayer from the
first day of his seeking to understand the future, and of his
self-mortification in sorrow and fasting ([Dan
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002), [Dan
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#003)), was heard of God, and the angel
was immediately sent forth by God to convey to him revelations. And, he
adds, בּדבריך בּאתי, I am come for thy words, i.e., in consequence of
thy prayer, according to it. The בּאתי most interpreters understand of
the coming to Daniel; Hofmann (Schriftbew. i. p. 331) and Kliefoth, on
the contrary, understand it of the coming of the angel to Persia ([Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)). According to the matter, both
views are correct, but in the form in which they are presented they are
incorrect. Against the latter stands the adversative וin ושׂר (but the
prince), [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), by which the
contents of [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013) are introduced;
for, according to this, [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)
cannot represent the object of the coming. Against the former stands the
fact, that the angel does not come to Daniel immediately, but only after
having gained a victory over the prince of the kingdom. The בּאתי is
again taken up in [Dan 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014), and must
have here the same meaning that it has there. But in [Dan
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014) it is connected with להבינך, "I
am come to bring thee understanding," in [Dan
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012) with בּדבריך, which only denotes
that the "coming" corresponded to Daniel's prayer, but not that he came
immediately to him. Daniel had, without doubt, prayed for the
accomplishment of the salvation promised to his people, and eo ipso for
the removal of all the hindrances that stood in the way of that
accomplishment. The hearing of his prayer may be regarded, therefore, as
containing in it not merely the fact that God directed an angel to
convey to him disclosures regarding the future fortunes of his people,
but also at the same time as implying that on the side of God steps were
taken for the removal of these hindrances.

The thirteenth verse speaks of this, not as denoting that the angel came
to Persia for the purpose of working for Israel, but much rather as
announcing the reason of the twenty-one days' delay in the coming of the
angel to Daniel, in the form of a parenthetical clause. His coming to
Daniel was hindered by this, that the prince of the kingdom of Persia
withstood him twenty-one days. The twenty-one days are those three weeks
of Daniel's fasting and prayer, [Dan
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002). Hence we see that the coming of
the angel had its reference to Daniel, for he came to bring him a
comforting answer from God; but in order that he might be able to do
this, he must first, according to [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), enter into war with and
overcome the spirit of the king of Persia, hostile to the people of God.
The contents of [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013) are hence
not to be understood as showing that the angel went to Persia in order
that he might there arrange the cause of Israel with the king; the verse
much rather speaks of a war in the kingdom of the supernatural spirits,
which could not relate to the court of the king of Persia. The prince
(שׂר) of the kingdom of Persia, briefly designated in [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021) "the prince of Persia," is not
king Cyrus, or the collectivum of the kings of Persia, as Hv. and Kran.,
with Calvin and most of the Reformers, think, but the guardian spirit or
the protecting genius of the Persian kingdom, as the Rabbis and most of
the Christian interpreters have rightly acknowledged. For the angel that
appeared to Daniel did not fight with the kings of Persia, but with a
spiritual intelligence of a like nature, for the victory, or precedence
with the kings of Persia. This spirit of the kingdom of Persia, whom,
after the example of Jerome, almost all interpreters call the guardian
angel of his kingdom, is as little the nature-power of this kingdom as
Michael is the nature-power of Israel, but is a spirit-being; yet not
the heathen national god of the Persians, but, according to the view of
Scripture ([Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020).), the δαιμόνιον
of the Persian kingdom, i.e., the supernatural spiritual power standing
behind the national gods, which we may properly call the guardian spirit
of this kingdom. In the לנגדּי עמד lies, according to the excellent
remark of Kliefoth, the idea, that "the שׂר of the kingdom of Persian
stood beside the kings of the Persians to influence them against Israel,
and to direct against Israel the power lying in Persian heathendom, so
as to support the insinuations of the Samaritans; that the angel, [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), came on account of Daniel's
prayer to dislodge this 'prince' from his position and deprive him of
his influence, but he kept his place for twenty-one days, till Michael
came to his help; then he so gained the mastery over him, that he now
stood in his place beside the kings of Persia, so as henceforth to
influence them in favour of Israel." He who appeared to Daniel, [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005), and spake with him, [Dan
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011), is not "the angel who had his
dominion among the nations of the world," or "his sphere of action in
the embodiments of the heathen world-power, to which the Jewish people
were now in subjection, to promote therein the working out of God's plan
of salvation" (Hofm. Schriftbew. i. p. 334). This supposition is
destitute of support from the Scriptures. It is rather the Angel of the
Lord who carries out God's plans in the world, and for their
accomplishment and execution makes war against the hostile spirit of the
heathen world-power. The subjugation of this spirit supposes a
particular angel ruling in the heathen world just as little as Jehovah's
contending against the heathen nations that oppress and persecute His
kingdom and people.

In the war against the hostile spirit of the kingdom of Persia, the
archangel Michael came to the help of the Angel of the Lord. The name
מיכאל, who is as God, comes into view, as does the name Gabriel, only
according to the appellative signification of the word, and expresses,
after the analogy of [Exo 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011); [Psa
89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)., the idea of God's unparalleled
helping power. Michael is thus the angel possessing the unparalleled
power of God. He is here said to be "one of the chief princes," i.e., of
the highest angel-princes, - [Dan
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021), "your prince," i.e., the prince
who contends for Israel, who conducts the cause of Israel. The first
title points undoubtedly to an arrangement of orders and degrees among
the angels, designating Michael as one of the most distinguished of the
angel-princes; hence called in [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009) ἀρχάγγελος, also in [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007), where he is represented as
contending with his angels against the dragon. The opinion that Michael
is called "one of the chief princes," not as in contrast with the
angels, but only with the demons of the heathen gods (Kliefoth), is
opposed by the words themselves and by the context. From the
circumstance that the guardian spirit of Persia is called שׂר it does
not follow that שׂרים is not a designation of the angels generally, but
only of the princes of the people, who are the spirits ruling in the
social affairs of nations and kingdoms (Hofmann, p. 337); and even
though this conclusion may be granted, this meaning for השׂרים with the
article and the predicate הראשׁנים is undemonstrable. For the Scripture
does not place the demon-powers of heathendom so on a line with the
angels that both are designated as ראשׁנים שׂרים. The ראשׁנים שׁרים can
only be the princes, chiefs, of the good angels remaining in communion
with God, and working for the kingdom of God. Though what is said by the
angel Michael, for the sake of the Israelitish people, among whom he has
the sphere of his activity, may be said for their comfort, yet it does
not follow therefrom that that which is said "cannot give disclosures
regarding the relation within the angel-world, but only regarding the
relation to the great historical nations and powers of the world" (Hofm.
p. 338). For as regards the statement adduced in support of this opinion
- "the greatness and importance of the work entrusted to him makes him
one of the ראשׁנים, not that the work is entrusted to him because he is
so" - just the contrary is true. To a subordinate spirit God will not
entrust a work demanding special power and greatness; much rather the
being entrusted with a great and important work supposes a man exalted
above the common mass. And for the comforting of Israel the words,
"Michael, one of the foremost princes, came to my help," affirm that
Israel is under very powerful protection, because its guardian spirit is
one of the foremost of the angel-princes, whereby implic. it is said at
the same time that the people, though they be little esteemed before the
world, yet cannot be destroyed by the nations of the world. This thought
follows as a conclusion from what is said regarding the dignity of their
guardian angel, but it does not form the contents of the saying
regarding Michael and his place among the heavenly spirits.

But we learn from [Dan 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021) the
reason why the archangel Michael, and no other angel, came to the help
of him who was clothed with linen. It was because Michael was the prince
of Israel, i.e., "the high angel-prince who had to maintain the cause of
the people of God in the invisible spirit-world against opposing powers"
(Auberlen, p. 289); and as such he appears also in [Jde
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#009) and [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007). The coming of Michael to give
help does not include in it this, that he was superior in might or in
position to the angel that spake, and thus supplies no proof that the
angel that spake was Gabriel, or an angel different from him who was
clothed with linen. For even a subordinate servant can bring help to his
master, and in a conflict render him aid in gaining the victory. Against
the idea of the subjection of Michael to the angel that spake, or the
man clothed with linen, stands the further unfolding of the angel's
message, the statement in [Dan 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)
and [Dan 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001), according to which the
angel that spake gave strength and help to Michael in the first year of
the Median Darius, from which we have more reason to conclude that the
angel who spake stood above the angel Michael; see under [Dan
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001).

In consequence of the assistance on the part of Michael, the Angel of
the Lord obtained the place of superiority by the side of the king of
Persia. נותר has not here the usual meaning, to be over and above, to
remain, but is to be translated after הותיר, [Gen
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004), to have the pre-eminence, to
excel, in the passive signification of the Hiphil: "to be provided with
the preference, to gain the superiority." The translation, "I have
maintained the place" (Hofm.), cannot be proved. אצל, at the side of,
near, is explained from the idea of the protecting spirit standing by
the side of his protege. The plural, "kings of Persia," neither refers
to Cyrus and Cambyses, nor to Cyrus and the conquered kings living with
him (Croesus, etc.), nor to Cyrus and the prince, i.e., his guardian
spirit (Hitzig). The plural denotes, that by the subjugation of the
demon of the Persian kingdom, his influence not merely over Cyrus, but
over all the following kings of Persia, was brought to an end, so that
the whole of the Persian kings became accessible to the influence of the
spirit proceeding from God and advancing the welfare of Israel.

[Daniel 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 10:14</span></span>

With this joyful message the angel comes to Daniel, to open up to him
what would befall his people in the last time. The punctuation of יקרה
(shall befall) is according to יקרא ([Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)); the Kethiv יקרה has the correct
form. חימים בּאחרית as [Dan 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#028), the
Messianic world-time, in [Dan 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#017) is
called the time of the end. "For," the angel adds, "the vision refers,
or stretches itself out, to the days." ליּמים, with the article, are the
days of the אחרית (the latter time), the Messianic world-time. חזון is
the revelation which in [Dan 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#001) is
called דּבר and מראה, the following revelation in Daniel 11. Kliefoth is
incorrect in thinking on the revelations already given, Daniel 7, 8, 9,
to Daniel, regarding which the angel now seeks to bring to him further
understanding. For although those revelations stretch out to the last
time, and the revelations in Daniel 11 only give further disclosures
regarding it, yet neither does the angel who speaks to Daniel here thus
represent the matter, nor does the form of the revelation Daniel 10-12,
namely, the majestic appearance of the Angel of the Lord, not a common
angel-revelation, correspond with this supposition. חזון also cannot,
without further definition, refer to those earlier revelations; and the
opinion that הבּין denotes the understanding, as distinguished from the
revelation or proclamation, does not accord with the usual style of
Daniel's language. הבּין denotes here, as in [Dan
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#016), the interpretation of the
vision, which in both cases contains the things which shall befall the
people of God in the future. Cf. [Dan
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#022), where יבּין is used of the
announcement of the revelation of God regarding the seventy weeks.

[Daniel 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 10:15</span></span>

In these verses it is further related how Daniel was gradually raised up
and made capable of receiving the revelation of God. The communication
of the angel hitherto had not fully gained this object. Daniel "stood
trembling," but he could not yet speak. With his face bent towards the
earth he was as yet speechless. Then one having the likeness of a man
touched his lips, whereby he received the power of speech, and could
address him who stood before him, and utter the complaint: "By the
vision anguish, i.e., violent terror, has fallen upon me: woes are
turned upon me." For this style of speech cf. [Sa1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#019), and for the matter itself, cf.
[Isa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003); [Isa
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008). For the following כּח עצרתּי ולא
(and I have no strength, [Dan 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#016)),
cf. [Dan 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008).

[Daniel 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 10:17</span></span>

Therefore he may not talk with this Lord, i.e., with Him who appeared
before him in such dread majesty; and he is yet in such a state, since
all strength has departed from him and his breath has gone, that he
fears he must die; cf. [Kg1 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017).
Then once more one like the appearance of a man touched him. אדם כּמראה
is in reality = אדם בּני כּדּמוּת: both forms of expression leave the
person of him who touched him undefined, and only state that the
touching proceeded from some one who was like a man, or that it was such
as proceeds from men, and are like the expression used in [Dan
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019), "a hand touched me." From this
it does not follow that he who spoke to him touched him, but only that
it was a spiritual being, who appeared like to a man. After thus being
touched for the third time ([Dan
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#018)), the encouragement of the angel
that talked with him imparted to him full strength, so that he could
calmly listen to and observe his communication.

[Daniel 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 10:20</span></span>

But before he communicated to Daniel what would befall his people in the
"latter days" ([Dan 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#014)), he gives
to him yet further disclosures regarding the proceedings in the
spirit-kingdom which determine the fate of nations, and contain for
Israel, in the times of persecution awaiting them, the comforting
certainty that they had in the Angel of the Lord and in the guardian
angel Michael a strong protection against the enmities of the heathen
world. Kliefoth supposes that the angel who speaks in v. 20 - Daniel
11:1 gives a brief resum of the contents of his previous statement ([Dan
10:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012)). But it is not so. These
verses, 10:20-11:1, contain new disclosures not yet made known in [Dan
11:12-19](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#012), although resembling the
contents of [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013). Of the coming
of the prince of Javan (v. 20b), and the help which the angel-prince
renders to Darius ([Dan 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001)), nothing
is said in [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013); also what the
Angel of the Lord, [Dan 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020), says
regarding the conflict with the prince of Persia is different from that
which is said in [Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013). In [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013) he speaks of that which he has
done before his coming to Daniel; in [Dan
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020), of that which he will now do.
To the question, "Knowest thou wherefore I come unto thee?" no answer
follows; it has, however, an affirmative sense, and is only an animated
mode of address to remind Daniel of that which is said in [Dan
10:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#012), and to impress it upon him
as weighty and worthy of consideration. Then follows the new
communication: "and now will I return to fight with the prince of
Persia," i.e., to carry forward and bring to an end the victory gained
for thee before my arrival over the demon of Persia, the spirit of the
Persian kingdom.

The words which follow, 'וגו והנּה יוצא ואני (v. 20b, and when I am gone
forth, lo, etc.), present some difficulty. The ואני in comparison with
אשׁוּב (will I return) points to a contrast, and והנּה plainly indicates
that which shall begin with the יוצא אני. By this, the union of the יוצא
ואני with that which goes before and the adversative interpretation of
והנּה (v. Leng.) is excluded. But יוצא is interpreted differently.
Hvernick, Maurer, and others understand it of going forth to war; only
we must not then think (with Maurer) of the war against the prince of
Persia. "For he will do that even now (in the third year of Cyrus), and
at this time the coming of the prince of Grecia has no meaning"
(Hitzig). Hofmann and Hitzig understand, therefore, יוצא, in contrast to
בּא, of a going forth from the conflict, as in [Kg2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#007) "they shall go forth on the
Sabbath" is placed over against "that enter in on the Sabbath" in [Kg2
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#005); but in an entirely different
sense. Hitzig thus renders the clause: "when I have done with the
Persians, and am on the point of departing, then shall the king of
Grecia rise up against me." יון must then be the Seleucidan kingdom, and
the שׂר the guardian spirit of Egypt - suppositions which need no
refutation, while the interpretation of the words themselves fails by
the arbitrary interpolation "against me" after בּא. According to
Hofmann, the angel says that "he had to return and contend further with
the prince of the people of Persia; and that when he has retired from
this conflict, then shall the prince of the Grecian people come,
compelling him to enter on a new war." This last clause Hofmann thus
more fully illustrates: "Into the conflict with the prince of the people
of Persia, which the angel retires from, the prince of the Grecian
people enters, and against him he resumes it after that the Persian
kingdom has fallen, and is then also helped by Michael, the prince of
the Jewish people, in this war against the prince of Grecia, as he had
been in the war against the prince of Persia" (Schriftbew. i. pp. 333,
334f.). But Hitzig and Kliefoth have, in opposition to this, referred to
the incongruity which lies in the thought that the prince of Javan shall
enter into the war of the angel against the Persians, and assume and
carry it forward. The angel fights against the demon of Persia, not to
destroy the Persians, but to influence the Persian king in favour of the
people of God; on the contrary, the prince of Javan comes to destroy the
Persian king. According to this, we cannot say that the prince of Javan
enters into the place of the angel in the war. "The Grecians and the
Persians much rather stand," as Hitzig rightly remarks, "on one side,
and are adversaries of Michael and our שׂר," i.e., of the angel who
spake to Daniel. Add to this, that although יצא, to go out, means also
to go away, to go off, yet the meaning to go away from the conflict, to
abandon it, is not confirmed: much rather יצא, sensu militari, always
denotes only "to go out, forth, into the conflict;" cf. [Sa1
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#020); [Sa1
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#015); [Ch1
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001); [Job
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#021), etc. We have to take the word
in this signification here (with C. B. Michaelis, Klief., and Kran.),
only we must not, with Kranichfeld, supply the clause, "to another more
extensive conflict," because this supplement is arbitrary, but rather,
with Kliefoth, interpret the word generally as it stands of the going
out of the angel to fight for the people of God, without excluding the
war with the prince of Persia, or limiting it to this war. Thus the
following will be the meaning of the passage: Now shall I return to
resume and continue the war with the prince of Persia, to maintain the
position gained ([Dan 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013)) beside
the kings of Persia; but when (while) I thus go forth to war, i.e.,
while I carry on this conflict, lo, the prince of Javan shall come (הנּה
with the partic. בּא of the future) - then shall there be a new
conflict. This last thought is not, it is true, expressly uttered, but
it appears from [Dan 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021). The
warring with the prince, i.e., the spirit of Persia hostile to Israel,
refers to the oppositions which the Jews would encounter in the
hindrances put in the way of their building the temple from the time of
Cyrus to the time of Darius Hystaspes, and further under Xerxes and
Artaxerxes till the rebuilding of the walls of Jerusalem by Nehemiah, as
well as at a later time on the side of the Persian world-power, in the
midst of all which difficulties the Angel of the Lord promises to guide
the affairs of His people. יון שׂר is the spirit of the Macedonian
world-kingdom, which would arise and show as great hostility as did the
spirit of Persia against the people of God.

[Daniel 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 10:21</span></span>

This verse is antithetically connected with the preceding by אבּל, but
yet. The contrast, however, does not refer to the fears for the
theocracy (Kranichfeld) arising out of the last-named circumstance (v.
20b), according to which the angel seeks to inform Daniel that under
these circumstances the prophecy can only contain calamity. For "the
prophecy by no means contains only calamity, but war and victory and
everlasting victory added thereto" (Klief.). C. B. Michaelis has more
correctly interpreted the connection thus: Verum ne forte et sic, quod
principem Graeciae Persarum principi successurum intellexisti, animum
despondeas, audi ergo, quod tibi tuisque solatio esse potest, ego
indicabo tibi, quod, etc. "The Scripture of truth" is the book in which
God has designated beforehand, according to truth, the history of the
world as it shall certainly be unfolded; cf. [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016); [Psa
139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016); [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001). The following clause, אחד ואין,
is not connected adversatively with the preceding: "there is yet no one
... " (Hofmann and others), but illustratively, for the angel states
more minutely the nature of the war which he has to carry on. He has no
one who fights with him against these enemies (אלּה על, against the evil
spirits of Persia and Greece) but Michael the angel-prince of Israel,
who strongly shows himself with him, i.e., as an ally in the conflict
(מתחזּק as [Sa1 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#009); [Sa2
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#012)), i.e., renders to him powerful
aid, as he himself in the first year of Darius the Mede had been a
strong helper and protection to Michael.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 11](dan011)

</div>
