<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu020)  [Next](deu022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 21:1</span></span>

The reason for grouping together these five laws, which are apparently
so different from one another, as well as for attaching them to the
previous regulations, is to be found in the desire to bring out
distinctly the sacredness of life and of personal rights from every
point of view, and impress it upon the covenant nation.

[Deu 21:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001)

Expiation of a Murder Committed by an Unknown Hand. - [Deu
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001) and [Deu
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#002). If any one was found lying in a
field in the land of Israel (נפל fallen, then lying, [Jdg
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#025); [Jdg
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#022)), having been put to death
without its being known who had killed him (וגו נודע לא, a
circumstantial clause, attached without a copula, see Ewald, 341, b. 3),
the elders and judges, sc., of the neighbouring towns, - the former as
representatives of the communities, the latter as administrators of
right, - were to go out and measure to the towns which lay round about
the slain man, i.e., measure the distance of the body from the towns
that were lying round about, to ascertain first of all which was the
nearest town.

[Deu 21:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#003)

This nearest town was then required to expiate the blood-guiltiness, not
only because the suspicion of the crime or of participation in the crime
fell soonest upon it, but because the guilt connected with the shedding
of innocent blood rested as a burden upon it before all others. To this
end the elders were to take a heifer (young cow), with which no work had
ever been done, and which had not yet drawn in the yoke, i.e., whose
vital force had not been diminished by labour (see at [Num
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002)), and bring it down into a
brook-valley with water constantly flowing, and there break its neck.
The expression, "it shall be that the city," is more fully defined by
"the elders of the city shall take." The elders were to perform the act
of expiation in the name of the city. As the murderer was not to be
found, an animal was to be put to death in his stead, and suffer the
punishment of the murderer. The slaying of the animal was not an
expiatory sacrifice, and consequently there was no slaughtering and
sprinkling of the blood; but, as the mode of death, viz., breaking the
neck (vid., [Exo 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013)), clearly
shows, it was a symbolical infliction of the punishment that should have
been borne by the murderer, upon the animal which was substituted for
him. To be able to take the guilt upon itself and bear it, the animal
was to be in the full and undiminished possession of its vital powers.
The slaying was to take place in a איתן נחל, a valley with water
constantly flowing through it, which was not worked (cultivated) and
sown. This regulation as to the locality in which the act of expiation
was to be performed was probably founded upon the idea, that the water
of the brook-valley would suck in the blood and clean it away, and that
the blood sucked in by the earth would not be brought to light again by
the ploughing and working of the soil.

[Deu 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#005)

The priests were to come near during this transaction; i.e., some
priests from the nearest Levitical town were to be present at it, not to
conduct the affair, but as those whom Jehovah had chosen to serve Him
and to bless in His name (cf. [Deu
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#005)), and according to whose mouth
(words) every dispute and every stroke happened (cf. [Deu
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008)), i.e., simply as those who were
authorized by the Lord, and as the representatives of the divine right,
to receive the explanation and petition of the elders, and acknowledge
the legal validity of the act.

[Deu 21:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#006)

The elders of the town were to wash their hands over the slain heifer,
i.e., to cleanse themselves by this symbolical act from the suspicion of
any guilt on the part of the inhabitants of the town in the murder that
had been committed (cf. [Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006);
[Psa 73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013); [Mat
27:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#024)), and then answer (to the charge
involved in what had taken place), and say, "Our hands have not shed
this blood (on the singular שׁפכה, see Ewald, 317, a.), and our eyes
have not seen" (sc., the shedding of blood), i.e., we have neither any
part in the crime nor any knowledge of it: "grant forgiveness (lit.,
'cover up,' viz., the blood-guiltiness) to Thy people...and give not
innocent blood in the midst of Thy people Israel," i.e., lay not upon us
the innocent blood that has been shed by imputation and punishment. "And
the blood shall be forgiven them," i.e., the bloodshed or murder shall
not be imputed to them. On נכּפּר, a mixed form from the Niphal and
Hithpael, see Ges. 55, and Ewald, 132, c.

[Deu 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#009)

In this way Israel was to wipe away the innocent blood (the bloodshed)
from its midst (cf. [Num 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033)). If
the murderer were discovered afterwards, of course the punishment of
death which had been inflicted vicariously upon the animal, simply
because the criminal himself could not be found, would still fall upon
him.

[Deuteronomy 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 21:10</span></span>

Treatment of a Wife who had been a Prisoner of War. - If an Israelite
saw among the captives, who had been brought away in a war against
foreign nations, a woman of beautiful figure, and loved her, and took
her as his wife, he was to allow her a month's time in his house, to
bewail her separation from her home and kindred, and accustom herself to
her new condition of life, before he married her. What is said here does
not apply to the wars with the Canaanites, who were to be cut off (vid.,
[Deu 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003)), but, as a comparison of the
introductory words in [Deu 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001) with
[Deu 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001) clearly shows, to the wars
which Israel would carry on with surrounding nations after the conquest
of Canaan. שׁבי and שׁביה, the captivity, for the captives.

[Deuteronomy 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 21:12</span></span>

When the woman was taken home to the house of the man who had loved her,
she was to shave her head, and make, i.e., cut, her nails (cf. [Sa2
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#025)), - both customary signs of
purification (on this signification of the cutting of the hair, see [Lev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008) and [Num
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007)), - as symbols of her passing out
of the state of a slave, and of her reception into the fellowship of the
covenant nation. This is perfectly obvious in her laying aside her
prisoner's clothes. After putting off the signs of captivity, she was to
sit (dwell) in the house, and bewail her father and mother for a month,
i.e., console herself for her separation from her parents, whom she had
lost, that she might be able to forget her people and her father's house
([Psa 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011)), and give herself up
henceforth in love to her husband with an undivided heart. The intention
of these laws was not to protect the woman against any outbreak of rude
passion on the part of the man, but rather to give her time and leisure
to loosen herself inwardly from the natural fellowship of her nation and
kindred, and to acquire affection towards the fellowship of the people
of God, into which she had entered against her will, that her heart
might cherish love to the God of Israel, who had given her favour in the
eyes of her master, and had taken from her the misery and reproach of
slavery. But her master becoming her husband, she entered into the
rights of a daughter of Israel, who had been sold by her father to a man
to be his wife ([Exo 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007).). If after
this her husband should find no pleasure in her, he was to let her go
לנפשׁהּ, i.e., at her free will, and not sell her for money (cf. [Exo
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)). "Thou shalt not put constraint
upon her, because thou hast humbled her." התעמּר, which only occurs
again in [Deu 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#007), probably signifies
to throw oneself upon a person, to practise violence towards him (cf.
Ges. thes. p. 1046).

[Deuteronomy 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 21:15</span></span>

The Right of the first-born. - Whilst the previous law was intended to
protect the slave taken in war against the caprice of her Israelitish
master, the law which follows is directed against the abuse of paternal
authority in favour of a favourite wife. If a man had two wives, of whom
one was beloved and the other hated, - as was the case, for example,
with Jacob, - and had sons by both his wives, but the first-born by the
wife he hated, he was not, when dividing his property as their
inheritance, to make the son of the wife he loved the first-born, i.e.,
was not to give him the inheritance of the first-born, but was to treat
the son of the hated wife, who was really the first-born son, as such,
and to give him a double share of all his possession. בּכּר, to make or
institute as first-born. וגו בּן על־פּני, over (by) the face of, i.e.,
opposite to the first-born son of the hated, when he was present; in
other words, "during his lifetime" (cf. [Gen
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#028)). יכּיר, to regard as that which
he is, the rightful first-born. The inheritance of the first-born
consisted in "a mouth of two" (i.e., a mouthful, portion, share of two)
of all that was by him, all that he possessed. Consequently the
first-born inherited twice as much as nay of the other sons. "Beginning
of his strength" (as in [Gen 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)).
This right of primogeniture did not originate with Moses, but was simply
secured by him against arbitrary invasion. It was founded, no doubt,
upon hereditary tradition; just as we find in many other nations, that
certain privileges are secured to the first-born sons above those born
afterwards.

[Deuteronomy 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 21:18</span></span>

Punishment of a Refractory Son. - The laws upon this point aim not only
at the defence, but also at the limitation, of parental authority. If
any one's son was unmanageable and refractory, not hearkening to the
voice of his parents, even when they chastised him, his father and
mother were to take him and lead him out to the elders of the town into
the gate of the place. The elders are not regarded here as judges in the
strict sense of the word, but as magistrates, who had to uphold the
parental authority, and administer the local police. The gate of the
town was the forum, where the public affairs of the place were discussed
(cf. [Deu 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#015); [Deu
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#007)); as it is in the present day in
Syria (Seetzen, R. ii. p. 88), and among the Moors (Hst, Nachrichten v.
Marokkos, p. 239).

[Deuteronomy 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 21:20</span></span>

Here they were to accuse the son as being unmanageable, refractory,
disobedient, as "a glutton and a drunkard." These last accusations show
the reason for the unmanageableness and refractoriness.

[Deuteronomy 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 21:21</span></span>

In consequence of this accusation, all the men of the town were to stone
him, so that he died. By this the right was taken away from the parents
of putting an incorrigible son to death (cf. [Pro
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#018)), whilst at the same time the
parental authority was fully preserved. Nothing is said about any
evidence of the charge brought by the parents, or about any judicial
inquiry generally. "In such a case the charge was a proof in itself. For
if the heart of a father and mother could be brought to such a point as
to give up their child to the judge before the community of the nation,
everything would have been done that a judge would need to know"
(Schnell, d. isr. Recht, p. 11). - On [Deu
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#021), cf. [Deu
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006) and [Deu
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012).

[Deuteronomy 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 21:22</span></span>

Burial of those who had been Hanged. - If there was a sin upon a man,
מות משׁפּט, lit., a right of death, i.e., a capital crime (cf. [Deu
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#006) and [Deu
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#026)), and he was put to death, and
they hanged him upon a tree (wood), his body was not to remain upon the
wood over night, but they were to bury him on the same day upon which he
as hanged; "for the hanged man is a curse of God," and they were not to
defile the land which Jehovah gave for an inheritance. The hanging, not
of criminals who were to be put to death, but of those who had been
executed with the sword, was an intensification of the punishment of
death (see at [Num 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#004)), inasmuch as
the body was thereby exposed to peculiar kinds of abominations. Moses
commanded the burial of those who had been hanged upon the day of their
execution, - that is to say, as we may see from the application of this
law in [Jos 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#029); [Jos
10:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#026), before sunset, - because the
hanged man, being a curse of God, defiled the land. The land was defiled
not only by vices and crimes (cf. [Lev
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#024), [Lev
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#028); [Num
35:34](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#034)), but also by the exposure to
view of criminals who had been punished with death, and thus had been
smitten by the curse of God, inasmuch as their shameful deeds were
thereby publicly exposed to view. We are not to think of any bodily
defilement of the land through the decomposition consequent upon death,
as J. D. Mich. and Sommer suppose; so that there is no ground for
speaking of any discrepancy between this and the old law. - (On the
application of this law to Christ, see [Gal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013).), - This regulation is appended
very loosely to what precedes. The link of connection is contained in
the thought, that with the punishment of the wicked the recollection of
their crimes was also to be removed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 22](deu022)

</div>
