<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu023)  [Next](deu025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 24:1</span></span>

[Deu 24:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001) contain two laws
concerning the relation of a man to his wife. The first ([Deu
24:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)) has reference to divorce. In
these verses, however, divorce is not established as a right; all that
is done is, that in case of a divorce a reunion with the divorced wife
is forbidden, if in the meantime she had married another man, even
though the second husband had also put her away, or had died. The four
verses form a period, in which [Deu
24:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001) are the clauses of the
protasis, which describe the matter treated about; and [Deu
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#004) contains the apodosis, with the
law concerning the point in question. If a man married a wife, and he
put her away with a letter of divorce, because she did not please him
any longer, and the divorced woman married another man, and he either
put her away in the same manner or died, the first husband could not
take her as his wife again. The putting away (divorce) of a wife with a
letter of divorce, which the husband gave to the wife whom he put away,
is assumed as a custom founded upon tradition. This tradition left the
question of divorce entirely at the will of the husband: "if the wife
does not find favour in his eyes (i.e., does not please him), because he
has found in her something shameful" ([Deu
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#015)). ערוה, nakedness, shame,
disgrace ([Isa 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#004); [Sa1
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#030)); in connection with דּבר, the
shame of a thing, i.e., a shameful thing (lxx ἄσχημον πρᾶγμα; Vulg.
aliquam faetiditatem). The meaning of this expression as a ground of
divorce was disputed even among the Rabbins. Hillel's school interpret
it in the widest and most lax manner possible, according to the
explanation of the Pharisees in [Mat
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003), "for every cause." They no doubt
followed the rendering of Onkelos, פתגם עבירת, the transgression of a
thing; but this is contrary to the use of the word ערוה, to which the
interpretation given by Shammai adhered more strictly. His explanation
of דּבר ערות is "rem impudicam, libidinem, lasciviam, impudicitiam."
Adultery, to which some of the Rabbins would restrict the expression, is
certainly not to be thought of, because this was to be punished with
death.

(Note: For the different views of the Rabbins upon this subject, see
Mishnah tract. Gittin ix. 10; Buxtorf, de sponsal. et divort. pp. 88ff.;
Selden, uxor ebr. l. iii. c. 18 and 20; and Lightfoot, horae ebr. et
talm. ad Matth. v. 31f.)

כּריתת ספר, βιβλίον ἀποστασίου, a letter of divorce; כּריתת, hewing off,
cutting off, sc., from the man, with whom the wife was to be one flesh
([Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)). The custom of giving
letters of divorce was probably adopted by the Israelites in Egypt,
where the practice of writing had already found its way into all the
relations of life.

(Note: The rabbinical rules on the grounds of divorce and the letter of
divorce, according to Maimonides, have been collected by Surenhusius, ad
Mishn. tr. Gittin, c. 1 (T. iii. pp. 322f. of the Mishnah of Sur.),
where different specimens of letters of divorce are given; the latter
also in Lightfoot, l.c.)

The law that the first husband could not take his divorced wife back
again, if she had married another husband in the meantime, even
supposing that the second husband was dead, would necessarily put a
check upon frivolous divorces. Moses could not entirely abolish the
traditional custom, if only "because of the hardness of the people's
hearts" ([Mat 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008)). The thought,
therefore, of the impossibility of reunion with the first husband, after
the wife had contracted a second marriage, would put some restraint upon
a frivolous rupture of the marriage tie: it would have this effect, that
whilst, on the one hand, the man would reflect when inducements to
divorce his wife presented themselves, and would recall a rash act if it
had been performed, before the wife he had put away had married another
husband; on the other hand, the wife would yield more readily to the
will of her husband, and seek to avoid furnishing him with an inducement
for divorce. But this effect would be still more readily produced by the
reason assigned by Moses, namely, that the divorced woman was defiled
(הטּמּאה, Hothpael, as in [Num 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#047))
by her marriage with a second husband. The second marriage of a woman
who had been divorced is designated by Moses a defilement of the woman,
primarily no doubt with reference to the fact that the emissio seminis
in sexual intercourse rendered unclean, though not merely in the sense
of such a defilement as was removed in the evening by simple washing,
but as a moral defilement, i.e., blemishing, desecration of the sexual
communion with was sanctified by marriage, in the same sense in which
adultery is called a defilement in [Lev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#020) and [Num
5:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#013). Thus the second marriage of a
divorced woman was placed implicite upon a par with adultery, and some
approach made towards the teaching of Christ concerning marriage:
"Whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, committeth adultery" ([Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032)). - But if the second marriage of
a divorced woman was a moral defilement, of course the wife could not
marry the first again even after the death of her second husband, not
only because such a reunion would lower the dignity of the woman, and
the woman would appear too much like property, which could be disposed
of at one time and reclaimed at another (Schultz), but because the
defilement of the wife would be thereby repeated, and even increased, as
the moral defilement which the divorced wife acquired through the second
marriage was not removed by a divorce from the second husband, nor yet
by his death. Such defilement was an abomination before Jehovah, by
which they would cause the land to sin, i.e., stain it with sin, as much
as by the sins of incest and unnatural licentiousness ([Lev
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#025)).

Attached to this law, which is intended to prevent a frivolous severance
of the marriage tie, there is another in [Deu
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005), which was of a more positive
character, and adapted to fortify the marriage bond. The newly married
man was not required to perform military service for a whole year; "and
there shall not come (anything) upon him with regard to any matter." The
meaning of this last clause is to be found in what follows: "Free shall
he be for his house for a year," i.e., they shall put no public burdens
upon him, that he may devote himself entirely to his newly established
domestic relations, and be able to gladden his wife (compare [Deu
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#007)).

[Deuteronomy 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 24:6</span></span>

Various Prohibitions. - [Deu 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006). "No
man shall take in pledge the handmill and millstone, for he (who does
this) is pawning life." רחים, the handmill; רכב, lit., the runner, i.e.,
the upper millstone. Neither the whole mill nor the upper millstone was
to be asked for as a pledge, by which the mill would be rendered
useless, since the handmill was indispensable for preparing the daily
food for the house; so that whoever took them away injured life itself,
by withdrawing what was indispensable to the preservation of life. The
mill is mentioned as one specimen of articles of this kind, like the
clothing in [Exo 22:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025), which
served the poor man as bed-clothes also. Breaches of this commandment
are reproved in [Amo 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#008); [Job
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#006); [Pro
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#016); [Pro
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#027); [Pro
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#013).

[Deu 24:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#007)

Repetition of the law against man-stealing ([Exo
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#016)). - [Deu
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#008), [Deu
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#009). The command, "Take heed by the
plague of leprosy to observe diligently and to do according to all that
the priests teach thee," etc., does not mean, that when they saw signs
of leprosy they were to be upon their guard, to observe everything that
the priests directed them, as Knobel and many others suppose. For, in
the first place, the reference to the punishment of Miriam with leprosy
is by no means appropriate to such a thought as this, since Miriam did
not act in opposition to the priests after she had been smitten with
leprosy, but brought leprosy upon herself as a punishment, by her
rebellion against Moses ([Num 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#010).).
And in the second place, this view cannot be reconciled with בּנגע
השּׁמר, since השּׁמר with בּ, either to be upon one's guard against
(before) anything ([Sa2 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010)), or
when taken in connection with בּנפשׁ, to beware by the soul, i.e., for
the sake of the worth of the soul ([Jer
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021)). The thought here, therefore,
is, "Be on thy guard because of the plague of leprosy," i.e., that thou
dost not get it, have to bear it, as the reward for thy rebellion
against what the priests teach according to the commandment of the Lord.
"Watch diligently, that thou do not incur the plague of leprosy"
(Vulgate); or, "that thou do not sin, so as to be punished with leprosy"
(J. H. Michaelis).

[Deuteronomy 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 24:10</span></span>

Warning against oppressing the Poor. - [Deu
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010), [Deu
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#011). If a loan of any kind was lent
to a neighbour, the lender was not to go into his house to pledge (take)
a pledge, but was to let the borrower bring the pledge out. The meaning
is, that they were to leave it to the borrower to give a pledge, and not
compel him to give up something as a pledge that might be indispensable
to him.

[Deuteronomy 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 24:12</span></span>

And if the man was in distress (עני), the lender was not to lie (sleep)
upon his pledge, since the poor man had very often nothing but his upper
garment, in which he slept, to give as a pledge. This was to be returned
to him in the evening. (A repetition of [Exo
22:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025).) On the expression, "It
shall be righteousness unto thee," see [Deu
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025).

[Deuteronomy 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 24:14</span></span>

They were not to oppress a poor and distressed labourer, by withholding
his wages. This command is repeated here from [Lev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013), with special reference to the
distress of the poor man. "And to it (his wages) he lifts up his soul:"
i.e., he feels a longing for it. "Lifts up his soul:" as in [Psa
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004); [Hos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#008); [Jer
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#027). On [Deu
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015), see [Deu
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#009) and [Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 24:16</span></span>

Warning against Injustice. - [Deu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016). Fathers were not to be put to
death upon (along with) their sons, nor sons upon (along with) their
fathers, i.e., they were not to suffer the punishment of death with them
for crimes in which they had no share; but every one was to be punished
simply for his own sin. This command was important, to prevent an
unwarrantable and abusive application of the law which is manifest in
the movements of divine justice to the criminal jurisprudence of the
lane ([Exo 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)), since it was a
common thing among the heathen nations - e.g., the Persians,
Macedonians, and others - for the children and families of criminals to
be also put to death (cf. [Est
9:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#013); Herod. iii. 19; Ammian
Marcell. xxiii. 6; Curtius, vi. 11, 20, etc.). An example of the
carrying out of this law is to be found in [Kg2
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#006); [Ch2
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#004). In [Deu
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#017), [Deu
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#018), the law against perverting the
right of strangers, orphans, and widows, is repeated from [Exo
22:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020), and [Exo
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#009); and an addition is made, namely,
that they were not to take a widow's raiment in pledge (cf. [Lev
19:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#033)).

[Deuteronomy 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 24:19</span></span>

Directions to allow strangers, widows, and orphans to glean in time of
harvest (as in [Lev 19:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#009), and [Lev
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#022)). The reason is given in [Deu
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#022), viz., the same as in [Deu
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#018) and [Deu
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#015).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 25](deu025)

</div>
