<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu019)  [Next](deu021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 20:0</span></span>

Instructions for Future Wars - Deuteronomy 20

The instructions in this chapter have reference to the wars which Israel
might wage in future against non-Canaanitish nations ([Deu
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#015).), and enjoin it as a duty upon
the people of God to spare as much as possible the lives of their own
soldiers and also of their enemies. All wars against their enemies, even
though they were superior to them in resources, were to be entered upon
by them without fear in reliance upon the might of their God; and they
were therefore to exempt from military service not only those who had
just entered into new social relations, and had not enjoyed the
pleasures of them, but also the timid and fainthearted ([Deu
20:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)). Moreover, whenever they
besieged hostile towns, they were to offer peace to their enemies,
excepting only the Canaanites; and even if it were not accepted, they
were to let the defenceless (viz., women and children) live, and not to
destroy the fruit-trees before the fortifications ([Deu
20:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)).

[Deuteronomy 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 20:1</span></span>

Instructions Relating to Military Service. - If the Israelites went out
to battle against their foes, and saw horses and chariots, a people more
numerous than they were, they were not to be afraid, because Jehovah
their God was with them. Horses and chariots constituted the principal
strength of the enemies round about Israel; not of the Egyptians only
([Exo 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007)), and of the Canaanites and
Philistines ([Jos 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016); [Jdg
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003); [Sa1
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005)), but of the Syrians also ([Sa2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004); [Ch1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#004); [Ch1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#018); cf. [Psa
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008)).

[Deu 20:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#002)

If they were thus drawing near to war, i.e., arranging themselves for
war for the purpose of being mustered and marching in order into the
battle (not just as the battle was commencing), the priest was to
address the warriors, and infuse courage into them by pointing to the
help of the Lord. "The priest" is not the high priest, but the priest
who accompanied the army, like Phinehas in the war against the
Midianites ([Num 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#006); cf. [Sa1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#004), [Sa1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#011); [Ch2
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#012)), whom the Rabbins call המלחמה
משׁיח (the anointed of the battle), and raise to the highest dignity
next to the high priest, no doubt simply upon the ground of [Num
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#006) (see Lundius, jd. Heiligth. p.
523).

[Deu 20:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#005)

Moreover, the shoterim, whose duty it was, as the keepers of the
genealogical tables, to appoint the men who were bound to serve, were to
release such of the men who had been summoned to the war as had entered
into domestic relations, which would make it a harder thing for them to
be exposed to death than for any of the others: for example, any man who
had built a new house and had not yet consecrated it, or had planted a
vineyard and not yet eaten any of the fruit of it, or was betrothed to a
wife and had not yet married her, - that such persons might not die
before they had enjoyed the fruits of what they had done. "Who is the
man, who," i.e., whoever, every man who. "Consecrated the house," viz.,
by taking possession and dwelling in it; entrance into the house was
probably connected with a hospitable entertainment. According to
Josephus (Ant. iv. 8, 41), the enjoyment of them was to last a year
(according to the analogy of [Deu
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005)). The Rabbins elaborated special
ceremonies, among which Jonathan in his Targum describes the fastening
of slips with sentences out of the law written upon them to the
door-posts, as being the most important (see at [Deu
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#009) : for further details, see Selden,
de Synedriis l. iii. c. 14, 15). Cerem is hardly to be restricted to
vineyards, but applied to olive-plantations as well (see at [Lev
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010)). חלּל, to make common, is to be
explained from the fact, that when fruit-trees were planted ([Lev
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023).), or vines set ([Jdg
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#024)), the fruit was not to be eaten
for the first three years, and that of the fourth year was to be
consecrated to the Lord; and it was only the fruit that was gathered in
the fifth year which could be applied by the owner to his own use, - in
other words, could be made common. The command to send away from the
army to his own home a man who was betrothed but had not yet taken his
wife, is extended still further in [Deu
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#005), where it is stated that a newly
married man was to be exempt for a whole year from military service and
other public burdens. The intention of these instructions was neither to
send away all persons who were unwilling to go into the war, and thus
avoid the danger of their interfering with the readiness and courage of
the rest of the army in prospect of the battle, nor to spare the lives
of those persons to whom life was especially dear; but rather to avoid
depriving any member of the covenant nation of his enjoyment of the good
things of this life bestowed upon him by the Lord.

[Deu 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#008)

The first intention only existed in the case of the timid (the
soft-hearted or despondent). ימּס ולא, that the heart of thy brethren
"may not flow away," i.e., may not become despondent (as in [Gen
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015), etc.).

[Deu 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#009)

When this was finished, the shoterim were to appoint captains at the
head of the people (of war). פּקד, to inspect, to muster, then to give
the oversight, to set a person over anything ([Num
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#010); [Num
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#027)). The meaning "to lead the
command" (Schultz) cannot be sustained; and if "captains of the armies"
were the subject, and reference were made to the commanders in the war,
the article would not be omitted. If the shoterim had to raise men for
the war and organize the army, the division of the men into hosts
(Zebaoth) and the appointment of the leaders would also form part of the
duties of their office.

[Deuteronomy 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 20:10</span></span>

Instructions Concerning Sieges. - [Deu
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010), [Deu
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#011). On advancing against a town to
attack it, they were "to call to it for peace," i.e., to summon it to
make a peaceable surrender and submission (cf. [Jdg
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#013)). "If it answered peace," i.e.,
returned an answer conducing to peace, and "opened" (sc., its gates),
the whole of its inhabitants were to become tributary to Israel, and
serve it; consequently even those who were armed were not to be put to
death, for Israel was not to shed blood unnecessarily. מס does not mean
feudal service, but a feudal slave (see at [Exo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#011)).

[Deuteronomy 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 20:12</span></span>

If the hostile town, however, did not make peace, but prepared for war,
the Israelites were to besiege it; and if Jehovah gave it into their
hands, they were to slay all the men in it without reserve ("with the
edge of the sword," see at [Gen
34:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#026)); but the women and children and
all that was in the city, all its spoil, they were to take as prey for
themselves, and to consume (eat) the spoil, i.e., to make use of it for
their own maintenance.

[Deuteronomy 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 20:15</span></span>

It was in this way that Israel was to act with towns that were far off;
but not with the towns of the Canaanites ("these nations"), which
Jehovah gave them for an inheritance. In these no soul was to be left
alive; but these nations were to be laid under the ban, i.e., altogether
exterminated, that they might not teach the Israelites their
abominations and sins (cf. [Deu 7:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001);
[Deu 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#031)). כּל־נשׁמה, lit., every
breath, i.e., everything living, by which, however, human beings alone
are to be understood (comp. [Jos
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040); [Jos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#011), with [Deu
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014)).

[Deuteronomy 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 20:19</span></span>

When they besieged a town a long time to conquer it, they were not to
destroy its trees, to swing the axe upon them. That we are to understand
by עצהּ the fruit-trees in the environs and gardens of the town, is
evident from the motive appended: "for of them (ממּנּוּ refers to עץ as
a collective) thou eatest, and thou shalt not hew them down." The
meaning is: thou mayest suppress and destroy the men, but not the trees
which supply thee with food. "For is the tree of the field a man, that
it should come into siege before thee?" This is evidently the only
suitable interpretation of the difficult words השּׂדה עץ האדם כּי, and
the one which has been expressed by all the older commentators, though
in different ways. But it is one which can only be sustained
grammatically by adopting the view propounded by Clericus and others:
viz., by pointing the noun האדם with ה interrog., instead of האדם, and
taking אדם as the object, which its position in the sentence fully
warrants (cf. Ewald, 324, b. and 306, b.). The Masoretic punctuation is
founded upon the explanation given by Aben Ezra, "Man is a tree of the
field, i.e., lives upon and is fed by the fruits of the trees," which
Schultz expresses in this way, "Man is bound up with the tree of the
field, i.e., has his life in, or from, the tree of the field," - an
explanation, however, which cannot be defended by appealing to [Deu
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006); [Ecc
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013); [Eze
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#010), as these three passages are of
a different kind. In no way whatever can האדם be taken as the subject of
the sentence, as this would not give any rational meaning. And if it
were rendered as the object, in such sense as this, The tree of the
field is a thing or affair of man, it would hardly have the article.

[Deu 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020)

"Only the trees which thou knowest that they are not trees of eating
(i.e., do not bear edible fruits), mayest thou hew down, and build a
rampart against the town till it come down," i.e., fall down from its
eminence. For ירד as applied to the falling or sinking of lofty
fortifications, see [Deu 28:52](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#052); [Isa
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#019). מצור, compressing or forcing
down; hence, as applied to towns, במּצור בּוא, to come into siege, i.e.,
to be besieged ([Deu 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019); [Kg2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010); [Kg2
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#002)). In [Deu
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#020) it is used to denote the object,
viz., the means of hemming in a town, i.e., the besieging rampart (cf.
[Eze 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 21](deu021)

</div>
