<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu018)  [Next](deu020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 19:0</span></span>

Laws Concerning the Cities of Refuge, the Sacredness of Landmarks,and
the Punishment of False Witnesses - Deuteronomy 19

After laying down the most important features in the national
constitution, Moses glances at the manifold circumstances of civil and
family life, and notices in this and the two following chapters the
different ways in which the lives of individuals might be endangered,
for the purpose of awakening in the minds of the people a holy reverence
for human life.

[Deuteronomy 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 19:1</span></span>

The laws concerning the Cities of Refuge for Unintentional Manslayers
are not a mere repetition of the laws given in Num 35:9-34, but rather
an admonition to carry out those laws, with special reference to the
future extension of the boundaries of the land.

[Deu 19:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#001)

As Moses had already set apart the cities of refuge for the land on the
east of the Jordan ([Deu 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041).), he is
speaking here simply of the land on the west, which Israel was to take
possession of before long; and supplements the instructions in [Num
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#014), with directions to maintain the
roads to the cities of refuge which were to be set apart in Canaan
itself, and to divide the land into three parts, viz., for the purpose
of setting apart these cities, so that one city might be chosen for the
purpose in every third of the land. For further remarks on this point,
as well as with regard to the use of these cities ([Deu
19:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#004)), see at [Num
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011). - In [Deu
19:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#008) there follow the fresh
instructions, that if the Lord should extend the borders of Israel,
according to His promise given to the patriarchs, and should give them
the whole land from the Nile to the Euphrates, according to [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018), they were to add three other
cities of refuge to these three, for the purpose of preventing the
shedding of innocent blood. The three new cities of refuge cannot be the
three appointed in [Num 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#014) for the
land on this side of the Jordan, nor the three mentioned in [Num
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#007) on the other side of Jordan, as
Knobel and others suppose. Nor can we adopt Hengstenberg's view, that
the three new ones are the same as the three mentioned in [Deu
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#002) and [Deu
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#007), since they are expressly
distinguished from "these three." The meaning is altogether a different
one. The circumstances supposed by Moses never existed, since the
Israelites did not fulfil the conditions laid down in [Deu
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#009), viz., that they should keep the
law faithfully, and love the Lord their God (cf. [Deu
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006); [Deu
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005), etc.). The extension of the power
of Israel to the Euphrates under David and Solomon, did not bring the
land as far as this river into their actual possession, since the
conquered kingdoms of Aram were still inhabited by the Aramaeans, who,
though conquered, were only rendered tributary. And the Tyrians and
Phoenicians, who belonged to the Canaanitish population, were not even
attacked by David.

[Deu 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#010)

Innocent blood would be shed if the unintentional manslayer was not
protected against the avenger of blood, by the erection of cities of
refuge in every part of the land. If Israel neglected this duty, it
would bring blood-guiltiness upon itself ("and so blood be upon thee"),
because it had not done what was requisite to prevent the shedding of
innocent blood.

[Deu 19:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#011)

But whatever care was to be taken by means of free cities to prevent the
shedding of blood, the cities of refuge were not to be asyla for
criminals who were deserving of death, nor to afford protection to those
who had slain a neighbour out of hatred. If such murderers should flee
to the free city, the elders (magistrates) of his own town were to fetch
him out, and deliver him up to the avenger of blood, that he might die.
The law laid down in [Num 35:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016) is
here still more minutely defined; but this does not transfer to the
elders the duty of instituting a judicial inquiry, and deciding the
matter, as Riehm follows Vater and De Wette in maintaining, for the
purpose of proving that there is a discrepancy between Deuteronomy and
the previous legislation. They are simply commanded to perform the duty
devolving upon them as magistrates and administrators of local affairs.
(On [Deu 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#013), see [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008) and [Deu
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#005).)

[Deuteronomy 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 19:14</span></span>

The prohibition against Removing a Neighbour's Landmark, which his
ancestors had placed, is inserted here, not because landmarks were of
special importance in relation to the free cities, and the removal of
them might possibly be fatal to the unintentional manslayer (as Clericus
and Rosenmller assume), for the general terms of the prohibition are at
variance with this, viz., "thy neighbour's landmark," and "in thine
inheritance which thou shalt inherit in the land;" but on account of the
close connection in which a man's possession as the means of his support
stood to the life of the man himself, "because property by which life is
supported participates in the sacredness of life itself, just as in [Deu
20:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019), sparing the fruit-trees is
mentioned in connection with the men who were to be spared" (Schultz). A
curse was to be pronounced upon the remover of landmarks, according to
[Deu 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017), just as upon one who
cursed his father, who led a blind man astray, or perverted the rights
of orphans and widows (cf. [Hos 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#010);
[Pro 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#028); [Pro
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#010)). Landmarks were regarded as
sacred among other nations also; by the Romans, for example, they were
held to be so sacred, that whoever removed them was to be put to death.

[Deuteronomy 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 19:15</span></span>

The Punishment of a False Witness. - To secure life and property against
false accusations, Moses lays down the law in [Deu
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015), that one witness only was not
"to rise up against any one with reference to any crime or sin, with
every sin that one commits" (i.e., to appear before a court of justice,
or be accepted as sufficient), but everything was to be established upon
the testimony of two or three witnesses. The rule laid down in [Deu
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006) and [Num
35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030) for capital crimes, is raised
hereby into a law of general application (see at [Num
35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030)). קוּם (in [Deu
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015)), to stand, i.e., to acquire
legal force. - But as it was not always possible to bring forward two or
three witnesses, and the statement of one witness could not well be
disregarded, in [Deu 19:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#016) Moses
refers accusations of this kind to the higher tribunal at the sanctuary
for investigation and decision, and appoints the same punishment for a
false witness, which would have fallen upon the person accused, if he
had been convicted of the crime with which he was charged. סרה בּו
לענות, "to testify against his departure," sc., from the law of God, not
merely falling away into idolatry ([Deu
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#006)), but any kind of crime, as we
may gather from [Deu 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#019), which
would be visited with capital punishment.

[Deuteronomy 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 19:17</span></span>

The two men between whom the dispute lay, the accused and the witness,
were to come before Jehovah, viz., before the priests and judges who
should be in those days - namely, at the place of the sanctuary, where
Jehovah dwelt among His people (cf. [Deu
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#009)), and not before the local
courts, as Knobel supposes. These judges were to investigate the case
most thoroughly (cf. [Deu 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#015)); and
if the witness had spoken lies, they were to do to him as he thought to
do to his brother. The words from "behold" to "his brother" are
parenthetical circumstantial clauses: "And, behold, is the witness a
false witness, has he spoken a lie against his brother? Ye shall do,"
etc. זמם, generally to meditate evil. On [Deu
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#020), see [Deu
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012).

[Deuteronomy 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 19:21</span></span>

The lex talionis was to be applied without reserve (see at [Exo
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#023); [Lev
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#020)). According to Diod. Sic. (i.
77), the same law existed in Egypt with reference to false accusers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 20](deu020)

</div>
