<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu031)  [Next](deu033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 32:1</span></span>

The Song of Moses. - In accordance with the object announced in [Deu
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019), this song contrasts the
unchangeable fidelity of the Lord with the perversity of His faithless
people. After a solemn introduction pointing out the importance of the
instruction about to be given ([Deu
32:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)), this thought is placed in the
foreground as the theme of the whole: the Lord is blameless and
righteous in His doings, but Israel acts corruptly and perversely; and
this is carried out in the first place by showing the folly of the
Israelites in rebelling against the Lord ([Deu
32:6-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)); secondly, by unfolding the
purpose of God to reject and punish the rebellious generation ([Deu
32:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019)); and lastly, by announcing
and depicting the fulfilment of this purpose, and the judgment in which
the Lord would have mercy upon His servants and annihilate His foes
([Deu 32:34-43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034)).

The song embraces the whole of the future history of Israel, and bears
all the marks of a prophetic testimony from the mouth of Moses, in the
perfectly ideal picture which it draws, on the one hand, of the benefits
and blessings conferred by the Lord upon His people; and on the other
hand, of the ingratitude with which Israel repaid its God for them all.
"This song, soaring as it does to the loftiest heights, moving amidst
the richest abundance of pictures of both present and future, with its
concise, compressed, and pictorial style, rough, penetrating, and sharp,
but full of the holiest solemnity, a witness against the disobedient
nation, a celebration of the covenant God, sets before us in miniature a
picture of the whole life and conduct of the great man of God, whose
office it pre-eminently was to preach condemnation" (O. v. Gerlach). -
It is true that the persons addressed in this ode are not the
contemporaries of Moses, but the Israelites in Canaan, when they had
grown haughty in the midst of the rich abundance of its blessings, and
had fallen away from the Lord, so that the times when God led the people
through the wilderness to Canaan are represented as days long past away.
But this, the stand-point of the ode, is not to be identified with the
poet's own time. It is rather a prophetic anticipation of the future,
which has an analogon in a poet's absorption in an ideal future, and
differs from this merely in the certainty and distinctness with which
the future is foreseen and proclaimed. The assertion that the entire ode
moves within the epoch of the kings who lived many centuries after the
time of Moses, rests upon a total misapprehension of the nature of
prophecy, and a mistaken attempt to turn figurative language into
prosaic history. In the whole of the song there is not a single word to
indicate that the persons addressed were "already sighing under the
oppression of a wild and hostile people, the barbarous hordes of
Assyrians or Chaldeans" (Ewald, Kamphausen, etc.).

(Note: How little firm ground there is for this assertion in the
contents of the ode, is indirectly admitted even by Kamphausen himself
in the following remarks: "The words of the ode leave us quite in the
dark as to the author;" and "if it were really certain that Deuteronomy
was composed by Moses himself, the question as to the authenticity of
the ode would naturally be decided in the traditional way."
Consequently, the solution of the whole is to be found in the dictum,
that "the circumstances which are assumed in any prophecy as already
existing, and to which the prophetic utterances are appended as to
something well known (?), really determine the time of the prophet
himself;" and, according to this canon, which is held up as "certain and
infallible," but which is really thoroughly uncritical, and founded upon
the purely dogmatic assumption that any actual foreknowledge of the
future is impossible, the ode before us is to be assigned to a date
somewhere about 700 years before Christ.)

The Lord had indeed determined to reject the idolatrous nation, and
excite it to jealousy through those that were "no people," and to heap
up all evils upon it, famine, pestilence, and sword; but the execution
of this purpose had not yet taken place, and, although absolutely
certain, was in the future still. Moreover, the benefits which God had
conferred upon His people, were not of such a character as to render it
impossible that they should have been alluded to by Moses. All that the
Lord had done for Israel, by delivering it from bondage and guiding it
miraculously through the wilderness, had been already witnessed by Moses
himself; and the description in [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013) and [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014), which goes beyond that time, is
in reality nothing more than a pictorial expansion of the thought that
Israel was most bountifully provided with the richest productions of the
land of Canaan, which flowed with milk and honey. It is true, the
satisfaction of Israel with these blessings had not actually taken place
in the time of Moses, but was still only an object of hope; but it was
hope of such a kind, that Moses could not cherish a moment's doubt
concerning it. Throughout the whole we find no allusions to peculiar
circumstances or historical events belonging to a later age. - On the
other hand, the whole circle of ideas, figures, and words in the ode
points decidedly to Moses as the author. Even if we leave out of sight
the number of peculiarities of style (ἅπ. λεγόμενα), which is by no
means inconsiderable, and such bold original composite words as לא־אל
(not-God, [Deu 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021); cf. [Deu
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)) and לא־עם (not-people, [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)), which might point to a very
remote antiquity, and furnish evidence of the vigour of the earliest
poetry, - the figure of the eagle in [Deu
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011) points back to [Exo
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004); the description of God as a rock
in [Deu 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018), [Deu
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030), [Deu
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031), [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037), recalls [Gen
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024); the fire of the wrath of God,
burning even to the world beneath ([Deu
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022)), points to the representation
of God in [Deu 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024) as a consuming
fire; the expression "to move to jealousy," in [Deu
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016) and [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021), recalls the "jealous God" in
[Deu 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024); [Deu
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#015); [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); [Exo
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#014); the description of Israel as
children (sons) in [Deu 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005), and
"children without faithfulness" in [Deu
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020), suggests [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001); and the words, "O that they were
wise," in [Deu 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029), recall [Deu
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006), "a wise people." Again, it is
only in the Pentateuch that the word גּדל (greatness, [Deu
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#003)) is used to denote the greatness
of God (vid., [Deu 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024); [Deu
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021); [Deu
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026); [Deu
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002); [Num
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#019)); the name of honour given to
Israel in [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), viz., Jeshurun,
only occurs again in [Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005) and
[Deu 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026), with the exception of [Isa
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002), where it is borrowed from these
passages; and the plural form ימות, in [Deu
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007), is only met with again in the
prayer of Moses, viz., [Psa 90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015).

[Deu 32:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)

"Introduction and Theme. - in the introduction ([Deu
32:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)), - "Give ear, O ye heavens, I
will speak; and let the earth hear the words of my mouth. Let my
doctrine drop as the rain, let my speech fall as the dew; as showers
upon green, and rain-drops upon herb, for I will publish the name of the
Lord; give ye greatness to our God," - Moses summons heaven and earth to
hearken to his words, because the instruction which he was about to
proclaim concerned both heaven and earth, i.e., the whole universe. It
did so, however, not merely as treating of the honour of its Creator,
which was disregarded by the murmuring people (Kamphausen), or to
justify God, as the witness of the righteousness of His doings, in
opposition to the faithless nation, when He punished it for its apostasy
(just as in [Deu 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026); [Deu
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019); [Deu
31:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#028), heaven and earth are
appealed to as witnesses against rebellious Israel), but also inasmuch
as heaven and earth would be affected by the judgment which God poured
out upon faithless Israel and the nations, to avenge the blood of His
servants ([Deu 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)); since the
faithfulness and righteousness of God would thus become manifest in
heaven and on earth, and the universe be sanctified and glorified
thereby. The vav consec. before אדבּרה expresses the desired or intended
sequel: so that I may then speak, or "so will I then speak" (vid., Khler
on Hagg. p. 44, note).

[Deu 32:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002)

But because what was about to be announced was of such importance
throughout, he desired that the words should trickle down like rain and
dew upon grass and herb. The point of comparison lies in the refreshing,
fertilizing, and enlivening power of the dew and rain. Might the song
exert the same upon the hearts of the hearers. לקח, accepting, then, in
a passive sense, that which is accepted, instruction (doctrine, [Pro
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#021), [Pro
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#023); [Isa
29:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#024)). To "publish the name of the
Lord:" lit., call, i.e., proclaim (not "call upon"), or praise. It was
not by himself alone that Moses desired to praise the name of the Lord;
the hearers of his song were also to join in this praise. The second
clause requires this: "give ye (i.e., ascribe by word and conduct)
greatness to our God." גּדל, applied here to God (as in [Deu
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024); [Deu
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#021); [Deu
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026); [Deu
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#002)), which is only repeated again in
[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002), is the greatness
manifested by God in His acts of omnipotence; it is similar in meaning
to the term "glory" in [Psa 29:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001);
[Psa 96:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007).

[Deu 32:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004)

"The Rock - blameless is His work; for all His ways are right: a God of
faithfulness, and without injustice; just and righteous is He. Corruptly
acts towards Him, not His children; their spot, a perverse and crooked
generation." הצּוּר is placed first absolutely, to give it the greater
prominence. God is called "the rock," as the unchangeable refuge, who
grants a firm defence and secure resort to His people, by virtue of His
unchangeableness or impregnable firmness (see the synonym, "the Stone of
Israel," in [Gen 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024)). This epithet
points to the Mosaic age; and this is clearly shown by the use made of
this title of God (Zur) in the construction of surnames in the Mosaic
era; such, for example, as Pedahzur ([Num
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#010)), which is equivalent to Pedahel
("God-redeemed," [Num 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#028)), Elizur
([Num 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005)), Zuriel ([Num
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#035)), and Zurishaddai ([Num
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#006); [Num
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#012)). David, who had so often
experienced the rock-like protection of his God, adopted it in his
Psalms ([Sa2 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#003), [Sa2
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#032) = [Psa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003), [Psa
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#032); also Ps. 19:15; [Psa
31:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003); [Psa
71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003)). Perfect (i.e., blameless,
without fault or blemish) is His work; for His ways, which He adopts in
His government of the world, are right. As the rock, He is "a God of
faithfulness," upon which men may rely and build in all the storms of
life, and "without iniquity," i.e., anything crooked or false in His
nature.

[Deu 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005)

His people Israel, on the contrary, had acted corruptly towards Him. The
subject of "acted corruptly" is the rebellious generation of the people
but before this subject there is introduced parenthetically, and in
apposition, "not his children, but their spot." Spot (mum) is used here
in a moral sense, as in [Pro 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#007); [Job
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#015); [Job
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#007), equivalent to stain. The
rebellious and ungodly were not children of the Lord, but a stain upon
them. If these words had stood after the actual subject, instead of
before them, they would have presented no difficulty. This verse is the
original of the expression, "children that are corrupters," in [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004).

[Deu 32:6-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)

Expansion of the theme according to the thought expressed in [Deu
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005). The perversity of the rebellious
generation manifested itself in the fact, that it repaid the Lord, to
whom it owed existence and well-being, for all His benefits, with a
foolish apostasy from its Creator and Father. This thought is expressed
in [Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006), in a reproachful
question addressed to the people, and then supported in [Deu
32:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007) by an enumeration of the
benefits conferred by God, and in [Deu
32:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015) by a description of the
ingratitude of the people.

[Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006)

"Will ye thus repay the Lord? thou foolish people and unwise! Is He not
thy Father, who hath founded thee, who hath made thee and prepared
thee?" גּמל, the primary idea of which is doubtful, signifies properly
to show, or do, for the most part good, but sometimes evil (vid., [Psa
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005)). For the purpose of painting the
folly of their apostasy distinctly before the eyes of the people, Moses
crowds words together to describe what God was to the nation - "thy
Father," to whose love Israel was indebted for its elevation into an
independent people: comp. [Isa 63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016),
where Father and Redeemer are synonymous terms, with [Isa
64:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#007), God the Father, Israel the clay
which He had formed, and [Mal 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010),
where God as Father is said to have created Israel; see also the remarks
at [Deu 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001) on the notion of Israel's
sonship. - קונך, He has acquired thee; קנה, κτᾶσθαι, to get, acquire
([Gen 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001)), then so as to involve the
idea of κτίζειν ([Gen 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#009)), though
without being identical with בּרא. It denotes here the founding of
Israel as a nation, by its deliverance out of the power of Pharaoh. The
verbs which follow (made and established) refer to the elevation and
preparation of the redeemed nation, as the nation of the Lord, by the
conclusion of a covenant, the giving of the law, and their guidance
through the desert.

[Deu 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007)

"Remember the days of old, consider the years of the past generations:
ask thy father, that he may make known to thee; thine old men, that they
may tell it to thee!" With these words Moses summons the people to
reflect upon what the Lord had done to them. The days of old (עולם), and
years of generation and generation, i.e., years through which one
generation after another had lived, are the times of the deliverance of
Israel out of Egypt, including the pre-Mosaic times, and also the
immediate post-Mosaic, when Israel had entered into the possession of
Canaan. These times are described by Moses as a far distant past,
because he transported himself in spirit to the "latter days" ([Deu
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029)), when the nation would have
fallen away from its God, and would have been forsaken and punished by
God in consequence. "Days of eternity" are times which lie an eternity
behind the speaker, not necessarily, however, before all time, but
simply at a period very far removed from the present, and of which even
the fathers and old men could only relate what had been handed down by
tradition to them.

[Deu 32:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)

"When the Most High portioned out inheritance to the nations, when He
divided the children of men; He fixed the boundaries of the nations
according to the number of the sons of Israel: for the Lord's portion is
His people; Jacob the cord of His inheritance." Moses commences his
enumeration of the manifestations of divine mercy with the thought, that
from the very commencement of the forming of nations God had cared for
His people Israel. The meaning of [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008) is given in general correctly by
Calvin: "In the whole arrangement of the world God had kept this before
Him as the end: to consult the interests of His chosen people." The
words, "when the Most High portioned out inheritance to the nations,"
etc., are not to be restricted to the one fact of the confusion of
tongues and division of the nations as described in Gen 11, but embrace
the whole period of the development of the one human family in separate
tribes and nations, together with their settlement in different lands;
for it is no doctrine of the Israelitish legend, as Kamphausen supposes,
that the division of the nations was completed once for all. The book of
Genesis simply teaches, that after the confusion of tongues at the
building of the tower of Babel, God scattered men over the entire
surface of the earth ([Deu 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#009)), and
that the nations were divided, i.e., separate nations were formed from
the families of the sons of Noah ([Gen
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032)); that is to say, the nations
were formed in the divinely-appointed way of generation and
multiplication, and so spread over the earth. And the Scriptures say
nothing about a division of the countries among the different nations at
one particular time; they simply show, that, like the formation of the
nations from families and tribes, the possession of the lands by the
nations so formed was to be traced to God, - was the work of divine
providence and government, - whereby God so determined the boundaries of
the nations ("the nations" are neither the tribes of Israel, nor simply
the nations round about Canaan, but the nations generally), that Israel
might receive as its inheritance a land proportioned to its numbers.

(Note: The Septuagint rendering, "according to the number of the angels
of God," is of no critical value, - in fact, is nothing more than an
arbitrary interpretation founded upon the later Jewish notion of
guardian angels of the different nations (Sir. 17:14), which probably
originated in a misunderstanding of [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019), as compared with [Dan
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#013), [Dan
10:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#020), and [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001).)

[Deu 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)

God did this, because He had chosen Israel as His own nation, even
before it came into existence. As the Lord's people of possession (cf.
[Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006); [Deu
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#015), and [Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005)), Israel was Jehovah's portion,
and the inheritance assigned to Him. חבל, a cord, or measure, then a
piece of land measured off; here it is figuratively applied to the
nation.

[Deu 32:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010)

He had manifested His fatherly care and love to Israel as His own
property.

[Deu 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010)

"He found him in the land of the desert, and in the wilderness, the
howling of the steppe; He surrounded him, took care of him, protected
him as the apple of His eye." These words do not "relate more especially
to the conclusion of the covenant at Sinai" (Luther), nor merely to all
the proofs of the paternal care with which God visited His people in the
desert, to lead them to Sinai, there to adopt them as His covenant
nation, and then to guide them to Canaan, to the exclusion of their
deliverance from the bondage of Egypt. The reason why Moses does not
mention this fact, or the passage through the Red Sea, is not to be
sought for, either solely or even in part, in the fact that "the song
does not rest upon the stand-point of the Mosaic times;" for we may see
clearly that distance of time would furnish no adequate ground for
"singling out and elaborating certain points only from the renowned
stories of old," say from the 105th Psalm, which no one would think of
pronouncing an earlier production than this song. Nor is it because the
gracious help of God, which the people experienced up to the time of the
exodus from Egypt, was inferior in importance to the divine care
exercised over it during the march through the desert (a fact which
would need to be proved), or because the solemn conclusion of the
covenant, whereby Israel first because the people of God, took place
during the sojourn at Sinai, that Moses speaks of God as finding the
people in the desert and adopting them there; but simply because it was
not his intention to give a historical account of the acts performed by
God upon and towards Israel, but to describe how Israel was in the most
helpless condition when the Lord had compassion upon it, to take it out
of that most miserable state in which it must have perished, and bring
it into the possession of the richly-blessed land of Canaan. The whole
description of what the Lord did for Israel ([Deu
32:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010)) is figurative; Israel is
represented as a man in the horrible desert, and in danger of perishing
in the desolate waste, where not only bread and water had failed, but
where ravenous beasts lay howling in wait for human life, when the Lord
took him up and delivered him out of all distress. The expression "found
him" is also to be explained from this figure. Finding presupposes
seeking, and in the seeking the love which goes in search of the loved
on is manifested. Also the expression "land of the desert" - a land
which is a desert, without the article defining the desert more
precisely - shows that the reference is not to the finding of Israel in
the desert of Arabia, and that these words are not to be understood as
relating to the fact, that when His people entered the desert the Lord
appeared to them in the pillar of cloud and fire ([Exo
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020), Schultz). For although the
figure of the desert is chosen, because in reality the Lord had led
Israel through the Arabian desert to Canaan, we must not so overlook the
figurative character of the whole description as to refer the expression
"in a desert land" directly and exclusively to the desert of Arabia. The
measures adopted by the Pharaohs, the object of which was the
extermination or complete suppression of Israel, made even Egypt a land
of desert to the Israelites, where they would inevitably have perished
if the Lord had not sought, found, and surrounded them there. To depict
still further the helpless and irremediable situation of Israel, the
idea of the desert is heightened still further by the addition of וגו
וּבתהוּ, "and in fact (ו is explanatory) in a waste," or wilderness
(tohu recalls [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002)). "Howling of
the desert" is in apposition to tohu (waste), and not a genitive
dependent upon it, viz., "waste of the howling of the desert, or of the
desert in which wild beasts howl" (Ewald), as if ילל stood after ישׁימן.
"Howling of the desert" does not mean the desert in which wild beasts
howl, but the howling which is heard in the desert of wild beasts. The
meaning of the passage, therefore, is "in the midst of the howling of
the wild beasts of the desert." This clause serves to strengthen the
idea of tohu (waste), and describes the waste as a place of the most
horrible howling of wild beasts. It was in this situation that the Lord
surrounded His people. סובב, to surround with love and care, not merely
to protect (vid., [Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006); [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022)). בּונן, from בּין or הבין, to
pay attention, in the sense of "not to lose sight of them." "To keep as
the apple of the eye" is a figurative description of the tenderest care.
The apple of the eye is most carefully preserved (vid., [Psa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008); [Pro
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#002)).

[Deu 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)

"As an eagle, which stirreth up its nest and soars over its young, He
spread out His wings, took him up, carried him upon His wings." Under
the figure of an eagle, which teaches its young to fly, and in doing so
protects them from injury with watchful affection, Moses describes the
care with which the Lord came to the relief of His people in their
helplessness, and assisted them to develop their strength. This figure
no doubt refers more especially to the protection and assistance of God
experienced by Israel in its journey through the Arabian desert; but it
must not be restricted to this. It embraces both the deliverance of
Israel out of Egypt by the outstretched arm of the Lord, as we may see
from a comparison with [Exo 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004),
where the Lord is said to have brought His people out of Egypt upon
eagles' wings, and also the introduction into Canaan, when the Lord
drove the Canaanites out from before them and destroyed them. This verse
contains an independent thought; the first half is the protasis, the
second the apodosis. The nominative to "spreadeth abroad" is Jehovah;
and the suffixes in יקּחהוּ and ישּׂאהוּ ("taketh" and "beareth") refer
to Israel or Jacob ([Deu 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009)), like
the suffixes in [Deu 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010). As כּ
cannot open a sentence like כּאשׁר, we must supply the relative אשׁר
after נשׁר. קנּו העיר, to waken up, rouse up its nest, i.e., to
encourage the young ones to fly. It is rendered correctly by the
Vulgate, provocans ad volandum pullos suos; and freely by Luther,
"bringeth out its young." "Soareth over its young:" namely, in order
that, when they were attempting to fly, if any were in danger of falling
through exhaustion, it might take them at once upon its powerful wings,
and preserve them from harm. Examples of this, according to the popular
belief, are given by Bochart (Hieroz. ii. p. 762). רחף, from רחף to be
loose or slack ([Jer 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009)): in the
Piel it is applied to a bird in the sense of loosening its wings, as
distinguished from binding its wings to its body; hence (1) to sit upon
eggs with loosened wings, and (2) to fly with loosened wings. Here it is
used in the latter sense, because the young are referred to. The point
of comparison between the conduct of God towards Jacob and the acts of
an eagle towards its young, is the loving care with which He trained
Israel to independence. The carrying of Israel upon the eagle's wings of
divine love and omnipotence was manifested in the most glorious way in
the guidance of it by the pillar of cloud and fire, though it was not so
exclusively in this visible vehicle of the gracious presence of God as
that the comparison can be restricted to this phenomenon alone. Luther's
interpretation is more correct than this - "Moses points out in these
words, how He fostered them in the desert, bore with their manners,
tried them and blessed them that they might learn to fly, i.e., to trust
in Him," - except that the explanation of the expression "to fly" is
narrowed too much.

[Deu 32:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#012)

"The Lord alone did lead him, and with Him was no strange god. He made
him drive over the high places of the earth, and eat the productions of
the field; and made him suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of the
flint-stone. Cream of cattle, and milk of the flock, with the fat of
lambs, and rams of Bashan's kind, and bucks, with the kidney-fat of
wheat: and grape-blood thou drankest as fiery wine." Moses gives
prominence to the fact that Jehovah alone conducted Israel, to deprive
the people of every excuse for their apostasy from the Lord, and put
their ingratitude in all the stronger light. If no other god stood by
the Lord to help Him, He had thereby laid Israel under the obligation to
serve Him alone as its God. "With Him" refers to Jehovah, and not to
Israel.

[Deu 32:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)

The Lord caused the Israelites to take possession of Canaan with
victorious power, and enter upon the enjoyment of its abundant
blessings. The phrase, "to cause to drive over the high places of the
earth," is a figurative expression for the victorious subjugation of a
land; it is not taken from [Psa 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034),
as Ewald assumes, but is original both here and in [Deu
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#029). "Drive" (ride) is only a more
majestic expression for "advance." The reference to this passage in [Isa
58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014) is unmistakeable. Whoever has
obtained possession of the high places of a country is lord of the land.
The "high places of the earth" do not mean the high places of Canaan
only, although the expression in this instance relates to the possession
of Canaan. "And he (Jacob) ate:" for, so that he could now eat, the
productions of the field, and in fact all the riches of the fruitful
land, which are then described in superabundant terms. Honey out of the
rock and oil out of the flint-stone, i.e., the most valuable productions
out of the most unproductive places, since God so blessed the land that
even the rocks and stones were productive. The figure is derived from
the fact that Canaan abounds in wild bees, which make their hives in
clefts of the rock, and in olive-trees which grow in a rocky soil.
"Rock-flints," i.e., rocky flints. The nouns in [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014) are dependent upon "to suck" in
[Deu 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013), as the expression is not
used literally. "Things which are sweet and pleasant to eat, people are
in the habit of sucking" (Ges. thes. p. 601). חמאה and חלב (though הלב
seems to require a form חלב; vid., Ewald, 213, b.) denotes the two forms
in which the milk yielded by the cattle was used; the latter, milk in
general, and the former thick curdled milk, cream, and possibly also
butter. The two are divided poetically here, and the cream being
assigned to the cattle, and the milk to the sheep and goats. "The fat of
lambs," i.e., "lambs of the best description laden with fat" (Vitringa).
Fat is a figurative expression for the best (vid., [Num
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#012)). "And rams:" grammatically, no
doubt, this might also be connected with "the fat," but it is improbable
from a poetical point of view, since the enumeration would thereby drag
prosaically; and it is also hardly reconcilable with the apposition בשׁן
בּני, i.e., reared in Bashan (vid., [Eze
39:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#018)), which implies that Bashan was
celebrated for its rams, and not merely for its oxen. This epithet,
which Kamphausen renders "of Bashan's kind," is unquestionably used for
the best description of rams. The list becomes poetical, if we take
"rams" as an accusative governed by the verb "to suck" ([Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)). "Kidney-fat (i.e., the best
fat) of wheat," the finest and most nutritious wheat. Wine is mentioned
last, and in this case the list passes with poetic freedom into the form
of an address. "Grape-blood" for red wine (as in [Gen
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011)). חמר, from חמר to ferment,
froth, foam, lit., the foaming, i.e., fiery wine, serves as a more
precise definition of the "blood of the grape."

[Deu 32:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)

Israel had repaid its God for all these benefits by a base apostasy. -
[Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015). "But Righteous-nation
became fat, and struck out - thou becamest fat, thick, gross - and let
go God who made him, and despised the rock of his salvation." So much is
certain concerning Jeshurun, that it was an honourable surname given to
Israel; that it is derived from ישׁר, and describes Israel as a nation
of just or right men (a similar description to that given by Balaam in
[Num 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)), because Jehovah, who is
just and right ([Deu 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004)), had called
it to uprightness, to walk in His righteousness, and chosen it as His
servant ([Isa 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002)). The prevalent
opinion, that Jeshurun is a diminutive, and signifies rectalus, or
"little pious" (Ges. and others), has no more foundation than the
derivation from Israel, and the explanation, "little Israel," since
there is no philological proof that the termination un ever had a
diminutive signification in Hebrew (see Hengstenberg, Balaam, p. 415);
and an appellatio blanda et charitativa is by no means suitable to this
passage, much less to [Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005). The
epithet Righteous-nation, as we may render Jeshurun, was intended to
remind Israel of its calling, and involved the serverest reproof of its
apostasy. "By placing the name of righteous before Israel, he censured
ironically those who had fallen away from righteousness; and by thus
reminding them with what dignity they had been endowed, he upbraided
them with the more severity for their guilt of perfidy. For in other
places (sc., [Deu 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005), [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)) Israel is honoured with an
eulogium of the same kind, without any such sinister meaning, but with
simple regard to its calling; whilst here Moses shows reproachfully how
far they had departed from that pursuit of piety, to the cultivation of
which they had been called" (Calvin). The words, "became fat, and struck
out," are founded upon the figure of an ox that had become fat, and
intractable in consequence (vid., [Isa
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#027); [Hos
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016); and for the fact itself, [Deu
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011); [Deu
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#010); [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020)). To sharpen this reproof, Moses
repeats the thought in the form of a direct address to the people: "Thou
hast become fat, stout, gross." Becoming fat led to forsaking God, the
Creator and ground of its salvation. "A full stomach does not promote
piety, for it stands secure, and neglects God" (Luther). נבּל is no
doubt a denom. verb from נבל, lit., to treat as a fool, i.e., to despise
(vid., Micah. [Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006)).

[Deu 32:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016)

"They excited His jealousy through strange (gods), they provoked Him by
abominations. They sacrificed to devils, which (were) not-God; to gods
whom they knew not, to new (ones) that had lately come up, whom your
fathers feared not. The rock which begat thee thou forsookest, and hast
forgotten the God that bare thee." These three verses are only a further
expansion of [Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015). Forsaking the
rock of its salvation, Israel gave itself up to the service of worthless
idols. The expression "excite to jealousy" is founded upon the figure of
a marriage covenant, under which the relation of the Lord to Israel is
represented (vid., [Deu 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016), and the
com. on [Exo 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#015)). "This jealousy
rests upon the sacred and spiritual marriage tie, by which God had bound
the people to Himself" (Calvin). "Strange gods," with which Israel
committed adultery, as in [Jer 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025);
[Jer 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#013). The idols are called
"abominations" because Jehovah abhorred them ([Deu
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025); [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015); cf. [Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013)). שׁדים signifies demons in
Syriac, as it has been rendered by the lxx and Vulgate here; lit.,
lords, like Baalim. It is also used in [Psa
106:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#037). - "Not-God," a composite noun,
in apposition to Shedim (devils), like the other expressions which
follow: "gods whom they knew not," i.e., who had not made themselves
known to them as gods by any benefit or blessing (vid., [Deu
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#028)); "new (ones), who had come from
near," i.e., had but lately risen up and been adopted by the Israelites.
"Near," not in a local but in a temporal sense, in contrast to Jehovah,
who had manifested and attested Himself as God from of old ([Deu
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007)). שׂער, to shudder, construed
here with an accusative, to experience a holy shuddering before a
person, to revere with holy awe. - In [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018) Moses returns to the thought of
[Deu 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015), for the purpose of
expressing it emphatically once more, and paving the way for a
transition to the description of the acts of the Lord towards His
rebellious nation. To bring out still more prominently the base
ingratitude of the people, he represents the creation of Israel by
Jehovah, the rock of its salvation, under the figure of generation and
birth, in which the paternal and maternal love of the Lord to His people
had manifested itself. חולל, to twist round, then applied to the pains
of childbirth. The ἁπ. λεγ. תּשׁי is to be traced to שׁיה, and is a
pausal form like יחי in [Deu 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033).
שׁיה = שׁהה, to forget, to neglect.

[Deu 32:19-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019)

For this foolish apostasy the Lord would severely visit His people. This
visitation is represented indeed in [Deu
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019), as the consequence of apostasy
that had taken place, - not, however, as a punishment already inflicted,
but simply as a resolution which god had formed and would carry out, -
an evident proof that we have no song here belonging to the time when
God visited with severe punishments the Israelites who had fallen into
idolatry. In [Deu 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019) the
determination to reject the degenerate children is announced, and in
[Deu 32:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020) this is still further
defined and explained.

[Deu 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019)

"And the Lord saw it, and rejected - from indignation at His sons and
daughters." The object to "saw" may easily be supplied from the context:
He saw the idolatry of the people, and rejected those who followed
idols, and that because of indignation that His sons and daughters
practised such abominations. The expression "he saw" simply serves to
bring out the causal link between the apostasy and the punishment.
ויּנאץ has been very well rendered by Kamphausen, "He resolved upon
rejection," since [Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020). clearly
show that the rejection had only been resolved upon by God, and was not
yet carried out. In what follows, Moses puts this resolution into the
mouth of the Lord Himself.

[Deu 32:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020)

"And He said, I will hide My face from them, I will see what their end
will be: for they are a generation full of perversities, children in
whom is no faithfulness. They excited My jealousy by a no-god, provoked
Me by their vanities: and I also will excite their jealousy by a
no-people, provoke them by a foolish nation. For a fire blazes up in My
nose, and burns to the lowest hell, and consumes the earth with its
increase, and sets on fire the foundations of the mountains." The divine
purpose contains two things: - first of all ([Deu
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020)) the negative side, to hide the
face, i.e., to withdraw His favour and see what their end would be,
i.e., that their apostasy would bring nothing but evil and destruction;
for they were "a nation of perversities" (taphuchoth is moral
perversity, [Pro 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014); [Pro
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014)), i.e., "a thoroughly perverse
and faithless generation" (Knobel); - and then, secondly ([Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)), the positive side, viz.,
chastisement according to the right of complete retaliation. The
Israelites had excited the jealousy and vexation of God by a no-god and
vanities; therefore God would excite their jealousy and vexation by a
no-people and a foolish nation. How this retaliation would manifest
itself is not fully defined however here, but is to be gathered from the
conduct of Israel towards the Lord. Israel had excited the jealousy of
God by preferring a no-god, or הבלים, nothingnesses, i.e., gods that
were vanities or nothings (Elilim, [Lev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#004)), to the true and living God, its
Father and Creator. God would therefore excite them to jealousy and
ill-will by a no-people, a foolish nation, i.e., by preferring a
no-people to the Israelites, transferring His favour to them, and giving
the blessing which Israel had despised to a foolish nation. It is only
with this explanation of the words that full justice is done to the idea
of retribution; and it was in this sense that Paul understood this
passage as referring to the adoption of the Gentiles as the people of
God ([Rom 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019)), and that not merely
by adaptation, or by connecting another meaning with the words, as
Umbreit supposes, but by interpreting it in exact accordance with the
true sense of the words.

(Note: But when Kamphausen, on the other hand, maintains that this
thought, which the apostle finds in the passage before us, would be
"quite erroneous if taken as an exposition of the words," the assertion
is supported by utterly worthless arguments: for example, (1) that
throughout this song the exalted heathen are never spoken of as the
bride of God, but simply as a rod of discipline used against Israel; (2)
that this verse refers to the whole nation of Israel, and there is no
trace of any distinction between the righteous and the wicked; and (3)
that the idea that God would choose another people as the covenant
nation would have been the very opposite of that Messianic hope with
which the author of this song was inspired. To begin with the last, the
Messianic hope of the song consisted unquestionably in the thought that
the Lord would do justice to His people, His servants, and would avenge
their blood, even when the strength of the nation should have
disappeared ([Deu 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036) and [Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)). But this thought, that the
Lord would have compassion upon Israel at last, by no means excludes the
reception of the heathen into the kingdom of God, as is sufficiently
apparent from Rom 9-11. The assertion that this verse refers to the
whole nation is quite incorrect. The plural suffixes used throughout in
[Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020) and [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021) show clearly that both verses
simply refer to those who had fallen away from the Lord; and nowhere
throughout the whole song is it assumed, that the whole nation would
fall away to the very last man, so that there would be no further
remnant of faithful servants of the Lord, to whom the Lord would
manifest His favour again. And lastly, it is nowhere affirmed that God
would simply use the heathen as a rod against Israel. The reference is
solely to enemies and oppressors of Israel; and the chastisement of
Israel by foes holds the second, and therefore a subordinate, place
among the evils with which God would punish the rebellious. It is true
that the heathen are not described as the bride of God in this song, but
that is for no other reason than because the idea of moving them to
jealousy with a not-people is not more fully expanded.)

The adoption of the Gentile world into covenant with the Lord involved
the rejection of the disobedient Israel; and this rejection would be
consummated in severe judgments, in which the ungodly would perish. In
this way the retribution inflicted by the Lord upon the faithless and
perverse generation of His sons and daughters becomes a judgment upon
the whole world. The jealousy of the Lord blazes up into a fire of
wrath, which burns down to sheol. This aspect of the divine retribution
comes into the foreground in what follows, from [Deu
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#023) onwards; whilst the adoption of
the Gentile world, which the Apostle Paul singles out as the leading
thought of this verse, in accordance with the special purpose of the
song, falls back behind the thought, that the Lord would not utterly
destroy Israel, but when all its strength had disappeared would have
compassion upon His servants, and avenge their blood upon His foes. The
idea of a no-people is to be gathered from the antithesis no-god. As
Schultz justly observes, "the expression no-people can no more denote a
people of monsters, than the no-god was a monster, by which Israel had
excited the Lord to jealousy." This remark is quite sufficient to show
that the opinion of Ewald and others is untenable and false, namely,
that "the expression no-people signifies a truly inhuman people,
terrible and repulsive." No-god is a god to whom the predicate of
godhead cannot properly be applied; and so also no-people is a people
that does not deserve the name of a people or nation at all. The further
definition of no-god is to be found in the word "vanities" No-god are
the idols, who are called vanities or nothingnesses, because they
deceive the confidence of men in their divinity; because, as Jeremiah
says ([Jer 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022)), they can give no
showers of rain or drops of water from heaven. No-people is explained by
a "foolish nation." A "foolish nation" is the opposite of a wise and
understanding people, as Israel is called in [Deu
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006), because it possessed righteous
statutes and rights in the law of the Lord. The foolish nation therefore
is not "an ungodly nation, which despises all laws both human and
divine" (Ros., Maur.), but a people whose laws and rights are not
founded upon divine revelation. Consequently the no-people is not "a
barbarous and inhuman people" (Ros.), or "a horde of men that does not
deserve to be called a people" (Maurer), but a people to which the name
of a people or nation is to be refused, because its political and
judicial constitution is the work of man, and because it has not the
true God for its head and king; or, as Vitringa explains, "a people not
chosen by the true God, passed by when a people was chosen, shut out
from the fellowship and grace of God, alienated from the commonwealth of
Israel, and a stranger from the covenant of promise ([Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012))." In this respect every heathen
nation was a "no-people," even though it might not be behind the
Israelites so far as its outward organization was concerned. This
explanation cannot be set aside, either by the objection that at that
time Israel had brought itself down to the level of the heathen, by its
apostasy from the Eternal, - for the notion of people and no-people is
not taken from the outward appearance of Israel at any particular time,
but is derived from its divine idea and calling, - or by an appeal to
the singular, "a foolish nation," whereas we should expect "foolish
nations" to correspond to the "vanities," if we were to understand by
the no-people not one particular heathen nation, but the heathen nations
generally. The singular, "a foolish nation," was required by the
antithesis, upon which it is founded, the "wise nation," from which the
expression no-people first receives its precise definition, which would
be altogether obliterated by the plural. Moreover, Moses did not intend
to give expression to the thought that God would excite Israel to
jealousy by either few, or many, or all the Gentile nations.

[Deu 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022)

In [Deu 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022), the determination of
the Lord with regard to the faithless generation is explained by the
threat, that the wrath of the Lord which was kindled against this
faithlessness would set the whole world in flames down to the lowest
hell. We may see how far the contents of this verse are from favouring
the conclusion that "no-people" means a barbarous and inhuman horde,
from the difficulty which the supporters of this view had found in
dealing with the word כּי. Ewald renders it doch (yet), in total
disregard of the usages of the language; and Venema, certe, profecto
(surely); whilst Kamphausen supposes it to be used in a somewhat
careless manner. The contents of [Deu
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#022), which are introduced with כּי,
by no means harmonize with the thought, "I will send a barbarous and
inhuman horde;" whilst the announcement of a judgment setting the whole
world in flames may form a very suitable explanation of the thought,
that the Lord would excite faithless Israel to jealousy by a
"no-people." This judgment, for example, would make the worthlessness of
idols and the omnipotence of the God of Israel manifest in all the
earth, and would lead the nations to seek refuge and salvation with the
living God; and, as we learn from the history of the kingdom of God, and
the allusions of the Apostle Paul to this mystery of the divine
counsels, the heathen themselves would be the first to do so when they
saw all their power and glory falling into ruins, and then the
Israelites, when they saw that God had taken the kingdom from them and
raised up the heathen who were converted to Him to be His people. The
fire in the nose of the Lord is a figurative description of burning
wrath and jealousy (vid., [Deu 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019)).
The fire signifies really nothing else than His jealousy, His vital
energy, and in a certain sense His breath; it therefore naturally burns
in the nose (vid., [Psa 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009)). In this
sense the Lord as "a jealous God" is a consuming fire (vid., [Deu
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024), and the exposition of [Exo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002)). This fire burns down even to the
lower hell. The lower hell, i.e., the lowest region of sheol, or the
lower regions, forms the strongest contrast to heaven; though we cannot
deduce any definite doctrinal conclusions from the expression as to the
existence of more hells than one. This fire "consumes the earth with its
increase," i.e., all its vegetable productions, and sets on fire the
foundations of the mountains. This description is not a hyperbolical
picture of the judgment which was to fall upon the children of Israel
alone (Kamphausen, Aben-Ezra, etc.); for it is a mistake to suppose that
the judgment foretold affected the Israelitish nation only. The thought
is weakened by the assumption that the language is hyperbolical. The
words are not intended to foretell one particular penal judgment, but
refer to judgment in its totality and universality, as realized in the
course of centuries in different judgments upon the nations, and only to
be completely fulfilled at the end of the world. "Calvin is right
therefore when he says, "As the indignation and anger of God follow His
enemies to hell, to eternal flames and infernal tortures, so they devour
their land with its produce, and burn the foundations of the
mountains;...there is no necessity therefore to imagine that there is
any hyperbole in the words, 'to the lower hell.'" This judgment is then
depicted in [Deu 32:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#023) as it would
discharge itself upon rebellious Israel.

[Deu 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#023)

"I will heap up evils upon them, use up My arrows against them." The
evils threatened against the despisers of the Lord and His commandments
would be poured out in great abundance by the Lord upon the foolish
generation. ספה, to add one upon the other (vid., [Num
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#014)); hence in Hiphil to heap up,
sweep together. These evils are represented in the second clause of the
verse as arrows, which the Lord as a warrior would shoot away at his
foes (as in [Deu 32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042); cf. [Psa
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003); [Psa
91:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006); [Job
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004)). כּלּה, to bring to an end, to
use up to the very last.

[Deu 32:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024)

"Have they wasted away with hunger, are they consumed with pestilential
heat and bitter plague: I will let loose the tooth of beasts upon them,
with the poison of things that crawl in the dust." ([Deu
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025)) "If the sword without shall
sweep them away, and in the chambers of terrors, the young man as the
maiden, the suckling with the grey-haired man." The evils mentioned are
hunger, pestilence, plague, wild beasts, poisonous serpents, and war.
The first hemistich in [Deu 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024)
contains simply nouns construed absolutely, which may be regarded as a
kind of circumstantial clause. The literal meaning is, "With regard to
those who are starved with hunger, etc., I will send against them;"
i.e., when hunger, pestilence, plague, have brought them to the verge of
destruction, I will send, etc. מזי, construct state of מזה, ἁπ. λεγ.
with which Cocceius compares מצה and מצץ, to suck out, and for which
Schultens has cited analogies from the Arabic. "Sucked out by hunger,"
i.e., wasted away. "Tooth of beasts and poison of serpents:" poetical
for beasts of prey and poisonous animals. See [Lev
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#022), where wild beasts are mentioned
as a plague along with pestilence, famine, and sword.

[Deu 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025)

These are accompanied by the evils of war, which sweeps away the men
outside in the slaughter itself by the sword, and the defenceless -
viz., youths and maidens, sucklings and old men - in the chambers by
alarm. אימה is a sudden mortal terror, and Knobel is wrong in applying
it to hunger and plague. The use of the verb שׁכּל, to make childless,
is to be explained on the supposition that the nation or land is
personified as a mother, whose children are the members of the nation,
old and young together. Ezekiel has taken the four grievous judgments
out of these two verses: sword, famine, wild beasts, and pestilence
([Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021) : see also [Eze
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017), and [Jer
15:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002)).

[Deu 32:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026)

"I should say, I will blow them away, I will blot out the remembrance of
them among men; if I did not fear wrath upon the enemy, that their
enemies might mistake it, that they might say, Our hand was high, and
Jehovah has not done all this." The meaning is, that the people would
have deserved to be utterly destroyed, and it was only for His own
name's sake that God abstained from utter destruction. אמרתּי to be
construed conditionally requires לוּלי: if I did not fear (as actually
was the case) I should resolve to destroy them, without leaving a trace
behind. "I should say," used to denote the purpose of God, like "he
said" in [Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020). The ἁπ. λεγ.
אפאיחם, which has been rendered in very different ways, cannot be
regarded, as it is by the Rabbins, as a denom. verb from פּאה, a corner;
and Calvin's rendering, "to scatter through corners," does not suit the
context; whilst the meaning, "to cast or scare out of all corners,"
cannot be deduced from this derivation. The context requires the
signification to annihilate, as the remembrance of them was to vanish
from the earth. We get this meaning if we trace it to פּאה, to blow, -
related to פּעה ([Isa 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#014)) and פּהה,
from which comes פּה, - in the Hiphil "to blow away," not to blow
asunder. השׁבּית, not "to cause to rest," but to cause to cease, delere
(as in [Amo 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#004)). "Wrath upon the
enemy," i.e., "displeasure on the part of God at the arrogant boasting
of the enemy, which was opposed to the glory of God" (Vitringa). פּן,
lest, after גּוּר, to fear. On this reason for sparing Israel, see [Deu
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#028); [Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012); [Num
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#013).; [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005). Enemy is a generic term, hence
it is followed by the plural. נכר, Piel, to find strange, sc., the
destruction of Israel, i.e., to mistake the reason for it, or, as is
shown by what follows, to ascribe the destruction of Israel to
themselves and their own power, whereas it had been the word of God.
"Our hand was high," i.e., has lifted itself up or shown itself mighty,
an intentional play upon the "high hand" of the Lord ([Exo
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#008); cf. [Isa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011)). - The reason why Israel did
not deserve to be spared is given in [Deu
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#028) : "For a people forsaken of
counsel are they, and there is not understanding in them." "Forsaken of
counsel," i.e., utterly destitute of counsel.

This want of understanding on the part of Israel is still further
expounded in [Deu 32:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029), where the
words of God pass imperceptibly into the words of Moses, who feels
impelled once more to impress the word which the Lord had spoken upon
the hearts of the people.

[Deu 32:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029)

"If they were wise, they would understand this, would consider their
end. Ah, how could one pursue a thousand, and two put ten thousand to
flight, were it not that their Rock had sold them, and Jehovah had given
them up! For their rock is not as our rock; of that our enemies are
judges." לוּ presupposes a case, which is either known not to exist, or
of which this is assumed; "if they were wise," which they are not.
"This" refers to the leading thought of the whole, viz., that apostasy
from God the Lord is sure to be followed by the severest judgment.
"Their end," as in [Deu 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#020), the end
towards which the people were going through obstinate perseverance in
their sin, i.e., utter destruction, if the Lord did not avert it for His
name's sake.

[Deu 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030)

If Israel were wise, it could easily conquer all its foes in the power
of its God (vid., [Lev 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#008)); but as
it had forsaken the Lord its rock, He, their (Israel's) rock, had given
them up into the power of the foe. כּי לא אם is more emphatic or
distinct than לא אם only, and introduces an exception which does not
permit the desired event to take place. Israel could have put all its
enemies to flight were it not that its God had given it entirely up to
them (sold them as slaves). The supposition that this had already
occurred by no means proves, as Kamphausen believes, "that the poet was
speaking of the existing state of the nation," but merely that Moses
thinks of the circumstances as certain to occur when the people should
have forsaken their God. The past implied in the verbs "sold" and "given
up" is a prophetically idea past or present, but not a real and
historical one. The assertion of Hupfeld and Kamphausen, that מכר, as
used with special reference to the giving up of a nation into the power
of the heathen, "belongs to a somewhat later usage of the language," is
equally groundless.

[Deu 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031)

The giving up of Israel into the power of the heathen arose, not from
the superior power of the heathen and their gods, but solely from the
apostasy of Israel from its own God. "Our rock," as Moses calls the
Lord, identifying himself with the nation, is not as their rock, i.e.,
the gods in whom the heathen trust. That the pronoun in "their rock"
refers to the heathen, is so perfectly obvious from the antithesis "our
rock," that there cannot possibly be any doubt about it. The second
hemistich in [Deu 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030) contains a
circumstantial clause, introduced to strengthen the thought which
precedes it. The heathen themselves could be arbitrators (vid., [Exo
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#022)), and decide whether the gods of
the heathen were not powerless before the God of Israel. "Having
experience so often the formidable might of God, they knew for a
certainty that the God of Israel was very different from their own
idols" (Calvin). The objection offered by Schultz, namely, that "the
heathen would not admit that their idols were inferior to Jehovah, and
actually denied this at the time when they had the upper hand ([Isa
10:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010))," has been quite anticipated
by Calvin, when he observes that Moses "leaves the decision to the
unbelievers, not as if they would speak the truth, but because he knew
that they must be convinced by experience." As a confirmation of this,
Luther and others refer not only to the testimony of Balaam (Num 23 and
24), but also to the Egyptians ([Exo
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#025)) and Philistines ([Sa1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#007).), to which we may add [Jos
2:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009).

[Deu 32:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032)

"For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorrah:
their grapes are poisonous grapes, bitter clusters have they.
Dragon-poison is their wine, and dreadful venom of asps." The connection
is pointed out by Calovius thus: "Moses returns to the Jews, showing
why, although the rock of the Jews was very different from the gods of
the Gentiles, even according to the testimony of the heathen themselves,
who were their foes, they were nevertheless to be put to flight by their
enemies and sold; and why Jehovah sold them, namely, because their vine
was of the vine of Sodom, i.e., of the very worst kind, resembling the
inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah, as if they were descended from them,
and not from their holy patriarchs." The "for" in [Deu
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032) is neither co-ordinate nor
subordinate to that in [Deu 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031). To
render it as subordinate would give no intelligible meaning; and the
supposition that it is co-ordinate is precluded by the fact, that in
that case [Deu 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032) and [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033) would contain a description of
the corruptions of the heathen. The objections to this view have been
thus expressed by Schultz with perfect justice: "It is priori
inconceivable, that in so short an ode there should be so elaborate a
digression on the subject of the heathen, seeing that their folly is
altogether foreign to the theme of the whole." To this we may add, that
throughout the Old Testament it is the moral corruption and ungodliness
of the Israelites, and never the vices of the heathen, that are compared
to the sins of Sodom and Gomorrah. The Israelites who were forsaken by
the Lord, were designated by Isaiah ([Isa
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#010)) as a people of Gomorrah, and
their rulers as rulers of Sodom (cf. [Isa
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009)); the inhabitants of Jerusalem
were all of them like Sodom and Gomorrah ([Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014)); and the sin of Jerusalem was
greater than that of Sodom ([Eze
16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046).). The only sense in which the
"for" in [Deu 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032) can be regarded as
co-ordinate to that in [Deu 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031), is
on the supposition that the former gives the reason for the thought in
[Deu 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030), whilst the latter serves
to support the idea in [Deu 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030). The
order of thought is the following: Israel would have been able to smite
its foes with very little difficulty, because the gods of the heathen
are not a rock like Jehovah; but Jehovah had given up His people to the
heathen, because it had brought forth fruits like Sodom, i.e., had
resembled Sodom in its wickedness. The vine and its fruits are
figurative terms, applied to the nation and its productions. "The nation
was not only a degenerate, but also a poisonous vine, producing nothing
but what was deadly" (Calvin). This figure is expanded still further by
[Isa 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002). Israel was a vineyard
planted by Jehovah, that it might bring forth good fruits, instead of
which it brought forth wild grapes (vid., [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021); [Psa
80:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009).; [Hos
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001)). "Their vine" is the Israelites
themselves, their nature being compared to a vine which had degenerated
as much as if it had been an offshoot of a Sodomitish vine. שׁדמת, the
construct state of שׁדמת, floors, fields. The grapes of this vine are
worse than wild grapes is snake-poison. Tannin: see [Exo
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#009). Pethen: the asp or adder, one
of the most poisonous kinds of snake, whose bite was immediately fatal
(vid., Rosenmller, bibl. Althk. iv. 2, pp. 364ff.). These figures
express the thought, that "nothing could be imagined worse, or more to
be abhorred, than that nation" (Calvin). Now although this comparison
simply refers to the badness of Israel, the thought of the penal
judgment that fell upon Sodom lies behind. "They imitate the Sodomites,
they bring forth the worst fruits of all impiety, they deserve to perish
like Sodom" (J. H. Michaelis).

The description of this judgment commences in [Deu
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034). Israel had deserved for its
corruption to be destroyed from the earth ([Deu
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026)); yet for His name's sake the
Lord would have compassion upon it, when it was so humiliated with its
heavy punishments that its strength was coming to an end.

[Deu 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034)

"Is not this hidden with Me, sealed up in My treasuries?" The allusion
in this verse has been disputed; many refer it to what goes before,
others to what follows after. There is some truth in both. The verse
forms the transition, closing what precedes, and introducing what
follows. The assertion that the figure of preserving in the treasuries
precludes the supposition that "this" refers to what follows, cannot be
sustained. For although in [Hos 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#012),
and [Job 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017), the binding and
sealing of sins in a bundle are spoken of, yet it is very evident from
[Psa 139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016); [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016), and [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010), that not only the evil doings of
men, but their days generally, i.e., not only their deeds, but the
things which happen to them, are written in a book before God. O. v.
Gerlach has explained it correctly: "All these things have been decreed
long ago; their coming is infallibly certain." "This" includes not only
the sins of the nation, but also the judgments of God. The apostasy of
Israel, as well as the consequent punishment, is laid up with God -
sealed up in His treasuries - and therefore they have not yet actually
occurred: an evident proof that we have prophecy before us, and not the
description of an apostasy that had already taken place, and of the
punishment inflicted in consequence. The ἁπ. λεγ. כּמס in this
connection signifies to lay up, preserve, conceal, although the
etymology is disputed. The figure in the second hemistich is not taken
from secret archives, but from treasuries or stores, in which whatever
was to be preserved was to be laid up, to be taken out in due time.

[Deu 32:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035)

"Vengeance is Mine, and retribution for the time when their foot shall
shake: for the day of their destruction is near, and that which is
determined for them cometh hastily. For the Lord will judge His people,
and have compassion upon His servants, when He seeth that every hold has
disappeared, and the fettered and the free are gone." - The Lord will
punish the sins of His people in due time. "Vengeance is Mine:" it
belongs to Me, it is My part to inflict. שׁלּם is a noun here for the
usual שׁלּוּם, retribution (vid., Ewald, 156, b.). The shaking of the
foot is a figure representing the commencement of a fall, or of
stumbling vid., [Psa 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017); [Psa
94:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#018)). The thought in this clause is
not, "At or towards the time when their misfortune begins, I will plunge
them into the greatest calamity," as Kamphausen infers from the fact
that the shaking denotes the beginning of the calamity; and yet the
vengeance can only be completed by plunging them into calamity, - a
though which he justly regards as unsuitable, though he resorts to
emendations of the text in consequence. But the supposed unsuitability
vanishes, if we simply regard the words, "Vengeance is Mine, and
retribution," not as the mere announcement of a quality founded in the
nature of God, and residing in God Himself, but as an expression of the
divine energy, with this signification, I will manifest Myself as an
avenger and recompenser, when their foot shall shake. Then what had
hitherto been hidden with God, lay sealed up as it were in His
treasures, should come to light, and be made manifest to the sinful
nation. God would not delay in this; for the day of their destruction
was near. איד signifies misfortune, and sometimes utter destruction. The
primary meaning of the word cannot be determined with certainty. That it
does not mean utter destruction, we may see from the parallel clause.
"The things that shall come upon them," await them, or are prepared for
them, are, according to the context, both in [Deu
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026) and also in [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036)., not destruction, but simply a
calamity or penal judgment that would bring them near to utter
destruction. Again, these words do not relate to the punishment of "the
wicked deeds of the inhuman horde," or the vengeance of God upon the
enemies of Israel (Ewald, Kamphausen), but to the vengeance or
retribution which God would inflict upon Israel. This is evident, apart
from what has been said above against the application of [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033), [Deu
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034), to the heathen, simply from
[Deu 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036), which unquestionably
refers to Israel, and has been so interpreted by every commentator. -
The first clause is quoted in [Rom
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#019) and [Heb
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030), in the former to warn against
self-revenge, in the latter to show the energy with which God will
punish those who fall away from the faith, in connection with [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036), "the Lord will judge His
people." - In [Deu 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036) the reason is
given for the thought in [Deu 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035).
דּין is mostly taken here in the sense of "procure right," help to
right, which it certainly often has (e.g., [Psa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003)), and which is not to be excluded
here; but this by no means exhausts the idea of the word. The parallel
יתנחם does not compel us to drop the idea of punishment, which is
involved in the judging; for it is a question whether the two clauses
are perfectly synonymous. "Judging His people" did not consist merely in
the fact that Jehovah punished the heathen who oppressed Israel, but
also in the fact that He punished the wicked in Israel who oppressed the
righteous. "His people" is no doubt Israel as a whole (as, for example,
in [Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)), but this whole was
composed of righteous and wicked, and God could only help the righteous
to justice by punishing and destroying the wicked. In this way the
judging of His people became compassion towards His servants. "His
servants" are the righteous, or, speaking more correctly, all who in the
time of judgment are found to be the servants of God, and are saved.
Because Israel was His nation, the Lord judged it in such a manner as
not to destroy it, but simply to punish it for its sins, and to have
compassion upon His servants, when He saw that the strength of the
nation was gone. יד, the hand, with which one grasps and works, is a
figure employed to denote power and might (vid., [Isa
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#002)). אזל, to run out, or come to an
end ([Sa1 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#007); [Job
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#011)). The meaning is, "when every
support is gone," when all the rotten props of its might, upon which it
has rested, are broken (Ewald). The noun אפס, cessation, disappearance,
takes the place of a verb. The words עזוּב עצוּר are a proverbial phrase
used to denote all men, as we may clearly see from [Kg1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#010); [Kg1
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#021); [Kg2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#008); [Kg2
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#006). The literal meaning of this
form, however, cannot be decided with certainty. The explanation given
by L. de Dieu is the most plausible one, viz., the man who is fettered,
restrained, i.e., married, and the single or free. For עזוּב the meaning
caelebs is established by the Arabic, though the Arabic can hardly be
appealed to as proving that עצוּר means paterfamilias, as this meaning,
which Roediger assigns to the Arabic word, is founded upon a mistaken
interpretation of a passage in Kamus.

[Deu 32:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037)

The Lord would then convince His people of the worthlessness of idols
and the folly of idolatry, and bring it to admit the fact that He was
God alone. "Then will He say, Where are their gods, the rock in whom
they trusted; who consumed the fat of their burnt-offerings, the wine of
their libations? Let them rise up and help you, that there may be a
shelter over you! See now that I, I am it, and there is no God beside
Me: I kill, and make alive; I smite in pieces, and I heal; and there is
no one who delivers out of My hand." ואמר might be taken impersonally,
as it has been by Luther and others, "men will say;" but as it is
certainly Jehovah who is speaking in [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039), and what Jehovah says there is
simply a deduction from what is addressed to the people in [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037) and [Deu
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038), there can hardly be any doubt
that Jehovah is speaking in [Deu
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037), [Deu
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038), as well as in [Deu
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034), [Deu
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035), and therefore that Moses simply
distinguishes himself from Jehovah in [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036), when explaining the reason for
the judgment foretold by the Lord. The expression "their gods," relates,
not to the heathen, but to the Israelites, upon whom the judgment had
fallen. The worthlessness of their gods had become manifest, namely, of
the strange gods or idols, which the Israelites had preferred to the
living God (vid., cf. [Deu 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016), [Deu
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017)), and to which they had brought
their sacrifices and drink-offerings. In [Deu
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038), אשׁר is the subject, - the
gods, who consumed the fat of the sacrifices offered to them by their
worshippers (the foolish Israelites), - and is not to be taken as the
relative with זבחימו, as the lxx, Vulg., and Luther have rendered it,
viz., "whose sacrifices they (the Israelites) ate," which neither suits
the context nor the word חלב (fat), which denotes the fat portions of
the sacrificial animals that were burned upon the altar, and therefore
presented to God. The wine of the drink-offerings was also poured out
upon the altar, and thus given up to the deity worshipped. The handing
over of the sacrificial portions to the deity is described here with
holy irony, as though the gods themselves consumed the fat of the slain
offerings, and drank the wine poured out for them, for the purpose of
expression this thought: "The gods, whom ye entertained so well, and
provided so abundantly with sacrifices, let them now arise and help you,
and thus make themselves clearly known to you." The address here takes
the form of a direct appeal to the idolaters themselves; and in the last
clause the imperative is introduced instead of the optative, to express
the thought as sharply as possible, that men need the protection of God,
and are warranted in expecting it from the gods they worship: "let there
be a shelter over you." Sithrah for sether, a shelter or defence.

[Deu 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)

The appeal to their own experience of the worthlessness of idols is
followed by a demand that they should acknowledge Jehovah as the only
true God. The repetition of "I" is emphatic: "I, I only it," as an
expression of being; I am it, ἐγώ εἰμι, [Joh
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#024); [Joh
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005). The predicate Elohim (vid., [Sa2
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#028); [Isa
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#016)) is omitted, because it is
contained in the thought itself, and moreover is clearly expressed in
the parallel clause which follows, "there is not a God beside Me."
Jehovah manifests himself in His doings, which Israel had experienced
already, and still continued to experience. He kills and makes alive,
etc., i.e., He has the power of life and death. These words do not refer
to the immortality of the soul, but to the restoration of life of the
people of Israel, which God had delivered up to death (so [Sa1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006); [Kg2
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#007); cf. [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019); [Hos
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#010); Wisd. 16:13; Tobit 13:2). This
thought, and the following one, which is equally consolatory, that God
smites and heals again, are frequently repeated by the prophets (vid.,
[Hos 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#001); [Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026); [Isa
57:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017); [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014)). None can deliver out of His
hand (vid., [Isa 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013); [Hos
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014); [Hos
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#012)).

[Deu 32:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#040)

The Lord will show Himself as the only true God, who slays and makes
alive, etc. He will take vengeance upon His enemies, avenge the blood of
His servants, and expiate His land, His people. With this promise, which
is full of comfort for all the servants of the Lord, the ode concludes.
"For I lift up My hand to heaven, and say, As truly as I live for ever,
if I have sharpened My flashing sword, and My hand grasps for judgment,
I will repay vengeance to My adversaries, and requite My haters. I will
make My arrows drunk with blood, and My sword will eat flesh; with the
blood of the slain and prisoners, with the hairy head of the foe."
Lifting up the hand to heaven was a gesture by which a person taking an
oath invoked God, who is enthroned in heaven, as a witness of the truth
and an avenger of falsehood ([Gen
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022)). Here, as in [Exo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#008) and [Num
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030), it is used anthropomorphically
of God, who is in heaven, and can swear by no greater than Himself
(vid., [Isa 45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023); [Jer
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#005); [Heb
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017)). The oath follows in [Deu
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041) and [Deu
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042). אם, however, is not the
particle employed in swearing, which has a negative meaning (vid., [Gen
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#023)), but is conditional, and
introduces the protasis. As the avenger of His people upon their foes,
the Lord is represented as a warlike hero, who whets His sword, and has
a quiver filled with arrows (as in [Psa
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#013)). "As long as the Church has to
make war upon the world, the flesh, and the devil, it needs a warlike
head" (Schultz). חרב בּרק, the flash of the sword, i.e., the flashing
sword (vid., [Gen 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#024); [Nah
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#003); [Hab
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011)). In the next clause, "and My
hand grasps judgment," mishpat (judgment) does not mean punishment or
destruction hurled by God upon His foes, nor the weapons employed in the
execution of judgment, but judgment is introduced poetically as the
thing which God takes in hand for the purpose of carrying it out. נקם
השׁיב, to lead back vengeance, i.e., to repay it. Punishment is
retribution for evil done. By the enemies and haters of Jehovah, we need
not understand simply the heathen enemies of the Israelites, for the
ungodly in Israel were enemies of God quite as much as the ungodly
heathen. If it is evident from [Deu
32:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025), where God is spoken of as
punishing Israel to the utmost when it had fallen into idolatry, but not
utterly destroying it, that the punishment which God would inflict would
also fall upon the heathen, who would have made an end of Israel; it is
no less apparent from [Deu 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#037) and
[Deu 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038), especially from the appeal
in [Deu 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038), Let your idols arise
and help you ([Deu 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#038)), which is
addressed, as all admit, to the idolatrous Israelites, and not to the
heathen, that those Israelites who had made worthless idols their rock
would be exposed to the vengeance and retribution of the Lord. In [Deu
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042) the figure of the warrior is
revived, and the judgment of God is carried out still further under this
figure. Of the four different clauses in this verse, the third is
related to the first, and the fourth to the second. God would make His
arrows drunk with the blood not only of the slain, but also of the
captives, whose lives are generally spared, but were not to be spared in
this judgment. This sword would eat flesh of the hairy head of the foe.
The edge of the sword is represented poetically as the mouth with which
it eats ([Sa2 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#026); [Sa2
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#008), etc.); "the sword is said to
devour bodies when it slays them by piercing" (Ges. thes. p. 1088).
פּרעות, from פּרע, a luxuriant, uncut growth of hair ([Num
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005); see at [Lev
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006)). The hairy head is not a figure
used to denote the "wild and cruel foe" (Knobel), but a luxuriant
abundance of strength, and the indomitable pride of the foe, who had
grown fat and forgotten his Creator ([Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)). This explanation is confirmed
by [Psa 68:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#022); whereas the rendering
ἄρχοντες, princes, leaders, which is given in the Septuagint, has no
foundation in the language itself, and no tenable support in [Jdg
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#002).

[Deu 32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043)

For this retribution which God accomplishes upon His enemies, the
nations were to praise the people of the Lord. As this song commenced
with an appeal to heaven and earth to give glory to the Lord ([Deu
32:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)), so it very suitably closes
with an appeal to the heathen to rejoice with His people on account of
the acts of the Lord. "Rejoice, nations, over His people; for He avenges
the blood of His servants, and repays vengeance to His adversaries, and
so expiates His land, His people." "His people" is an accusative, and
not in apposition to nations in the sense of "nations which are His
people." For, apart from the fact that such a combination would be
unnatural, the thought that the heathen had become the people of God is
nowhere distinctly expressed in the song (not even in [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021)); nor is the way even so
prepared for it as that we could expect it here, although the appeal to
the nations to rejoice with His people on account of what God had done
involves the Messianic idea, that all nations will come to the knowledge
of the Lord (vid., [Psa 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002); [Psa
66:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#008); [Psa
67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004)). - The reason for this rejoicing
is the judgment through which the Lord avenges the blood of His servants
and repays His foes. As the enemies of God are not the heathen as such
(see at [Deu 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041)), so the servants
of Jehovah are not the nation of Israel as a whole, but the faithful
servants whom the Lord had at all times among His people, and who were
persecuted, oppressed, and put to death by the ungodly. By this the land
was defiled, covered with blood-guiltiness, so that the Lord was obliged
to interpose as a judge, to put an end to the ways of the wicked, and to
expiate His land, His people, i.e., to wipe out the guilt which rested
upon the land and people, by the punishment of the wicked, and the
extermination of idolatry and ungodliness, and to sanctify and glorify
the land and nation (vid., [Isa 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#027);
[Isa 4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004)).

[Deuteronomy 32:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">deu 32:44</span></span>

In [Deu 32:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#044) it is stated that
Moses, with Joshua, spake the song to the people; and on finishing this
rehearsal, once more impressed upon the hearts of the people the
importance of observing all the commandments of God. This account
proceeds from the author of the supplement to the Thorah of Moses, who
inserted the song in the book of the law. This explains the name Hoshea,
instead of Jehoshuah (Joshua), which Moses had given to his servant
([Num 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#008), [Num
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#016)), and invariably uses (compare
[Deu 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#003), [Deu
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#007), [Deu
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014), [Deu
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#023), with [Deu
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#038); [Deu
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#021), [Deu
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#028), and the exposition of [Num
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#016)). - On [Deu
32:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#046), vid., [Deu
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007) and [Deu
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#019); and on [Deu
32:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#047), vid., [Deu
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#020).

[Deuteronomy 32:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">deu 32:48</span></span>

"That self-same day," viz., the day upon which Moses had rehearsed the
song to the children of Israel, the Lord renewed the announcement of his
death, by repeating the command already given to him ([Num
27:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)) to ascend Mount Nebo, there
to survey the land of Canaan, and then to be gathered unto his people.
In form, this repetition differs from the previous announcement, partly
in the fact that the situation of Mount Nebo is more fully described (in
the land of Moab, etc., as in [Deu
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005); [Deu
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001)), and partly in the continual use
of the imperative, and a few other trifling points. These differences
may all be explained from the fact that the account here was not written
by Moses himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 33](deu033)

</div>
