<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu000)  [Next](deu002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 1:1</span></span>

[Deu 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001) contain the heading to the
whole book; and to this the introduction to the first address is
appended in [Deu 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005). By the
expression, "These be the words," etc., Deuteronomy is attached to the
previous books; the word "these," which refers to the addresses that
follow, connects what follows with what goes before, just as in [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004); [Gen
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009), etc. The geographical data in
[Deu 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001) present no little difficulty;
for whilst the general statement as to the place where Moses delivered
the addresses in this book, viz., beyond Jordan, is particularized in
the introduction to the second address ([Deu
4:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#046)), as "in the valley over against
Beth-Peor," here it is described as "in the wilderness, in the Arabah,"
etc. This contrast between the verse before us and [Deu
4:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#045), and still more the
introduction of the very general and loose expression, "in the desert,"
which is so little adapted for a geographical definition of the
locality, that it has to be defined itself by the additional words "in
the Arabah," suggest the conclusion that the particular names introduced
are not intended to furnish as exact a geographical account as possible
of the spot where Moses explained the law to all Israel, but to call up
to view the scene of the addresses which follow, and point out the
situation of all Israel at that time. Israel was "in the desert," not
yet in Canaan the promised inheritance, and in fact "in the Arabah."
This is the name given to the deep low-lying plain on both sides of the
Jordan, which runs from the Lake of Gennesaret to the Dead Sea, and
stretches southwards from the Dead Sea to Aila, at the northern
extremity of the Red Sea, as we may see very clearly from [Deu
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#008), where the way which the
Israelites took past Edom to Aila is called the "way of the Arabah," and
also from the fact that the Dead Sea is called "the sea of the Arabah"
in [Deu 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#017) and [Deu
4:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#049). At present the name Arabah is
simply attached to the southern half of this valley, between the Dead
Sea and the Red Sea; whilst the northern part, between the Dead Sea and
the Sea of Galilee, is called el Ghor; though Abulfeda, Ibn Haukal, and
other Arabic geographers, extend the name Ghor from the Lake of
Gennesaret to Aila (cf. Ges. thes. p. 1166; Hengstenberg, Balaam, p.
520; Robinson, Pal. ii. p. 596). - סוּף מול, "over against Suph" (מול
for מוּל, [Deu 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019); [Deu
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#029), etc., for the sake of euphony,
to avoid the close connection of the two 8-sounds). Suph is probably a
contraction of ים־סוּף, "the Red Sea" (see at [Exo
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019)). This name is given not only to
the Gulf of Suez ([Exo 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018); [Exo
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#004), [Exo
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022), etc.), but to that of Akabah
also ([Num 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#025); [Num
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004), etc.). There is no other Suph
that would be at all suitable here. The lxx have rendered it πλήσιον τῆς
ἐρυθρᾶς θαλάσσης; and Onkelos and others adopt the same rendering. This
description cannot serve as a more precise definition of the Arabah, in
which case עשׁר (which) would have to be supplied before מול, since "the
Arabah actually touches the Red Sea." Nor does it point out the
particular spot in the Arabah where the addresses were delivered, as
Knobel supposes; or indicate the connection between the Arboth Moab and
the continuation of the Arabah on the other side of the Dead Sea, and
point out the Arabah in all this extent as the heart of the country over
which the Israelites had moved during the whole of their forty years'
wandering (Hengstenberg). For although the Israelites passed twice
through the Arabah, it formed by no means the heart of the country in
which they continued for forty years. The words "opposite to Suph," when
taken in connection with the following names, cannot have any other
object than to define with greater exactness the desert in which the
Israelites had moved during the forty years. Moses spoke to all Israel
on the other side of the Jordan, when it was still in the desert, in the
Arabah, still opposite to the Red Sea, after crossing which it had
entered the wilderness ([Exo 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022)),
"between Paran, and Tophel, and Laban, and Hazeroth, and Di-Sahab."
Paran is at all events not the desert of this name in all its extent,
but the place of encampment in the "desert of Paran" ([Num
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#012); [Num
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016)), i.e., the district of Kadesh
in the desert of Zin ([Num 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021), [Num
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026)); and Hazeroth is most probably
the place of encampment of that name mentioned in [Num
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#035); [Num
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016), from which Israel entered the
desert of Paran. Both places had been very eventful to the Israelites.
At Hazeroth, Miriam the prophetess and Aaron the high priest had
stumbled through rebellion against Moses (Num 12). In the desert of
Paran by Kadesh the older generation had been rejected, and sentenced to
die in the wilderness on account of its repeated rebellion against the
Lord (Num 14); and when the younger generation that had grown up in the
wilderness assembled once more in Kadesh to set out for Canaan, even
Moses and Aaron, the two heads of the nation, sinned there at the water
of strife, so that they two were not permitted to enter Canaan, whilst
Miriam died there at that time (Num 20). But if Paran and Hazeroth are
mentioned on account of the tragical events connected with these places,
it is natural to conclude that there were similar reasons for mentioning
the other three names as well.

Tophel is supposed by Hengstenberg (Balaam, p. 517) and Robinson (Pal.
ii. p. 570) and all the more modern writers, to be the large village of
Tafyleh, with six hundred inhabitants, the chief place in Jebal, on the
western side of the Edomitish mountains, in a well-watered valley of the
wady of the same name, with large plantations of fruit-trees
(Burckhardt, Syr. pp. 677, 678). The Israelites may have come upon this
place in the neighbourhood of Oboth ([Num
21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010)); and as its inhabitants,
according to Burckhardt, p. 680, supply the Syrian caravans with a
considerable quantity of provisions, which they sell to them in the
castle of el Ahsa, Schultz conjectures that it may have been here that
the people of Israel purchased food and drink of the Edomites for money
([Deu 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#029)), and that Tafyleh is
mentioned as a place of refreshment, where the Israelites partook for
the first time of different food from the desert supply. There is a
great deal to be said in favour of this conjecture: for even if the
Israelites did not obtain different food for the first time at this
place, the situation of Tophel does warrant the supposition that it was
here that they passed for the first time from the wilderness to an
inhabited land; on which account the place was so memorable for them,
that it might very well be mentioned as being the extreme east of their
wanderings in the desert, as the opposite point to the encampment at
Paran, where they first arrived on the western side of their wandering,
at the southern border of Canaan. Laban is generally identified with
Libnah, the second place of encampment on the return journey from Kadesh
([Num 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#022)), and may perhaps have
been the place referred to in Num 16, but not more precisely defined,
where the rebellion of the company of Korah occurred. Lastly, Di-Sahab
has been identified by modern commentators with Mersa Dahab or Mina
Dahab, i.e., gold-harbour, a place upon a tongue of land in the Elanitic
Gulf, about the same latitude as Sinai, where there is nothing to be
seen now except a quantity of date-trees, a few sand-hills, and about a
dozen heaps of stones piled up irregularly, but all showing signs of
having once been joined together (cf. Burckhardt, pp. 847-8; and Ritter,
Erdk. xiv. pp. 226ff.). But this is hardly correct. As Roediger has
observed (on Wellsted's Reisen, ii. p. 127), "the conjecture has been
based exclusively upon the similarity of name, and there is not the
slightest exegetical tradition to favour it." But similarity of names
cannot prove anything by itself, as the number of places of the same
name, but in different localities, that we meet with in the Bible, is
very considerable. Moreover, the further assumption which is founded
upon this conjecture, namely, that the Israelites went from Sinai past
Dahab, not only appears untenable for the reasons given above, but is
actually rendered impossible by the locality itself. The approach to
this tongue of land, which projects between two steep lines of coast,
with lofty mountain ranges of from 800 to 2000 feet in height on both
north and south, leads from Sinai through far too narrow and
impracticable a valley for the Israelites to be able to march thither
and fix an encampment there.

(Note: From the mouth of the valley through the masses of the primary
mountains to the sea-coast, there is a fan-like surface of drifts of
primary rock, the radius of which is thirty-five minutes long, the
progressive work of the inundations of an indefinable course of
thousands of years" (Rppell, Nubien, p. 206).)

And if Israel cannot have touched Dahab on its march, every probability
vanishes that Moses should have mentioned this place here, and the name
Di-Sahab remains at present undeterminable. But in spite of our
ignorance of this place, and notwithstanding the fact that even the
conjecture expressed with regard to Laban is very uncertain, there can
be no well-founded doubt that the words "between Paran and Tophel" are
to be understood as embracing the whole period of the thirty-seven years
of mourning, at the commencement of which Israel was in Paran, whilst at
the end they sought to enter Canaan by Tophel (the Edomitish Tafyleh),
and that the expression "opposite to Suph" points back to their first
entrance into the desert. - Looking from the steppes of Moab over the
ground that the Israelites had traversed, Suph, where they first entered
the desert of Arabia, would lie between Paran, where the congregation
arrived at the borders of Canaan towards the west, and Tophel, where
they first ended their desert wanderings thirty-seven years later on the
east.

[Deu 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#002)

In [Deu 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#002) also the retrospective
glance at the guidance through the desert is unmistakeable. "Eleven days
is the way from Horeb to the mountains of Seir as far as Kadesh-Barnea."
With these words, which were unquestionably intended to be something
more than a geographical notice of the distance of Horeb from
Kadesh-barnea, Moses reminded the people that they had completed the
journey from Horeb, the scene of the establishment of the covenant, to
Kadesh, the border of the promised land, in eleven days, that he might
lead them to lay to heart the events which took place at Kadesh itself.
The "way of the mountains of Seir" is not the way along the side of
these mountains, i.e., the way through the Arabah, which is bounded by
the mountains of Seir on the east, but the way which leads to the
mountains of Seir, just as in [Deu 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001)
the way of the Red Sea is the way that leads to this sea. From these
words, therefore, it by no means follows that Kadesh-Barnea is to be
sought for in the Arabah, and that Israel passed through the Arabah from
Horeb to Kadesh. According to [Deu
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019), they departed from Horeb, went
through the great and terrible wilderness by the way to the mountains of
the Amorites, and came to Kadesh-barnea. Hence the way to the mountains
of the Amorites, i.e., the southern part of what were afterwards the
mountains of Judah (see at [Num
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017)), is the same as the way to the
mountains of Seir; consequently the Seir referred to here is not the
range on the eastern side of the Arabah, but Seir by Hormah ([Deu
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#044)), i.e., the border plateau by
Wady Murreh, opposite to the mountains of the Amorites ([Jos
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017); [Jos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#007) : see at [Num
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#003)).

[Deu 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003)

To the description of the ground to which the following addresses refer,
there is appended an allusion to the not less significant time when
Moses delivered them, viz., "on the first of the eleventh month in the
fortieth year," consequently towards the end of his life, after the
conclusion of the divine lawgiving; so that he was able to speak
"according to all that Jehovah had given him in commandment unto them"
(the Israelites), namely, in the legislation of the former books, which
is always referred to in this way ([Deu
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#005), [Deu
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#023); [Deu
5:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029); [Deu
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)). The time was also significant,
from the fact that Sihon and Og, the kings of the Amorites, had then
been slain. By giving a victory over these mighty kings, the Lord had
begun to fulfil His promises (see [Deu
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025)), and had thereby laid Israel
under the obligation to love, gratitude, and obedience (see [Num
21:21-35](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021)). The suffix in הכּתו refers
to Moses, who had smitten the Amorites at the command and by the power
of Jehovah. According to [Jos 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#004);
[Jos 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#012), [Jos
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#031); Edrei was the second capital of
Og, and it is as such that it is mentioned, and not as the place where
Og was defeated ([Deu 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001); [Num
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033)). The omission of the copula ו
before בּאדרעי is to be accounted for from the oratorical character of
the introduction to the addresses which follow. Edrei is the present Dra
(see at [Num 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033)). - In [Deu
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005), the description of the locality
is again resumed in the words "beyond the Jordan," and still further
defined by the expression "in the land of Moab;" and the address itself
is introduced by the clause, "Moses took in hand to expound this law,"
which explains more fully the דּבּר (spake) of [Deu
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003). "In the land of Moab" is a
rhetorical and general expression for "in the Arboth Moab." הואיל does
not mean to begin, but to undertake, to take in hand, with the
subordinate idea sometimes of venturing, or daring ([Gen
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027)), sometimes of a bold
resolution: here it denotes an undertaking prompted by internal impulse.
Instead of being construed with the infinitive, it is construed
rhetorically here with the finite verb without the copula (cf. Ges. 143,
3, b). בּאר probably signified to dig in the Kal; but this is not used.
In the Piel it means to explain (διασαφῆσαι, explanare, lxx, Vulg.),
never to engrave, or stamp, not even here nor in [Deu
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#008) and [Hab
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#002). Here it signifies "to expound
this law clearly," although the exposition was connected with an earnest
admonition to preserve and obey it. "This" no doubt refers to the law
expounded in what follows; but substantially it is no other than the law
already given in the earlier books. "Substantially there is throughout
but one law" (Schultz). That the book of Deuteronomy was not intended to
furnish a new or second law, is as evident as possible from the word
בּאר.

[Deuteronomy 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 1:6</span></span>

Moses commenced with the summons issued by the Lord to Israel at Horeb,
to rise and go to Canaan.

[Deu 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006)

As the epithet applied to God, "Jehovah our God," presupposes the
reception of Israel into covenant with Jehovah, which took place at
Sinai, so the words, "ye have dwelt long enough at this mountain," imply
that the purpose for which Israel was taken to Horeb had been answered,
i.e., that they had been furnished with the laws and ordinances
requisite for the fulfilment of the covenant, and could now remove to
Canaan to take possession of the promised land. The word of Jehovah
mentioned here is not found in this form in the previous history; but as
a matter of fact it is contained in the divine instructions that were
preparatory to their removal (Num 1-4 and 9:15-10:10), and the rising of
the cloud from the tabernacle, which followed immediately afterwards
([Num 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011)). The fixed use of the
name Horeb to designate the mountain group in general, instead of the
special name Sinai, which is given to the particular mountain upon which
the law was given, is in keeping with the rhetorical style of the book.

[Deu 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007)

"Go to the mount of the Amorites, and to all who dwell near." The mount
of the Amorites is the mountainous country inhabited by this tribe, the
leading feature in the land of Canaan, and is synonymous with the "land
of the Canaanites" which follows; the Amorites being mentioned instar
omnium as being the most powerful of all the tribes in Canaan, just as
in [Gen 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016) (see at [Gen
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#016)). שׁכניו, "those who dwell by
it," are the inhabitants of the whole of Canaan, as is shown by the
enumeration of the different parts of the land, which follows
immediately afterwards. Canaan was naturally divided, according to the
character of the ground, into the Arabah, the modern Ghor (see at [Deu
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)); the mountain, the subsequent
mountains of Judah and Ephraim (see at [Num
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017)); the lowland (shephelah), i.e.,
the low flat country lying between the mountains of Judah and the
Mediterranean Sea, and stretching from the promontory of Carmel down to
Gaza, which is intersected by only small undulations and ranges of
hills, and generally includes the hill country which formed the
transition from the mountains to the plain, though the two are
distinguished in [Jos 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040) and [Jos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#008) (see at [Jos
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033).); the south land (negeb: see at
[Num 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017)); and the sea-shore, i.e.,
the generally narrow strip of coast running along by the Mediterranean
Sea from Joppa to the Tyrian ladders, or Rs el Abiad, just below Tyre
(vid., v. Raumer, Pal. p. 49). - The special mention of Lebanon in
connection with the land of the Canaanites, and the enumeration of the
separate parts of the land, as well as the extension of the eastern
frontier as far as the Euphrates (see at [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018)), are to be attributed to the
rhetorical fulness of the style. The reference, however, is not to
Antilibanus, but to Lebanon proper, which was within the northern border
of the land of Israel, as fixed in [Num
34:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#007).

[Deu 1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#008)

This land the Lord had placed at the disposal of the Israelites for them
to take possession of, as He had sworn to the fathers (patriarchs) that
He would give it to their posterity (cf. [Gen
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007); [Gen
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015); [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018)., etc.). The "swearing" on the
part of God points back to [Gen 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016).
The expression "to them and to their seed" is the same as "to thee and
to thy seed" in [Gen 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015); [Gen
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008), and is not to be understood as
signifying that the patriarchs themselves ought to have taken actual
possession of Canaan; but "to their seed" is in apposition, and also a
more precise definition (comp. [Gen
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007) with [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018), where the simple statement "to
thee" is explained by the fuller statement "to thy seed"). ראה has grown
into an interjection = הנּה. לפני נתן: to give before a person,
equivalent to give up to a person, or place at his free disposal (for
the use of the word in this sense, see [Gen
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#009); [Gen
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#010)). Jehovah (this is the idea of
[Deu 1:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006)), when He concluded the
covenant with the Israelites at Horeb, had intended to fulfil at once
the promise which He gave to the patriarchs, and to put them into
possession of the promised land; and Moses had also done what was
required on his part, as he explained in [Deu
1:9-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#009), to bring the people safety to
Canaan (cf. [Exo 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#023)). As the nation
had multiplied as the stars of heaven, in accordance with the promise of
the Lord, and he felt unable to bear the burden alone and settle all
disputes, he had placed over them at that time wise and intelligent men
from the heads of the tribes to act as judges, and had instructed them
to adjudicate upon the smaller matters of dispute righteously and
without respect of person. For further particulars concerning the
appointment of the judges, see at [Exo
18:13-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013), where it is related how
Moses adopted this plan at the advice of Jethro, even before the giving
of the law at Sinai. The expression "at that time," in [Deu
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#009), is not at variance with this. The
imperfect ואמר with vav rel., expresses the order of thought and not of
time. For Moses did not intend to recall the different circumstances to
the recollection of the people in their chronological order, but
arranged them according to their relative importance in connection with
the main object of his address. And this required that he should begin
with what God had done for the fulfilment of His promise, and then
proceed afterwards to notice what he, the servant of God, had done in
his office, as an altogether subordinate matter. So far as this object
was concerned, it was also perfectly indifferent who had advised him to
adopt this plan, whilst it was very important to allude to the fact that
it was the great increase in the number of the Israelites which had
rendered it necessary, that he might remind the congregation how the
Lord, even at that time, had fulfilled the promise which He gave to the
patriarchs, and in that fulfilment had given a practical guarantee of
the certain fulfilment of the other promises as well. Moses accomplished
this by describing the increase of the nation in such a way that his
hearers should be involuntarily reminded of the covenant promise in [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005). (cf. [Gen
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002); [Gen
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#018); [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017); [Gen
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#004)).

[Deu 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#011)

But in order to guard against any misinterpretation of his words, "I
cannot bear you myself alone," Moses added, "May the Lord fulfil the
promise of numerous increase to the nation a thousand-fold." "Jehovah,
the God of your fathers (i.e., who manifested Himself as God to your
fathers), add to you a thousand times, כּכם, as many as ye are, and
bless you as He has said." The "blessing" after "multiplying" points
back to [Gen 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002). Consequently, it is
not to be restricted to "strengthening, rendering fruitful, and
multiplying," but must be understood as including the spiritual blessing
promised to Abraham.

[Deu 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#012)

"How can I myself alone bear your cumbrance, and your burden, and your
strife?" The burden and cumbrance of the nation are the nation itself,
with all its affairs and transactions, which pressed upon the shoulders
of Moses.

[Deu 1:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#013)

לכם הבוּ, give here, provide for yourselves. The congregation was to
nominate, according to its tribes, wise, intelligent, and well-known
men, whom Moses would appoint as heads, i.e., as judges, over the
nation. At their installation he gave them the requisite instructions
([Deu 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016)): "Ye shall hear between
your brethren," i.e., hear both parties as mediators, "and judge
righteously, without respect of person." פּנים הכּיר, to look at the
face, equivalent to פּנים נשׁא ([Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015)), i.e., to act partially (cf.
[Exo 23:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002)). "The judgment is God's,"
i.e., appointed by God, and to be administered in the name of God, or in
accordance with His justice; hence the expression "to bring before God"
([Exo 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006); [Exo
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007), etc.). On the difficult cases
which the judges were to bring before Moses, see at [Exo
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#026).

[Deuteronomy 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 1:19</span></span>

Everything had been done on the part of God and Moses to bring Israel
speedily and safely to Canaan. The reason for their being compelled to
remain in the desert for forty years was to be found exclusively in
their resistance to the commandments of God. The discontent of the
people with the guidance of God was manifested at the very first places
of encampment in the desert (Num 11 and 12); but Moses passed over this,
and simply reminded them of the rebellion at Kadesh (Num 13 and 14),
because it was this which was followed by the condemnation of the
rebellious generation to die out in the wilderness.

[Deu 1:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019)

"When we departed from Horeb, we passed through the great and dreadful
wilderness, which ye have seen," i.e., become acquainted with, viz., the
desert of et Tih, "of the way to the mountains of the Amorites, and came
to Kadesh-Barnea" (see at [Num 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016)).
הלך, with an accusative, to pass through a country (cf. [Deu
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007); [Isa
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010), etc.). Moses had there
explained to the Israelites, that they had reached the mountainous
country of the Amorites, which Jehovah was about to give them; that the
land lay before them, and they might take possession of it without fear
([Deu 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#020), [Deu
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#021)). But they proposed to send out
men to survey the land, with its towns, and the way into it. Moses
approved of this proposal, and sent out twelve men, one from each tribe,
who went through the land, etc. (as is more fully related in Num 13, and
has been expounded in connection with that passage, [Deu
1:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#022)). Moses' summons to them to
take the land ([Deu 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#020), [Deu
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#021)) is not expressly mentioned
there, but it is contained implicite in the fact that spies were sent
out; as the only possible reason for doing this must have been, that
they might force a way into the land, and take possession of it. In [Deu
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#025), Moses simply mentions so much of
the report of the spies as had reference to the nature of the land,
viz., that it was good, that he may place in immediate contrast with
this the refusal of the people to enter in.

[Deu 1:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#026)

"But ye would not go up, and were rebellious against the mouth (i.e.,
the express will) of Jehovah our God, and murmured in your tents, and
said, Because Jehovah hated us, He hath brought us forth out of the land
of Egypt, to give us into the hand of the Amorites to destroy us."
שׂנאה, either an infinitive with a feminine termination, or a verbal
noun construed with an accusative (see Ges. 133; Ewald, 238, a.). - By
the allusion to the murmuring in the tents, Moses points them to [Num
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001), and then proceeds to describe
the rebellion of the congregation related there ([Deu
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#002)), in such a manner that the
state of mind manifested on that occasion presents the appearance of the
basest ingratitude, inasmuch as the people declared the greatest
blessing conferred upon them by God, viz., their deliverance from Egypt,
to have been an act of hatred on His part. At the same time, by
addressing the existing members of the nation, as if they themselves had
spoken so, whereas the whole congregation that rebelled at Kadesh had
fallen in the desert, and a fresh generation was now gathered round him,
Moses points to the fact, that the sinful corruption which broke out at
that time, and bore such bitter fruit, had not died out with the older
generation, but was germinating still in the existing Israel, and even
though it might be deeply hidden in their hearts, would be sure to break
forth again.

[Deu 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#028)

"Whither shall we go up? Our brethren (the spies) have quite discouraged
our heart" (המס, lit., to cause to flow away; cf. [Jos
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009)), viz., through their report ([Num
13:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#028), [Num
13:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#031)), the substance of which is
repeated here. The expression בּשּׁמים, "in heaven," towering up into
heaven, which is added to "towns great and fortified," is not an
exaggeration, but, as Moses also uses it in [Deu
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001), a rhetorical description of the
impression actually received with regard to the size of the towns.

(Note: "The eyes of weak faith or unbelief saw the towns really towering
up to heaven. Nor did the height appear less, even to the eyes of faith,
in relation, that is to say, to its own power. Faith does not hide the
difficulties from itself, that it may not rob the Lord, who helps it
over them, of any of the praise that is justly His due" (Schultz).)

"The sons of the Anakims:" see at [Num
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022).

[Deu 1:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#029)

The attempt made by Moses to inspire the despondent people with courage,
when they were ready to despair of ever conquering the Canaanites, by
pointing them to the help of the Lord, which they had experienced in so
mighty and visible a manner in Egypt and the desert, and to urge them to
renewed confidence in this their almighty Helper and Guide, was
altogether without success. And just because the appeal of Moses was
unsuccessful, it is passed over in the historical account in Num 13; all
that is mentioned there ([Deu 1:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006))
being the effort made by Joshua and Caleb to stir up the people, and
that on account of the effects which followed the courageous bearing of
these two men, so far as their own future history was concerned. The
words "goeth before you," in [Deu
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#030), are resumed in [Deu
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#033), and carried out still further.
"Jehovah,...He shall fight for you according to all (כּכל) that," i.e.,
in exactly the same manner, as, "He did for you in Egypt," especially at
the crossing of the Red Sea (Ex 14), "and in the wilderness, which thou
hast seen (ראית, as in [Deu 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019)),
where (אשׁר without בּו in a loose connection; see Ewald, 331, c. and
333, a.) Jehovah thy God bore thee as a man beareth his son;" i.e.,
supported, tended, and provided for thee in the most fatherly way (see
the similar figure in [Num 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012), and
expanded still more fully in [Psa
23:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)).

[Deu 1:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#032)

"And even at this word ye remained unbelieving towards the Lord;" i.e.,
notwithstanding the fact that I reminded you of all the gracious help
that he had experienced from your God, ye persisted in your unbelief.
The participle אינכם מאמינם, "ye were not believing," is intended to
describe their unbelief as a permanent condition. This unbelief was all
the more grievous a sin, because the Lord their God went before them all
the way in the pillar of cloud and fire, to guide and to defend them. On
the fact itself, comp. [Num 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015).,
[Num 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033), with [Exo
13:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021).

[Deu 1:34-37](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#034)

Jehovah was angry, therefore, when He heard these loud words, and swore
that He would not let any one of those men, that evil generation, enter
the promised land, with the exception of Caleb, because he had followed
the Lord faithfully (cf. [Num
14:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#021)). The hod in זוּלתי is the
antiquated connecting vowel of the construct state.

But in order that he might impress upon the people the judgment of the
holy God in all its stern severity, Moses added in [Deu
1:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#037) : "also Jehovah was angry with me
for your sakes, saying, Thou also shalt not go in thither;" and he did
this before mentioning Joshua, who was excepted from the judgment as
well as Caleb, because his ultimate intention was to impress also upon
the minds of the people the fact, that even in wrath the Lord had been
mindful of His covenant, and when pronouncing the sentence upon His
servant Moses, had given the people a leader in the person of Joshua,
who was to bring them into the promised inheritance. We are not to infer
from the close connection in which this event, which did not take place
according to [Num 20:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001) till the
second arrival of the congregation at Kadesh, is placed with the earlier
judgment of God at Kadesh, that the two were contemporaneous, and so
supply, after "the Lord as angry with me," the words "on that occasion."
For Moses did not intend to teach the people history and chronology, but
to set before them the holiness of the judgments of the Lord. By using
the expression "for your sakes," Moses did not wish to free himself from
guilt. Even in this book his sin at the water of strife is not passed
over in silence (cf. [Deu 32:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#051)). But
on the present occasion, if he had given prominence to his own fault, he
would have weakened the object for which he referred to this event,
viz., to stimulate the consciences of the people, and instil into them a
wholesome dread of sin, by holding up before them the magnitude of their
guilt. But in order that he might give no encouragement to false
security respecting their own sin, on the ground that even highly gifted
men of God fall into sin as well, Moses simply pointed out the fact,
that the quarrelling of the people with him occasioned the wrath of God
to fall upon him also.

[Deu 1:38-44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#038)

"Who standeth before thee," equivalent to "in thy service" ([Exo
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013); [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011) : for this meaning, see [Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008); [Deu
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#007); [Kg1
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#028)). "Strengthen him:" comp. [Deu
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#007); and with regard to the
installation of Joshua as the leader of Israel, see [Num
27:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018). The suffix in ינחילנּה
points back to הארץ in [Deu 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#035).
Joshua would divide the land among the Israelites for an inheritance,
viz., (v. 39) among the young Israelites, the children of the condemned
generation, whom Moses, when making a further communication of the
judicial sentence of God ([Num 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#031)),
had described as having no share in the sins of their parents, by
adding, "who know not to-day what is good and evil." This expression is
used to denote a condition of spiritual infancy and moral responsibility
([Isa 7:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015)). It is different in
[Sa2 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#036). - In [Deu
1:40-45](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#040) he proceeds to describe still
further, according to [Num 14:39-45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#039),
how the people, by resisting the command of God to go back into the
desert ([Deu 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#041), compared with [Num
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#025)), had simply brought still
greater calamities upon themselves, and had had to atone for the
presumptuous attempt to force a way into Canaan, in opposition to the
express will of the Lord, by enduring a miserable defeat. Instead of
"they acted presumptuously to go up" ([Num
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#044)), Moses says here, in [Deu
1:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#041), "ye acted frivolously to go up;"
and in [Deu 1:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#043), "ye acted rashly,
and went up." הזיד from זוּד, to boil, or boil over ([Gen
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029)), signifies to act
thoughtlessly, haughtily, or rashly. On the particular fact mentioned in
[Deu 1:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#044), see at [Num
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#045).

[Deu 1:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#045)

"Then ye returned and wept before Jehovah," i.e., before the sanctuary;
"but Jehovah did not hearken to your voice." שׁוּב does not refer to the
return to Kadesh, but to an inward turning, not indeed true conversion
to repentance, but simply the giving up of their rash enterprise, which
they had undertaken in opposition to the commandment of God-the return
from a defiant attitude to unbelieving complaining on account of the
misfortune that had come upon them. Such complaining God never hears.
"And ye sat (remained) in Kadesh many days, that ye remained," i.e., not
"as many days as ye had been there already before the return of the
spies," or "as long as ye remained in all the other stations together,
viz., the half of thirty-eight years" (as Seder Olam and many of the
Rabbins interpret); but "just as long as ye did remain there," as we may
see from a comparison of [Deu 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#025). It
seemed superfluous to mention more precisely the time they spent in
Kadesh, because that was well known to the people, whom Moses was
addressing. He therefore contented himself with fixing it by simply
referring to its duration, which was known to them all. It is no doubt
impossible for us to determine the time they remained in Kadesh, because
the expression "many days" is imply a relative one, and may signify many
years, just as well as many months or weeks. But it by no means warrants
the assumption of Fires and others, that no absolute departure of the
whole of the people from Kadesh ever took place. Such an assumption is
at variance with [Deu 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001). The change
of subjects, "ye sat," etc. ([Deu
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046)), and "we turned and removed"
([Deu 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001)), by no means proves that
Moses only went away with that part of the congregation which attached
itself to him, whilst the other portion, which was most thoroughly
estranged from him, or rather from the Lord, remained there still. The
change of subject is rather to be explained from the fact that Moses was
passing from the consideration of the events in Kadesh, which he held up
before the people as a warning, to a description of the further guidance
of Israel. The reference to those events had led him involuntarily, from
[Deu 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#022) onwards, to distinguish
between himself and the people, and to address his words to them for the
purpose of bringing out their rebellion against God. And now that he had
finished with this, he returned to the communicative mode of address
with which he set out in [Deu 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006), but
which he had suspended again until [Deu
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 2](deu002)

</div>
