<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu030)  [Next](deu032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 31:0</span></span>

IV\. Moses' Farewell and Death - Deuteronomy 31-34

With the renewal of the covenant, by the choice set before the people
between blessing and curse, life and death, Moses had finished the
interpretation and enforcement of the law ([Deu
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005)), and brought the work of
legislation to a close. But in order that the work to which the Lord had
called him might be thoroughly completed, it still remained for him,
before his approaching death, to hand over the task of leading the
people into Canaan to Joshua, who had been appointed as his successor,
to finish writing out the laws, and to hand over the book of the law to
the priests. The Lord also directed him to write an ode, as a witness
against the people, on account of their obstinacy, and teach it to the
Israelites. To these last arrangements and acts of Moses, which are
narrated in ch. 31 and 32, there are added in ch. 33 the blessing with
which this man of god bade farewell to the tribes of Israel, and in ch.
34 the account of his death, with which the Pentateuch closes.

[Deuteronomy 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 31:1</span></span>

[Deu 31:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#001) describe how Moses
promised the help of the Lord in the conquest of the land, both to the
people generally, and also to Joshua, their leader into Canaan ([Deu
31:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#002)), and commanded the priests to
keep the book of the law, and read it publicly every seventh year ([Deu
31:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009)); and [Deu
31:14-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014), how the Lord appeared to
Moses before the tabernacle, and directed him to compose an ode as a
testimony against the apostasy of the people, and promised Joshua His
assistance. And lastly, [Deu 31:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#024)
relate how the book of the law, when brought to completion, was handed
over to the Levites; and [Deu 31:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#028)
describe the reading of the ode to the people.

[Deu 31:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#001)

In [Deu 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#001) Moses' final arrangements
are announced. ויּלך does not mean "he went away" (into his tent), which
does not tally with what follows ("and spake"); nor is it merely
equivalent to porro, amplius. It serves, as in [Exo
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#001) and [Gen
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022), as a pictorial description of
what he was about to do, in the sense of "he prepared himself," or rose
up. After closing the exposition of the law, Moses had either withdrawn,
or at any rate made a pause, before he proceeded to make his final
arrangements for laying down his office, and taking leave of the people.

[Deu 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#002)

These last arrangements he commences with the declaration, that he must
now bid them farewell, as he is 120 years old (which agrees with [Exo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007)), and can no more go out and in,
i.e., no longer work in the nation and for it (see at [Num
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#017)); and the Lord has forbidden him
to cross over the Jordan and enter Canaan (see [Num
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#024)). The first of these reasons is
not at variance with the statement in [Deu
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#007), that up to the time of his death
his eyes were not dim, nor his strength abated. For this is merely an
affirmation, that he retained the ability to see and to work to the last
moment of his life, which by no means precludes his noticing the decline
of his strength, and feeling the approach of his death.

[Deu 31:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#003)

But although Moses could not, and was not to lead his people into
Canaan, the Lord would fulfil His promise, to go before Israel and
destroy the Canaanites, like the two kings of the Amorites; only they
(the Israelites) were to do to them as the Lord had commanded them,
i.e., to root out the Canaanites (vid., [Deu
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#002).; [Num
33:51](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#051).; [Exo
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#011).).

[Deu 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#006)

Israel was therefore to be of good courage, and not to be afraid of them
(vid., [Deu 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#021); [Deu
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#003)).

[Deu 31:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#007)

Moses then encourages Joshua in the same way in the presence of all the
people, on the strength of the promise of God in [Deu
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#038) and [Num
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018). את־העם תּבוא, "thou wilt come
with this people into the land." These words are quite appropriate; and
the alteration of תּבוא into תּביא, according to [Deu
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#023) (Samar., Syr., Vulg.), is a
perfectly unnecessary conjecture; for Joshua was not appointed leader of
the people here, but simply promised an entrance with all the people
into Canaan.

[Deu 31:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009)

Moses then handed over the law which he had written to the Levitical
priests who carried the ark of the covenant, and to all the elders of
Israel, with instructions to read it to the people at the end of every
seven years, during the festal season of the year of release ("at the
end," as in [Deu 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#001)), viz., at the
fast of Tabernacles (see [Lev 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034)),
when they appeared before the Lord. It is evident from the context and
contents of these verses, apart from [Deu
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#024), that the ninth verse is to be
understood in the way described, i.e., that the two clauses, which are
connected together by vav. relat. ("and Moses wrote this law," "and
delivered it"), are not logically co-ordinate, but that the handing over
of the written law was the main thing to be recorded here. With regard
to the handing over of the law, the fact that Moses not only gave the
written law to the priests, that they might place it by the ark of the
covenant, but also "to all the elders of Israel," proves clearly enough
that Moses did not intend at this time to give the law-book entirely out
of his own hands, but that this handing over was merely an assignment of
the law to the persons who were to take care, that in the future the
written law should be kept before the people, as the rule of their life
and conduct, and publicly read to them. The explanation which J. H.
Mich. gives is perfectly correct, "He gave it for them to teach and
keep." The law-book would only have been given to the priests, if the
object had been simply that it should be placed by the ark of the
covenant, or at the most, in the presence of the elders, but certainly
not to all the elders, since they were not allowed to touch the ark. The
correctness of this view is placed beyond all doubt by the contents of
[Deu 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#010). The main point in hand was
not the writing out of the law, or the transfer of it to the priests and
elders of the nation, but the command to read the law in the presence of
the people at the feast of Tabernacles of the year of release. The
writing out and handing over simply formed the substratum for this
command, so that we cannot infer from them, that by this act Moses
formally gave the law out of his own hands. He entrusted the reading to
the priesthood and the college of elders, as the spiritual and secular
rulers of the congregation; and hence the singular, "Thou shalt read
this law to all Israel." The regulations as to the persons who were to
undertake the reading, and also as to the particular time during the
seven days' feast, and the portions that were to be read, he left to the
rulers of the congregation. We learn from [Neh
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#018), that in Ezra's time they read in
the book of the law every day from the first to the last day of the
feast, from which we may see on the one hand, that the whole of the
Thorah (or Pentateuch), from beginning to end, was not read; and on the
other hand, by comparing the expression in [Deu
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#018), "the book of the law of God,"
with "the law," in [Deu 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014), that
the reading was not restricted to Deuteronomy: for, according to v. 14,
they had already been reading in Leviticus (ch. 23) before the feast was
held - an evident proof that Ezra the scribe did not regard the book of
Deuteronomy like the critics of our day, as the true national law-book,
an acquaintance with which was all that the people required. Moses did
not fix upon the feast of Tabernacles of the sabbatical year as the time
for reading the law, because it fell at the beginning of the year,

(Note: It by no means follows, that because the sabbatical year
commenced with the omission of the usual sowing, i.e., began in the
autumn with the civil year, it therefore commenced with the feast of
Tabernacles, and the order of the feasts was reversed in the sabbatical
year. According to [Exo 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016), the
feast of Tabernacles did not fall at the beginning, but at the end of
the civil year. The commencement of the year with the first of Tisri was
an arrangement introduced after the captivity, which the Jews had
probably adopted from the Syrians (see my bibl. Archaeol. i. 74, note
15). Nor does it follow, that because the year of jubilee was to be
proclaimed on the day of atonement in the sabbatical year with a blast
of trumpets ([Lev 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009)), therefore the
year of jubilee must have begun with the feast of Tabernacles. The
proclamation of festivals is generally made some time before they
commence.)

as Schultz wrongly supposes, that the people might thereby be incited to
occupy this year of entire rest in holy employment with the word and
works of God. And the reading itself was nether intended to promote a
more general acquaintance with the law on the part of the people, - an
object which could not possibly have been secured by reading it once in
seven years; nor was it merely to be a solemn promulgation and
restoration of the law as the rule for the national life, for the
purpose of removing any irregularities that might have found their way
in the course of time into either the religious or the political life of
the nation (Bhr, Symbol. ii. p. 603). To answer this end, it should have
been connected with the Passover, the festival of Israel's birth. The
reading stood rather in close connection with the idea of the festival
itself; it was intended to quicken the soul with the law of the Lord, to
refresh the heart, to enlighten the eyes, - in short, to offer the
congregation the blessing of the law, which David celebrated from his
own experience in Ps. 19:8-15, to make the law beloved and prized by the
whole nation, as a precious gift of the grace of God. Consequently ([Deu
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#012), [Deu
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#013)), not only the men, but the
women and children also, were to be gathered together for this purpose,
that they might hear the word of God, and learn to fear the Lord their
God, as long as they should live in the land which He gave them for a
possession. On [Deu 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#011), see [Exo
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017), and [Exo
34:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#023), where we also find לראות for
להראות ([Exo 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#024)).

[Deuteronomy 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 31:14</span></span>

After handing over the office to Joshua, and the law to the priests and
elders, Moses was called by the Lord to come to the tabernacle with
Joshua, to command him (צוּה), i.e., to appoint him, confirm him in his
office. To this end the Lord appeared in the tabernacle ([Deu
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#015)), in a pillar of cloud, which
remained standing before it, as in [Num
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#005) (see the exposition of [Num
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025)). But before appointing Joshua,
He announced to Moses that after his death the nation would go a whoring
after other gods, and would break the covenant, for which it would be
visited with severe afflictions, and directed him to write an ode and
teach it to the children of Israel, that when the apostasy should take
place, and punishment from God be felt in consequence, it might speak as
a witness against the people, as it would not vanish from their memory.
The Lord communicated this commission to Moses in the presence of
Joshua, that he also might hear from the mouth of God that the Lord
foreknew the future apostasy of the people, and yet nevertheless would
bring them into the promised land. In this there was also implied an
admonition to Joshua, not only to take care that the Israelites learned
the ode and kept it in their memories, but also to strive with all his
might to prevent the apostasy, so long as he was leader of Israel; which
Joshua did most faithfully to the very end of his life (vid., Josh 23
and 24). - The announcement of the falling away of the Israelites from
the Lord into idolatry, and the burning of the wrath of God in
consequence ([Deu 31:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016)), serves as
a basis for the command in [Deu 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019).
In this announcement the different points are simply linked together
with "and," whereas in their actual signification they are subordinate
to one another: When thou shalt lie with thy fathers, and the people
shall rise up, and go a whoring after other gods: My anger will burn
against them, etc. קוּם, to rise up, to prepare, serves to bring out
distinctly the course which the thing would take. The expression,
"foreign gods of the land," indicates that in the land which Jehovah
gave His people, He (Jehovah) alone was God and Lord, and that He alone
was to be worshipped there. בּקרבּו is in apposition to שׁמּה, "whither
thou comest, in the midst of it." The punishment announced in [Deu
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#017) corresponds most closely to the
sin of the nation. For going a whoring after strange gods, the anger of
the Lord would burn against them; for forsaking Him, He would forsake
them; and for breaking His covenant, He would hide His face from them,
i.e., withdraw His favour from them, so that they would be destroyed.
לאכל היה, it (the nation) will be for devouring, i.e., will be devoured
or destroyed (see Ewald, 237, c.; and on אכל in this sense, see [Deu
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016), and [Num
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009)). "And many evils and troubles
will befall it; and it will say in that day, Do not these evils befall
me, because my God is not in the midst of me?" When the evils and
troubles broke in upon the nation, the people would inquire the cause,
and would find it in the fact that they were forsaken by their God; but
the Lord ("but I" in [Deu 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#018) forms
the antithesis to "they" in [Deu
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#017)) would still hide His face,
namely, because simply missing God is not true repentance.

[Deuteronomy 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 31:19</span></span>

"And now," sc., because what was announced in [Deu
31:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016) would take place, "write you
this song." "This" refers to the song which follows in ch. 32. Moses and
Joshua were to write the song, because they were both of them to strive
to prevent the apostasy of the people; and Moses, as the author, was to
teach it to the children of Israel, to make them learn it, that it might
be a witness for the Lord (for Me) against the children of Israel.
"This" is defined still further in [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020), [Deu
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021) : if Israel, through growing
satisfied and fat in its land, which was so rich in costly good, should
turn to other gods, and the Lord should visit it in consequence with
grievous evils and troubles, the song was to answer before Israel as a
witness; i.e., not only serve the Lord as a witness to the people that
He had foretold all the evil consequences of apostasy, and had given
Israel proper warning (Knobel), but to serve, as we may see from [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020), [Deu
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021), and from the contents of the
song, as a witness, on the one hand, that the Lord had conferred upon
the people so many benefits and bestowed upon them such abundant
blessings of His grace, that apostasy from Him was the basest
ingratitude, for which they would justly be punished; and, on the other
hand, that the Lord had not rejected His people in spite of the
punishments inflicted upon them, but would once more have compassion
upon them and requite their foes, and thus would sanctify and glorify
Himself as the only true God by His judgments upon Israel and the
nations. The law, with its commandments, promises, and threats, was
already a witness of this kind against Israel (cf. [Deu
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#026)); but just as in every other
instance the appearance of a plurality of unanimous witnesses raises the
matter into an indisputable truth, so the Lord would set up another
witness against the Israelites besides the law, in the form of this
song, which was adapted to give all the louder warning, "because the
song would not be forgotten out of the mouths of their seed" ([Deu
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021)). The song, when once it had
passed into the mouths of the people, would not very readily vanish from
their memory, but would be transmitted from generation to generation,
and be heard from the mouths of their descendants, as a perpetual
warning voice, as it would be used by Israel for God knew the invention
of the people, i.e., the thoughts and purposes of their heart, which
they cherished (עשׂה used to denote the doing of the heart, as in [Isa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006)) even then before He had brought
them into Canaan. (On [Deu 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020),
vid., [Deu 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005); [Deu
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#005), and [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008).) - In [Deu
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#022) the result is anticipated, and
the command of God is followed immediately by an account of its
completion by Moses (just as in [Exo
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#050); [Lev
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#034), etc.). - After this command
with reference to the song, the Lord appointed Joshua to the office
which he had been commanded to take, urging him at the same time to be
courageous, and promising him His help in the conquest of Canaan. That
the subject to ויצו is not Moses, but Jehovah, is evident partly from
the words themselves, "I will be with thee' (vid., [Exo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012)). (Note: Knobel's assertion (on
[Num 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#023)) that the appointment of
Joshua on the part of Moses by the imposition of hands, as described in
that passage, is at variance with this verse, scarcely needs any
refutation. Or is it really the case, that the installation of Joshua on
the part of God is irreconcilable with his ordination by Moses?)

[Deuteronomy 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 31:24</span></span>

With the installation of Joshua on the part of God, the official life of
Moses was brought to a close. Having returned from the tabernacle, he
finished the writing out of the laws, and then gave the book of the law
to the Levites, with a command to put it by the side of the ark of the
covenant, that it might be there for a witness against the people, as He
knew its rebellion and stiffneckedness ([Deu
31:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#024)). על־ספר כּתב, to write upon
a book, equivalent to write down, commit to writing. תּמּם עד, till
their being finished, i.e., complete. By the "Levites who bare the ark
of the covenant" we are not to understand ordinary Levites, but the
Levitical priests, who were entrusted with the ark. "The Levites" is
simply a contraction for the full expression, "the priests the sons of
Levi" ([Deu 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009)). It is true that,
according to [Num 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004)., the Kohathites
were appointed to carry the holy vessels, which included the ark of the
covenant, on the journey through the desert; but it was the priests, and
not they, who were the true bearers and guardians of the holy things, as
we may see from the fact that the priests had first of all to wrap up
these holy things in a careful manner, before they handed them over to
the Kohathites, that they might not touch the holy things and die ([Num
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015)). Hence we find that on solemn
occasions, when the ark was to be brought out in all its full
significance and glory, - as, for example, in the crossing of the Jordan
([Jos 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#003)., [Deu
4:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009)), when encompassing Jericho
([Jos 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#006), [Jos
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#012)), at the setting up of the law on
Ebal and Gerizim ([Jos 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033)), and at
the consecration of Solomon's temple ([Kg1
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#003)), - it was not by the Levites, but
by the priests, that the ark of the covenant was borne. In fact the
Levites were, strictly speaking, only their (the priests') servants, who
relieved them of this and the other labour, so that what they did was
done in a certain sense through them. If the (non-priestly) Levites were
not to touch the ark of the covenant, and not even to put in the poles
([Num 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#006)), Moses would not have
handed over the law-book, to be kept by the ark of the covenant to them,
but to the priests. ארון מצּד, at the side of the ark, or, according to
the paraphrase of Jonathan, "in a case on the right side of the ark of
the covenant," which may be correct, although we must not think of this
case, as many of the early theologians do, as a secondary ark attached
to the ark of the covenant (see Lundius, Jd. Heiligth. pp. 73, 74). The
tables of the law were deposited in the ark ([Exo
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016); [Exo
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#020)), and the book of the law was to
be kept by its side. As it formed, from its very nature, simply an
elaborate commentary upon the decalogue, it was also to have its place
outwardly as an accompaniment to the tables of the law, for a witness
against the people, in the same manner as the song in the mouth of the
people ([Deu 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021)). For, as Moses
adds in [Deu 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#027), in explanation of
his instructions, "I know thy rebelliousness, and thy stiff neck:
behold, while I am yet alive with you this day, ye have been rebellious
against the Lord (vid., [Deu 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#007)); and
how much more after my death."

With these words Moses handed over the complete book of the law to the
Levitical priests. For although the handing over is not expressly
mentioned, it is unquestionably implied in the words, "Take this book,
and put it by the side of the ark of the covenant," as the finishing of
the writing of the laws is mentioned immediately before. But if Moses
finished the writing of the law after he had received instructions from
the Lord to compose the ode, what he wrote will reach to [Deu
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#023); and what follows from [Deu
31:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#024) onwards will form the appendix
to his work by a different hand.

(Note: The objection brought against this view by Riehm, namely, that
"it founders on the fact that the style and language in [Deu
31:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#024) and [Deu
32:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#044) are just the same as in the
earlier portion of the book," simply shows that he has not taken into
consideration that, with the simple style adopted in Hebrew narrative,
we could hardly expect in eleven verses, which contain for the most part
simply words and sayings of Moses, to find any very striking difference
of language or of style. This objection, therefore, merely proves that
no valid arguments can be adduced against the view in question.)

The supposition that Moses himself inserted his instructions concerning
the preservation of the book of the law, and the ode which follows, is
certainly possible, but not probable. The decision as to the place where
it should be kept was not of such importance as to need insertion in the
book of the law, since sufficient provision for its safe keeping had
been made by the directions in [Deu
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#009).; and although God had commanded
him to write the ode, it was not for the purpose of inserting it on the
Thorah as an essential portion of it, but to let the people learn it, to
put it in the mouth of the people. The allusion to this ode in [Deu
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019). furnishes no conclusive
evidence, either that Moses himself included it in the law-book which he
had written with the account of his oration in [Deu
31:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#028) and Deut 32:1-43, or that the
appendix which Moses did not write commences at [Deu
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#014) of this chapter. For all that
follows with certainty from the expression "this song" ([Deu
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#019) and [Deu
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#022)), which certainly points to the
song in ch. 32, is that Moses himself handed over the ode to the priests
with the complete book of the law, as a supplement to the law, and that
this ode was then inserted by the writer of the appendix in the appendix
itself.

[Deuteronomy 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 31:28</span></span>

Directly after handing over the book of the law, Moses directed the
elders of all the tribes, together with the official persons, to gather
round him, that he might rehearse to them the ode which he had written
fore the people. The summons, "gather unto me," was addressed to the
persons to whom he had given the book of the law. The elders and
officers, as the civil authorities of the congregation, were collected
together by him to hear the ode, because they were to put it in the
mouth of the people, i.e., to take care that all the nation should learn
it. The words, "I will call heaven and earth as witnesses against you,"
refer to the substance of the ode about to be rehearsed, which begins
with an appeal to the heaven and the earth ([Deu
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001)). The reason assigned for this in
[Deu 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#029) is a brief summary of what
the Lord had said to Moses in [Deu
31:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#016), and Moses thought it
necessary to communicate to the representatives of the nation. "The work
of your hands" refers to the idols (vid., [Deu
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#028)).

[Deuteronomy 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 31:30</span></span>

[Deu 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#030) forms the introduction to
the rehearsal of the ode.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 32](deu032)

</div>
