<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu015)  [Next](deu017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 16:1</span></span>

The annual feasts appointed by the law were to be celebrated, like the
sacrificial meals, at the place which the Lord would choose for the
revelation of His name; and there Israel was to rejoice before the Lord
with the presentation of sacrifices. From this point of view Moses
discusses the feasts of Passover, Pentecost, and Tabernacles, assuming
the laws previously given concerning these festivals (Ex 12; [Lev
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001), and Num 28 and 29) as already
known, and simply repeating those points which related to the
sacrificial meals held at these festivals. This serves to explain the
reason why only those three festivals are mentioned, at which Israel had
already been commanded to appear before the Lord in [Exo
23:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014), and [Exo
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#018), [Exo
34:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#024), and not the feast of
trumpets or day of atonement: viz., because the people were not required
to assemble at the sanctuary out of the whole land on the occasion of
these two festivals.

(Note: That the assembling of the people at the central sanctuary is the
leading point of view under which the feasts are regarded here, has been
already pointed out by Bachmann (die Feste, p. 143), who has called
attention to the fact that "the place which Jehovah thy God will choose"
occurs six times ([Deu 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002), [Deu
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#006), [Deu
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#007), [Deu
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011), [Deu
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#015), [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016)); and "before the face of
Jehovah" three times ([Deu 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011) and
[Deu 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016) twice); and that the
celebration of the feast at any other place is expressly declared to be
null and void. At the same time, he has once more thoroughly exploded
the contradictions which are said to exist between this chapter and the
earlier festal laws, and which Hupfeld has revived in his comments upon
the feasts, without troubling himself to notice the careful discussion
of the subject by Hvernick in his Introduction, and Hengstenberg in his
Dissertations.)

[Deu 16:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001)

Israel was to make ready the Passover to the Lord in the earing month
(see at [Exo 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002)). The precise day is
supposed to be known from Ex 12, as in [Exo
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015). פּסח עשׂה (to prepare the
Passover), which is used primarily to denote the preparation of the
paschal lamb for a festal meal, is employed here in a wider
signification viz., "to keep the Passover." At this feast they were to
slay sheep and oxen to the Lord for a Passover, at the place, etc. In
[Deu 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002), as in [Deu
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001), the word "Passover" is employed
in a broader sense, and includes not only the paschal lamb, but the
paschal sacrifices generally, which the Rabbins embrace under the common
name of chagiga; not the burnt-offerings and sin-offerings, however,
prescribed in [Num 28:19-26](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#019), but all
the sacrifices that were slain at the feast of the Passover (i.e.,
during the seven days of the Mazzoth, which are included under the name
of pascha) for the purpose of holding sacrificial meals. This is evident
from the expression "of the flock and the herd;" as it was expressly
laid down, that only a שׂה, i.e., a yearling animal of the sheep or
goats, was to be slain for the paschal meal on the fourteenth of the
month in the evening, and an ox was never slaughtered in the place of
the lamb. But if any doubt could exist upon this point, it would be
completely set aside by [Deu 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003) :
"Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it: seven days shalt thou eat
unleavened bread therewith." As the word "therewith" cannot possibly
refer to anything else than the "Passover" in [Deu
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002), it is distinctly stated that the
slaughtering and eating of the Passover was to last seven days, whereas
the Passover lamb was to be slain and consumed in the evening of the
fourteenth Abib ([Exo 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010)). Moses
called the unleavened bread "the bread of affliction," because the
Israelites had to leave Egypt in anxious flight ([Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011)) and were therefore unable to
leaven the dough ([Exo 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#039)), for the
purpose of reminding the congregation of the oppression endured in
Egypt, and to stir them up to gratitude towards the Lord their
deliverer, that they might remember that day as long as they lived. (On
the meaning of the Mazzothy, see at [Exo
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008) and [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015).) - On account of the importance
of the unleavened bread as a symbolical shadowing forth of the
significance of the Passover, as the feast of the renewal and
sanctification of the life of Israel, Moses repeats in [Deu
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#004) two of the points in the law of
the feast: first of all the one laid down in [Exo
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#007), that no leaven was to be seen in
the land during the seven days; and secondly, the one in [Exo
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#018) and [Exo
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#025), that none of the flesh of the
paschal lamb was to be left till the next morning, in order that all
corruption might be kept at a distance from the paschal food. Leaven,
for example, sets the dough in fermentation, from which putrefaction
ensues; and in the East, if flesh is kept, it very quickly decomposes.
He then once more fixes the time and place for keeping the Passover (the
former according to [Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006) and [Lev
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005), etc.), and adds in [Deu
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#007) the express regulation, that not
only the slaughtering and sacrificing, but the roasting (see at [Exo
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#009)) and eating of the paschal lamb
were to take place at the sanctuary, and that the next morning they
could turn and go back home. This rule contains a new feature, which
Moses prescribes with reference to the keeping of the Passover in the
land of Canaan, and by which he modifies the instructions for the first
Passover in Egypt, to suit the altered circumstances. In Egypt, when
Israel was not yet raised into the nation of Jehovah, and had as yet no
sanctuary and no common altar, the different houses necessarily served
as altars. But when this necessity was at an end, the slaying and eating
of the Passover in the different houses were to cease, and they were
both to take place at the sanctuary before the Lord, as was the case
with the feast of Passover at Sinai ([Num
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)). Thus the smearing of the
door-posts with the blood was tacitly abolished, since the blood was to
be sprinkled upon the altar as sacrificial blood, as it had already been
at Sinai. - The expression "to thy tents," for going "home," points to
the time when Israel was till dwelling in tents, and had not as yet
secured any fixed abodes and houses in Canaan, although this expression
was retained at a still later time (e.g., [Sa1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#002); [Sa2
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#009), etc.). The going home in the
morning after the paschal meal, is not to be understood as signifying a
return to their homes in the different towns of the land, but simply, as
even Riehm admits, to their homes or lodgings at the place of the
sanctuary. How very far Moses was from intending to release the
Israelites from the duty of keeping the feast for seven days, is evident
from the fact that in [Deu 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#008) he
once more enforces the observance of the seven days' feast. The two
clauses, "six days thou shalt eat mazzoth," and "on the seventh day
shall be azereth (Eng. Ver. 'a solemn assembly') to the Lord thy God,"
are not placed in antithesis to each other, so as to imply (in
contradiction to [Deu 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003) and [Deu
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#004); [Exo
12:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018); [Exo
13:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#006); [Lev
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#006); [Num
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#017)) that the feast of Mazzoth was
to last only six days instead of seven; but the seventh day is brought
into especial prominence as the azereth of the feast (see at [Lev
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036)), simply because, in addition to
the eating of mazzoth, there was to be an entire abstinence from work,
and this particular feature might easily have fallen into neglect at the
close of the feast. But just as the eating of mazzoth for seven days is
not abolished by the first clause, so the suspension of work on the
first day is not abolished by the second clause, any more than in [Exo
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#006) the first day is represented as a
working day by the fact that the seventh day is called "a feast to
Jehovah."

[Deu 16:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#009)

With regard to the Feast of Weeks (see at [Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016)), it is stated that the time for
its observance was to be reckoned from the Passover. Seven weeks shall
they count "from the beginning of the sickle to the corn," i.e., from
the time when the sickle began to be applied to the corn, or from the
commencement of the corn-harvest. As the corn-harvest was opened with
the presentation of the sheaf of first-fruits on the second day of the
Passover, this regulation as to time coincides with the rule laid down
in [Lev 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015). "Thou shalt keep the
feast to the Lord thy God according to the measure of the free gift of
thy hand, which thou givest as Jehovah thy God blesseth thee." The ἁπ.
λεγ. מסּת is the standing rendering in the Chaldee for דּי, sufficiency,
need; it probably signifies abundance, from מסס = מסה, to flow, to
overflow, to derive. The idea is this: Israel was to keep this feast
with sacrificial gifts, which every one was able to bring, according to
the extent to which the Lord had blessed him, and ([Deu
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011)) to rejoice before the Lord at
the place where His name dwelt with sacrificial meals, to which the
needy were to be invited (cf. [Deu
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#029)), in remembrance of the fact
that they also were bondmen in Egypt (cf. [Deu
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#015)). The "free-will offering of the
hand," which the Israelites were to bring with them to this feast, and
with which they were to rejoice before the Lord, belonged to the
free-will gifts of burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, drink-offerings, and
thank-offerings, which might be offered, according to [Num
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#039) (cf. [Lev
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#038)), at every feast, along with the
festal sacrifices enjoined upon the congregation. The latter were
binding upon the priests and congregation, and are fully described in
Num 28 and 29, so that there was no necessity for Moses to say anything
further with reference to them.

[Deu 16:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013)

In connection with the Feast of Tabernacles also, he simply enforces the
observance of it at the central sanctuary, and exhorts the people to
rejoice at this festival, and not only to allow their sons and daughters
to participate in this joy, but also the man-servant and maid-servant,
and the portionless Levites, strangers, widows, and orphans. After what
had already been stated, Moses did not consider it necessary to mention
expressly that this festal rejoicing was also to be manifested in joyous
sacrificial meals; it was enough for him to point to the blessing which
God had bestowed upon their cultivation of the corn, the olive, and the
vine, and upon all the works of their hands, i.e., upon their labour
generally ([Deu 16:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013)), as there
was nothing further to remark after the instructions which had already
been given with reference to this feast also ([Lev
23:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034), [Lev
23:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039); Num 29:12-38).

[Deu 16:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016)

In conclusion, the law is repeated, that the men were to appear before
the Lord three times a year at the three feasts just mentioned (compare
[Exo 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017) with [Exo
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014), and [Exo
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#023)), with the additional clause,
"at the place which the Lord shall choose," and the following
explanation of the words "not empty:" "every man according to the gift
of his hand, according to the blessing of Jehovah his God, which He hath
given thee," i.e., with sacrificial gifts, as much as every one could
offer, according to the blessing which he had received from God.

[Deuteronomy 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 16:18</span></span>

Just as in its religious worship the Israelitish nation was to show
itself to be the holy nation of Jehovah, so was it in its political
relations also. This thought forms the link between the laws already
given and those which follow. Civil order - that indispensable condition
of the stability and prosperity of nations and states - rests upon a
conscientious maintenance of right by means of a well-ordered judicial
constitution and an impartial administration of justice. - For the
purpose of settling the disputes of the people, Moses had already
provided them with judges at Sinai, and had given the judges themselves
the necessary instructions for the fulfilment of their duties (Ex 18).
This arrangement might suffice as long as the people were united in one
camp and had Moses for a leader, who could lay before God any difficult
cases that were brought to him, and give an absolute decision with
divine authority. But for future times, when Israel would no longer
possess a prophet and mediator like Moses, and after the conquest of
Canaan would live scattered about in the towns and villages of the whole
land, certain modifications and supplementary additions were necessary
to adapt this judicial constitution to the altered circumstances of the
people. Moses anticipates this want in the following provisions, in
which he first of all commands the appointment of judges and officials
in every town, and gives certain precise injunctions as to their
judicial proceedings (Deut 16:18-17:7); and secondly, appoints a higher
judicial court at the place of the sanctuary for the more difficult
cases ([Deu 17:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008)); and thirdly,
gives them a law for the future with reference to the choice of a king
([Deu 16:14-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#014)).

[Deu 16:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018)

Appointment and Instruction of the Judges. - [Deu
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018). "Judges and officers thou shalt
appoint thee in all thy gates (place, see at [Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010)), which Jehovah thy God shall
give thee, according to thy tribes." The nation is addressed as a whole,
and directed to appoint for itself judges and officers, i.e., to choose
them, and have them appointed by its rulers, just as was done at Sinai,
where the people chose the judges, and Moses inducted into office the
persons so chosen (cf. [Deu 1:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#012)).
That the same course was to be adopted in future, is evident from the
expression, "throughout thy tribes," i.e., according to thy tribes,
which points back to [Deu 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#013).
Election by majorities was unknown to the Mosaic law. The shoterim,
officers (lit., writers, see at [Exo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006)), who were associated with the
judges, according to [Deu 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#015), even
under the previous arrangement, were not merely messengers and servants
of the courts, but secretaries and advisers of the judges, who derived
their title from the fact that they had to draw up and keep the
genealogical lists, and who are mentioned as already existing in Egypt
as overseers of the people and of their work (see at [Exo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006); and for the different opinions
concerning their official position, see Selden, de Synedriis, i. pp.
342-3). The new features, which Moses introduces here, consist simply in
the fact that every place was to have its own judges and officers,
whereas hitherto they had only been appointed for the larger and smaller
divisions of the nation, according to their genealogical organization.
Moses lays down no rule as to the number of judges and shoterim to be
appointed in each place, because this would depend upon the number of
the inhabitants; and the existing arrangement of judges over tens,
hundreds, etc. ([Exo 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021)), would
still furnish the necessary standard. The statements made by Josephus
and the Rabbins with regard to the number of judges in each place are
contradictory, or at all events are founded upon the circumstances of
much later times (see my Archologie, ii. pp. 257-8). - These judges were
to judge the people with just judgment. The admonition in [Deu
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019) corresponds to the instructions
in [Exo 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006) and [Exo
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008). "Respect persons:" as in [Deu
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#017). To this there is added, in [Deu
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020), an emphatic admonition to
strive zealously to maintain justice. The repetition of the word justice
is emphatic: justice, and nothing but justice, as in [Gen
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#010), etc. But in order to give the
people and the judges appointed by them a brief practical admonition, as
to the things they were more especially to observe in their
administration of justice, Moses notices by way of example a few crimes
that were deserving of punishment ([Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021), [Deu
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#022), and [Deu
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#001)), and then proceeds in [Deu
17:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#002) to describe more fully the
judicial proceedings in the case of idolaters.

[Deuteronomy 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 16:21</span></span>

"Thou shalt not plant thee as asherah any wood beside the altar of
Jehovah." נטע, to plant, used figuratively, to plant up or erect, as in
[Ecc 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#011); [Dan
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#025); cf. [Isa
51:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#016). Asherah, the symbol of Astarte
(see at [Exo 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#013)), cannot mean
either a green tree or a grove (as Movers, Relig. der Phnizier, p. 572,
supposes), for the simple reason that in other passages we find the
words עשׂה, make ([Kg1 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#015); [Kg1
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#033); [Kg2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#016); [Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003); [Ch2
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#003)), or הצּיב, set up ([Kg2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#010)), העמיד, stand up ([Ch2
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#019)), and בּנה, build ([Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023)), used to denote the erection of
an asherah, not one of which is at all suitable to a tree or grove. But
what is quite decisive is the fact that in [Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023); [Kg2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#010); [Jer
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002), the asherah is spoken of as
being set up under, or by the side of, the green tree. This idol
generally consisted of a wooden column; and a favourite place for
setting it up was by the side of the altars of Baal.

[Deuteronomy 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 16:22</span></span>

They were also to abstain from setting up any mazzebah, i.e., any
memorial stone, or stone pillar dedicated to Baal (see at [Exo
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#024)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 17](deu017)

</div>
