<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu005)  [Next](deu007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 6:1</span></span>

Announcement of the commandments which follow, with a statement of the
reason for communicating them, and the beneficent results of their
observance. המּצוה, that which is commanded, i.e., the substance of all
that Jehovah had commanded, synonymous therefore with the Thorah ([Deu
4:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#044)). The words, "the statutes and
the rights," are explanatory of and in apposition to "the commandment."
These commandments Moses was to teach the Israelites to keep in the land
which they were preparing to possess (cf. [Deu
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001)).

[Deu 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#002)

The reason for communicating the law was to awaken the fear of God (cf.
[Deu 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010); [Deu
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026)), and, in fact, such fear of
Jehovah as would show itself at all times in the observance of every
commandment. "Thou and thy son:" this forms the subject to "thou
mightest fear," and is placed at the end for the sake of emphasis. The
Hiphil האריך has not the transitive meaning, "to make long," as in [Deu
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#030), but the intransitive, to last
long, as in [Deu 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#016); [Exo
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012), etc.

[Deu 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#003)

The maintenance of the fear of God would bring prosperity, and the
increase of the nation promised to the fathers. In form this thought is
not connected with [Deu 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#003) as the
apodosis, but it is appended to the leading thought in [Deu
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001) by the words "Hear therefore, O
Israel!" which correspond to the expression "to teach you" in [Deu
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001). אשׁר, that, in order that (as in
[Deu 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025); [Deu
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010), etc.). The increase of the
nation had been promised to the patriarchs from the very first ([Gen
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001); cf. [Lev
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#009)). - On "milk and honey," see at
[Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008).

[Deuteronomy 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 6:4</span></span>

With [Deu 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004) the burden of the law
commences, which is not a new law added to the ten commandments, but
simply the development and unfolding of the covenant laws and rights
enclosed as a germ in the decalogue, simply an exposition of the law, as
had already been announced in [Deu
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005). The exposition commences with an
explanation and enforcing of the first commandment. There are two things
contained in it: (1) that Jehovah is the one absolute God; (2) that He
requires love with all the heart, all the soul, and all the strength.
"Jehovah our God is one Jehovah."

(Note: On the majuscula ע and ד in שׁמע and אחד, R. Bochin has this
remark: "It is possible to confess one God with the mouth, although the
heart is far from Him. For this reason ע and ד are majuscula, from which
the tsere subscribed the word עד, 'a witness,' is formed, that every one
may know, when he professes the unity of God, that his heart ought to be
engaged, and free from every other thought, because God is a witness and
knows all things" (J. H. Mich. Bibl. Hebr.).)

This does not mean Jehovah is one God, Jehovah alone (Abenezra), for in
that case לבדּו יהוה would be used instead of אחד יהוה; still less
Jehovah our God, namely, Jehovah is one (J. H. Michaelis). אחד יהוה
together form the predicate of the sentence. The idea is not, Jehovah
our God is one (the only) God, but "one (or the only) Jehovah:" not in
this sense, however, that "He has not adopted one mode of revelation or
appearance here and another there, but one mode only, viz., the
revelation which Israel had received" (Schultz); for Jehovah never
denotes merely a mode in which the true God is revealed or appears, but
God as the absolute, unconditioned, or God according to the absolute
independence and constancy of His actions. Hence what is predicated here
of Jehovah (Jehovah one) does not relate to the unity of God, but simply
states that it is to Him alone that the name Jehovah rightfully belongs,
that He is the one absolute God, to whom no other Elohim can be
compared. This is also the meaning of the same expression in [Zac
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009), where the words added, "and His
name one," can only signify that in the future Jehovah would be
acknowledged as the one absolute God, as King over all the earth. This
clause not merely precludes polytheism, but also syncretism, which
reduces the one absolute God to a national deity, a Baal ([Hos
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#018)), and in fact every form of
theism and deism, which creates for itself a supreme God according to
philosophical abstractions and ideas. For Jehovah, although the absolute
One, is not an abstract notion like "absolute being" or "the absolute
idea," but the absolutely living God, as He made Himself known in His
deeds in Israel for the salvation of the whole world.

[Deu 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)

As the one God, therefore, Israel was to love Jehovah its God with all
its heart, with all its soul, and with all its strength. The motive for
this is to be found in the words "thy God," in the fact that Jehovah was
Israel's God, and had manifested Himself to it as one God. The demand
"with all the heart" excludes all half-heartedness, all division of the
heart in its love. The heart is mentioned first, as the seat of the
emotions generally and of love in particular; then follows the soul
(nephesh) as the centre of personality in man, to depict the love as
pervading the entire self-consciousness; and to this is added, "with all
the strength," sc., of body and soul. Loving the Lord with all the heart
and soul and strength is placed at the head, as the spiritual principle
from which the observance of the commandments was to flow (see also [Deu
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#001); [Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006)). It was in love that the fear of
the Lord ([Deu 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)), hearkening to
His commandments ([Deu 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013)), and the
observance of the whole law ([Deu
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#022)), were to be manifested; but
love itself was to be shown by walking in all the ways of the Lord ([Deu
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#022); [Deu
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#009); [Deu
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#016)). Christ therefore calls the
command to love God with all the heart "the first and great
commandment," and places on a par with this the commandment contained in
[Lev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#008) to love one's neighbour as
oneself, and then observes that on these two commandments hang all the
law and the prophets ([Mat 22:37-40](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037);
[Mar 12:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#029); [Luk
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)).

(Note: In quoting this commandment, Matthew ([Mat
22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037)) has substituted δαίνοια, "thy
mind," for "thy strength," as being of especial importance to spiritual
love, whereas in the lxx the mind (διάνοια) is substituted for the
heart. Mark ([Mar 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#030)) gives the
triad of Deuteronomy (heart, soul, and strength); but he has inserted
"mind" (διάνοια) before strength (ἰσχύς), whilst in [Mar
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033) the understanding (σύνεσις) is
mentioned between the heart and the soul. Lastly, Luke has given the
three ideas of the original passage quite correctly, but has added at
the end, "and with all thy mind" (διάνοια). Although the term διάνοια
(mind) originated with the Septuagint, not one of the Evangelists has
adhered strictly to this version.)

Even the gospel knows no higher commandment than this. The distinction
between the new covenant and the old consists simply in this, that the
love of God which the gospel demands of its professors, is more
intensive and cordial than that which the law of Moses demanded of the
Israelites, according to the gradual unfolding of the love of God
Himself, which was displayed in a much grander and more glorious form in
the gift of His only begotten Son for our redemption, than in the
redemption of Israel out of the bondage of Egypt.

[Deu 6:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006)

But for the love of God to be of the right kind, the commandments of God
must be laid to heart, and be the constant subject of thought and
conversation. "Upon thine heart:" i.e., the commandments of God were to
be an affair of the heart, and not merely of the memory (cf. [Deu
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018)). They were to be enforced upon
the children, talked of at home and by the way, in the evening on lying
down and in the morning on rising up, i.e., everywhere and at all times;
they were to be bound upon the hand for a sign, and worn as bands
(frontlets) between the eyes (see at [Exo
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#016)). As these words are figurative,
and denote an undeviating observance of the divine commands, so also the
commandment which follows, viz., to write the words upon the door-posts
of the house, and also upon the gates, are to be understood spiritually;
and the literal fulfilment of such a command could only be a
praiseworthy custom or well-pleasing to God when resorted to as the
means of keeping the commandments of God constantly before the eye. The
precept itself, however, presupposes the existence of this custom, which
is not only met with in the Mahometan countries of the East at the
present day (cf. A. Russell, Naturgesch. v. Aleppo, i. p. 36; Lane,
Sitten u. Gebr. i. pp. 6, 13, ii. p. 71), but was also a common custom
in ancient Egypt (cf. Wilkinson, Manners and Customs, vol. ii. p. 102).

(Note: The Jewish custom of the Medusah is nothing but a formal and
outward observance founded upon this command. It consists in writing the
words of [Deu 6:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004) and [Deu
11:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013) upon a piece of parchment,
which is then placed upon the top of the doorway of houses and rooms,
enclosed in a wooden box; this box they touch with the finger and then
kiss the finger on going either out or in. S. Buxtorf, Synag. Jud. pp.
582ff.; and Bodenschatz. Kirchl. Verfassung der Juden, iv. pp. 19ff.)

[Deuteronomy 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 6:10</span></span>

To the positive statement of the command there is attached, in the next
place, the negative side, or a warning against the danger to which
prosperity and an abundance of earthly goods so certainly exposed, viz.,
of forgetting the Lord and His manifestations of mercy. The Israelites
were all the more exposed to this danger, as their entrance into Canaan
brought them into the possession of all the things conducive to
well-being, in which the land abounded, without being under the
necessity of procuring these things by the labour of their own hands; -
into the possession, namely, of great and beautiful towns which they had
not built, of houses full of all kinds of good things which they had not
filled, of wells ready made which they had not dug, of vineyards and
olive-plantations which they had not planted. - The nouns ערים, etc. are
formally dependent upon לך לתת, and serve as a detailed description of
the land into which the Lord was about to lead His people.

[Deuteronomy 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 6:12</span></span>

"House of bondage," as in [Exo 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003).
"Not forgetting" is described from a positive point of view, as fearing
God, serving Him, and swearing by His name. Fear is placed first, as the
fundamental characteristic of the Israelitish worship of God; it was no
slavish fear, but simply the holy awe of a sinner before the holy God,
which includes love rather than excludes it. "Fearing" is a matter of
the heart; "serving," a matter of working and striving; and "swearing in
His name," the practical manifestation of the worship of God in word and
conversation. It refers not merely to a solemn oath before a judicial
court, but rather to asseverations on oath in the ordinary intercourse
of life, by which the religious attitude of a man involuntarily reveals
itself.

[Deuteronomy 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 6:14</span></span>

The worship of Jehovah not only precludes all idolatry, which the Lord,
as a jealous God, will not endure (see at [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)), but will punish with
destruction from the earth ("the face of the ground," as in [Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012)); but it also excludes tempting
the Lord by an unbelieving murmuring against God, if He does not remove
any kind of distress immediately, as the people had already sinned at
Massah, i.e., at Rephidim ([Exo
17:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001)).

[Deuteronomy 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 6:17</span></span>

They were rather to observe all His commandments diligently, and do what
was right and good in His eyes. The infinitive וגו להדף contains the
further development of וגו ייטב למען: "so that He (Jehovah) thrust out
all thine enemies before thee, as He hath spoken" (viz., [Exo
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#027)., [Deu
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#011)).

[Deuteronomy 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 6:20</span></span>

In [Deu 6:20-25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020), the teaching to the
children, which is only briefly hinted at in [Deu
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007), is more fully explained. The
Israelites were to instruct their children and descendants as to the
nature, meaning, and object of the commandments of the Lord; and in
reply to the inquiries of their sons, to teach them what the Lord had
done for the redemption of Israel out of the bondage of Egypt, and how
He had brought them into the promised land, and thus to awaken in the
younger generation love to the Lord and to His commandments. The "great
and sore miracles" ([Deu 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#022)) were
the Egyptian plagues, like מפתּים, in [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034). - "To fear," etc., i.e., that we
might fear the Lord.

[Deuteronomy 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 6:25</span></span>

"And righteousness will be to us, if we observe to do:" i.e., our
righteousness will consist in the observance of the law; we shall be
regarded and treated by God as righteous, if we are diligent in the
observance of the law. "Before Jehovah" refers primarily, no doubt, to
the expression, "to do all these commandments;" but, as we may see from
[Deu 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#013), this does not prevent the
further reference to the "righteousness" also. This righteousness before
Jehovah, it is true, is not really the gospel "righteousness of faith;"
but there is no opposition between the two, as the righteousness
mentioned here is not founded upon the outward (pharisaic) righteousness
of works, but upon an earnest striving after the fulfilment of the law,
to love God with all the heart; and this love is altogether impossible
without living faith.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 7](deu007)

</div>
