<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu002)  [Next](deu004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 3:1</span></span>

The Help of God in the Conquest of the Kingdom of Og of Bashan. - [Deu
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001). After the defeat of king Sihon
and the conquest of his land, the Israelites were able to advance to the
Jordan. But as the powerful Amoritish king Og still held the northern
half of Gilead and all Bashan, they proceeded northwards at once and
took the road to Bashan, that they might also defeat this king, whom the
Lord had likewise given into their hand, and conquer his country (cf.
[Num 21:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033)). They smote him at
Edrei, the modern Dra, without leaving him even a remnant; and took all
his towns, i.e., as is here more fully stated in [Deu
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004)., "sixty towns, the whole region
of Argob, the kingdom of Og in Bashan." These three definitions refer to
one and the same country. The whole region of Argob included the sixty
towns which formed the kingdom of Og in Bashan, i.e., all the towns of
the land of Bashan, viz., (according to [Deu
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005)) all the fortified towns, besides
the unfortified and open country towns of Bashan. חבל, the chain for
measuring, then the land or country measured with the chain. The name
"region of Argob," which is given to the country of Bashan here, and in
[Deu 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004), [Deu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013), [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014), and also in [Kg1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#013), is probably derived from רגוב,
stone-heaps, related to רגב, a clump or clod of earth ([Job
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033); [Job
38:38](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#038)). The Targumists have rendered
it correctly טרכונא (Trachona), from τραθών, a rough, uneven, stony
district, so called from the basaltic hills of Hauran; just as the plain
to the east of Jebel Hauran, which resembles Hauran itself, is sometimes
called Tellul, from its tells or hills (Burckhardt, Syr. p. 173).

(Note: The derivation is a much more improbable one, "from the town of
Argob, πρὸς Γέρασαν πόλιν Ἀραβίας, according to the Onomast., fifteen
Roman miles to the west of Gerasa, which is called Ῥαγαβᾶ by Josephus
(Ant. xiii. 15, 5).")

This district has also received the name of Bashan, from the character
of its soil; for בּשׁן signifies a soft and level soil. From the name
given to it by the Arabic translators, the Greek name Βαταναία,
Batanaea, and possibly also the modern name of the country on the
north-eastern slope of Hauran at the back of Mount Hauran, viz.,
Bethenije, are derived.

The name Argob probably originated in the north-eastern part of the
country of Bashan, viz., the modern Leja, with its stony soil covered
with heaps of large blocks of stone (Burckhardt, p. 196), or rather in
the extensive volcanic region to the east of Hauran, which was first of
all brought to distinct notice in Wetzstein's travels, and of which he
says that the "southern portion, bearing the name Harra, is thickly
covered with loose volcanic stones, with a few conical hills among them,
that have been evidently caused by eruptions" (Wetzstein, p. 6). The
central point of the whole is Safa, "a mountain nearly seven hours'
journey in length and about the same in breadth," in which "the black
mass streaming from the craters piled itself up wave upon wave, so that
the centre attained to the height of a mountain, without acquiring the
smoothness of form observable in mountains generally," - "the black
flood of lava being full of innumerable streams of stony waves, often of
a bright red colour, bridged over with thin arches, which rolled down
the slopes out of the craters and across the high plateau" (Wetzstein,
pp. 6 and 7). At a later period this name was transferred to the whole
of the district of Hauran (= Bashan), because not only is the Jebel
Hauran entirely of volcanic formation, but the plain consists throughout
of a reddish brown soil produced by the action of the weather upon
volcanic stones, and even "the Leja plain has been poured out from the
craters of the Hauran mountains" (Wetzstein, p. 23). Through this
volcanic character of the soil, Hauran differs essentially from Balka,
Jebel Ajlun, and the plain of Jaulan, which is situated between the Sea
of Galilee and the upper Jordan on the one side, and the plain of Hauran
on the other, and reaches up to the southern slope of the Hermon. In
these districts the limestone and chalk formations prevail, which
present the same contrast to the basaltic formation of the Hauran as
white does to black (cf. v. Raumer, Pal. pp. 75ff.). - The land of the
limestone and chalk formation abounds in caves, which are not altogether
wanting indeed in Hauran (as v. Raumer supposes), though they are only
found in eastern and south-eastern Hauran, where most of the volcanic
elevations have been perforated by troglodytes (see Wetzstein, pp. 92
and 44ff.). But the true land of caves on the east of the Jordan is
northern Gilead, viz., Erbed and Sut (Wetzst. p. 92). Here the
troglodyte dwellings predominate, whereas in Hauran you find for the
most part towns and villages with houses of one or more stories built
above the surface of the ground, although even on the eastern slope of
the Hauran mountains there are hamlets to be seen, in which the style of
building forms a transition from actual caves to dwellings built upon
the ground. An excavation is first of all made in the rocky plateau, of
the breadth and depth of a room, and this is afterwards arched over with
a solid stone roof. The dwellings made in this manner have all the
appearance of cellars or tunnels. This style of building, such as
Wetzstein found in Hibbike for example, belongs to the most remote
antiquity. In some cases, hamlets of this kind were even surrounded by a
wall. Those villages of Hauran which are built above the surface of the
ground, attract the eye and stimulate the imagination, when seen from a
distance, in various ways. "In the first place, the black colour of the
building materials present the greatest contrast to the green around
them, and to the transparent atmosphere also. In the second place, the
height of the walls and the compactness of the houses, which always form
a connected whole, are very imposing. In the third place, they are
surmounted by strong towers. And in the fourth place, they are in such a
good state of preservation, that you involuntarily yield to the delusion
that they must of necessity be inhabited, and expect to see people going
out and in" (Wetzstein, p. 49). The larger towns are surrounded by
walls; but the smaller ones as a rule have none: "the backs of the
houses might serve as walls." The material of which the houses are built
is a grey dolerite, impregnated with glittering particles of olivine.
"The stones are rarely cemented, but the fine and for the most part
large squares lie one upon another as if they were fused together."
"Most of the doors of the houses which lead into the streets or open
fields are so low, that it is impossible to enter them without stooping;
but the large buildings and the ends of the streets have lofty gateways,
which are always tastefully constructed, and often decorated with
sculptures and Greek inscriptions." The "larger gates have either simple
or (what are most common) double doors. They consist of a slab of
dolerite. There are certainly no doors of any other kind." These stone
doors turn upon pegs, deeply inserted into the threshold and lintel.
"Even a man can only shut and open doors of this kind, by pressing with
the back or feet against the wall, and pushing the door with both hands"
(Wetzstein, pp. 50ff.; compare with this the testimony of Buckingham,
Burckhardt, Seetzen, and others, in v. Raumer's Palestine, pp. 78ff.).

Now, even if the existing ruins of Hauran date for the most part from a
later period, and are probably of a Nabataean origin belonging to the
times of Trajan and the Antonines, yet considering the stability of the
East, and the peculiar nature of the soil of Hauran, they give a
tolerably correct idea of the sixty towns of the kingdom of Og of
Bashan, all of which were fortified with high walls, gates, and bars,
or, as it is stated in [Kg1 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#013),
"with walls and brazen bars."

(Note: It is also by no means impossible, that many of the oldest
dwellings in the ruined towers of Hauran date from a time anterior to
the conquest of the land by the Israelites. "Simple, built of heavy
blocks of basalt roughly hewn, and as hard as iron, with very thick
walls, very strong stone gates and doors, many of which were about
eighteen inches thick, and were formerly fastened with immense bolts,
and of which traces still remain; such houses as these may have been the
work of the old giant tribe of Rephaim, whose king, Og, was defeated by
the Israelites 3000 years ago" (C. v. Raumer, Pal. p. 80, after Porter's
Five Years in Damascus).)

The brazen bars were no doubt, like the gates themselves, of basalt or
dolerite, which might easily be mistaken for brass. Besides the sixty
fortified towns, the Israelites took a very large number of הפּרזי ערי,
"towns of the inhabitants of the flat country," i.e., unfortified open
hamlets and villages in Bashan, and put them under the ban, like the
towns of king Sihon ([Deu 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#006), [Deu
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#007); cf. [Deu
2:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#034)). The infinitive, החרם, is to
be construed as a gerund (cf. Ges. 131, 2; Ewald, 280, a.). The
expression, "kingdom of Og in Bashan," implies that the kingdom of Og
was not limited to the land of Bashan, but included the northern half of
Gilead as well. In [Deu 3:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#008), Moses
takes a retrospective view of the whole of the land that had been taken
on the other side of the Jordan; first of all ([Deu
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009)) in its whole extent from the
Arnon to Hermon, then ([Deu 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010)) in
its separate parts, to bring out in all its grandeur what the Lord had
done for Israel. The notices of the different names of Hermon ([Deu
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009)), and of the bed of king Og ([Deu
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)), are also subservient to this
end. Hermon is the southernmost spur of Antilibanus, the present Jebel
es Sheikh, or Jebel et Telj. The Hebrew name is not connected with חרם,
anathema, as Hengstenberg supposes (Diss. pp. 197-8); nor was it first
given by the Israelites to this mountain, which formed part of the
northern boundary of the land which they had taken; but it is to be
traced to an Arabic word signifying prominens montis vertex, and was a
name which had long been current at that time, for which the Israelites
used the Hebrew name שׂיאן (Sion = נשׂיאן, the high, eminent: [Deu
4:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#048)), though this name did not
supplant the traditional name of Hermon. The Sidonians called it Siron,
a modified form of שׁריון ([Sa1 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005)),
or נשׂיון ([Jer 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#004)), a "coat of
mail;" the Amorites called it Senir, probably a word with the same
meaning. In [Psa 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006), Sirion is used
poetically for Hermon; and Ezekiel ([Eze
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004)) uses Senir, in a mournful dirge
over Tyre, as synonymous with Lebanon; whilst Senir is mentioned in [Ch1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#023), and Shenir in [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008), in connection with Hermon, as a
part of Antilibanus, as it might very naturally happen that the
Amoritish name continued attached to one or other of the peaks of the
mountain, just as we find that even Arabian geographers, such as
Abulfeda and Maraszid, call that portion of Antilibanus which stretches
from Baalbek to Emesa (Homs, Heliopolis) by the name of Sanir.

[Deuteronomy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 3:10</span></span>

The different portions of the conquered land were the following:
המּישׁר, the plain, i.e., the Amoritish table-land, stretching from the
Arnon to Heshbon, and in a north-easterly direction nearly as far as
Rabbath-Ammon, with the towns of Heshbon, Bezer, Medeba, Jahza, and
Dibon ([Deu 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043); [Jos
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#009), [Jos
13:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#016), [Jos
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#021); [Jos
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008); [Jer
48:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#021).), which originally belonged to
the Moabites, and is therefore called "the field of Moab" in [Num
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#020). "The whole of Gilead," i.e.,
the mountainous region on the southern and northern sides of the Jabbok,
which was divided into two halves by this river. The southern half,
which reached to Heshbon, belonged to the kingdom of Sihon ([Jos
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#002)), and was assigned by Moses to
the Reubenites and Gadites ([Deu
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)); whilst the northern half, which
is called "the rest of Gilead" in [Deu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013), the modern Jebel Ajlun,
extending as far as the land of Bashan (Hauran and Jaulan), belonged to
the kingdom of Og ([Jos 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#005)), and was
assigned to the Manassite family of Machir ([Deu
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#015), and [Jos
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#031); cf. v. Raumer, Pal. pp. 229,
230). "And all Bashan unto Salcah and Edrei." All Bashan included not
only the country of Hauran (the plan and mountain), but unquestionably
also the district of Jedur and Jaulan, to the west of the sea of Galilee
and the upper Jordan, or the ancient Gaulonitis (Jos. Ant. xviii. 4, 6,
etc.), as the kingdom of Og extended to the coasts of Geshuri and
Maachathi (see at [Deu 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)). Og had
not conquered the whole of the land of Hauran, however, but only the
greater part of it. His territory extended eastwards to Salcah, i.e.,
the present Szalchat or Szarchad, about six hours to the east of Bozrah,
south of Jebel Hauran, a town with 800 houses, and a castle upon a
basaltic rock, but uninhabited (cf. v. Raumer, Pal. p. 255); and
northwards to Edrei, i.e., the northern Edrei (see at [Num
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#033)), a considerable ruin on the
northwest of Bozrah, three or four English miles in extent, in the old
buildings of which there are 200 families living at present (Turks,
Druses, and Christians). By the Arabian geographers (Abulfeda, Ibn
Batuta) it is called Sora, by modern travellers Adra or Edra (v.
Richter), or Oezraa (Seetzen), or Ezra (Burckhardt), and Edhra
(Robinson, App. 155). Consequently nearly the whole of Jebel Hauran, and
the northern portion of the plain, viz., the Leja, were outside the
kingdom of Og and the land of Bashan, of which the Israelites took
possession, although Burckhardt reckons Ezra as part of the Leja.

[Deuteronomy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 3:11</span></span>

Even in Abraham's time, the giant tribe of Rephaim was living in Bashan
([Gen 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005)). But out of the remnant of
these, king Og, whom the Israelites defeated and slew, was the only one
left. For the purpose of recalling the greatness of the grace of God
that had been manifested in that victory, and not merely to establish
the credibility of the statements concerning the size of Og ("just as
things belonging to an age that has long passed away are shown to be
credible by their remains," Spinoza, etc.), Moses points to the iron bed
of this king, which was still in Rabbath-Ammon, and was nine cubits long
and four broad, "after the cubit of a man," i.e., the ordinary cubit in
common use (see the analogous expression, "a man's pen," [Isa
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)). הלה, for הלא, synonymous with
הנּה. There is nothing to amaze is in the size of the bed or bedstead
given here. The ordinary Hebrew cubit was only a foot and a half,
probably only eighteen Dresden inches (see my Archologie, ii. p. 126,
Anm. 4). Now a bed is always larger than the man who sleeps in it. But
in this case Clericus fancies that Og "intentionally exceeded the
necessary size, in order that posterity might be led to draw more
magnificent conclusions from the size of the bed, as to the stature of
the man who was accustomed to sleep in it." He also refers to the
analogous case of Alexander the Great, of whom Diod. Sic. (xvii. 95)
affirms, that whenever he was obliged to halt on his march to India, he
made colossal arrangements of all kinds, causing, among other things,
two couches to be prepared in the tents for every foot-soldier, each
five cubits long, and two stalls for every horseman, twice as large as
the ordinary size, "to represent a camp of heroes, and leave striking
memorials behind for the inhabitants of the land, of gigantic men and
their supernatural strength." With a similar intention Og may also have
left behind him a gigantic bed as a memorial of his superhuman
greatness, on the occasion of some expedition of his against the
Ammonites; and this bed may have been preserved in their capital as a
proof of the greatness of their foe.

(Note: "It will often be found, that very tall people are disposed to
make themselves appear even taller than they actually are"
(Hengstenberg, Diss. ii. p. 201). Moreover, there are still giants who
are eight feet high and upwards. "According to the N. Preuss. Zeit. of
1857, there came a man to Berlin 8 feet 4 inches high, and possibly
still growing, as he was only twenty years old; and he was said to have
a great-uncle who was nine inches taller" (Schultz).)

Moses might then refer to this gigantic bed of Og, which was known to
the Israelites; and there is no reason for resorting to the improbable
conjecture, that the Ammonites had taken possession of a bed of king Og
upon some expedition against the Amorites, and had carried it off as a
trophy to their capital.

(Note: There is still less probability in the conjecture of J. D.
Michaelis, Vater, Winer, and others, that Og's iron bed was a
sarcophagus of basalt, such as are still frequently met with in those
regions, as much as 9 feet long and 3 1/2 feet broad, or even as much as
12 feet long and 6 feet in breadth and height (vid., Burckhardt, pp.
220, 246; Robinson, iii. p. 385; Seetzen, i. pp. 355, 360); and the
still further assumption, that the corpse of the fallen king was taken
to Rabbah, and there interred in a royal way, is altogether improbable.)

"Rabbath of the sons of Ammon," or briefly Rabbah, i.e., the great ([Jos
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025); [Sa2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)), was the capital of the
Ammonites, afterwards called Philadelphia, probably from Ptolemaeus
Philadelphus; by Polybius, Ῥαββατάμανα; by Abulfeda, Ammn, which is the
name still given to the uninhabited ruins on the Nahr Ammn, i.e., the
upper Jabbok (see Burckhardt, pp. 612ff. and v. Raumer, Pal. p. 268).

[Deuteronomy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 3:12</span></span>

Review of the Distribution of the Conquered Land. - The land which the
Israelites had taken belonging to these two kingdoms was given by Moses
to the two tribes and a half for their possession, viz., the southern
portion from Aroer in the Arnon valley (see at [Num
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034)), and half Gilead (as far as the
Jabbok: see at [Deu 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010)) with its
towns, which are enumerated in [Jos
13:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#015) and [Jos
13:24-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#024), to the Reubenites and
Gadites; and the northern half of Gilead, with the whole of Bashan
(i.e., all the region of Argob: see at [Deu
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004), and [Num
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033)), to the half-tribe of Manasseh.
לכל־הבּשׁן, "as for all Bashan," is in apposition to "all the region of
Argob," and the ל simply serves to connect it; for "all the region of
Argob" was not merely one portion of Bashan, but was identical with "all
Bashan," so far as it belonged to the kingdom of Og (see at v. 4). All
this region passed for a land of giants. הקּרא, to be called, i.e., to
be, and to be recognised as being.

[Deuteronomy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 3:14</span></span>

The region of Argob, or the country of Bashan, was given to Jair (see
[Num 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041)), as far as the territory
of the Geshurites and Maachathites (cf. [Jos
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#005); [Jos
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#011)). "Unto," as far as, is to be
understood as inclusive. This is evident from the statement in [Jos
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#013) : "The children of Israel
expelled not the Geshurites nor the Maachathites; but the Geshurites and
the Maachathites dwell among the Israelites until this day."
Consequently Moses allotted the territory of these two tribes to the
Manassites, because it formed part of the kingdom of Og. "Geshuri and
Maachathi" are the inhabitants of Geshur and Maachah, two provinces
which formed small independent kingdoms even in David's time ([Sa2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003); [Sa2
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037), and [Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006)). Geshur bordered on Aram. The
Geshurites and Aramaeans afterwards took from the Israelites the
Jair-towns and Kenath, with their daughter towns ([Ch1
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#023)). In David's time Geshur had a
king Thalmai, whose daughter David married. This daughter was the mother
of Absalom; and it was in Geshur that Absalom lived for a time in exile
([Sa2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003); [Sa2
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037); [Sa2
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#023); [Sa2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#008)). The exact situation of Geshur
has not yet been determined. It was certainly somewhere near Hermon, on
the eastern side of the upper Jordan, and by a bridge over the Jordan,
as Geshur signifies bridge in all the Semitic dialects. Maachah, which
is referred to in [Ch1 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#006) as a
kingdom under the name of Aram-Maachah (Eng. V. Syria-Maachah), is
probably to be sought for to the north-east of Geshur. According to the
Onomast. (s. v. Μαχαθί), it was in the neighbourhood of the Hermon. "And
he called them (the towns of the region of Argob) after his own name;
Bashan (sc., he called) Havvoth Jair unto this day" (cf. [Num
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041)). The word חוּת (Havvoth), which
only occurs in connection with the Jair-towns, does not mean towns or
camps of a particular kind, viz., tent villages, as some suppose, but is
the plural of חוּה, life (Leben, a common German termination, e.g.,
Eisleben), for which afterwards the word חיּה was used (comp. [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013) with [Ch1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015)). It applies to any kind of
dwelling-place, being used in the passages just mentioned to denote even
a warlike encampment. The Jair's-lives (Jairsleben) were not a
particular class of towns, therefore, in the district of Argob, but Jair
gave this collective name to all the sixty fortified towns, as is
perfectly evident from the verse before us when compared with [Deu
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005) and [Num
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041), and expressly confirmed by [Jos
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#030) and [Kg1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#013), where the sixty fortified towns
of the district of Argob are called Havvoth Jair. - The statement in
[Ch1 2:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#022), that "Jair had
twenty-three towns in Gilead (which is used here as in [Deu
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001); [Jos
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009); [Jos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#015); [Jdg
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017); [Jdg
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001), to denote the whole of Palestine
to the east of the Jordan), and Geshur and Aram took the Havvoth Jair
from them, (and) Kenath and its daughters, sixty towns (sc., in all),"
is by no means at variance with this, but, on the contrary, in the most
perfect harmony with it. For it is evident from this passage, that the
twenty-three Havvoth Jair, with Kenath and its daughters, formed sixty
towns altogether. The distinction between the twenty-three Havvoth Jair
and the other thirty-seven towns, viz., Kenath and its daughters, is to
be explained from the simple fact that, according to [Num
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#042), Nobah, no doubt a family of
sons of Machir related to Jair, conquered Kenath and its daughters, and
called the conquered towns by his name, namely, when they had been
allotted to him by Moses. Consequently Bashan, or the region of Argob,
with its sixty fortified towns, was divided between two of the leading
families of Machir the Manassite, viz., the families of Jair and Nobah,
each family receiving the districts which it had conquered, together
with their towns; namely, the family of Nobah, Kenath and its daughter
towns, or the eastern portion of Bashan; and the family of Jair,
twenty-three towns in the west, which are called Havvoth Jair in [Ch1
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#023), in harmony with [Num
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041), where Jair is said to have
given this name to the towns which were conquered by him. In the address
before us, however, in which Moses had no intention to enter into
historical details, all the (sixty) towns of the whole district of
Argob, or the whole of Bashan, are comprehended under the name of
Havvoth Jair, probably because Nobah was a subordinate branch of the
family of Jair, and the towns conquered by him were under the supremacy
of Jair. The expression "unto this day" certainly does not point to a
later period than the Mosaic age. This definition of time is simply a
relative one. It does not necessarily presuppose a very long duration,
and here it merely serves to bring out the marvellous change which was
due to the divine grace, viz., that the sixty fortified towns of the
giant king Og of Bashan had now become Jair's lives.

(Note: The conquest of these towns, in fact, does not seem to have been
of long duration, and the possession of them by the Israelites was a
very disputed one (cf. [Ch1 2:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#022)).
In the time of the judges we find thirty in the possession of the judge
Jair ([Jdg 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#004)), which caused the old
name Havvoth Jair to be revived.)

[Deuteronomy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 3:15</span></span>

Machir received Gilead (see [Num
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#040)). - In [Deu
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#016) and [Deu
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#017) the possession of the tribes of
Reuben and Gad is described more fully according to its boundaries. They
received the land of Gilead (to the south of the Jabbok) as far as the
brook Arnon, the middle of the valley and its territory. הנּחל תּוך is a
more precise definition of ארנן נחל, expressive of the fact that the
territory of these tribes was not to reach merely to the northern edge
of the Arnon valley, but into the middle of it, viz., to the river
Arnon, which flowed through the middle of the valley; and וּגבוּל (and
the border) is an explanatory apposition to what goes before, as in [Num
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#006), signifying, "viz., the border of
the Arnon valley as far as the river." On the east, "even unto Jabbok
the brook, the (western) border of the Ammonites" (i.e., as far as the
upper Jabbok, the Nahr Ammn: see at [Num
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#024)); and on the west "The Arabah
(the Ghor: see [Deu 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)) and the
Jordan with territory" (i.e., with its eastern bank), "from Chinnereth"
(i.e., the town from which the Sea of Galilee received the name of Sea
of Chinnereth: [Num 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#011); see at [Jos
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#035)) "to the sea of the Arabah, the
Salt Sea under the slopes of Pisgah (see at [Num
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#015) and [Num
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012)) eastward" (i.e., merely the
eastern side of the Arabah and Jordan). - In [Deu
3:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#018) Moses reminds them of the
conditions upon which he had given the two tribes and a half the land
referred to for their inheritance (cf. [Num
32:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#020)).

[Deuteronomy 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 3:21</span></span>

Nomination of Joshua as his Successor. - This reminiscence also recalls
the goodness of God in the appointment of Joshua ([Num
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012).), which took place "at that
time," i.e., after the conquest of the land on the east of the Jordan.
In accordance with the object of his address, which was to hold up to
view what the Lord had done for Israel, he here relates how, at the very
outset, he pointed Joshua to the things which he had seen with his eyes
(הראת עיניך, thine eyes were seeing; cf. Ewald, 335, b.), namely, to the
defeat of the two kings of the Amorites, in which the pledge was
contained, that the faithful covenant God would complete the work He had
begun, and would do the same to all kingdoms whither Joshua would go
over (i.e., across the Jordan).

[Deu 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#022)

For this reason they were not to be afraid; for Jehovah Himself would
fight for them. "He" is emphatic, and adds force to the subject.

[Deu 3:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#023)

Moses then describes how, notwithstanding his prayer, the Lord had
refused him permission to cross over into Canaan and see the glorious
land. This prayer is not mentioned in the historical account given in
the fourth book; but it must have preceded the prayer for the
appointment of a shepherd over the congregation in [Num
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#016), as the Lord directs him in His
reply ([Deu 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#028)) to appoint Joshua as
the leader of the people. In his prayer, Moses appealed to the
manifestations of divine grace which he had already received. As the
Lord had already begun to show him His greatness and His mighty hand, so
might He also show him the completion of His work. The expression,
"begun to show Thy greatness," relates not so much to the mighty acts of
the Lord in Egypt and at the Red Sea (as in [Exo
32:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011), and [Num
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#013).), as to the manifestation of
the divine omnipotence in the defeat of the Amorites, by which the Lord
had begun to bring His people into the possession of the promised land,
and had made Himself known as God, to whom there was no equal in heaven
or on earth. אשׁר before אל מי (v. 24) is an explanatory and causal
relative: because (quod, quia), or for. "For what God is there in heaven
and on earth," etc. These words recall [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011), and are echoed in many of the
Psalms, - in [Psa 86:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008) almost
verbatim. The contrast drawn between Jehovah and other gods does not
involve the reality of the heathen deities, but simply presupposes a
belief in the existence of other gods, without deciding as to the truth
of that belief. גּבוּרת, manifestations of גּבוּרה, mighty deeds.

[Deu 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#025)

"I pray Thee, let me go over." אעבּרה־נּא, a form of desire, used as a
petition, as in [Deu 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#027); [Num
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#022), etc. "That goodly mountain" is
not one particular portion of the land of Canaan, such as the mountains
of Judah, or the temple mountain (according to [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)), but the whole of Canaan
regarded as a mountainous country, Lebanon being specially mentioned as
the boundary wall towards the north. As Moses stood on the lower level
of the Arabah, the promised land presented itself not only to his eyes,
but also to his soul, as a long mountain range; and that no merely as
suggestive of the lower contrast, that "whereas the plains in the East
are for the most part sterile, on account of the want of springs or
rain, the mountainous regions, which are well watered by springs and
streams, are very fertile and pleasant" (Rosenmller), but also on a much
higher ground, viz., as a high and lofty land, which would stand by the
side of Horeb, "where he had spent the best and holiest days of his
life, and where he had seen the commencement of the covenant between God
and His people" (Schultz).

[Deu 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026)

But the Lord would not grant his request. "Let it suffice thee' (satis
sit tibi, as in [Deu 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006)),
substantially equivalent to [Co2 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#008),
"My grace is sufficient for thee" (Schultz). בּ דּבּר, to speak about a
thing (as in [Deu 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007); [Deu
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#019), etc.).

[Deu 3:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#027)

[Deu 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#027) is a rhetorical paraphrase
of [Num 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#012), where the mountains of
Abarim are mentioned in the place of Pisgah, which was the northern
portion of Abarim. (On [Deu 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#028), cf.
[Deu 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#038) and [Num
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#023).)

[Deu 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#029)

"So we abode in the valley over against Beth-peor," i.e., in the Arboth
Moab ([Num 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001)), sc., where we still
are. The pret. ונּשׁב is used, because Moses fixes his eye upon the
past, and looks back upon the events already described in Num 28-34 as
having taken place there. On Beth-Peor, see at [Num
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#028).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 4](deu004)

</div>
