<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc005)  [Next](ecc007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 6:1</span></span>

"There is an evil which I have seen under the sun, and in great weight
it lies upon man: a man to whom God giveth riches, and treasures, and
honour, and he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he may wish, but
God giveth him not power to have enjoyment of it, for a strange man hath
the enjoyment: that is vanity and an evil disease." The author presents
the result of personal observation; but inasmuch as he relates it in the
second tense, he generalizes the matter, and places it scenically before
the eyes of the reader. A similar introduction with ישׁ, but without the
unnecessary asher, is found at [Ecc
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#012); [Ecc
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#005). Regarding בּה, vid., under [Ecc
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#006); על does not denote the subj., as
at [Ecc 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#017) : it appears great to a
man, but it has its nearest lying local meaning; it is a great ([Ecc
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#021)) evil, pressing in its greatness
heavily upon man. The evil is not the man himself, but the condition in
which he is placed, as when, e.g., the kingdom of heaven is compared to
a merchant ([Mat 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#045).), - not the
merchant in himself, but his conduct and life is a figure of the kingdom
of heaven.

[Ecclesiastes 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 6:2</span></span>

To עשׁר וּנך, as at [Ch2 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#011), וך and
honour is added as a third thing. What follows we do not translate: "and
there is nothing wanting ... ;" for that איננּוּ with the pleonastic
suff. may mean: "there is not," is not to be proved from [Gen
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#009), thus: and he spares not for his
soul (lxx καὶ οὐκ κ.τ.λ) what he always desires. חסר is adj. in the
sense of wanting, lacking, as at [Sa1
21:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001) :16; [Kg1
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#022); [Pro
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#009). לנפשׁו, "for his soul," i.e.,
his person, is = the synon. לעצמו found in the later usage of the
language; מן (different from the min, [Ecc
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#008)) is, as at [Gen
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002), partitive. The נכרי, to whom this
considerable estate, satisfying every wish, finally comes, is certainly
not the legal heir (for that he enters into possession, in spite of the
uncertainty of his moral character, [Ecc
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#019), would be in itself nothing less
than a misfortune, yet perfectly in order, [Ecc
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#013) \[14\]), but some stranger
without any just claim, not directly a foreigner (Heiligst.), but, as
Burger explains: talis qui proprie nullum habet jus in bona ejus cui
נכרי dicitur (cf. נכריּה of the unmarried wife in the Book of Proverbs).

That wealth without enjoyment is nothing but vanity and an evil disease,
the author now shows by introducing another historical figure, and
thereby showing that life without enjoyment is worse than never to have
come into existence at all:

[Ecclesiastes 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 6:3</span></span>

"If a man begat an hundred, and lived many years, and the amount of the
days of his years was great, and his soul satisfied not itself in good,
and also he had no grave, then I say: Better than he is the untimely
birth." The accentuation of 3a is like that of 2a. The disjunctives
follow the Athnach, as at [Kg2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013),
only that there Telisha Gedhola stands for Pazer. Hitzig finds
difficulty with the clause לו ... וגם־, and regards it as a marginal
gloss to 5a, taken up into the text at a wrong place. But just the
unexpected form and the accidental nature, more than the inward
necessity of this feature in the figure, leads us to conclude that the
author here connects together historical facts, as conjecturally noted
above, into one fanciful picture. מאה is obviously to be supplemented by
(ובנות) בנים; the Targ. and Midrash make this man to be Cain, Ahab,
Haman, and show at least in this that they extend down into the time of
the Persian kingdom a spark of historical intelligence. שׁן רבּ
interchanges with שׁן הר, [Ecc 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#008),
as at [Neh 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#030). In order to
designate the long life emphatically, the author expresses the years
particularly in days: "and if it is much which (Heiligst.: multum est
quod) the days of his years amount to;" cf. ימי ויּהיוּ, in Gen 5. With
venaphsho there follows the reverse side of this long life with many
children: (1) his soul satisfies not itself, i.e., has no
self-satisfying enjoyment of the good (min, as at [Psa
104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013), etc.), i.e., of all the good
things which he possesses, - in a word, he is not happy in his life; and
(2) an honourable burial is not granted to him, but קב חם, [Jer
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#019), which is the contrary of a
burial such as becomes a man (the body of Artaxerxes Ochus was thrown to
the cats); whereupon Elster rightly remarks that in an honourable burial
and an honourable remembrance, good fortune, albeit shaded with sadness,
might be seen. But when now, to one so rich in children and so
long-lived, neither enjoyment of his good fortune nor even this shaded
glory of an honourable burial is allowed, the author cannot otherwise
judge than that the untimely birth is better than he. In this section
regarding the uncertainty of riches, we have already, [Ecc
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#014), fallen on a reminiscence from
the Book of Job; it is so much the more probable that here also [Job
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#016) has an influence on the formation
of the thought. נפל is the foetus which comes lifeless from the mother's
womb.

[Ecclesiastes 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 6:4</span></span>

The comparison of an untimely birth with such a man is in favour of the
former: "For it cometh in nothingness and departeth in darkness; and
with darkness its name is covered. Moreover, it hath not seen the sun,
and hath not known: it is better with it than with that other." It has
entered into existence, בּהבל, because it was a lifeless existence into
which it entered when its independent life should have begun; and
בּהשׁך, it departeth, for it is carried away in all quietness, without
noise or ceremony, and "with darkness" its name is covered, for it
receives no name and remains a nameless existence, and is forgotten as
if it had never been. Not having entered into a living existence, it is
also (gam) thus happy to have neither seen the sun nor known and named
it, and thus it is spared the sight and the knowledge of all the
vanities and evils, the deceptions and sorrows, that are under the sun.
When we compare its fate with the long joyless life of that man, the
conclusion is apparent: מ ... נחת, plus quietis est huic quam illi,
which, with the generalization of the idea of rest ([Job
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013)) in a wider sense, is = melius
est huic quam illi (זה ... זה, as at [Ecc
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#019)). The generalization of the idea
proceeds yet further in the Mishn. נוח לו, e.g.: "It is better (נוח לו
לאדם) for a man that he throw himself into a lime-kiln than that (ואל),
etc." From this usage Symm. renders מ ... נחת as obj. to ידע לא, and
translates: οὐδὲ ἐπειράθη διαφορᾶς ἑτέρου πράγματος πρὸς ἓτερον ; and
Jerome: neque cognovit distantiam boni et mali, - a rendering which is
to be rejected, because thus the point of the comparison in which it
terminates is broken, for 5b draws the facit. It is true that this
contains a thought to which it is not easy to reconcile oneself. For
supposing that life were not in itself, as over against non-existence, a
good, there is yet scarcely any life that is absolutely joyless; and a
man who has become the father of an hundred children, has, as it
appears, sought the enjoyment of life principally in sexual love, and
then also has found it richly. But also, if we consider his life less as
relating to sense: his children, though not all, yet partly, will have
been a joy to him; and has a family life, so lengthened and rich in
blessings, only thorns, and no roses at all? And, moreover, how can
anything be said of the rest of an untimely birth, which has been
without motion and without life, as of a rest excelling the termination
of the life of him who has lived long, since rest without a subjective
reflection, a rest not felt, certainly does not fall under the point of
view of more or less, good or evil? The saying of the author on no side
bears the probe of exact thinking. In the main he designs to say:
Better, certainly, is no life than a joyless life, and, moreover, one
ending dishonourably. And this is only a speciality of the general
clause, [Ecc 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#002)., that death is
better than life, and not being born is better than both. The author
misunderstands the fact that the earthly life has its chief end beyond
itself; and his false eudaemonism, failing to penetrate to the inward
fountain of true happiness, which is independent of the outward lot,
makes exaggerated and ungrateful demands on the earthly life.

[Ecclesiastes 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 6:6</span></span>

A life extending to more than even a thousand years without enjoyment
appears to him worthless: "And if he has lived twice a thousand years
long, and not seen good - Do not all go hence to one place?" This long
period of life, as well as the shortest, sinks into the night of Sheol,
and has advantage over the shortest if it wants the ראות ט, i.e., the
enjoyment of that which can make man happy. That would be correct if
"good" were understood inwardly, ethically, spiritually; but although,
according to Koheleth's view, the fear of God presides over the
enjoyment of life, regulating and hallowing it, yet it remains unknown
to him that life deepened into fellowship with God is in itself a most
real and blessed, and thus the highest good. Regarding אלּוּ (here, as
at [Est 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#004), with perf. foll.: etsi
vixisset, tamen interrogarem: nonne, etc.); it occurs also in the oldest
liturgical Tefilla, as well as in the prayer Nishmath (vid., Baer's
Siddur, Abodath Jisrael, p. 207). פּ ... אלף, a thousand years twice,
and thus an Adam's life once and yet again. Otherwise Aben Ezra: 1000
years multiplied by itself, thus a million, like פּעמים עשׂרים, 20 x 20
= 400; cf. Targ. [Isa 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026), which
translates שׁבעתים by 343 = 7 x 7 x 7. Perhaps that is right; for why
was not the expression שׁנה אלפּים directly used? The "one place" is, as
at [Ecc 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#020), the grave and Hades,
into which all the living fall. A life extending even to a million of
years is worthless, for it terminates at last in nothing. Life has only
as much value as it yields of enjoyment.

[Ecclesiastes 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 6:7</span></span>

"All the labour of man is for his mouth, and yet his soul has never
enough;" or, properly, it is not filled, so that it desires nothing
further and nothing more; נמלא used as appropriately of the soul as of
the ear, [Ecc 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#008); for that the mouth
and the soul are here placed opposite to one another as "organs of the
purely sensual and therefore transitory enjoyment, and of the deeper and
more spiritual and therefore more lasting kind of joys" (Zck.), is an
assertion which brings out of the text what it wishes to be in it, -
נפשׁ and פּה stand here so little in contrast, that, as at [Pro
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#026); [Isa
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#014); [Isa
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#008), instead of the soul the stomach
could also be named; for it is the soul longing, and that after the
means from without of self-preservation, that is here meant; נפשׁ היפה,
"beautiful soul," Chullin iv. 7, is an appetite which is not fastidious,
but is contented. גּמו, καὶ ὃμως ὃμως δέ, as at [Ecc
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#013); [Psa
129:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#002). All labour, the author means to
say, is in the service of the impulse after self-preservation; and yet,
although it concentrates all its efforts after this end, it does not
bring full satisfaction to the longing soul. This is grounded in the
fact that, however in other respects most unlike, men are the same in
their unsatisfied longing.

[Ecclesiastes 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 6:8</span></span>

"For what hath the wise more than the fool; what the poor who knoweth to
walk before the living?" The old translators present nothing for the
interpretation, but defend the traditional text; for Jerome, like the
Syr., which translates freely, follows the Midrash (fixed in the Targ.),
which understands החיים, contrary to the spirit of the book, of the
blessed future. The question would be easier if we could, with Bernst.
and Ginsburg, introduce a comparat. min before יודע; we would then
require to understand by him who knows to walk before the living, some
one who acts a part in public life; but how strange a designation of
distinguished persons would that be! Thus, as the text stands, יודע
,sdnat is attrib. to לעני, what preference hath the poor, such an one,
viz., as understands (vid., regarding יודע instead of היודע, under [Psa
143:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010)); not: who is intelligent (Aben
Ezra); יודע is not, as at [Ecc 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#011),
an idea contained in itself, but by the foll. הח ... לה (cf. [Ecc
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#013), [Ecc
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#014); and the inf. form, [Exo
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#019); [Num
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#013); [Job
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#023)) obtains the supplement and
colouring required: the sequence of the accents (Zakeph, Tifcha, Silluk,
as e.g., at [Gen 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004)) is not against
this. How the lxx understood its πορευθῆναι κατέναντι τῆς ζωῆς, and the
Venet. it's ἀπιέναι ἀντικρὺ τῆς ζωῆς, is not clear; scarcely as Grtz,
with Mendelss.: who, to go against (נגד, as at [Ecc
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#012)) life, to fight against it, has
to exercise himself in self-denial and patience; for "to fight with
life" is an expression of modern coinage. הח signifies here, without
doubt, not life, but the living. But we explain now, not as Ewald, who
separates יודע from the foll. inf. להלך: What profit has then the wise
man, the intelligent, patient man, above the fool, that he walks before
the living? - by which is meant (but how does this interrog. form agree
thereto?), that the wise, patient man has thereby an advantage which
makes life endurable by him, in this, that he does not suffer destroying
eagerness of desire so to rule over him, but is satisfied to live in
quietness.Also this meaning of a quiet life does not lie in the words הח
... הלך. "To know to walk before the living" is, as is now generally
acknowledged = to understand the right rule of life (Elst.), to possess
the savoir vivre (Heiligst.), to be experienced in the right art of
living. the question accordingly is: What advantage has the wise above
the fool; and what the poor, who, although poor, yet knows how to
maintain his social position? The matter treated of is the insatiable
nature of sensual desire. The wise seeks to control his desire; and he
who is more closely designated poor, knows how to conceal it; for he
lays upon himself restraints, that he may be able to appear and make
something of himself. But desire is present in both; and they have in
this nothing above the fool, who follows the bent of his desire and
lives for the day. He is a fool because he acts as one not free, and
without consideration; but, in itself, it is and remains true, that
enjoyment and satisfaction stand higher than striving and longing for a
thing.

[Ecclesiastes 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 6:9</span></span>

"Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the soul: also
this is vain and windy effort." We see from the fin. הל־ן interchanging
with מר that the latter is not meant of the object ([Ecc
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#009)), but of the action, viz., the
"rejoicing in that which one has" (Targ.); but this does not signify
grassatio,-i.e., impetus animae appetentis, ὁρμὴ τῆς ψυχῆς (cf. Marcus
Aurelius, iii. 16), which Knobel, Heiligst., and Ginsburg compare (for
הלך means grassari only with certain subjects, as fire, contagion, and
the life; and in certain forms, as יהלך for ילך, to which הלך = לכת does
not belong), - but erratio, a going out in extent, roving to a distance
(cf. הלך, wanderer), ῥεμβασμὸς ἐπιθυμίας, Wisd. 4:12. - Going is the
contrast of rest; the soul which does not become full or satisfied goes
out, and seeks and reaches not its aim. This insatiableness,
characteristic of the soul, this endless unrest, belongs also to the
miseries of this present life; for to have and to enjoy is better than
this constant Hungern und Lungern hungering and longing. More must not
be put into 9a than already lies in it, as Elster does: "the only
enduring enjoyment of life consists in the quiet contemplation of that
which, as pleasant and beautiful, it affords, without this mental joy
mingling with the desire for the possession of sensual enjoyment." The
conception of "the sight of the eyes" is certainly very beautifully
idealized, but in opposition to the text. If 9a must be a moral proverb,
then Luther's rendering is the best: "It is better to enjoy the present
good, than to think about other good."

[Ecclesiastes 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 6:10</span></span>

"That which hath been, its name hath long ago been named; and it is
determined what a man shall be: and he cannot dispute with Him who is
stronger than he." According to the usage of the tense, it would be more
correct to translate: That which (at any time) has made its appearance,
the name of which was long ago named, i.e., of which the What? and the
How? were long ago determined, and, so to speak, formulated. This שׁ ...
כּבר does not stand parallel to היה כבר, [Ecc
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#010); for the expression here does not
refer to the sphere of that which is done, but of the predetermination.
Accordingly, אדם ... ונו is also to be understood. Against the accents,
inconsistently periodizing and losing sight of the comprehensiveness of
אדם ... אשׁר, Hitzig renders: "and it is known that, if one is a man, he
cannot contend," etc., which is impossible for this reason, that אדם הוא
cannot be a conditional clause enclosed within the sentence יוכל ...
אשׁר. Obviously ונודע, which in the sense of constat would be a useless
waste of words, stands parallel to שׁמו נקרא, and signifies known, viz.,
previously known, as passive of ידע, in the sense of [Zac
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007); cf. [Psa
139:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001). Bullock rightly compares [Act
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018). After ידע, asher, like ki,
which is more common, may signify "that," [Ecc
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012); [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026); but neither "that he is a man"
(Knobel, Vaih., Luzz., Hengst., Ginsb.), nor "that he is the man"
(Ewald, Elst., Zckler), affords a consistent meaning. As mah after yada'
means quid, so asher after it may mean quod = that which (cf. [Dan
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#019), although it does not at all
stand in need of proof); and id quod homo est (we cannot render הוּא
without the expression of a definite conception of time) is intended to
mean that the whole being of a man, whether of this one or that one, at
all times and on all sides, is previously known; cf. to this pregnant
substantival sentence, [Ecc 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013).
Against this formation of his nature and of his fate by a higher hand,
man cannot utter a word.

The thought in 10b is the same as that at [Isa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#009); [Rom
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#020). The Chethı̂b שׁהתּקּיף

(Note: With He unpointed, because it is omitted in the Kerı̂, as in like
manner in כּשׁה, [Ecc 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#003), שׁה, [Lam
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#018). In the bibl. Rabb., the ה is
noted as superfluous.)

is not inadmissible, for the stronger than man is מנּהּ ... מרי. Also
התקיף might in any case be read: with one who overcomes him, has and
manifests the ascendency over him. There is indeed no Hiph. הת .hpiH
found in the language of the Bible (Herzf. and Frst compare הג, [Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)); but in the Targ., אתקף is
common; and in the school-language of the Talm., הת is used of the
raising of weighty objections, e.g., Kamma 71a. The verb, however,
especially in the perf., is in the passage before us less appropriate.
In לא־יוּכל lie together the ideas of physical (cf. [Gen
43:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032); [Deu
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#017); [Deu
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#005), etc.) and moral inability.

[Ecclesiastes 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 6:11</span></span>

"For there are many words which increase vanity: What cometh forth
therefrom for man?" The dispute (objection), דּין, takes place in words;
דּברים here will thus not mean "things" (Hengst., Ginsb., Zckl.,
Bullock, etc.), but "words." As that wrestling or contending against
God's decision and providence is vain and worthless, nothing else
remains for man but to be submissive, and to acknowledge his limitation
by the fear of God; thus there are also many words which only increase
yet more the multitude of vanities already existing in this world, for,
because they are resultless, they bring no advantage for man. Rightly,
Elster finds herein a hint pointing to the influence of the learning of
the Jewish schools already existing in Koheleth's time. We know from
Josephus that the problem of human freedom and of God's absoluteness was
a point of controversy between opposing parties: the Sadducees so
emphasized human freedom, that they not only excluded (Antt. xiii. 5. 9;
Bell. ii. 8. 14) all divine predetermination, but also co-operation; the
Pharisees, on the contrary supposed an interconnection between divine
predetermination (εἱμαρμένη) and human freedom (Antt. xiii. 5. 9, xviii.
1. 3; Bell. ii. 8. 14). The Talm. affords us a glance at this
controversy; but the statement in the Talm. (in Berachoth 33a, and
elsewhere), which conditions all by the power of God manifesting itself
in history, but defends the freedom of the religious-moral
self-determination of man, may be regarded as a Pharisaic maxim. In Rom
9, Paul places himself on this side; and the author of the Book of
Koheleth would subscribe this passage as his testimony, for the "fear
God" is the "kern und stern" kernel and star of his pessimistic book.

[Ecclesiastes 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 6:12</span></span>

Man ought to fear God, and also, without dispute and murmuring, submit
to His sway: "For who knoweth what is good for man in life during the
number of the days of his vain life, and which he spendeth like a
shadow? No one can certainly show a man what shall be after him under
the sun." We translate אשׁר only by "ja" ("certainly"), because in Germ.
no interrogative can follow "dieweil" ("because"). The clause with asher
(as at [Ecc 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#009); [Ecc
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011); [Ecc
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#015); cf. Song, under [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002)), according to its meaning not
different from ki, is related in the way of proof to that beginning with
ki. Man is placed in our presence. To be able to say to him what is good
for him, - i.e., what position he must take in life, what direction he
must give to his activity, what decision he must adopt in difficult and
important cases, - we ought not only to be able to penetrate his future,
but, generally, the future; but, as Tropfen drops in the stream of
history, we are poor Trpfe simpletons, who are hedged up within the
present. Regarding the accus. of duration, וגו מספּר, pointing to the
brevity of human life, vid., at [Ecc
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#003). With הבלו, the attribute of
breath-like transitiveness is assigned to life (as at [Ecc
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#015); [Ecc
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#009)) (as already in the name given to
Abel, the second son of Adam), which is continued by כּ ויע with the
force of a relative clause, which is frequently the case after preceding
part. attrib., e.g., [Isa 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#023). We
translate: which he spendeth like the (1) shadow \[in the nom.\] (after
[Ecc 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#013); [Job
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#002)); not: like a shadow \[in the
accus.\]; for although the days of life are also likened to a shadow,
[Psa 144:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#004), etc., yet this use of עשׂה
does not accord therewith, which, without being a Graecism (Zirkel,
Grtz), harmonises with the Greek phrase, ποιεῖν χρόνον, [Act
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033); cf. [Pro
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#023), lxx (also with the Lat. facere
dies of Cicero, etc.). Thus also in the Syr. and Palest.-Aram. lacad is
used of time, in the sense of transigere. Aharav does not mean: after
his present condition (Zckl.); but, as at [Ecc
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022); [Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014) : after he has passed away from
this scene. Luzz. explains it correctly: Whether his children will
remain in life? Whether the wealth he has wearied himself in acquiring
will remain and be useful to them? But these are only illustrations. The
author means to say, that a man can say, neither to himself nor to
another, what in definite cases is the real advantage; because, in order
to say this, he must be able to look far into the future beyond the
limits of the individual life of man, which is only a small member of a
great whole.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 7](ecc007)

</div>
