<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est000)  [Next](est002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

The Banquet of King Ahashverosh and the Divorce of Queen Vashti - Esther
1

Ahashverosh, king of Persia, gave, in the third year of his reign, a
banquet to the grandees of his kingdom then assembled in Susa, for the
purpose of showing them the greatness and glory of his kingdom; while
the queen at the same time made a feast for the women in the royal
palace ([Est 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)). On the seventh
day of the feast, the king, "when his heart was merry with wine," sent a
message by his chief courtiers to the queen, commanding her to appear
before him, to show the people and the princes her beauty, and on her
refusal to come, was greatly incensed against her ([Est
1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010)). Upon inquiring of his
astrologers and princes what ought in justice to be done to the queen on
account of this disobedience, they advised him to divorce Vashti by an
irrevocable decree, and to give her dignity to another and better; also
to publish this decree throughout the whole kingdom ([Est
1:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013)). This advice pleasing the
king, it was acted upon accordingly ([Est
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#021) and [Est
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#022)).

[Esther 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 1:1</span></span>

The banquet. [Est 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001) mark a period.
משׁתּה עשׂה, which belongs to ויהי, does not follow till [Est
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003), and even then the statement
concerning the feast is again interrupted by a long parenthesis, and not
taken up again and completed till [Est
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005). On the use of ויהי in historical
narratives at the beginning of relations having, as in the present
instance and [Rut 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001), no reference to
a preceding narrative, see the remark on [Jos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001). Even when no express reference to
any preceding occurrence takes place, the historian still puts what he
has to relate in connection with other historical occurrences by an "and
it came to pass." Ahashverosh is, as has already been remarked on Ezra
4, Xerxes, the son of Darius Hystaspis. Not only does the name אחשׁורושׁ
point to the Old-Persian name Ks'ayars'a (with א prosthetic), but the
statements also concerning the extent of the kingdom ([Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001); [Est
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/est010.htm#001)), the manners and customs of the
country and court, the capricious and tyrannical character of
Ahashverosh, and the historical allusions are suitable only and
completely to Xerxes, so that, after the discussions of Justi in
Eichhorn's Repert. xv. pp. 3-38, and Baumgarten, de fide, etc., pp.
122-151, no further doubt on the subject can exist. As an historical
background to the occurrences to be delineated, the wide extent of the
kingdom ruled by the monarch just named is next described: "He is that
Ahashverosh who reigned from India to Ethiopia over 127 provinces."
מדינה ... שׁבע is not an accusative dependent on מלך, he ruled 127
provinces, for מלך, to reign, is construed with על or בּ, but is annexed
in the form of a free apposition to the statement: "from India to Cush;"
as also in [Est 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009). הדּוּ is in the
Old-Persian cuneiform inscriptions, Hidhu; in Zend, Hendu; in Sanscrit,
Sindhu, i.e., dwellers on the Indus, for Sindhu means in Sanscrit the
river Indus; comp. Roediger in Gesenius, Thes. Append. p. 83, and
Lassen, Indische Alterthumsk. i. p. 2. כּוּשׁ is Ethiopia. This was the
extent of the Persian empire under Xerxes. Mardonius in Herod. 7:9 names
not only the Sakers and Assyrians, but also the Indians and Ethiopians
as nations subject to Xerxes. Comp. also Herod. 7:97, 98, and 8:65, 69,
where the Ethiopians and Indians are reckoned among the races who paid
tribute to the Persian king and fought in the army of Xerxes. The 127
מדינות, provinces, are governmental districts, presided over, according
to [Est 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009), by satraps, pechahs, and
rulers. This statement recalls that made in [Dan
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002), that Darius the Mede set over his
kingdom 120 satraps. We have already shown in our remarks on [Dan
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002) that this form of administration
is not in opposition to the statement of Herod. iii. 89f., that Darius
Hystaspis divided the kingdom for the purpose of taxation into twenty
ἀρχαί which were called σατραπηΐ́αι. The satrapies into which Darius
divided the kingdom generally comprised several provinces. The first
satrapy, e.g., included Mysia and Lydia, together with the southern part
of Phrygia; the fourth, Syria and Phoenicia, with the island of Cyprus.
The Jewish historians, on the other hand, designate a small portion of
this fourth satrapy, viz., the region occupied by the Jewish community
(Judah and Benjamin, with their chief city Jerusalem), as מדינה, [Ezr
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001); [Neh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#003); [Neh
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#006); [Neh
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#003). Consequently the satrapies of
Darius mentioned in Herodotus differ from the medinoth of [Dan
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#002), and [Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001); [Est
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009). The 127 medinoth are a division
of the kingdom into geographical regions, according to the races
inhabiting the different provinces; the list of satrapies in Herodotus,
on the contrary, is a classification of the nations and provinces
subject to the empire, determined by the tribute imposed on them.

[Est 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#002)

The words: in those days, take up the chronological statement of [Est
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001), and add thereto the new
particular: when King Ahashverosh sat on the throne of his kingdom in
the citadel of Susa. שׁבת does not involve the notion of quiet and
peaceable possession after the termination of wars (Clericus, Rambach),
but that of being seated on the throne with royal authority. Thus the
Persian kings are always represented upon a raised seat or throne, even
on journeys and in battle. According to Herod. vii. 102, Xerxes watched
the battle of Thermopylae sitting upon his throne. And Plutarch
(Themistocl. c. 13) says the same of the battle of Salamis. Further
examples are given by Baumg. l.c. p. 85f. On the citadel of Susa, see
[Neh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001), and remarks on [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002).

[Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003)

"In the third year of his reign he made a feast to all his princes and
his servants, when the forces of Persia and Media, the nobles and
princes of the provinces, were before him." משׁתּה עשׂה, to make, to
prepare, i.e., to give, a feast; comp. [Gen
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#008). The princes and the servants
are, all who were assembled about him in Susa. These are specified in
the words which follow as חיל פ. We might supply ל before חיל from the
preceding words, (viz.) the forces, etc.; but this would not suit the
לפניו at the end of the verse. For this word shows that an independent
circumstantial clause begins with חיל, which is added to call attention
to the great number of princes and servants assembled at Susa
(Bertheau): the forces of Persia ... were before him: when they were
before him. By חיל, the host, the forces, Bertheau thinks the body-guard
of the king, which, according to Herod. vii. 40, consisted of 2000
selected horsemen, 2000 lancers, and 10,000 infantry, is intended. There
is, however, no adequate reason for limiting חיל to the body-guard. It
cannot, indeed, be supposed that the whole military power of Persia and
Media was with the king at Susa; but חיל without כּל can only signify an
lite of the army, perhaps the captains and leaders as representing it,
just as "the people" is frequently used for "the representatives of the
people." The Persians and Medes are always named together as the two
kindred races of the ruling nation. See [Dan
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#009), who, however, as writing in the
reign of Darius the Mede, places the Medes first and the Persians
second, while the contrary order is observed here when the supremacy had
been transferred to the Persians by Cyrus. On the form פּרס, see rem. on
[Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001). After the mention of the
forces, the Partemim, i.e., nobles, magnates (see on [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003)), and the princes of the provinces
are named as the chief personages of the civil government.

[Est 1:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004)

"When he showed the glorious riches of his kingdom and the excellent
honour of his greatness many days, one hundred and eighty days." This
verse has been understood by most expositors as stating that the king
magnificently and splendidly entertained all the grandees mentioned in
[Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003) for a full half-year, and
gave them a banquet which lasted 180 days. Clericus supposes proceedings
to have been so arranged, that the proceres omnium provinciarum were not
entertained at one and the same time, but alii post alios, because all
could not be absent together per sex menses a suis provinciis. Bertheau,
however, thinks that the historian did not purpose to give an exact and
graphic description of the proceeding, but only to excite astonishment,
and that they who are astonished will not inquire as to the manner in
which all took place. The text, however, does not say, that the feast
lasted 180 days, and hence offers no occasion for such a view, which is
founded on a mistaken comprehension of [Est
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004), which combines וגו בּהראתו with
משׁתּה עשׂה of [Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003), while the
whole of [Est 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004) is but a further
amplification of the circumstantial clause: when the forces, etc., were
before him; the description of the banquet not following till [Est
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005), where, however, it is joined to
the concluding words of [Est 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004) :
"when these (180) days were full, the king made a feast to all the
people that were found in the citadel of Susa, from great to small,
seven days, in the court of the garden of the king's house." This verse
is thus explained by Bertheau: after the soldiers, nobles, and princes
of the district had been entertained for six months, all the male
inhabitants of Susa were also entertained in a precinct of the palace
garden, the women being feasted by Vashti the queen in the palace ([Est
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#009)), It is, however, obvious, even
from [Est 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#011), which says that on the
seventh day of this banquet the king commanded the queen to appear "to
show the people and the princes her beauty," that such a view of the
occurrence is inadmissible. For this command presupposes, that the
people and princes were assembled at the king's banquet; while,
according to the view of Bertheau and older expositors, who insist on
two banquets, one lasting 180 days, the other seven, the latter was
given to the male inhabitants of Susa only. The princes and people of
the whole kingdom did not, however, dwell in Susa. These princes and
people, to whom the queen was to show her beauty, are undoubtedly the
princes and servants of the king, the forces of Persia and Media, and
the nobles and princes of the provinces enumerated in [Est
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003). With this agrees also the
description of the guests invited to the seven days feast. בּשׁוּשׁן
הנּמצאים כּל־העם does not signify "all the inhabitants of Susa," but all
then present, i.e., then assembled in the citadel of Susa. הנּמצאים used
of persons means, those who for some purpose are found or present in any
place, in distinction from its usual inhabitants; comp. [Ch1
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#017); [Ch2
34:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#032); [Ezr
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#025); and העם does not here signify
people in the sense of population, but people who are met in a certain
place, and is used both here and [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038) of an assembly of nobles and
princes. קטן ועד למגּדול, moreover, does not mean old and young, but
high and low, the greater and lesser servants (עבדים) of the king, and
informs us that of those assembled at Susa, both princes and servants
participated without exception in the banquet.

This view of [Est 1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003) is confirmed
by the consideration, that if the seven days banquet were a different
one from that mentioned in [Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003),
there could be no reason for naming the latter, which would then be not
only entirely unconnected with the narrative, but for which no object at
all would be stated; for בּהראתו cannot be translated, as in the
Vulgate, by ut ostenderet, because, as Bertheau justly remarks, ב cannot
indicate a purpose. From all these reasons it is obvious, that the feast
of which further particulars are given in [Est
1:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005) is the same משׁתּה which the
king, according to [Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003), gave to
his שׂרים and עבדים, and that the text, rightly understood, says nothing
of two consecutive banquets. The sense of [Est
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003) is accordingly as follows: King
Ahasuerus gave to his nobles and princes, when he had assembled them
before him, and showed them the glorious riches of his kingdom and the
magnificence of his greatness for 180 days, after these 180 days, to all
assembled before him in the fortress of Susa, a banquet which lasted
seven days. The connection of the more particular description of this
banquet, by means of the words: when these (the previously named 180)
days were over, following upon the accessory clause, [Est
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004), is anacoluthistic, and the
anacoluthon has given rise to the misconception, by which [Est
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005) is understood to speak of a second
banquet differing from the משׁתּה of [Est
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003). The purpose for which the king
assembled the grandees of his kingdom around him in Susa fore a whole
half-year is not stated, because this has no connection with the special
design of the present book. If, however, we compare the statement of
Herod. vii. 8, that Xerxes, after the re-subjection of Egypt, summoned
the chief men of his kingdom to Susa to take counsel with them
concerning the campaign against Greece, it is obvious, that the assembly
for 180 days in Susa, of the princes and nobles mentioned in the book of
Esther, took place for the purpose of such consultation. When, too, we
compare the statement of Herod. vii. 20, that Xerxes was four years
preparing for this war, we receive also a corroboration of the
particular mentioned in [Est 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#003), that
he assembled his princes and nobles in the third year of his reign. In
this view "the riches of his kingdom," etc., mentioned in [Est
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#004), must not be understood of the
splendour and magnificence displayed in the entertainment of his guests,
but referred to the greatness and resources of the realm, which Xerxes
descanted on to his assembled magnates for the purpose of showing them
the possibility of carrying into execution his contemplated campaign
against Greece. The banquet given them after the 180 days of
consultation, was held in the court of the garden of the royal palace.
בּיתן is a later form of בּית, which occurs only here and [Est
7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007). חצר, court, is the space in the
park of the royal castle which was prepared for the banquet. The
fittings and furniture of this place are described in [Est
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#006). "White stuff, variegated and
purple hangings, fastened with cords of byssus and purple to silver
rings and marble pillars; couches of gold and silver upon a pavement of
malachite and marble, mother-of-pearl and tortoise-shell." The
description consists of mere allusions to, or exclamations at, the
splendour of the preparations. In the first half of the verse the
hangings of the room, in the second, the couches for the guests, are
noticed. חוּר from חור means a white tissue of either linen or cotton.
Bertheau supposes that the somewhat larger form of ch is intended to
denote, even by the size of letter employed, the commencement of the
description. כּרפּס, occurring in Sanscrit, Persian, Armenian, and
Arabic, in Greek κάρπασος, means originally cotton, in Greek, according
to later authorities, a kind of fine flax, here undoubtedly a cotton
texture of various colours. תּכלת, deep blue, purple. The hangings of
the space set apart were of these materials. Blue and white were,
according to Curtius [Est 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#006), [Est
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004), the royal colours of the
Persians; comp. M. Duncker, Gesch. des Alterthums, ii. pp. 891 and 951
of the third edition, in which is described also the royal table, p.
952. The hangings were fastened (אחוּז) with cords of white byssus and
purple to rings and pillars of white marble. מטּות, couches (divans) of
gold and silver, i.e., covered with cloth woven of gold and silver
thread, were prepared for the guests at the feast. These couches were
placed upon a tesselated, mosaic-like floor; the tesselation being
composed of stones of various colours. בּהט, in Arabic a mock stone, in
lxx σμαραγδίτης, a spurious emerald, i.e., a green-coloured stone
resembling the emerald, probably malachite or serpentine. שׁשׁ is white
marble; דּר, Arabic darrun, darratun, pearl, lxx πίννινος λίθος, a
pearl-like stone, perhaps mother-of-pearl. סחרת, a kind of dark-coloured
stone (from סחר = שׁחר, to be dark), black, black marble with
shield-like spots (all three words occur only here).

[Est 1:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#007)

The entertainment: "And drinks poured into vessels of gold! and vessels
differing from vessels, and royal wine in abundance, according to the
hand of a king. ([Est 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#008)) And the
drinking was according to law; nine did compel: for so the king had
appointed to all the officers of his house to do according to every
one's pleasure." השׁקות, inf. Hiph., to give to drink, to hand drinks,
is used substantively. The golden drinking vessels were of various
kinds, and each differing in form from another. Great variety in
drinking vessels pertained to the luxury of Persians; comp. Xenoph.
Cyrop. viii. 8, 18. מלכוּת יין is wine from the royal cellar, therefore
costly wine. Many interpreters understand it of the Chalybonian wine,
which the Persian kings used to drink. See rem. on [Eze
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018). המּלך כּיד, according to the
hand of the king, i.e., according to royal bounty; comp. [Kg1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#013). The words: "the drinking was
according to law, none did compel," are generally understood to say,
that the king abolished for this banquet, the prevailing custom of
pledging his guests. According to Grecian information (see Baumgarten,
p. 12f.), an exceedingly large quantity of wine was drunk at Persian
banquets. This sense of the words is not, however, quite certain. The
argument of Baumgarten, Si hic mos vulgaris fuisset in epulis regiis,
sine dubio haec omnia non commemorata essent, no more holds good than
his further remark: formulam illam אנס אין כּדּת non puto adhibitam
fuisse, nisi jam altera contraria אנס כּדּת solemnis esset facta. The
historian can have noticed this only because it was different from the
Jewish custom. Bertheau also justly remarks: "We are not told in the
present passage, that the king, on this occasion, exceptionally
permitted moderation, especially to such of his guests as were,
according to their ancestral customs, addicted to moderation, and who
would else have been compelled to drink immoderately. For the words with
which this verse concludes, which they imply also a permission to each
to drink as little as he chose, are specially intended to allow every
one to take much. על יסּד, to appoint concerning, i.e., to enjoin, comp.
[Ch1 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#022). בּית רב, those over the
house, i.e., the court officials.

[Esther 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 1:9</span></span>

Vashti the queen also gave a banquet to the women in the royal house
(palace) which belonged to King Ahashverosh, probably in the royal
apartments of the palace, which were placed at her disposal for this
great feast to be given to the women. The name Vashti may be compared
with the Old-Persian vahista, i.e., optimus. In Persian šty, means a
beautiful woman. This statement serves as an introduction to the scene
which follows. [Est 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010) and [Est
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#011). On the seventh, i.e., the last
day of the banquet, when the king's heart was merry with wine, he
commanded his seven chamberlains to bring Vashti the queen before him,
with the royal crown, to show here beauty to the people and princes. וגו
לב כּטוב, when the heart of the king was merry through wine, i.e., when
the wine had made him merry, comp. [Sa2
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#028); [Jdg
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#025). It was the office of the seven
eunuchs who served before the king (את־פּני משׁרת like [Sa1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018)) to be the means of communication
between him and the women, and to deliver to them messages on the part
of the monarch. Their number, seven, was connected with that of the
Amshaspands; see rem. on [Est 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014).
The attempts made to explain their several names are without adequate
foundation; nor would much be gained thereby, the names being of no
significance with respect to the matter in question. In the lxx the
names vary to some extent. The queen was to appear with the crown on her
head (כּתר, κίδαρις or κίταρις, a high turban terminating in a point),
and, as is self-evident, otherwise royally apparelled. The queen was
accustomed on ordinary occasions to take her meals at the king's table;
comp. Herod. ix. 110. There is, however, an absence of historical proof,
that she was present at great banquets. The notice quoted from Lucian in
Brissonius, de regio Pers. princ. i. c. 103, is not sufficient for the
purpose.

[Esther 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 1:12</span></span>

The queen refused to appear at the king's command as delivered by the
eunuchs, because she did not choose to stake her dignity as a queen and
a wife before his inebriated guests. The audacity of Persians in such a
condition is evident from the history related Herod. [Est
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#018).

[Esther 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 1:13</span></span>

The king, greatly incensed at this disobedience to his behest, inquired
of his wise men what was to be done to Queen Vashti according to law.
These wise men are [Est 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013)
designated as those "who knew the times," i.e., astrologers and magi,
who give counsel according to celestial phenomena; comp. the wise men of
Babylon, [Dan 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#027); [Dan
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#015); [Isa
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025); [Isa
47:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#013); [Jer
50:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#035). Of these he inquires, "for thus
was the business of the king conducted before all that knew law and
judgment." דּבר here does not signify word or speech, but matter,
business; and the meaning of this parenthetical sentence is, that in
every matter, the king, before deciding, applied to those who were
skilled in law and judgment to hear their opinions concerning it. With
this is joined a second explanatory parenthetical sentence, [Est
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014) : "And those next him were
Carshena, etc., the seven princes of the Persians and Medes, who behold
the king's countenance, who hold the first seat in his kingdom." אליו
הקּרב is indefinite, and may be understood as expressing the plural. It
is perhaps questionable how this clause should be combined with what
precedes, whether with ודין דּת כּל־ידעי, before all that knew law and
judgment and those next him, or with לחכמים, [Est
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013) : he spoke to the wise men ...
and those next him. In any case the sense is, that the seven princes of
the Persians and Medes were also numbered either among the wise men who
knew the times, or those who were skilled in the law. These seven
princes are the seven king's counsellors of [Ezr
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#014), and by their number of seven
form a counterpart to the seven Amshaspands. They who see the face of
the king, i.e., are allowed direct intercourse with him. Herod. iii. 84
relates of the seven princes who conspired the overthrow of the
pretended Smerdis, that they resolved, that it should be permitted them
to present themselves unannounced before the future king. Hence many
expositors identify these seven princes with the authorities called the
seven counsellors, but without sufficient grounds. The number seven
frequently recurs, - comp. the seven eunuchs, [Est
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005), the seven maidens who waited on
[Est 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#009), - and refers in the present
case to the seven Amshaspands, in others to the days of the week, or the
seven planets. ראשׁנה היּשׁבים, who sit first, i.e., in the highest
place, i.e., constitute the highest authority in the realm. What the
king said ([Est 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#013)) does not follow
till [Est 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#015) : "According to law,
what is to be done to Queen Vashti, because she has not done the word of
the king," i.e., not obeyed his command by the eunuchs? כּדת, according
to law, legally, is placed first because it is intended emphatically to
assert that the proceeding is to be in conformity with the law. עשׂה
with בּ, to inflict something on any one.

[Esther 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">est 1:16</span></span>

The counsel of the wise men. [Est
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#016). Memucan, who was the last
mentioned in [Est 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014), comes forward
as spokesman for the rest, and declares before the king and the princes,
i.e., in a solemn assembly, and evidently as the result of a previous
joint consultation: Vashti the queen has not done wrong to the king
alone, but also to all the princes and all the people, because the
example of the queen will lead all the Median and Persian wives to
despise their husbands. Therefore an irrevocable edict is to be
published decreeing the divorce of Queen Vashti, and this law published
throughout the whole realm, that all wives may show honour to their
husbands. Vashti has not transgressed against the king alone ([Est
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#016)), but against all the princes and
people in all the provinces of King Ahashverosh ([Est
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#016)). In what respect, then, is the
latter assertion true? We are told [Est
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#017) and [Est
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#018). "For the deed of the queen will
come abroad to (על for אל) all women, to bring their husbands into
contempt in their eyes (the infin. להבזות stating the result), while
they will say," etc. (the suffix of בּאמרם relates to the women, who
will appeal to the disobedience of the queen). [Est
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#018). "And this day (i.e., already)
the princesses of the Persians and Medians, who hear of the act of the
queen (דּבר, not the word, but the thing, i.e., her rejection of her
husband's command), will tell it to all the princes of the king, and
(there will be) enough contempt and provocation. קצף is an outburst of
anger; here, therefore, a provocation to wrath. Bertheau makes the words
זק בז וּכדי the object of תּאמרנה, which, after the long parenthesis, is
united to the copula by w, and for, "to speak contempt and wrath,"
reads: to speak contemptuously in wrath. But this change cannot be
substantiated. The expression, to speak wrath, is indeed unexampled, but
that is no reason for making קצף stand for בּקצף, the very adoption of
such an ellipsis showing, that this explanation is inadmissible. The
words must be taken alone, as an independent clause, which may be
readily completed by יהיה: and contempt and wrath will be according to
abundance. כּדי is a litotes for: more than enough. The object of
תּאמרנה must be supplied from the context: it - that is, what the queen
said to her husband. In the former verse Memucan was speaking of all
women; here ([Est 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#018)) he speaks only
of the princesses of the Persians and Medes, because these are staying
in the neighbourhood of the court, and will immediately hear of the
matter, and "after the manner of the court ladies and associates of a
queen will quickly follow, and appeal to her example" (Berth.).

[Esther 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">est 1:19</span></span>

That Vashti come no more before king Ahasuerus; and let the king give
her royal estate unto another that is better than she. After this
argument on the queen's conduct, follows the proposal: "If it please the
king (על טּוב like [Neh 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#005)), let
there go from him a word of the kingdom (i.e., a royal edict), and let
it be written (entered) in the laws of the Persians and the Medes, and
not pass away, that Vashti come no more before King Ahashverosh; and let
the king give her queenship (her royal rank) to another who is better
than she." An edict issued by the king, entered among the laws of the
Persians and Medes, and sealed with the royal signet ([Est
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#008)), does not pass away, i.e.,
remains in force, is irrevocable (comp. [Dan
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#009)). The counsellors press for the
issue of such an edict, for the purpose of making it impossible to the
king to take Vashti again into favour, lest they should experience her
vengeance on the restoration of her influence. רעוּתהּ, her companion,
is any other woman, Vashti being here regarded merely as a woman. הטּובה
includes both beauty and good behaviour (Berth.). By this means, add the
counsellors in [Est 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#020), all the ill
effects of Vashti's contumacy will be obviated. "And when the king's
decree, which he shall make, is heard in his whole kingdom, for it is
great, all wives shall give honour to their husbands, from great to
small." פּתגּן is according to the Keri to be pointed as the
constructive state, פּתגּם. The expression עשׂה פּתגּן is explained by
the circumstance, that פתגם signifies not only edict, decree, but also
thing (see on [Dan 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016)): to do a
thing. In the present verse also it might be so understood: when the
thing is heard which the king will do in his whole kingdom. The
parenthetical clause, for it is great, is intended to flatter the king's
vanity, and induce an inclination to agree to the proposal. "From great
to small" signifies high and low, old and young.

[Esther 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">est 1:21</span></span>

The saying pleased the king and the princes, and the king carried it
into execution. He sent letters into all his provinces to make known his
commands, and to let all husbands know, that they were to bear rule in
their own houses. "In every province according to its writing, and to
every people according to their speech" (comp. [Est
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#009)), that his will might be clearly
understood by all the subjects of his wide domain, who spoke different
languages and used different alphabetical characters. The contents of
these letters follow in וגו להיות, that every man should be master in
his own house. These words state only the chief matter and object of the
edict; but they presuppose that the fact which gave rise to the decree,
viz., the refusal of Vashti, and her consequent deposition, were also
mentioned. The last words: "and that he shall speak according to the
language of his people," are obscure. Older expositors understand them
to mean, that every man was to speak only his native language in his
house, so that in case he had a foreign wife, or several who spoke other
languages, they might be obliged to learn his language, and to use that
alone. Bertheau, on the other hand, objects that such a sense is but
imported into the words, and in no wise harmonizes with the context.
Both these assertions are, however, unfounded. In the words, the man
shall speak according to the language of his people, i.e., he shall
speak his native tongue in his house, it is implied that no other
language was to be used in the house, and the application of this law to
foreign wives is obvious from the context. The rule of the husband in
the house was to be shown by the fact, that only the native tongue of
the head of the house was to be used in the family. Thus in a Jewish
family the Ashdodite or any other language of the wife's native land
could not have been used, as we find to have been the case in Judaea
([Neh 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023)). All other explanations
are untenable, as has been already shown by Baumgarten, p. 20; and the
conjecture set up after Hitzig by Bertheau, that instead of עמּו כּלשׁון
we should read עמּו כּל־שׁוה, every one shall speak what becomes him,
gives not only a trivial, and not at all an appropriate thought, but is
refuted even by the fact that not עם שׁוה, but only ל שׁוה (comp. [Est
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008)) could bear the meaning: to be
becoming to any one. Such a command may, indeed, appear strange to us;
but the additional particular, that every man was to speak his native
tongue, and to have it alone spoken, in his own house, is not so strange
as the fact itself that an edict should be issued commanding that the
husband should be master in the house, especially in the East, where the
wife is so accustomed to regard the husband as lord and master. Xerxes
was, however, the author of many strange facts besides this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 2](est002)

</div>
