<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](gen050)  [Next](exo001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 0:0</span></span>

The Second Book Of Moses(Exodus)

Introduction

Contents and Arrangement of the Book of Exodus

The second book of Moses is called שׁמות ואלה in the Hebrew Codex from
the opening words; but in the Septuagint and Vulgate it has received the
name Ἔξοδος, Exodus, from the first half of its contents. It gives an
account of the first stage in the fulfilment of the promises given to
the patriarchs, with reference to the growth of the children of Israel
into a numerous people, their deliverance from Egypt, and their adoption
at Sinai as the people of God. It embraces a period of 360 years,
extending from the death of Joseph, with which the book of Genesis
closes, to the building of the tabernacle, at the commencement of the
second year after the departure from Egypt. During this period the rapid
increase of the children of Israel, which is described in Exo 1, and
which caused such anxiety to the new sovereigns of Egypt who had
ascended the throne after the death of Joseph, that they adopted measure
for the enslaving and suppression of the ever increasing nation,
continued without interruption. With the exception of this fact, and the
birth, preservation, and education of Moses, who was destined by God to
be the deliverer of His people, which are circumstantially related in
Exo 2, the entire book from Exo 3 to Exo 40 is occupied with an
elaborate account of the events of two years, viz., the last year before
the departure of the Israelites from Egypt, and the first year of their
journey. This mode of treating the long period in question, which seems
out of all proportion when judged by a merely outward standard, may be
easily explained from the nature and design of the sacred history. The
430 years of the sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt were the period
during which the immigrant family was to increase and multiply, under
the blessing and protection of God, in the way of natural development;
until it had grown into a nation, and was ripe for that covenant which
Jehovah had made with Abraham, to be completed with the nation into
which his seed had grown. During the whole of this period the direct
revelations from God to Israel were entirely suspended; so that, with
the exception of what is related in Exo 1 and 2, no event occurred of
any importance to the kingdom of God. It was not till the expiration of
these 400 years, that the execution of the divine plan of salvation
commenced with the call of Moses (Exo 3) accompanied by the founding of
the kingdom of God in Israel. To this end Israel was liberated from the
power of Egypt, and, as a nation rescued from human bondage, was adopted
by God, the Lord of the whole earth, as the people of His possession.

These two great facts of far-reaching consequences in the history of the
world, as well as in the history of salvation, form the kernel and
essential substance of this book, which may be divided accordingly into
two distinct parts. In the first part, Exo 1-15:21, we have seven
sections, describing (1) the preparation for the saving work of God,
through the multiplication of Israel into a great people and their
oppression in Egypt (Exo 1), and through the birth and preservation of
their liberator (Exo 2); (2) the call and training of Moses to be the
deliverer and leader of Israel (Exo 3 and 4); (3) the mission of Moses
to Pharaoh (Exo 5-7:7); (4) the negotiations between Moses and Pharaoh
concerning the emancipation of Israel, which were carried on both in
words and deeds or miraculous signs ([Exo
7:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008)); (5) the consecration of
Israel as the covenant nation through the institution of the feast of
Passover; (6) the exodus of Israel effected through the slaying of the
first-born of the Egyptians (Exo 12-13:16); and (7) the passage of
Israel through the Red Sea, and destruction of Pharaoh and his host,
with Israel's song of triumph at its deliverance (Exo 13:17-15:21). - In
the second part, Exo 15:22-40:38, we have also seven sections,
describing the adoption of Israel as the people of God; viz., (1) the
march of Israel from the Red Sea to the mountain of God (Exo
15:22-17:7); (2) the attitude of the heathen towards Israel, as seen in
the hostility of Amalek, and the friendly visit of Jethro the Midianite
at Horeb (Exo 17:8-18:27); (3) the establishment of the covenant at
Sinai through the election of Israel as the people of Jehovah's
possession, the promulgation of the fundamental law and of the
fundamental ordinances of the Israelitish commonwealth, and the solemn
conclusion of the covenant itself (Exo 19-24:11); (4) the divine
directions with regard to the erection and arrangement of the
dwelling-place of Jehovah in Israel (Exo 24:12-31:18); (5) the rebellion
of the Israelites and their renewed acceptance on the part of God (Exo
32-34); (6) the building of the tabernacle and preparation of holy
things for the worship of God (Exo 35-39); and (7) the setting up of the
tabernacle and its solemn consecration (Exo 40).

These different sections are not marked off, it is true, like the ten
parts of Genesis, by special headings, because the account simply
follows the historical succession of the events described; but they may
be distinguished with perfect east, through the internal grouping and
arrangement of the historical materials. The song of Moses at the Red
Sea (15:1-21) formed most unmistakeably the close of the first stage of
the history, which commenced with the call of Moses, and for which the
way was prepared, not only by the enslaving of Israel on the part of the
Pharaohs, in the hope of destroying its national and religious
independence, but also by the rescue and education of Moses, and by his
eventful life. And the setting up of the tabernacle formed an equally
significant close to the second stage of the history. By this, the
covenant which Jehovah had made with the patriarch Abram (Gen 15) was
established with the people Israel. By the filling of the
dwelling-place, which had just been set up, with the cloud of the glory
of Jehovah ([Exo 40:34-38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034)), the nation
of Israel was raised into a congregation of the Lord and the
establishment of the kingdom of God in Israel fully embodied in the
tabernacle, with Jehovah dwelling in the Most Holy Place; so that all
subsequent legislation, and the further progress of the history in the
guidance of Israel from Sinai to Canaan, only served to maintain and
strengthen that fellowship of the Lord with His people, which had
already been established by the conclusion of the covenant, and
symbolically exhibited in the building of the tabernacle. By this marked
conclusion, therefore, with a fact as significant in itself as it was
important in the history of Israel, Exodus, which commences with a list
of the names of the children of Israel who went down to Egypt, is
rounded off into a complete and independent book among the five books of
Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 1](exo001)

</div>
