<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo015)  [Next](exo017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)

[Exodus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 16:1</span></span>

Quails and Manna in the Desert of Sin. - [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001). From Elim the congregation of
Israel proceeded into the desert of Sin. According to [Num
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#010), they encamped at the Red Sea
between Elim and the desert of Sin; but this is passed over here, as
nothing of importance happened there. Judging from the nature of the
ground, the place of encampment at the Red Sea is to be found at the
mouth of the Wady Taiyibeh. For the direct road from the W. Gharandel to
Sinai, and the only practicable one for caravans, goes over the
tableland between this wady and the Wady Useit to the upper end of the
W. Taiyibeh, a beautiful valley, covered with tamarisks and shrubs,
where good water may be found by digging, and which winds about between
steep rocks, and opens to the sea at Ras Zelimeh. To the north of this
the hills and rocks come close to the sea, but to the south they recede,
and leave a sandy plain with numerous shrubs, which is bounded on the
east by wild and rugged rocky formations, and stretches for three miles
along the shore, furnishing quite space enough therefore for the
Israelitish camp. It is about eight hours' journey from Wady Gharandel,
so that by a forced march the Israelites might have accomplished it in
one day. From this point they went "to the desert of Sin, which is
between Elim and Sinai." The place of encampment here is doubtful. There
are two roads that lead from W. Taiyibeh to Sinai: the lower, which
enters the desert plain by the sea at the Murkha or Morcha well, not far
from the mouth of the Wady eth Thafary, and from which you can either go
as far as Tr by the sea-coast, and then proceed in a north-easterly
direction to Sinai, or take a more direct road through Wady Shelll and
Badireh into Wady Mukatteb and Feirn, and so on to the mountains of
Horeb; and the upper road, first pointed out by Burckhardt and Robinson,
which lies in a S.E. direction from W. Taiyibeh through W. Shubeikeh,
across en elevated plain, then through Wady Humr to the broad sandy
plain of el Debbe or Debbet en Nasb, thence through Wady Nasb to the
plain of Debbet er Ramleh, which stretches far away to the east, and so
on across the Wadys Chamile and Seich in almost a straight line to
Horeb. One of these two roads the Israelites must have taken. The
majority of modern writers have decided in favour of the lower road, and
place the desert of Sin in the broad desert plain, which commences at
the foot of the mountain that bounds the Wady Taiyibeh towards the
south, and stretches along the sea-coast to Ras Muhammed, the
southernmost point of the peninsula, the southern part of which is now
called el Ka. The encampment of the Israelites in the desert of Sin is
then supposed to have been in the northern part of this desert plain,
where the well Murkha still furnishes a resting-place plentifully
supplied with drinkable water. Ewald has thus represented the Israelites
as following the desert of el Ka to the neighbourhood of Tr, and then
going in a north-easterly direction to Sinai. But apart from the fact
that the distance is too great for the three places of encampment
mentioned in [Num 33:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#012), and a
whole nation could not possibly reach Rephidim in three stages by this
route, it does not tally with the statement in [Num
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#012), that the Israelites left the
desert of Sin and went to Dofkah; so that Dofkah and the places that
follow were not in the desert of Sin at all.

For these and other reasons, De Laborde, v. Raumer, and others suppose
the Israelites to have gone from the fountain of Murkha to Sinai by the
road which enters the mountains not far from this fountain through Wady
Shelll, and so continues through Wady Mukatteb to Wady Fern (Robinson,
i. p. 105). But this view is hardly reconcilable with the encampment of
the Israelites "in the desert of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai."
For instance, the direct road from W. Gharandel (Elim) to Sinai does not
touch the desert plain of el Ka at all, but turns away from it towards
the north-east, so that it is difficult to understand how this desert
could be said to lie between Elim and Sinai. For this reason, even Kurtz
does not regard the clause "which is between Elim and Sinai" as pointing
out the situation of the desert itself, but (contrary to the natural
sense of the words) as a more exact definition of that part or point of
the desert of Sin at which the road from Elim to Sinai crosses it. But
nothing is gained by this explanation. There is no road from the place
of encampment by the Red Sea in the Wady Taiyibeh by which a whole
nation could pass along the coast to the upper end of this desert, so as
to allow the Israelites to cross the desert on the way from Taiyibeh to
the W. Shelll. As the mountains to the south of the W. Taiyibeh come so
close to the sea again, that it is only at low water that a narrow
passage is left (Burckhardt, p. 985), the Israelites would have been
obliged to turn eastwards from the encampment by the Red Sea, to which
they had no doubt gone for the sake of the water, and to go all round
the mountain to get to the Murkha spring. This spring (according to
Burckhardt, p. 983), "a small lake in the sandstone rock, close at the
foot of the mountain") is "the principal station on this road," next to
Ayun Musa and Gharandel; but the water is "of the worst description,
partly from the moss, the bog, and the dirt with which the well is
filled, but chiefly no doubt from the salt of the soil by which it is
surrounded," and men can hardly drink it; whereas in the Wady Thafary, a
mile (? five English miles) to the north-east of Murkha, there is a
spring that "yields the only sweet water between Tor and Suez" (p. 982).
Now, even if we were to assume that the Israelites pitched their camp,
not by this, the only sweet water in the neighbourhood, but by the bad
water of Murkha, the Murkah spring is not situated in the desert of el
Ka, but only on the eastern border of it; so that if they proceeded
thence into the Wady Shelll, and so on to the Wady Feirn, they would not
have crossed the desert at all. In addition to this, although the lower
road through the valley of Mukatteb is described by Burckhardt as "much
easier and more frequented," and by Robinson as "easier" than the upper
road across Nasseb (Nasb), there are two places in which it runs through
very narrow defiles, by which a large body of people like the Israelites
could not possibly have forced their way through to Sinai. From the
Murkha spring, the way into the valley of Mukatteb is through "a wild
mountain road," which is shut out from the eyes of the wanderer by
precipitous rocks. "We got off our dromedaries," says Dieterici, ii. p.
27, "and left them to their own instinct and sure tread to climb the
dangerous pass. We looked back once more at the desolate road which we
had threaded between the rocks, and saw our dromedaries, the only signs
of life, following a serpentine path, and so climbing the pass in this
rocky theatre Nakb el Butera." Strauss speaks of this road in the
following terms: "We went eastwards through a large plain, overgrown
with shrubs of all kinds, and reached a narrow pass, only broad enough
for one camel to go through, so that our caravan emerged in a very
pictorial serpentine fashion. The wild rocks frowned terribly on every
side." Moreover, it is only through a "terribly wild pass" that you can
descend from the valley Mukatteb into the glorious valley of Feiran
(Strauss, p. 128).

(Note: This pass is also mentioned by Graul (Reise ii. p. 226) as "a
wild romantic mountain pass," and he writes respecting it, "For five
minutes the road down was so narrow and steep, that the camels stept in
fear, and we ourselves preferred to follow on foot. If the Israelites
came up here on their way from the sea at Ras Zelime, the immense
procession must certainly have taken a long time to get through the
narrow gateway." To this we may add, that if Moses had led the people to
Sinai through one of these narrow passes, they could not possibly have
reached Sinai in a month from the desert of Sin, to say nothing of eight
days, which was all that was left for them, if, as is generally
supposed, and as Kurtz maintains, their stay at the place of encampment
in the desert of Sin, where they arrived on the 15th day of the second
month ([Exo 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)), lasted full seven
days, and their arrival at Sinai took place on the first day of the
third month. For if a pass is so narrow that only one camel can pass,
not more than three men could walk abreast. Now if the people of Israel,
consisting of two millions of men, had gone through such a pass, it
would have taken at least twenty days for them all to pass through, as
an army of 100,000 men, arranged three abreast, would reach 27 English
miles; so that, supposing the pass to be not more than five minutes walk
long, 100,000 Israelites would hardly go through in a day, to say
nothing at all about their flocks and herds.)

For these reasons we must adopt Knobel's conclusions, and seek the
desert of Sin in the upper road which leads from Gharandel to Sinai,
viz., in the broad sandy table-land el Debbe or Debbet er Ramle, which
stretches from the Tih mountains over almost the whole of the peninsula
from N.W. to S.E. (vid., Robinson, i. 112), and in its south-eastern
part touches the northern walls of the Horeb or Sinai range, which helps
to explain the connection between the names Sin and Sinai, though the
meaning "thorn-covered" is not established, but is merely founded upon
the idea that סין has the same meaning as סנה. This desert table-land,
which is essentially distinguished from the limestone formations of the
Tih mountains, and the granite mass of Horeb, by its soil of sand and
sandstone, stretches as far as Jebel Humr to the north-west, and the
Wady Khamile and Barak to the south-west (vid., Robinson, i. p. 101,
102). Now, if this sandy table-land is to be regarded as the desert of
Sin, we must look for the place of Israel's encampment somewhere in this
desert, most probably in the north-western portion, in a straight line
between Elim (Gharandel) and Sinai, possibly in Wady Nasb, where there
is a well surrounded by palm-trees about six miles to the north-west of
Sarbut el Khadim, with a plentiful supply of excellent water, which
Robinson says was better than he had found anywhere since leaving the
Nile (i. 110). The distance from W. Taiyibeh to this spot is not greater
than that from Gharandel to Taiyibeh, and might therefore be
accomplished in a hard day's march.

[Exodus 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 16:2</span></span>

Here, in this arid sandy waste, the whole congregation murmured against
Moses and Aaron on account of the want of food. What they brought with
them from Egypt had been consumed in the 30 days that had elapsed since
they came out ([Exo 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)). In their
vexation the people expressed the wish that they had died in Egypt by
the flesh-pot, in the midst of plenty, "by the hand of Jehovah," i.e.,
by the last plague which Jehovah sent upon Egypt, rather than here in
the desert of slow starvation. The form ויּלּינוּ is a Hiphil according
to the consonants, and should be pointed ילּינוּ, from הלּין for הלין
(see Ges. 72, Anm. 9, and Ewald, 114c.). As the want really existed,
Jehovah promised them help ([Exo
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)). He would rain bread from
heaven, which the Israelites should gather every day for their daily
need, to try the people, whether they would walk in His law or not. In
what the trial was to consist, is briefly indicated in [Exo
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005) : "And it will come to pass on
the sixth day (of the week), that they will prepare what they have
brought, and it will be double what they gather daily." The meaning is,
that what they gathered and brought into their tents on the sixth day of
the week, and made ready for eating, would be twice as much as what they
gathered on every other day; not that Jehovah would miraculously double
what was brought home on the sixth day, as Knobel interprets the words
in order to make out a discrepancy between [Exo
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005) and [Exo
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#022). הכין, to prepare, is to be
understood as applying partly to the measuring of what had been gathered
([Exo 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018)), and partly to the
pounding and grinding of the grains of manna into meal ([Num
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#008)). In what respect this was a test
for the people, is pointed out in [Exo
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016). Here, in [Exo
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004) and [Exo
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#005), the promise of God is only
briefly noticed, and its leading points referred to; it is described in
detail afterwards, in the communications which Moses and Aaron make to
the people. In [Exo 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#006), [Exo
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007), they first tell the people, "At
even, then shall ye know that Jehovah hath brought you out of Egypt; and
in the morning, then shall ye see the glory of the Lord." Bearing in
mind the parallelism of the clauses, we obtain this meaning, that in the
evening and in the morning the Israelites would perceive the glory of
the Lord, who had brought them out of Egypt. "Seeing" is synonymous with
"knowing." Seeing the glory of Jehovah did not consist in the sight of
the glory of the Lord which appeared in the cloud, as mentioned in [Exo
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010), but in their perception or
experience of that glory in the miraculous gift of flesh and bread ([Exo
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#008), cf. [Num
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#022)). "By His hearing" (בּשׁמעו),
i.e., because He has heard, "your murmuring against Jehovah ("Against
Him" in [Exo 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#008), as in [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)); for what are we, that ye
murmur against us?" The murmuring of the people against Moses and Aaron
as their leaders really affected Jehovah as the actual guide, and not
Moses and Aaron, who had only executed His will. Jehovah would therefore
manifest His glory to the people, to prove to them that He had heard
their murmuring. The announcement of this manifestation of God is more
fully explained to the people by Moses in [Exo
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#008), and the explanation is linked on
to the leading clause in [Exo 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007) by
the words, "when He giveth," etc. Ye shall see the glory of Jehovah,
when Jehovah shall give you, etc.

[Exodus 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 16:9</span></span>

But before Jehovah manifested Himself to the people in His glory, by
relieving their distress, He gave them to behold His glory in the cloud,
and by speaking out of the cloud, confirmed both the reproaches and
promises of His servants. In the murmuring of the people, their unbelief
in the actual presence of God had been clearly manifested. "It was a
deep unbelief," says Luther, "that they had thus fallen back, letting go
the word and promise of God, and forgetting His former miracles and
aid." Even the pillar of cloud, this constant sign of the gracious
guidance of God, had lost its meaning in the eyes of the people; so that
it was needful to inspire the murmuring multitude with a salutary fear
of the majesty of Jehovah, not only that their rebellion against the God
who had watched them with a father's care might be brought to mind, but
also that the fact might be deeply impressed upon their hearts, that the
food about to be sent was a gift of His grace. "Coming near before
Jehovah" ([Exo 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#009)), was coming out
of the tents to the place where the cloud was standing. On thus coming
out, "they turned towards the desert" ([Exo
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010)), i.e., their faces were
directed towards the desert of Sin; "and, behold, the glory of Jehovah
appeared in the cloud," i.e., in a flash of light bursting forth from
the cloud, and revealing the majesty of God. This extraordinary sign of
the glory of God appeared in the desert, partly to show the estrangement
of the murmuring nation from its God, but still more to show to the
people, that God could glorify Himself by bestowing gifts upon His
people even in the barren wilderness. For Jehovah spoke to Moses out of
this sign, and confirmed to the people what Moses had promised them
([Exo 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#011), [Exo
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#012)).

[Exodus 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 16:13</span></span>

The same evening (according to [Exo
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#012), "between the two evenings,"
vid., [Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006)) quails came up and
covered the camp. עלה: to advance, applied to great armies. השּׂלו, with
the article indicating the generic word, and used in a collective sense,
are quails, ὀρτυγομήτρα (lxx); i.e., the quail-king, according to
Hesychius ὄρτυξ ὑπερμεγέθης, and Phot. ὄρτυξ μέγας, hence a large
species of quails, ὄρτυγες (Josephus), coturnices (Vulg.). Some suppose
it to be the Kat or the Arabs, a kind of partridge which is found in
great abundance in Arabia, Palestine, and Syria. These fly in such dense
masses that the Arab boys often kill two or three at a time, by merely
striking at them with a stick as they fly (Burckhardt, Syr. p. 681). But
in spring the quails also come northwards in immense masses from the
interior of Africa, and return in autumn, when they sometimes arrive so
exhausted, that they can be caught with the hand (cf. Diod. Sic. i. 60;
v. Schubert, Reise ii. p. 361). Such a flight of quails was now brought
by God, who caused them to fall in the camp of the Israelites, so that
it was completely covered by them. Then in the morning there came an
"effusion of dew round about the camp; and when the effusion of dew
ascended (i.e., when the mist that produced the dew had cleared away),
behold there (it lay) upon the surface of the desert, fine, congealed,
fine as the hoar-frost upon the ground." The meaning of the ἁπ. λεγ.
מחספּס is uncertain. The meaning, scaled off, scaly, decorticatum, which
is founded upon the Chaldee rendering מקלּף, is neither suitable to the
word nor to the thing. The rendering volutatum, rotundum, is better; and
better still perhaps that of Meier, "run together, curdled." When the
Israelites noticed this, which they had never seen before, they said to
one another, הוּא מן, τί ἐστι τοῦτο (lxx), "what is this?" for they knew
not what it was. מן for מה belongs to the popular phraseology, and has
been retained in the Chaldee and Ethiopic, so that it is undoubtedly to
be regarded as early Semitic. From the question, man hu, the divine
bread received the name of man ([Exo
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#031)), or manna. Kimchi, however,
explains it as meaning donum et portio. Luther follows him, and says,
"Mann in Hebrew means ready money, a present or a gift;" whilst Gesenius
and others trace the word to מנה, to divide, to apportion, and render
הוּא מן "what is apportioned, a gift or present." But the Arabic word to
which appeal is made, is not early Arabic; and this explanation does not
suit the connection. How could the people say "it is apportioned," when
they did not know what it was, and Moses had to tell them, it is the
bread which Jehovah has given you for food? If they had seen at once
that it was food sent them by God, there would have been no necessity
for Moses to tell them so.

[Exodus 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 16:16</span></span>

After explaining the object of the manna, Moses made known to them at
once the directions of God about gathering it. In the first place, every
one was to gather according to the necessities of his family, a bowl a
head, which held, according to [Exo
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#036), the tenth part of an ephah.
Accordingly they gathered, "he that made much, and he that made little,"
i.e., he that gathered much, and he that gathered little, and measured
it with the omer; and he who gathered much had no surplus, and he who
gathered little had no lack: "every one according to the measure of his
eating had they gathered." These words are generally understood by the
Rabbins as meaning, that whether they had gathered much or little, when
they measured it in their tents, they had collected just as many omers
as they needed for the number in their families, and therefore that no
one had either superfluity or deficiency. Calvin, on the other hand, and
other Christian commentators, suppose the meaning to be, that all that
was gathered was placed in a heap, and then measured out in the quantity
that each required. In the former case, the miraculous superintendence
of God was manifested in this, that no one was able to gather either
more or less than what he needed for the number in his family; in the
second case, in the fact that the entire quantity gathered, amounted
exactly to what the whole nation required. In both cases, the
superintending care of God would be equally wonderful, but the words of
the text decidedly favour the old Jewish view.

[Exodus 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 16:19</span></span>

In the second place, Moses commanded them, that no one was to leave any
of what had been gathered till the next morning. Some of them disobeyed,
but what was left went into worms (תּולעים ירם literally rose into
worms) and stank. Israel was to take no care for the morrow ([Mat
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#034)), but to enjoy the daily bread
received from God in obedience to the giver. The gathering was to take
place in the morning ([Exo 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#021)); for
when the sun shone brightly, it melted away.

[Exodus 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 16:22</span></span>

Moreover, God bestowed His gift in such a manner, that the Sabbath was
sanctified by it, and the way was thereby opened for its sanctification
by the law. On the sixth day of the week the quantity yielded was twice
as much, viz., two omers for one (one person). When the princes of the
congregation informed Moses of this, he said to them, "Let tomorrow be
rest (שׁבּתון), a holy Sabbath to the Lord." They were to bake and boil
as much as was needed for the day, and keep what was over for the
morrow, for on the Sabbath they would find none in the field. They did
this, and what was kept for the Sabbath neither stank nor bred worms. It
is perfectly clear from this event, that the Israelites were not
acquainted with any sabbatical observance at that time, but that, whilst
the way was practically opened, it was through the decalogue that it was
raised into a legal institution (see [Exo
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#008).). שׁבּתון is an abstract noun
denoting "rest," and שׁבּי a concrete, literally the observer, from
which it came to be used as a technical term for the seventh day of the
week, which was to be observed as a day of rest to the Lord.

[Exodus 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 16:27</span></span>

On the seventh day some of the people went out to gather manna,
notwithstanding Moses' command, but they found nothing. Whereupon God
reproved their resistance to His commands, and ordered them to remain
quietly at home on the seventh day. Through the commandments which the
Israelites were to keep in relation to the manna, this gift assumed the
character of a temptation, or test of their obedience and faith (cf.
[Exo 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)).

[Exodus 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 16:31</span></span>

The manna was "like coriander-seed, white; and the taste of it like cake
with honey." גּד: Chald. גּידא; lxx κόριον; Vulg. coriandrum; according
to Dioscorid. 3, 64, it was called γοίδ by the Carthaginians. צפּיחת is
rendered ἔγκρις by the lxx; according to Athenaeus and the Greek
Scholiasts, a sweet kind of confectionary made with oil. In [Num
11:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#007), the manna is said to have had
the appearance of bdellium, a fragrant and transparent resin, resembling
wax ([Gen 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#012)). It was ground in
handmills or pounded in mortars, and either boiled in pots or baked on
the ashes, and tasted like השּׁמן לשׁד, "dainty of oil," i.e., sweet
cakes boiled with oil.

This "bread of heaven" ([Psa 78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024);
[Psa 105:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#040)) Jehovah gave to His
people for the first time at a season of the year and also in a place in
which natural manna is still found. It is ordinarily met with in the
peninsula of Sinai in the months of June and July, and sometimes even in
May. It is most abundant in the neighbourhood of Sinai, in Wady Feirn
and es Sheikh, also in Wady Gharandel and Taiyibeh, and some of the
valleys to the south-east of Sinai (Ritter, 14, p. 676; Seetzen's Reise
iii. pp. 76, 129). In warm nights it exudes from the branches of the
tarfah-tree, a kind of tamarisk, and falls down in the form of small
globules upon the withered leaves and branches that lie under the trees;
it is then gathered before sunrise, but melts in the heat of the sun. In
very rainy seasons it continues in great abundance for six weeks long;
but in many seasons it entirely fails. It has the appearance of gum, and
has a sweet, honey-like taste; and when taken in large quantities, it is
said to act as a mild aperient (Burckhardt, Syr. p. 954; Wellsted in
Ritter, p. 674). There are striking points of resemblance, therefore,
between the manna of the Bible and the tamarisk manna. Not only was the
locality in which the Israelites first received the manna the same as
that in which it is obtained now; but the time was also the same,
inasmuch as the 15th day of the second month ([Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001)) falls in the middle of our May,
if not somewhat later. The resemblance in colour, form, and appearance
is also unmistakeable; for, though the tamarisk manna is described as a
dirty yellow, it is also said to be white when it falls upon stones.
Moreover, it falls upon the earth in grains, is gathered in the morning,
melts in the heat of the sun, and has the flavour of honey. But if these
points of agreement suggest a connection between the natural manna and
that of the Scriptures, the differences, which are universally admitted,
point with no less distinctness of the miraculous character of the bread
of heaven. This is seen at once in the fact that the Israelites received
the manna for 40 years, in all parts of the desert, at every season of
the year, and in sufficient quantity to satisfy the wants of so numerous
a people. According to [Exo 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035),
they ate manna "until they came to a land inhabited, unto the borders of
the land of Canaan;" and according to [Jos
5:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#011), the manna ceased, when they
kept the Passover after crossing the Jordan, and ate of the produce of
the land of Canaan on the day after the Passover. Neither of these
statements is to be so strained as to be made to signify that the
Israelites ate no other bread than manna for the whole 40 years, even
after crossing the Jordan: they merely affirm that the Israelites
received no more manna after they had once entered the inhabited land of
Canaan; that the period of manna or desert food entirely ceased, and
that of bread baked from corn, or the ordinary food of the inhabited
country, commenced when they kept the Passover in the steppes of
Jericho, and ate unleavened bread and parched cakes of the produce of
the land as soon as the new harvest had been consecrated by the
presentation of the sheaf of first-fruits to God.

But even in the desert the Israelites had other provisions at command.
In the first place, they had brought large flocks and herds with them
out of Egypt ([Exo 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038); [Exo
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003)); and these they continued in
possession of, not only at Sinai ([Exo
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#003)), but also on the border of Edom
and the country to the east of the Jordan ([Num
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019); [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001)). Now, if the maintenance of
these flocks necessitated, on the one hand, their seeking for grassy
spots in the desert; on the other hand, the possession of cattle secured
them by no means an insignificant supply of milk and flesh for food, and
also of wool, hair, and skins for clothing. Moreover, there were
different tribes in the desert at that very time, such as the
Ishmaelites and Amalekites, who obtained a living for themselves from
the very same sources which must necessarily have been within reach of
the Israelites. Even now there are spots in the desert of Arabia where
the Bedouins sow and reap; and no doubt there was formerly a much larger
number of such spots than there are now, since the charcoal trade
carried on by the Arabs has interfered with the growth of trees, and
considerably diminished both the fertility of the valleys and the number
and extent of the green oases (cf. Rppell, Nubien, pp. 190, 201, 256).
For the Israelites were not always wandering about; but after the
sentence was pronounced, that they were to remain for 40 years in the
desert, they may have remained not only for months, but in some cases
even for years, in certain places of encampment, where, if the soil
allowed, they could sow, plant, and reap. There were many of their
wants, too, that they could supply by means of purchases made either
from the trading caravans that travelled through the desert, or from
tribes that were settled there; and we find in one place an allusion
made to their buying food and water from the Edomites ([Deu
2:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#006)). It is also very obvious from
[Lev 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002); [Lev
26:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031); [Lev
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#004); [Lev
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#012); [Lev
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005)., and [Num
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#013)., that they were provided with
wheaten meal during their stay at Sinai.

(Note: Vide Hengstenberg's Geschichte Bileam's, p. 284ff. For the
English translation, see "Hengstenberg on the Genuineness of Daniel,
etc.," p. 566. Clark. 1847.)

But notwithstanding all these resources, the desert was "great and
terrible" ([Deu 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#019); [Deu
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)); so that, even though it is no
doubt the fact that the want of food is very trifling in that region
(cf. Burckhardt, Syria, p. 901), there must often have been districts to
traverse, and seasons to endure, in which the natural resources were
either insufficient for so numerous a people, or failed altogether. It
was necessary, therefore, that God should interpose miraculously, and
give His people bread and water and flesh by supernatural means. So that
it still remains true, that God fed Israel with manna for 40 years,
until their entrance into an inhabited country rendered it possible to
dispense with these miraculous supplies. We must by no means suppose
that the supply of manna was restricted to the neighbourhood of Sinai;
for it is expressly mentioned after the Israelites had left Sinai ([Num
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#007).), and even when they had gone
round the land of Edom ([Num 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#005)).
But whether it continued outside the true desert, - whether, that is to
say, the Israelites were still fed with manna after they had reached the
inhabited country, viz., in Gilead and Bashan, the Amoritish kingdoms of
Sihon and Og, which extended to Edrei in the neighbourhood of Damascus,
and where there was no lack of fields, and vineyards, and wells of water
([Num 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#022)), that came into the
possession of the Israelites on their conquest of the land, - or during
their encampment in the fields of Moab opposite to Jericho, where they
were invited by the Moabites and Edomites to join in their sacrificial
meals ([Num 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002)), and where they took
possession, after the defeat of the Midianites, of their cattle and all
that they had, including 675,000 sheep and 72,000 beeves ([Num
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#031).), - cannot be decided in the
negative, as Hengstenberg supposes; still less can it be answered with
confidence in the affirmative, as it has been by C. v. Raumer and Kurtz.
For if, as even Kurtz admits, the manna was intended either to supply
the want of bread altogether, or where there was bread to be obtained,
though not in sufficient quantities, to make up the deficiency, it might
be supposed that no such deficiency would occur in these inhabited and
fertile districts, where, according to [Jos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#011), there were sufficient supplies,
at hand to furnish ample provision for the passage across the Jordan. It
is possible too, that as there were more trees in the desert at that
time than there are now, and, in fact, more vegetation generally, there
may have been supplies of natural manna in different localities, in
which it is not met with at present, and that this manna harvest,
instead of yielding only 5 or 7 cwt., as is the case now, produced
considerably more.

(Note: The natural manna was not exclusively confined to the tamarisk,
which seems to be the only tree in the peninsula of Sinai that yields it
now; but, according to both ancient and modern testimony, it has been
found in Persia, Chorasan, and other parts of Asia, dropping from other
trees. Cf. Rosenmller ubi supra, and Ritter, 14, pp. 686ff.)

Nevertheless, the quantity which the Israelites gathered every day, -
Viz. an omer a head, or at least 2 lbs., - still remains a divine
miracle; though this statement in [Exo
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016). is not to be understood as
affirming, that for 40 years they collected that quantity every day, but
only, that whenever and wherever other supplies failed, that quantity
could be and was collected day by day.

Moreover, the divine manna differed both in origin and composition from
the natural produce of the tamarisk. Though the tamarisk manna resembles
the former in appearance, colour, and taste, yet according to the
chemical analysis to which it has been submitted by Mitscherlich, it
contains no farina, but simply saccharine matter, so that the grains
have only the consistency of wax; whereas those of the manna supplied to
the Israelites were so hard that they could be ground in mills and
pounded in mortars, and contained so much meal that it was made into
cakes and baked, when it tasted like honey-cake, or sweet confectionary
prepared with oil, and formed a good substitute for ordinary bread.
There is no less difference in the origin of the two. The manna of the
Israelites fell upon the camp with the morning dew ([Exo
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#013), [Exo
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#014); [Num
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#009)), therefore evidently out of the
air, so that Jehovah might be said to have rained it from heaven ([Exo
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004)); whereas the tamarisk manna
drops upon the ground from the fine thin twigs of this shrub, and, in
Ehrenberg's opinion, in consequence of the puncture of a small, yellow
insect, called coccus maniparus. But it may possibly be produced apart
from this insect, as Lepsius and Tischendorf found branches with a
considerable quantity of manna upon them, and saw it drop from trees in
thick adhesive lumps, without being able to discover any coccus near
(see (Ritter, 14, pp. 675-6). Now, even though the manna of the Bible
may be connected with the produce of the tamarisk, the supply was not so
inseparably connected with these shrubs, as that it could only fall to
the earth with the dew, as it was exuded from their branches. After all,
therefore, we can neither deny that there was some connection between
the two, nor explain the gift of the heavenly manna, as arising from an
unrestricted multiplication and increase of this gift of nature. We
rather regard the bread of heaven as the production and gift of the
grace of God, which fills all nature with its powers and productions,
and so applies them to its purposes of salvation, as to create out of
that which is natural something altogether new, which surpasses the
ordinary productions of nature, both in quality and quantity, as far as
the kingdom of nature is surpassed by the kingdom of grace and glory.

[Exodus 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 16:32</span></span>

As a constant memorial of this bread of God for succeeding generations,
Jehovah commanded Moses to keep a bowl full (העמר מלא, the filling of a
bowl) of the manna. Accordingly Aaron placed a jar of manna (as it is
stated in [Exo 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#034), [Exo
16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035), by way of anticipation, for the
purpose of summing up everything of importance relating to the manna)
"before Jehovah," or speaking still more exactly, "before the
testimony," i.e., the tables of the law (see [Exo
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016)), or according to Jewish
tradition, in the ark of the covenant ([Heb
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004)). צנצנת, from צנן to guard round,
to preserve, signifies a jar or bottle, not a basket. According to the
Jerusalem Targum, it was an earthenware jar; in the lxx it is called
στάμνος χρυσοῦς, a golden jar, but there is nothing of this kind in the
original text.

[Exodus 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 16:36</span></span>

In conclusion, the quantity of the manna collected for the daily supply
of each individual, which was preserved in the sanctuary, is given
according to the ordinary measurement, viz., the ephah. The common
opinion, that עמר was the name for a measure of capacity, which was
evidently shared by the Seventy, who have rendered the word γομόρ, has
no foundation so far as the Scriptures are concerned. Not only is it a
fact, that the word omer is never used as a measure except in this
chapter, but the tenth of an ephah is constantly indicated, even in the
Pentateuch, by "the tenth part of an ephah" ([Lev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011); [Lev
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013); [Num
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015); [Num
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#005)), or "a tenth deal" ([Exo
29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040); [Lev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#010), etc.; in all 30 times). The
omer was a small vessel, cup, or bowl, which formed part of the
furniture of every house, and being always of the same size, could be
used as a measure in case of need.

(Note: Omer proprie nomen poculi fuit, quale secum gestare solent
Orientales, per deserta iter facientes, ad hauriendam si quam rivus vel
fons offerret aquam.... Hoc in poculo, alia vasa non habentes, et mannam
collegerunt Israelitae (Michaelis, Supplem. ad Lex. hebr., p. 1929). Cf.
Hengstenberg, Dissertations on the Pentateuch, vol. ii. p. 172.)

The ephah is given by Bertheau as consisting of 198577 Parisian cubic
inches, and holding 739,800 Parisian grains of water; Thenius, however,
gives only 101439 Parisian, or 112467 Rhenish inches. (See my
Archologie, ii. 141-2.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 17](exo017)

</div>
