<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo013)  [Next](exo015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001)

[Exodus 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 14:1</span></span>

Passage of the Israelites through the Red Sea; Destruction of Pharaoh
and His Army. - [Exo 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001), [Exo
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002). At Etham God commanded the
Israelites to turn (שׁוּב) and encamp by the sea, before Pihachiroth,
between Migdol and the sea, before Baalzephon, opposite to it. In [Num
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#007), the march is described thus: on
leaving Etham they turned up to (על) Pihachiroth, which is before
(על־פּני( e in the front of) Baalzephon, and encamped before Migdol. The
only one of these places that can be determined with any certainty is
Pihachiroth, or Hachiroth ([Num 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#008),
pi being simply the Egyptian article), which name has undoubtedly been
preserved in the Ajrud mentioned by Edrisi in the middle of the twelfth
century. At present this is simply a fort, which a well 250 feet deep,
the water of which is so bitter, however, that camels can hardly drink
it. It stands on the pilgrim road from Kahira to Mecca, four hours'
journey to the north-west of Suez (vid., Robinson, Pal. i. p. 65). A
plain, nearly ten miles long and about as many broad, stretches from
Ajrud to the sea to the west of Suez, and from the foot of Atkah to the
arm of the sea on the north of Suez (Robinson, Pal. i. 65). This plain
most probably served the Israelites as a place of encampment, so that
they encamped before, i.e., to the east of, Ajrud towards the sea. The
other places just also be sought in the neighbourhood of Hachiroth
(Ajrud), though no traces of them have been discovered yet. Migdol
cannot be the Migdol twelve Roman miles to the south of Pelusium, which
formed the north-eastern boundary of Egypt ([Eze
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#010)), for according to [Num
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#007), Israel encamped before Migdol;
nor is it to be sought for in the hill and mountain-pass called Montala
by Burckhardt, el Muntala by Robinson (pp. 63, 64), two hours' journey
to the northwest of Ajrud, as Knobel supposes, for this hill lies too
far to the west, and when looked at from the sea is almost behind Ajrud;
so that the expression "encamping before Migdol" does not suit this
situation, not to mention the fact that a tower (מגדּל) does not
indicate a watch-tower (מצפּה). Migdol was probably to the south of
Ajrud, on one of the heights of the Atkah, and near it, though more to
the south-east, Baalzephon (locus Typhonis), which Michaelis and Forster
suppose to be Heroopolis, whilst Knobel places it on the eastern shore,
and others to the south of Hachiroth. If Israel therefore did not go
straight into the desert from Etham, on the border of the desert, but
went southwards into the plain of Suez, to the west of the head of the
Red Sea, they were obliged to bend round, i.e., "to turn" from the road
they had taken first. The distance from Etham to the place of encampment
at Hachiroth must be at least a six hours' journey (a tolerable day's
journey, therefore, for a whole nation), as the road from Suez to Ajrud
takes four hours (Robinson, i. p. 66).

[Exodus 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 14:3</span></span>

This turn in their route was not out of the way for the passage through
the Red Sea; but apart from this, it was not only out of the way, but a
very foolish way, according to human judgment. God commanded Moses to
take this road, that He might be honoured upon Pharaoh, and show the
Egyptians that He was Jehovah (cf. [Exo
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030), [Exo
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)). Pharaoh would say of the
Israelites, They have lost their way; they are wandering about in
confusion; the desert has shut them in, as in a prison upon which the
door is shut (על סנר as in [Job
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014)); and in his obduracy he would
resolve to go after them with his army, and bring them under his sway
again.

[Exo 14:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004)

When it was announced that Israel had fled, "the heart of Pharaoh and
his servants turned against the people," and they repented that they had
let them go. When and whence the information came, we are not told. The
common opinion, that it was brought after the Israelites changed their
route, has no foundation in the text. For the change in Pharaoh's
feelings towards the Israelites, and his regret that he had let them go,
were caused not by their supposed mistake, but by their flight. Now the
king and his servants regarded the exodus as a flight, as soon as they
recovered from the panic caused by the death of the first-born, and
began to consider the consequences of the permission given to the people
to leave his service. This may have occurred as early as the second day
after the exodus. In that case, Pharaoh would have had time to collect
chariots and horsemen, and overtake the Israelites at Hachiroth, as they
could easily perform the same journey in two days, or one day and a
half, to which the Israelites had taken more than three. "He yoked his
chariot (had it yoked, cf. [Kg1 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#014)),
and took his people (i.e., his warriors) with him," viz., "six hundred
chosen war chariots ([Exo 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007)), and
all the chariots of Egypt" (sc., that he could get together in the
time), and "royal guards upon them all." שׁלשׁים, τριστάται, tristatae
qui et terni statores vocantur, nomen est secundi gradus post regiam
dignitatem (Jerome on [Eze 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023)), not
charioteers (see my Com. on [Kg1
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#022)). According to [Exo
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#009), the army raised by Pharaoh
consisted of chariot horses (רכב סוּס), riding horses (פּרשׁים, lit.,
runners, [Kg1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006)), and חיל, the men
belonging to them. War chariots and cavalry were always the leading
force of the Egyptians (cf. [Isa 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001);
[Isa 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#009)). Three times ([Exo
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004), [Exo
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#008), and [Exo
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017)) it is stated that Jehovah
hardened Pharaoh's heart, so that he pursued the Israelites, to show
that God had decreed this hardening, to glorify Himself in the judgment
and death of the proud king, who would not honour God, the Holy One, in
his life. "And the children of Israel were going out with a high hand:"
[Exo 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#008). is a conditional clause in
the sense of, "although they went out" (Ewald, 341). רמה יד, the high
hand, is the high hand of Jehovah with the might which it displayed
([Isa 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011)), not the armed hand of
the Israelites. This is the meaning also in [Num
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#003); it is different in [Num
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030). The very fact that Pharaoh did
not discern the lifting up of Jehovah's hand in the exodus of Israel
displayed the hardening of his heart. "Beside Pihachiroth:" see [Exo
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002).

[Exodus 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 14:10</span></span>

When the Israelites saw the advancing army of the Egyptians, they were
greatly alarmed; for their situation to human eyes was a very
unfortunate one. Shut in on the east by the sea, on the south and west
by high mountains, and with the army of the Egyptians behind them,
destruction seemed inevitable, since they were neither outwardly armed
nor inwardly prepared for a successful battle. Although they cried unto
the Lord, they had no confidence in His help, notwithstanding all the
previous manifestation so the fidelity of the true God; they therefore
gave vent to the despair of their natural heart in complaints against
Moses, who had brought them out of the servitude of Egypt to give them
up to die in the desert. "Hast thou, because there were no graves at all
(אין מבּלי, a double negation to give emphasis) in Egypt, fetched us to
die in the desert?" Their further words in [Exo
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012) exaggerated the true state of
the case from cowardly despair. For it was only when the oppression
increased, after Moses' first interview with Pharaoh, that they
complained of what Moses had done ([Exo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#021)), whereas at first they accepted
his proposals most thankfully ([Exo
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#031)), and even afterwards implicitly
obeyed his directions.

[Exodus 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 14:13</span></span>

Moses met their unbelief and fear with the energy of strong faith, and
promised them such help from the Lord, that they would never see again
the Egyptians, whom they had seen that day. ראיתם אשׁר does not mean ὅν
τρόπον ἑωράκατε (lxx), quemadmodum vidistis (Ros., Kn.); but the
sentence is inverted: "The Egyptians, whom ye have seen to-day, ye will
never see again."

[Exodus 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 14:14</span></span>

"Jehovah will fight for you (לכם, dat comm.), but you will be silent,"
i.e., keep quiet, and not complain any more (cf. [Gen
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#005)).

[Exodus 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 14:15</span></span>

The words of Jehovah to Moses, "What criest thou to Me?" imply that
Moses had appealed to God for help, or laid the complaints of the people
before Him, and do not convey any reproof, but merely an admonition to
resolute action. The people were to move forward, and Moses was to
stretch out his hand with his staff over the sea and divide it, so that
the people might go through the midst on dry ground. [Exo
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017) and [Exo
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#018) repeat the promise in [Exo
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#003), [Exo
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004). The command and promise were
followed by immediate help ([Exo
14:19-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)). Whilst Moses divided the
water with his staff, and thus prepared the way, the angel of God
removed from before the Israelites, and placed himself behind them as a
defence against the Egyptians, who were following them. "Upon his
chariots, and upon his horsemen" ([Exo
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017)), is in apposition to "all his
host;" as Pharaoh's army consisted entirely of chariots and horsemen
(cf. [Exo 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#018)).

[Exodus 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 14:20</span></span>

"And it was the cloud and the darkness (sc., to the Egyptians), and
lighted up the night (sc., to the Israelites)." Fuit nubes partim lucida
et partim tenebricosa, ex una parte tenebricosa fuit Aegyptiis, ex
altera lucida Israelitis (Jonathan). Although the article is striking in
והחשׁך, the difficulty is not to be removed, as Ewald proposes, by
substituting והחשׁך, "and as for the cloud, it caused darkness;" for in
that case the grammar would require the imperfect with ו consec. This
alteration of the text is also rendered suspicious from the fact that
both Onkelos and the lxx read and render the word as a substantive.

[Exodus 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 14:21</span></span>

When Moses stretched out his hand with the staff ([Exo
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016)) over the sea, "Jehovah made the
water go (flow away) by a strong east wind the whole night, and made the
sea into dry (ground), and the water split itself" (i.e., divided by
flowing northward and southward); "and the Israelites went in the midst
of the sea (where the water had been driven away by the wind) in the
dry, and the water was a wall (i.e., a protection formed by the damming
up of the water) on the right and on the left." קדים, the east wind,
which may apply either to the south-east or north-east, as the Hebrew
has special terms for the four quarters only. Whether the wind blew
directly from the east, or somewhat from the south-east or north-east,
cannot be determined, as we do not know the exact spot where the passage
was made. in any case, the division of the water in both directions
could only have been effected by an east wind; and although even now the
ebb is strengthened by a north-east wind, as Tischendorf says, and the
flood is driven so much to the south by a strong north-west wind that
the gulf can be ridden through, and even forded on foot, to the north of
Suez (v. Schub. Reise ii. p. 269), and "as a rule the rise and fall of
the water in the Arabian Gulf is nowhere so dependent upon the wind as
it is at Suez" (Wellsted, Arab. ii. 41, 42), the drying of the sea as
here described cannot be accounted for by an ebb strengthened by the
east wind, because the water is all driven southwards in the ebb, and
not sent in two opposite directions. Such a division could only be
produced by a wind sent by God, and working with omnipotent force, in
connection with which the natural phenomenon of the ebb may no doubt
have exerted a subordinate influence.

(Note: But as the ebb at Suez leaves the shallow parts of the gulf so
far dry, when a strong wind is blowing, that it is possible to cross
over them, we may understand how the legend could have arisen among the
Ichthyophagi of that neighbourhood (Diod. Sic. 3, 39) and even the
inhabitants of Memphis (Euseb. praep. ev. 9, 27), that the Israelites
took advantage of a strong ebb, and how modern writers like Clericus
have tried to show that the passage through the sea may be so accounted
for.)

The passage was effected in the night, through the whole of which the
wind was blowing, and in the morning watch (between three and six
o'clock, [Exo 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)) it was finished.

As to the possibility of a whole nation crossing with their flocks,
Robinson concludes that this might have been accomplished within the
period of an extraordinary ebb, which lasted three, or at the most four
hours, and was strengthened by the influence of a miraculous wind. "As
the Israelites," he observes, "numbered more than two millions of
persons, besides flocks and herds, they would of course be able to pass
but slowly. If the part left dry were broad enough to enable them to
cross in a body one thousand abreast, which would require a space of
more than half a mile in breadth (and is perhaps the largest supposition
admissible), still the column would be more than two thousand persons in
depth, and in all probability could not have extended less than two
miles. It would then have occupied at least an hour in passing over its
own length, or in entering the sea; and deducting this from the largest
time intervening, before the Egyptians also have entered the sea, there
will remain only time enough, under the circumstances, for the body of
the Israelites to have passed, at the most, over a space of three or
four miles." (Researches in Palestine, vol. i. p. 84.)

But as the dividing of the water cannot be accounted for by an
extraordinary ebb, even though miraculously strengthened, we have no
occasion to limit the time allowed for the crossing to the ordinary
period of an ebb. If God sent the wind, which divided the water and laid
the bottom dry, as soon as night set in, the crossing might have begun
at nine o'clock in the evening, if not before, and lasted till four of
five o'clock in the morning (see [Exo
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027)). By this extension of the time
we gain enough for the flocks, which Robinson has left out of his
calculation. The Egyptians naturally followed close upon the Israelites,
from whom they were only divided by the pillar of cloud and fire; and
when the rear of the Israelites had reached the opposite shore, they
were in the midst of the sea. And in the morning watch Jehovah cast a
look upon them in the pillar of cloud and fire, and threw their army
into confusion ([Exo 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)). The
breadth of the gulf at the point in question cannot be precisely
determined. At the narrowest point above Suez, it is only two-thirds of
a mile in breadth, or, according to Niebuhr, 3450 feet; but it was
probably broader formerly, and even now is so farther up, opposite to
Tell Kolzum (Rob. i. pp. 84 and 70). The place where the Israelites
crossed must have been broader, otherwise the Egyptian army, with more
than six hundred chariots and many horsemen, could not have been in the
sea and perished there when the water returned. - "And Jehovah looked at
the army of the Egyptians in (with) the pillar of cloud and fire, and
troubled it." This look of Jehovah is to be regarded as the appearance
of fire suddenly bursting forth from the pillar of cloud that was turned
towards the Egyptians, which threw the Egyptian army into alarm and
confusion, and not as "a storm with thunder and lightning," as Josephus
and even Rosenmller assume, on the ground of [Psa
78:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#018), though without noticing the
fact that the psalmist has merely given a poetical version of the event,
and intends to show "how all the powers of nature entered the service of
the majestic revelation of Jehovah, when He judged Egypt and set Israel
free" (Delitzsch). The fiery look of Jehovah was a much more stupendous
phenomenon than a storm; hence its effect was incomparably grander,
viz., a state of confusion in which the wheels of the chariots were
broken off from the axles, and the Egyptians were therefore impeded in
their efforts to escape.

[Exodus 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 14:25</span></span>

"And (Jehovah) made the wheels of his (the Egyptian's) chariots give
way, and made, that he (the Egyptian) drove in difficulty." נהג
".ytlucif to drive a chariot ([Sa2
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#003), cf. [Kg2
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#020)).

[Exodus 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 14:26</span></span>

Then God directed Moses to stretch out his staff again over the sea, and
the sea came back with the turning of the morning (when the morning
turned, or approached) to its position (איתן perennitas, the lasting or
permanent position), and the Egyptians were flying to meet it. "When the
east wind which divided the sea ceased to blow, the sea from the north
and south began to flow together on the western side;" whereupon, to
judge from [Exo 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010), the wind began
immediately to blow from the west, and drove the waves in the face of
the flying Egyptians. "And thus Jehovah shook the Egyptians (i.e.,
plunged them into the greatest confusion) in the midst of the sea," so
that Pharaoh's chariots and horsemen, to the very last man, were buried
in the waves.

[Exodus 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 14:30</span></span>

This miraculous deliverance of Israel from the power of Egypt, through
the mighty hand of their God, produced so wholesome a fear of the Lord,
that they believed in Jehovah, and His servant Moses.

[Exo 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)

"The great hand:" i.e., the might which Jehovah had displayed upon
Egypt. In addition to the glory of God through the judgment upon Pharaoh
([Exo 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004), [Exo
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017)), the guidance of Israel through
the sea was also designed to establish Israel still more firmly in the
fear of the Lord and in faith. But faith in the Lord was inseparably
connected with faith in Moses as the servant of the Lord. Hence the
miracle was wrought through the hand and staff of Moses. But this second
design of the miraculous guidance of Israel did not exclude the first,
viz., glory upon Pharaoh. From this manifestation of Jehovah's
omnipotence, the Israelites were to discern not only the merciful
Deliverer, but also the holy Judge of the ungodly, that they might grow
in the fear of God, as well as in the faith which they had already
shown, when, trusting in the omnipotence of Jehovah, they had gone, as
though upon dry land ([Heb 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#029)),
between the watery walls which might at any moment have overwhelmed
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 15](exo015)

</div>
