<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo031)  [Next](exo033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)

[Exodus 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 32:1</span></span>

The long stay that Moses made upon the mountain rendered the people so
impatient, that they desired another leader, and asked Aaron, to whom
Moses had directed the people to go in all their difficulties during his
absence ([Exo 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#014)), to make them a
god to go before them. The protecting and helping presence of God had
vanished with Moses, of whom they said, "We know not what has become of
him," and whom they probably supposed to have perished on the mountain
in the fire that was burning there. They came to Aaron, therefore, and
asked him, not for a leader, but for a god to go before them; no doubt
with the intention of trusting the man as their leader who was able to
make them a god. They were unwilling to continue longer without a God to
go before them; but the faith upon which their desire was founded was a
very perverted one, not only as clinging to what was apparent to the
eye, but as corrupted by the impatience and unbelief of a natural heart,
which has not been pervaded by the power of the living God, and imagines
itself forsaken by Him, whenever His help is not visibly and outwardly
at hand. The delay (בּשׁשׁ, from בּושׁ to act bashfully, or with
reserve, then to hesitate, or delay) of Moses' return was a test for
Israel, in which it was to prove its faith and confidence in Jehovah and
His servant Moses ([Exo 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009)), but in
which it gave way to the temptation of flesh and blood.

[Exo 32:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002)

Aaron also succumbed to the temptation along with the people. Instead of
courageously and decidedly opposing their proposal, and raising the
despondency of the people into the strength of living faith, by pointing
them to the great deeds through which Jehovah had proved Himself to be
the faithful covenant God, he hoped to be able to divert them from their
design by means of human craftiness. "Tear off the golden ornaments in
the ears of your wives, your sons, and your daughters, and bring them to
me:" this he said in the hope that, by a demand which pressed so heavily
upon the vanity of the female sex and its love of display, he might
arouse such opposition as would lead the people to desist from their
desire. But his cleverness was put to shame. "All the people" tore off
their golden ornaments and brought them to him ([Exo
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#003)); for their object was not merely
"to accomplish an act of pure self-will, in which case there is no
sacrifice that the human heart is not ready to make," but to secure a
pledge of the protection of God through a visible image of the Deity.
The weak-minded Aaron had no other course left than to make (i.e., to
cause to be made) an image of God for the people.

[Exo 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)

He took (the golden ear-rings) from their hands, and formed it (the
gold) with the graving-tool, or chisel, and made it a molten calf." Out
of the many attempts that have been made at interpreting the words בּחרט
אתו ויּצר, there are only two that deserve any notice, viz., the one
adopted by Bochart and Schroeder, "he bound it up in a bag," and the one
given by the earlier translators, "he fashioned (יצר, as in [Kg1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#015)) the gold with the chisel." No
doubt ויּצר (from צוּר = צרר) does occur in the sense of binding in [Kg2
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023), and חרט may certainly be used
for חריט a bag; but why should Aaron first tie up the golden ear-rings
in a bag? And if he did so, why this superfluous and incongruous
allusion to the fact? We give in our adhesion to the second, which is
adopted by the lxx, Onkelos, the Syriac, and even Jonathan, though the
other rendering is also interpolated into the text. Such objections, as
that the calf is expressly spoken of as molten work, or that files are
used, and not chisels, for giving a finer finish to casts, have no force
whatever. The latter is not even correct. A graving-knife is quite as
necessary as a file for chiselling, and giving a finer finish to things
cast in a mould; and cheret does not necessarily mean a chisel, but may
signify any tool employed for carving, engraving, and shaping hard
metals. The other objection rests upon the supposition that massecah
means an image made entirely of metal (e.g., gold). But this cannot be
sustained. Apart from the fact, that most of the larger idols worshipped
by the ancients had a wooden centre, and were merely covered with gold
plate, such passages as [Isa 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#019) and
[Isa 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#022) prove, not only that the
casting of gold for idols consisted merely in casting the metal into a
flat sheet, which the goldsmith hammered out and spread into a coating
of gold plate, but also that a wooden image, when covered in this way
with a coating of gold, was actually called massecah. And Aaron's molten
calf was also made in this way: it was first of all formed of wood, and
then covered with gold plate. This is evident from the way in which it
was destroyed: the image was first of all burnt, and then beaten or
crushed to pieces, and pounded or ground to powder ([Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021)); i.e., the wooden centre was
first burnt into charcoal, and then the golden covering beaten or rubbed
to pieces ([Exo 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020) compared with
[Deu 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021)).

The "golden calf" (עגל a young bull) was copied from the Egyptian Apis
(vid., Hengstenberg, Dissertations); but for all that, it was not the
image of an Egyptian deity-it was no symbol of the generative or bearing
power of nature, but an image of Jehovah. For when it was finished,
those who had made the image, and handed it over to the people, said,
"This is thy God (pluralis majest.), O Israel, who brought thee out of
Egypt." This is the explanation adopted in [Psa
106:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#019).

[Exo 32:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#005)

When Aaron saw it, he built an altar in front of the image, and called
aloud to the people, "To-morrow is a feast of Jehovah;" and the people
celebrated this feast with burnt-offerings and thank-offerings, with
eating and drinking, i.e., with sacrificial meals and sports (צחק), or
with loud rejoicing, shouting, antiphonal songs, and dances (cf. [Exo
32:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#017)), in the same manner in which
the Egyptians celebrated their feast of Apis (Herod. 2, 60, and 3, 27).
But this intimation of an Egyptian custom is no proof that the feast was
not intended for Jehovah; for joyous sacrificial meals, and even sports
and dances, are met with in connection with the legitimate worship of
Jehovah (cf. [Exo 15:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)).
Nevertheless the making of the calf, and the sacrificial meals and other
ceremonies performed before it, were a shameful apostasy from Jehovah, a
practical denial of the inimitable glory of the true God, and a culpable
breach of the second commandment of the covenant words ([Exo
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)), whereby Israel had broken the
covenant with the Lord, and fallen back to the heathen customs of Egypt.
Aaron also shared the guilt of this transgression, although it was
merely out of sinful weakness that he had assented to the proposals of
the people and gratified their wishes (cf. [Deu
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020)). He also fell with the people,
and denied the God who had chosen him, though he himself was unconscious
of it, to be His priest, to bear the sins of the people, and to expiate
them before Jehovah. The apostasy of the nation became a temptation to
him, in which the unfitness of his nature for the office was to be made
manifest, in order that he might ever remember this, and not excuse
himself from the office, to which the Lord had not called him because of
his own worthiness, but purely as an act of unmerited grace.

[Exodus 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 32:7</span></span>

Before Moses left the mountain, God told him of the apostasy of the
people ([Exo 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007), [Exo
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#008)). "Thy people, which thou hast
brought out of Egypt:" God says this not in the sense of an "obliqua
exprobratio," or "Mosen quodammodo vocare in partem criminis quo
examinetur ejus tolerantia et plus etiam maeroris ex rei indignitate
concipiat" (Calvin), or even because the Israelites, who had broken the
covenant, were no longer the people of Jehovah; but the transgression of
the people concerned Moses as the mediator of the covenant.

[Exo 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#008)

"They have turned aside quickly (lit., hurriedly):" this had increased
their guilt, and made their ingratitude to Jehovah, their Redeemer, all
the more glaring.

[Exo 32:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009)

"Behold, it is a stiff-necked people (a people with a hard neck, that
will not bend to the commandment of God; cf. [Exo
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003), [Exo
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#005); [Exo
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#009); [Deu
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#006), etc.): now therefore suffer Me,
that My wrath may burn against them, and I may consume them, and I will
make of thee a great nation." Jehovah, as the unchangeably true and
faithful God, would not, and could not, retract the promises which He
had given to the patriarchs, or leave them unfulfilled; and therefore if
in His wrath He should destroy the nation, which had shown the obduracy
of its nature in its speedy apostasy, He would still fulfil His promise
in the person of Moses, and make of him a great nation, as He had
promised Abraham in [Gen 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002). When
God says to Moses, "Leave Me, allow Me, that My wrath may burn," this is
only done, as Gregory the Great expresses it, deprecandi ansam praebere.
God puts the fate of the nation into the hand of Moses, that he may
remember his mediatorial office, and show himself worthy of his calling.
This condescension on the part of God, which placed the preservation or
destruction of Israel in the hands of Moses, coupled with a promise,
which left the fullest freedom to his decision, viz., that after the
destruction of the people he should himself be made a great nation,
constituted a great test for Moses, whether he would be willing to give
up his own people, laden as they were with guilt, as the price of his
own exaltation. And Moses stood the test. The preservation of Israel was
dearer to him than the honour of becoming the head and founder of a new
kingdom of God. True to his calling as mediator, he entered the breach
before God, to turn away His wrath, that He might not destroy the sinful
nation ([Psa 106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023)). - But what if
Moses had not stood the test, had not offered his soul for the
preservation of his people, as he is said to have done in [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)? Would God in that case have
thought him fit to make into a great nation? Unquestionably, if this had
occurred, he would not have proved himself fit or worthy of such a call;
but as God does not call those who are fit and worthy in themselves, for
the accomplishment of His purposes of salvation, but chooses rather the
unworthy, and makes them fit for His purposes ([Co2
3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)), He might have made even Moses
into a great nation. The possibility of such a thing, however, is
altogether an abstract thought: the case supposed could not possibly
have occurred, since God knows the hearts of His servants, and foresees
what they will do, though, notwithstanding His omniscience, He gives to
human freedom room enough for self-determination, that He may test the
fidelity of His servants. No human speculation, however, can fully
explain the conflict between divine providence and human freedom. This
promise is referred to by Moses in [Deu
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#014), when he adds the words which God
made use of on a subsequent occasion of a similar kind ([Num
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#012)), "I will make of thee a nation
stronger and more numerous than this."

[Exo 32:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011)

"And Moses besought the Lord his God." יי את־פּני חלּה, lit., to stroke
the face of Jehovah, for the purpose of appeasing His anger, i.e., to
entreat His mercy, either by means of sacrifices ([Sa1
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#012)) or by intercession. He pleaded
His acts towards Israel ([Exo 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011)),
His honour in the sight of the Egyptians ([Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012)), and the promises He had made
to the patriarchs ([Exo 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013)), and
prayed that for His own sake, and the sake of His honour among the
heathen, He would show mercy instead of justice. בּרעה ([Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012)) does not mean μετὰ πονεερίας,
or callide (Vulg.), but "for their hurt," - the preposition denoting the
manner in which, or according to which, anything took place.

[Exo 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014)

"And Jehovah repented of the evil, etc." - On the repentance of God, see
at [Gen 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#006). Augustine is
substantially correct in saying that "an unexpected change in the things
which God has put in His own power is called repentance" (contra adv.
leg. 1, 20), but he has failed to grasp the deep spiritual idea of the
repentance of God, as an anthropopathic description of the pain which is
caused to the love of God by the destruction of His creatures. - [Exo
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014) contains a remark which
anticipates the development of the history, and in which the historian
mentions the result of the intercession of Moses, even before Moses had
received the assurance of forgiveness, for the purpose of bringing the
account of his first negotiations with Jehovah to a close. God let Moses
depart without any such assurance, that He might display before the
people the full severity of the divine wrath.

[Exodus 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 32:15</span></span>

When Moses departed from God with the two tables of the law in his hand
(see at [Exo 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018)), and came to
Joshua on the mountain (see at ch. [Jos
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#013)), the latter heard the shouting
of the people (lit., the voice of the people in its noise, רעה for רעו,
from רע noise, tumult), and took it to be the noise of war; but Moses
said ([Exo 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#018)), "It is not the
sound of the answering of power, nor the sound of the answering of
weakness," i.e., they are not such sounds as you hear in the heat of
battle from the strong (the conquerors) and the weak (the conquered);
"the sound of antiphonal songs I hear." (ענּת is to be understood, both
here and in [Psa 88:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001), in the same
sense as in [Exo 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021).)

[Exodus 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 32:19</span></span>

But when he came nearer to the camp, and saw the calf and the dancing,
his anger burned, and he threw down the tables of the covenant and broke
them at the foot of the mountain, as a sign that Israel had broken the
covenant.

[Exodus 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 32:20</span></span>

He then proceeded to the destruction of the idol. "He burned it in
(with) fire," by which process the wooden centre was calcined, and the
golden coating either entirely or partially melted; and what was left by
the fire he ground till it was fine, or, as it is expressed in [Deu
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021), he beat it to pieces, grinding
it well (i.e., crushing it with and between stones), till it was as fine
as dust.

(Note: There is no necessity to refer to the process of calcining gold,
either here or in connection with the destruction of the Asherah by
Josiah ([Kg2 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004), [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012); [Ch2
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#004), [Ch2
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#007)), apart altogether from the
question, whether this chemical mode of reducing the precious metals was
known at all to Moses and the Israelites.)

The dust, which consisted of particles of charcoal and gold, he then
strewed upon the water," or, according to Deuteronomy, "threw it into
the brook which flowed down from the mountain, and made the children of
Israel drink," i.e., compelled them to drink the dust that had been
thrown in along with the water of the brook. The object of this was
certainly not to make them ashamed, by showing them the worthlessness of
their god, and humiliating them by such treatment as compelling them to
swallow their own god (as Knobel supposes). It was intended rather to
set forth in a visible manner both the sin and its consequences. The sin
was poured as it were into their bowels along with the water, as a
symbolical sign that they would have to bear it and atone for it, just
as a woman who was suspected of adultery was obliged to drink the
curse-water ([Num 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#024)).

[Exodus 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 32:21</span></span>

After the calf had been destroyed, Moses called Aaron to account. "What
has this people done to thee ("done" in a bad sense, as in [Gen
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#045); [Exo
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011)), that thou hast brought a great
sin upon it?" Even if Aaron had merely acted from weakness in carrying
out the will of the people, he was the most to blame, for not having
resisted the urgent entreaty of the people firmly and with strong faith,
and even at the cost of his life. Consequently he could think of nothing
better than the pitiful subterfuge, "Be not angry, my lord (he addresses
Moses in this way on account of his office, and because of his anger,
cf. [Num 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#011)): thou knowest the
people, that it is in wickedness" (cf. [Jo1
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019)), and the admission that he had
been overcome by the urgency of the people, and had thrown the gold they
handed him into the fire, and that this calf had come out ([Exo
32:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#022)), as if the image had come
out of its own accord, without his intention or will. This excuse was so
contemptible that Moses did not think it worthy of a reply, at the same
time, as he told the people afterwards ([Deu
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020)), he averted the great wrath of
the Lord from him through his intercession.

[Exodus 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 32:25</span></span>

Moses then turned to the unbridled nation, whom Aaron had set free from
all restraint, "for a reproach among their foes," inasmuch as they would
necessarily become an object of scorn and derision among the heathen on
account of the punishment which their conduct would bring down upon them
from God (compare [Exo 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012) and [Deu
28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)), and sought to restrain their
licentiousness and ward off the threatened destruction of the nation
through the infliction of a terrible punishment. If the effect of this
punishment should show that there were still some remains of obedience
and faithfulness towards God left in the nation, Moses might then hope,
that in accordance with the pleading of Abraham in [Gen
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023)., he should obtain mercy from
God for the whole nation for the sake of those who were righteous. He
therefore went into the gate of the camp (the entrance to the camp) and
cried out: "Whoever (belongs) to the Lord, (come) to me?" and his hope
was not disappointed. "All the Levites gathered together to him." Why
the Levites? Certainly not merely, nor chiefly, "because the Levites for
the most part had not assented to the people's sin and the worship of
the calf, but had been displeased on account of it" (C. a Lapide); but
partly because the Levites were more prompt in their determination to
confess their crime, and return with penitence, and partly out of regard
to Moses, who belonged to their tribe, in connection with which it must
be borne in mind that the resolution and example of a few distinguished
men was sure to be followed by all the rest of their tribe. The reason
why no one came over to the side of Moses from any of the other tribes,
must also be attributed, to some extent, to the bond that existed among
members of the same tribe, and is not sufficiently explained by Calvin's
hypothesis, that "they were held back, not by contempt or obstinacy, so
much as by shame, and that they were all so paralyzed by their alarm,
that they waited to see what Moses was about to do and to what length he
would proceed."

[Exodus 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 32:27</span></span>

The Levites had to allow their obedience to God to be subjected to a
severe test. Moses issued this command to them in the name of Jehovah
the God of Israel: "Let every one gird on his sword, and go to and fro
through the camp from one gate (end) to the other, and put to death
brothers, friends, and neighbours," i.e., all whom they met, without
regard to relationship, friendship, or acquaintance. And they stood the
test. About 3000 men fell by their sword on that day. There are several
difficulties connected with this account, which have furnished occasion
for doubts as to its historical credibility. The one of least importance
is that which arises from the supposed severity and recklessness of
Moses' proceedings. The severity of the punishment corresponded to the
magnitude of the crime. The worship of an image, being a manifest
transgression of one of the fundamental laws of the covenant, was a
breach of the covenant, and as such a capital crime, bringing the
punishment of death or extermination in its train. Now, although the
whole nation had been guilty of this crime, yet in this, as in every
other rebellion, the guilt of all would not be the same, but many would
simply follow the example of others; so that, instead of punishing all
alike, it was necessary that a separation should be made, if not between
the innocent and guilty, yet between the penitent and the stiff-necked
transgressors. To effect this separation, Moses called out into the
camp: "Over to me, whoever is for the Lord!" All the Levites responded
to his call, but not the other tribes; and it was necessary that the
refractory should be punished. Even these, however, had not all sinned
to the same extent, but might be divided into tempters and tempted; and
as they were all mixed up together, nothing remained but to adopt that
kind of punishment, which has been resorted to in all ages in such
circumstances as these. "If at any time," as Calvin says, "mutiny has
broken out in an army, and has led to violence, and even to bloodshed,
by universal law a commander proceeds to decimate the guilty." He then
adds, "How much milder, however, was the punishment here, when out of
six hundred thousand only three thousand were put to death!" This
decimation Moses committed to the Levites; and just as in every other
decimation the selection must be determined by lot or accidental choice,
so here Moses left it to be determined by chance, upon whom the sword of
the Levites would fall, knowing very well that even the so-called chance
would be under the direction of God.

There is apparently a greater difficulty in the fact, that not only did
the Levites execute the command of Moses without reserve, but the people
let them pass through the camp, and kill every one who came within reach
of their sword, without offering the slightest resistance. To remove
this difficulty, there is no necessity that we should either assume that
the Levites knew who were the originators and ringleaders of the worship
of the calf, and only used their swords against them, as Calvin does, or
that we should follow Kurtz, and introduce into the text a "formal
conflict between the two parties, in which some of Moses' party were
also slain," since the history says nothing about "the men who sided
with Moses gaining a complete victory," and merely states that in
obedience to the word of Jehovah the God of Israel, as declared by
Moses, they put 3000 men of the people to death with the sword. The
obedience of the Levites was an act of faith, which knows neither the
fear of man nor regard to person. The unresisting attitude of the people
generally may be explained, partly from their reverence for Moses, whom
God had so mightily and marvellously accredited as His servant in the
sight of all the nation, and partly from the despondency and fear so
natural to a guilty conscience, which took away all capacity for
opposing the bold and determined course that was adopted by the divinely
appointed rulers and their servants in obedience to the command of God.
It must also be borne in mind, that in the present instance the sin of
the people was not connected with any rebellion against Moses.

Very different explanations have been given of the words which were
spoken by Moses to the Levites ([Exo
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#029)): "Fill your hand to-day for
Jehovah; for every one against his son and against his brother, and to
bring a blessing upon you to-day." "To fill the hand for Jehovah" does
not mean to offer a sacrifice to the Lord, but to provide something to
offer to God ([Ch1 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#005); [Ch2
29:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#031)). Thus Jonathan's explanation,
which Kurtz has revived in a modified form, viz., that Moses commanded
the Levites to offer sacrifices as an expiation for the blood that they
had shed, or for the rent made in the congregation by their reckless
slaughter of their blood-relations, falls to the ground; though we
cannot understand how the fulfilment of a divine command, or an act of
obedience to the declared will of God, could be regarded as
blood-guiltiness, or as a crime that needed expiation. As far as the
clause which follows is concerned, so much is clear, viz., that the
words can neither be rendered, "for every one is in his son," etc., nor
"for every one was against his son," etc. To the former it is impossible
to attach any sense; and the latter cannot be correct, because the
preterite חיח could not be omitted after an imperative, if the
explanatory clause referred to what was past. If כּי were a causal
particle in this case, the meaning could only be, "for every one shall
be against his son," etc. But it is much better to understand it as
indicating the object, "that every one may be against his son and
against his brother;" i.e., that in the cause of the Lord every one may
not spare eve his nearest relative, but deny either son or brother for
the Lord's sake ([Deu 33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)). "And to
give" (or bring), i.e., so that ye may bring, a blessing upon yourselves
to-day." The following, then, is the thought contained in the verse:
Provide yourselves to-day with a gift for the Lord, consecrate
yourselves to-day for the service of the Lord, by preserving the
obedience you have just shown towards Him, by not knowing either son or
brother in His service, and thus gain for yourselves a blessing. In the
fulfilment of the command of God, with the denial of their own flesh and
blood, Moses discerns such a disposition and act as would fit them for
the service of the Lord. He therefore points to the blessing which it
would bring them, and exhorts them by their election as the peculiar
possession of Jehovah (Num 3-4), which would be secured to them from
this time forward, to persevere in this fidelity to the Lord. "The zeal
of the tribe-father burned still in the Levites; but this time it was
for the glory of God, and not for their own. Their ancestor had violated
both truth and justice by his vengeance upon the Shechemites, from a
false regard to blood-relationship, but now his descendants had saved
truth, justice, and the covenant by avenging Jehovah upon their own
relations" (Kurtz, and Oehler in Herzog's Cycl.), so that the curse
which rested upon them ([Gen 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007))
could now be turned into a blessing (cf. [Deu
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#009)).

[Exodus 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 32:30</span></span>

After Moses had thus avenged the honour of the Lord upon the sinful
nation, he returned the next day to Jehovah as a mediator, who is not a
mediator of one ([Gal 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#020)), that by
the force of his intercession he might turn the divine wrath, which
threatened destruction, into sparing grace and compassion, and that he
might expiate the sin of the nation. He had received no assurance of
mercy in reply to his first entreaty ([Exo
32:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011)). He therefore announced his
intention to the people in these words: "Peradventure I can make an
atonement for your sin." But to the Lord he said ([Exo
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031), [Exo
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032)), "The sin of this people is a
great sin; they have made themselves a god of gold," in opposition to
the clear commandment in [Exo 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#023) :
"and now, if Thou wilt forgive their sin, and if not, blot me out of the
book that Thou hast written." The book which Jehovah has written is the
book of life, or of the living ([Psa
69:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)). This expression is founded upon
the custom of writing the names of the burgesses of a town or country in
a burgess-list, whereby they are recognised as natives of the country,
or citizens of the city, and all the privileges of citizenship are
secured to them. The book of life contains the list of the righteous
([Psa 69:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029)), and ensures to those
whose names are written there, life before God, first in the earthly
kingdom of God, and then eternal life also, according to the knowledge
of salvation, which keeps pace with the progress of divine revelation,
e.g., in the New Testament, where the heirs of eternal life are found
written in the book of life ([Phi 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003);
[Rev 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#005); [Rev
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008), etc.), - an advance for which
the way was already prepared by [Isa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003) and [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001). To blot out of Jehovah's book,
therefore, is to cut off from fellowship with the living God, or from
the kingdom of those who live before God, and to deliver over to death.
As a true mediator of his people, Moses was ready to stake his own life
for the deliverance of the nation, and not to live before God himself,
if Jehovah did not forgive the people their sin. These words of Moses
were the strongest expression of devoted, self-sacrificing love. And
they were just as deep and true as the wish expressed by the Apostle
Paul in [Rom 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003), that he might be
accursed from Christ for the sake of his brethren according to the
flesh. Bengel compares this wish of the apostle to the prayer of Moses,
and says with regard to this unbounded fulness of love, "It is not easy
to estimate the measure of love in a Moses and a Paul; for the narrow
boundary of our reasoning powers does not comprehend it, as the little
child is unable to comprehend the courage of warlike heroes" (Eng. Tr.).
The infinite love of God is unable to withstand the importunity of such
love. God, who is holy love, cannot sacrifice the righteous and good for
the unrighteous and guilty, nor can He refuse the mediatorial
intercession of His faithful servant, so long as the sinful nation has
not filled up the measure of its guilt, in which case even the
intercession of a Moses and a Samuel would not be able to avert the
judgment ([Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001), cf. [Eze
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016)). Hence, although Jehovah puts
back the wish and prayer of Moses with the words, "Whoever (אשׁר מי,
both here and in [Sa2 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#011), is more
emphatic than either one or the other alone) has sinned, him will I blot
out of My book," He yields to the entreaty that He will ensure to Moses
the continuance of the nation under His guidance, and under the
protection of His angel, which shall go before it (see at [Exo
33:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#002)), and defer the punishment of
their sin until the day of His visitation.

[Exodus 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 32:35</span></span>

"Thus Jehovah smote the people because they had made the calf." With
these words the historian closes the first act of Moses' negotiations
with the Lord on account of this sin, from which it was apparent how God
had repented of the evil with which He had threatened the nation ([Exo
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014)). Moses had obtained the
preservation of the people and their entrance into the promised land,
under the protection of God, through his intercession, and averted from
the nation the abrogation of the covenant; but the covenant relation
which had existed before was not restored in its integrity. Though grace
may modify and soften wrath, it cannot mar the justice of the holy God.
No doubt an atonement had been made to justice, through the punishment
which the Levites had inflicted upon the nation, but only a passing and
imperfect one. Only a small portion of the guilty nation had been
punished, and that without the others showing themselves worthy of
forgiving grace through sorrow and repentance. The punishment,
therefore, was not remitted, but only postponed in the long-suffering of
God, "until the day of retribution" or visitation. The day of visitation
came at length, when the stiff-necked people had filled up the measure
of their sin through repeated rebellion against Jehovah and His servant
Moses, and were sentenced at Kadesh to die out in the wilderness ([Num
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#026).). The sorrow manifested by the
people ([Exo 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#004)), when the answer of
God was made known to them, was a proof that the measure was not yet
full.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 33](exo033)

</div>
