<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo006)  [Next](exo008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

[Exodus 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 7:1</span></span>

Moses' last difficulty ([Exo 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#012),
repeated in [Exo 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#030)) was removed by
God with the words: "See, I have made thee a god to Pharaoh, and Aaron
thy brother shall be thy prophet" ([Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)). According to [Exo
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#016), Moses was to be a god to Aaron;
and in harmony with that, Aaron is here called the prophet of Moses, as
being the person who would announce to Pharaoh the revelations of Moses.
At the same time Moses was also made a god to Pharaoh; i.e., he was
promised divine authority and power over Pharaoh, so that henceforth
there was no more necessity for him to be afraid of the king of Egypt,
but the latter, notwithstanding all resistance, would eventually bow
before him. Moses was a god to Aaron as the revealer of the divine will,
and to Pharaoh as the executor of that will. - In [Exo
7:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#002) God repeats in a still more
emphatic form His assurance, that notwithstanding the hardening of
Pharaoh's heart, He would bring His people Israel out of Egypt. ושׁלּח
([Exo 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#002)) does not mean ut dimittat
or mittat (Vulg. Ros.; "that he send," Eng. ver.); but ו is vav consec.
perf., "and so he will send." On [Exo
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#003) cf. [Exo
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021).

[Exodus 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 7:4</span></span>

את־ידי ונתתּי: "I will lay My hand on Egypt," i.e., smite Egypt, "and
bring out My armies, My people, the children of Israel." צבאות (armies)
is used of Israel, with reference to its leaving Egypt equipped ([Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018)) and organized as an army
according to the tribes (cf. [Exo 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#026)
and [Exo 12:51](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#051) with Num 1 and 2), to
contend for the cause of the Lord, and fight the battles of Jehovah. In
this respect the Israelites were called the hosts of Jehovah. The
calling of Moses and Aaron was now concluded. [Exo
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#006) and [Exo
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#007) pave the way for the account of
their performance of the duties consequent upon their call.

[Exodus 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 7:8</span></span>

The negotiations of Moses and Aaron as messengers of Jehovah with the
king of Egypt, concerning the departure of Israel from his land,
commenced with a sign, by which the messengers of God attested their
divine mission in the presence of Pharaoh ([Exo
7:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008)), and concluded with the
announcement of the last blow that God would inflict upon the hardened
king ([Exo 11:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#001)). The centre of
these negotiations, or rather the main point of this lengthened section,
which is closely connected throughout, and formally rounded off by [Exo
11:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#009) into an inward unity, is found
in the nine plagues which the messengers of Jehovah brought upon Pharaoh
and his kingdom at the command of Jehovah, to bend the defiant spirit of
the king, and induce him to let Israel go out of the land and serve
their God. If we carefully examine the account of these nine penal
miracles, we shall find that they are arranged in three groups of three
plagues each. For the first and second, the fourth and fifth, and the
seventh and eighth were announced beforehand by Moses to the king ([Exo
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015); [Exo
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#001), [Exo
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020); [Exo
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001), [Exo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013); [Exo
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#001)), whilst the third, sixth, and
ninth were sent without any such announcement ([Exo
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#016); [Exo
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008); [Exo
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#021)). Again, the first, fourth, and
seventh were announced to Pharaoh in the morning, and the first and
fourth by the side of the Nile ([Exo
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015); [Exo
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020)), both of them being connected
with the overflowing of the river; whilst the place of announcement is
not mentioned in the case of the seventh (the hail, [Exo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013)), because hail, as coming from
heaven, was not connected with any particular locality. This grouping is
not a merely external arrangement, adopted by the writer for the sake of
greater distinctness, but is founded in the facts themselves, and the
effect which God intended the plagues to produce, as we may gather from
these circumstances - that the Egyptian magicians, who had imitated the
first plagues, were put to shame with their arts by the third, and were
compelled to see in it the finger of God ([Exo
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019)), - that they were smitten
themselves by the sixth, and were unable to stand before Moses ([Exo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#011)), - and that after the ninth,
Pharaoh broke off all further negotiation with Moses and Aaron ([Exo
10:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028)). The last plague, commonly
known as the tenth, which Moses also announced to the king before his
departure ([Exo 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004).), differed from
the nine former ones both in purpose and form. It was the first
beginning of the judgment that was coming upon the hardened king, and
was inflicted directly by God Himself, for Jehovah "went out through the
midst of Egypt, and smote the first-born of the Egyptians both of man
and beast" ([Exo 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004); [Exo
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#029)); whereas seven of the previous
plagues were brought by Moses and Aaron, and of the two that are not
expressly said to have been brought by them, one, that of the dog-flies,
was simply sent by Jehovah ([Exo 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#021),
[Exo 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#024)), and the other, the murrain
of beasts, simply came from His hand ([Exo
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#003), [Exo
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006)). The last blow (נגע [Exo
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#001)), which brought about the release
of Israel, was also distinguished from the nine plagues, as the direct
judgment of God, by the fact that it was not effected through the medium
of any natural occurrence, as was the case with all the others, which
were based upon the natural phenomena of Egypt, and became signs and
wonders through their vast excess above the natural measure of such
natural occurrences and their supernatural accumulation, blow after blow
following one another in less than a year, and also through the peculiar
circumstances under which they were brought about. In this respect also
the triple division is unmistakeable. The first three plagues covered
the whole land, and fell upon the Israelites as well as the Egyptians;
with the fourth the separation commenced between Egyptians and
Israelites, so that only the Egyptians suffered from the last six, the
Israelites in Goshen being entirely exempted. The last three, again,
were distinguished from the others by the fact, that they were far more
dreadful than any of the previous ones, and bore visible marks of being
the forerunners of the judgment which would inevitably fall upon
Pharaoh, if he continued his opposition to the will of the Almighty God.

In this graduated series of plagues, the judgment of hardening was
inflicted upon Pharaoh in the manner explained above. In the first three
plagues God showed him, that He, the God of Israel, was Jehovah ([Exo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#017)), i.e., that He ruled as Lord and
King over the occurrences and powers of nature, which the Egyptians for
the most part honoured as divine; and before His power the magicians of
Egypt with their secret arts were put to shame. These three wonders made
no impression upon the king. The plague of frogs, indeed, became so
troublesome to him, that he begged Moses and Aaron to intercede with
their God to deliver him from them, and promised to let the people go
([Exo 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#008)). But as soon as they were
taken away, he hardened his heart, and would not listen to the
messengers of God. Of the three following plagues, the first (i.e., the
fourth in the entire series), viz., the plague of swarming creatures or
dog-flies, with which the distinction between the Egyptians and
Israelites commenced, proving to Pharaoh that the God of Israel was
Jehovah in the midst of the land ([Exo
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#022)), made such an impression upon
the hardened king, that he promised to allow the Israelites to sacrifice
to their God, first of all in the land, and when Moses refused this
condition, even outside the land, if they would not go far away, and
Moses and Aaron would pray to God for him, that this plague might be
taken away by God from him and from his people ([Exo
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#025).). But this concession was only
forced out of him by suffering; so that as soon as the plague ceased he
withdrew it again, and his hard heart was not changed by the two
following plagues. Hence still heavier plagues were sent, and he had to
learn from the last three that there was no god in the whole earth like
Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews ([Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014)). The terrible character of these
last plagues so affected the proud heart of Pharaoh, that twice he
acknowledged he had sinned ([Exo 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#027);
[Exo 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#016)), and gave a promise that
he would let the Israelites go, restricting his promise first of all to
the men, and then including their families also ([Exo
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#011), [Exo
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#024)). But when this plague was
withdrawn, he resumed his old sinful defiance once more ([Exo
9:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#034); [Exo
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#020)), and finally was altogether
hardened, and so enraged at Moses persisting in his demand that they
should take their flocks as well, that he drove away the messengers of
Jehovah and broke off all further negotiations, with the threat that he
would kill them if ever they came into his presence again ([Exo
10:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#028)).

[Exo 7:8-13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#008)

Attestation of the Divine Mission of Moses and Aaron. - By Jehovah's
directions Moses and Aaron went to Pharaoh, and proved by a miracle
(מופת [Exo 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)) that they were the
messengers of the God of the Hebrews. Aaron threw down his staff before
Pharaoh, and it became a serpent. Aaron's staff as no other than the
wondrous staff of Moses ([Exo 4:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#002)).
This is perfectly obvious from a comparison of [Exo
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015) and [Exo
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#017) with [Exo
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#019) and [Exo
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020). If Moses was directed, according
to [Exo 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015)., to go before Pharaoh
with his rod which had been turned into a serpent, and to announce to
him that he would smite the water of the Nile with the staff in his hand
and turn it into blood, and then, according to [Exo
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#019)., this miracle was carried out by
Aaron taking his staff and stretching out his hand over the waters of
Egypt, the staff which Aaron held over the water cannot have been any
other than the staff of Moses which had been turned into a serpent.
Consequently we must also understand by the staff of Aaron, which was
thrown down before Pharaoh and became a serpent, the same wondrous staff
of Moses, and attribute the expression "thy (i.e., Aaron's) staff" to
the brevity of the account, i.e., to the fact that the writer restricted
himself to the leading facts, and passed over such subordinate incidents
as that Moses gave his staff to Aaron for him to work the miracle. For
the same reason he has not even mentioned that Moses spoke to Pharaoh by
Aaron, or what he said, although in [Exo
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#013) he states that Pharaoh did not
hearken unto them, i.e., to their message or their words. The serpent,
into which the staff was changed, is not called נחשׁ here, as in [Exo
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015) and [Exo
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#003), but תּנּיּן (lxx δράκων, dragon),
a general term for snake-like animals. This difference does not show
that there were two distinct records, but may be explained on the ground
that the miracle performed before Pharaoh had a different signification
from that which attested the divine mission of Moses in the presence of
his people. The miraculous sign mentioned here is distinctly related to
the art of snake-charming, which was carried to such an extent by the
Psylli in ancient Egypt (cf. Bochart, and Hengstenberg, Egypt and Moses,
pp. 98ff. transl.). It is probable that the Israelites in Egypt gave the
name תּנּיּן (Eng. ver. dragon), which occurs in [Deu
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#033) and [Psa
91:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#013) as a parallel to פּתן (Eng. ver.
asp), to the snake with which the Egyptian charmers generally performed
their tricks, the Hayeh of the Arabs. What the magi and conjurers of
Egypt boasted that they could perform by their secret or magical arts,
Moses was to effect in reality in Pharaoh's presence, and thus manifest
himself to the king as Elohim ([Exo
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#001)), i.e., as endowed with divine
authority and power. All that is related of the Psylli of modern times
is, that they understand the art of turning snakes into sticks, or of
compelling them to become rigid and apparently dead (for examples see
Hengstenberg); but who can tell what the ancient Psylli may have been
able to effect, or may have pretended to effect, at a time when the
demoniacal power of heathenism existed in its unbroken force? The
magicians summoned by Pharaoh also turned their sticks into snakes ([Exo
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#012)); a fact which naturally excites
the suspicion that the sticks themselves were only rigid snakes, though,
with our very limited acquaintance with the dark domain of heathen
conjuring, the possibility of their working "lying wonders after the
working of Satan," i.e., supernatural things ([Th2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)), cannot be absolutely denied. The
words, "They also, the chartummim of Egypt, did in like manner with
their enchantments," are undoubtedly based upon the assumption, that the
conjurers of Egypt not only pretended to possess the art of turning
snakes into sticks, but of turning sticks into snakes as well, so that
in the persons of the conjurers Pharaoh summoned the might of the gods
of Egypt to oppose the might of Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews. For
these magicians, whom the Apostle Paul calls Jannes and Jambres,
according to the Jewish tradition ([Ti2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)), were not common jugglers, but
חכמים "wise men," men educated in human and divine wisdom, and חרטתּים,
ἱερογραμματεῖς, belonging to the priestly caste ([Gen
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008)); so that the power of their gods
was manifested in their secret arts (להטים from להט to conceal, to act
secretly, like לטים in [Exo 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022) from
לוּט), and in the defeat of their enchantments by Moses the gods of
Egypt were overcome by Jehovah ([Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012)). The supremacy of Jehovah over
the demoniacal powers of Egypt manifested itself in the very first
miraculous sign, in the fact that Aaron's staff swallowed those of the
magicians; though this miracle made no impression upon Pharaoh ([Exo
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#013)).

[Exodus 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 7:14</span></span>

When Pharaoh hardened his heart against the first sign, notwithstanding
the fact that it displayed the supremacy of the messengers of Jehovah
over the might of the Egyptian conjurers and their gods, and refused to
let the people of Israel go; Moses and Aaron were empowered by God to
force the release of Israel from the obdurate king by a series of penal
miracles. These מפתים were not purely supernatural wonders, or
altogether unknown to the Egyptians, but were land-plagues with which
Egypt was occasionally visited, and were raised into miraculous deeds of
the Almighty God, by the fact that they burst upon the land one after
another at an unusual time of the year, in unwonted force, and in close
succession. These plagues were selected by God as miraculous signs,
because He intended to prove thereby to the king and his servants, that
He, Jehovah, was the Lord in the land, and ruled over the powers of
nature with unrestricted freedom and omnipotence. For this reason God
not only caused them to burst suddenly upon the land according to His
word, and then as suddenly to disappear according to His omnipotent
will, but caused them to be produced by Moses and Aaron and disappear
again at their word and prayer, that Pharaoh might learn that these men
were appointed by Him as His messengers, and were endowed by Him with
divine power for the accomplishment of His will.

[Exo 7:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#014)

The Water of the Nile Turned into Blood. - In the morning, when Pharaoh
went to the Nile, Moses took his staff at the command of God; went up to
him on the bank of the river, with the demand of Jehovah that he would
let His people Israel go; and because hitherto (עד־כּה) he had not
obeyed, announced this first plague, which Aaron immediately brought to
pass. Both time and place are of significance here. Pharaoh went out in
the morning to the Nile ([Exo 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#015);
[Exo 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#020)), not merely to take a
refreshing walk, or to bathe in the river, or to see how high the water
had risen, but without doubt to present his daily worship to the Nile,
which was honoured by the Egyptians as their supreme deity (vid., [Exo
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#005)). At this very moment the will of
God with regard to Israel was declared to him; and for his refusal to
comply with the will of the Lord as thus revealed to him, the smiting of
the Nile with the staff made known to him the fact, that the God of the
Hebrews was the true God, and possessed the power to turn the
fertilizing water of this object of their highest worship into blood.
The changing of the water into blood is to be interpreted in the same
sense as in [Joe 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004), where the moon
is said to be turned into blood; that is to say, not as a chemical
change into real blood, but as a change in the colour, which caused it
to assume the appearance of blood ([Kg2
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#022)). According to the statements of
many travellers, the Nile water changes its colour when the water is
lowest, assumes first of all a greenish hue and is almost undrinkable,
and then, while it is rising, becomes as red as ochre, when it is more
wholesome again. The causes of this change have not been sufficiently
investigated. The reddening of the water is attributed by many to the
red earth, which the river brings down from Sennaar (cf. Hengstenberg,
Egypt and the Books of Moses, pp. 104ff. transl.; Laborde, comment. p.
28); but Ehrenberg came to the conclusion, after microscopical
examinations, that it was caused by cryptogamic plants and infusoria.
This natural phenomenon was here intensified into a miracle, not only by
the fact that the change took place immediately in all the branches of
the river at Moses' word and through the smiting of the Nile, but even
more by a chemical change in the water, which caused the fishes to die,
the stream to stink, and, what seems to indicate putrefaction, the water
to become undrinkable; whereas, according to the accounts of travellers,
which certainly do not quite agree with one another, and are not
entirely trustworthy, the Nile water becomes more drinkable as soon as
the natural reddening beings. The change in the water extended to "the
streams," or different arms of the Nile; "the rivers," or Nile canals;
"the ponds," or large standing lakes formed by the Nile; and all "the
pools of water," lit., every collection of their waters, i.e., all the
other standing lakes and ponds, left by the overflowings of the Nile,
with the water of which those who lived at a distance from the river had
to content themselves. "So that there was blood in all the land of
Egypt, both in the wood and in the stone;" i.e., in the vessels of wood
and stone, in which the water taken from the Nile and its branches was
kept for daily use. The reference is not merely to the earthen vessels
used for filtering and cleansing the water, but to every vessel into
which water had been put. The "stone" vessels were the stone reservoirs
built up at the corners of the streets and in other places, where fresh
water was kept for the poor (cf. Oedmann's verm. Samml. p. 133). The
meaning of this supplementary clause is not that even the water which
was in these vessels previous to the smiting of the river was turned
into blood, in which Kurtz perceives "the most miraculous part of the
whole miracle;" for in that case the "wood and stone" would have been
mentioned immediately after the "gatherings of the waters;" but simply
that there was no more water to put into these vessels that was not
changed into blood. The death of the fishes was a sign, that the smiting
had taken away from the river its life-sustaining power, and that its
red hue was intended to depict before the eyes of the Egyptians all the
terrors of death; but we are not to suppose that there was any reference
to the innocent blood which the Egyptians had poured into the river
through the drowning of the Hebrew boys, or to their own guilty blood
which was afterwards to be shed.

[Exo 7:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022)

This miracle was also imitated by the magicians. The question, where
they got any water that was still unchanged, is not answered in the
biblical text. Kurtz is of opinion that they took spring water for the
purpose; but he has overlooked the fact, that if spring water was still
to be had, there would be no necessity for the Egyptians to dig wells
for the purpose of finding drinkable water. The supposition that the
magicians did not try their arts till the miracle wrought by Aaron had
passed away, is hardly reconcilable with the text, which places the
return of Pharaoh to his house after the work of the magicians. For it
can neither be assumed, that the miracle wrought by the messengers of
Jehovah lasted only a few hours, so that Pharaoh was able to wait by the
Nile till it was over, since in that case the Egyptians would not have
thought it necessary to dig wells; nor can it be regarded as probable,
that after the miracle was over, and the plague had ceased, the
magicians began to imitate it for the purpose of showing the king that
they could do the same, and that it was after this that the king went to
his house without paying any need to the miracle. We must therefore
follow the analogy of [Exo 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025) as
compared with [Exo 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#005), and not press
the expression, "every collection of water" ([Exo
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#019)), so as to infer that there was
no Nile water at all, not even what had been taken away before the
smiting of the river, that was not changed, but rather conclude that the
magicians tried their arts upon water that was already drawn, for the
purpose of neutralizing the effect of the plague as soon as it had been
produced. The fact that the clause, "Pharaoh's heart was hardened," is
linked with the previous clause, "the magicians did so, etc.," by a vav
consecutive, unquestionably implies that the imitation of the miracle by
the magicians contributed to the hardening of Pharaoh's heart. The
expression, "to this also," in [Exo
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#023), points back to the first
miraculous sign in [Exo 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#010). This
plague was keenly felt by the Egyptians; for the Nile contains the only
good drinking water, and its excellence is unanimously attested by both
ancient and modern writers (Hengstenberg ut sup. pp. 108, 109, transl.).
As they could not drink of the water of the river from their loathing at
its stench ([Exo 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#018)), they were
obliged to dig round about the river for water to drink ([Exo
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#024)). From this it is evident that
the plague lasted a considerable time; according to [Exo
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#025), apparently seven days. At least
this is the most natural interpretation of the words, "and seven days
were fulfilled after that Jehovah had smitten the river." It is true,
there is still the possibility that this verse may be connected with the
following one, "when seven days were fulfilled...Jehovah said to Moses."
But this is not probable; for the time which intervened between the
plagues is not stated anywhere else, nor is the expression, "Jehovah
said," with which the plagues are introduced, connected in any other
instance with what precedes. The narrative leaves it quite undecided how
rapidly the plagues succeeded one another. On the supposition that the
changing of the Nile water took place at the time when the river began
to rise, and when the reddening generally occurs, many expositors fix
upon the month of June or July for the commencement of the plague; in
which case all the plagues down to the death of the first-born, which
occurred in the night of the 14th Abib, i.e., about the middle of April,
would be confined to the space of about nine months. But this conjecture
is a very uncertain one, and all that is tolerably sure is, that the
seventh plague (the hail) occurred in February (vid., [Exo
9:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031)), and there were (not three
weeks, but) eight weeks therefore, or about two months, between the
seventh and tenth plagues; so that between each of the last three there
would be an interval of fourteen or twenty days. And if we suppose that
there was a similar interval in the case of all the others, the first
plague would take place in September or October-that is to say, after
the yearly overflow of the Nile, which lasts from June to September.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 8](exo008)

</div>
