<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo008)  [Next](exo010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)

[Exodus 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 9:1</span></span>

The fifth plague consisted of a severe Murrain, which carried off the
cattle (מקנה, the living property) of the Egyptians, that were in the
field. To show how Pharaoh was accumulating guilt by his obstinate
resistance, in the announcement of this plague the expression, "If thou
refuse to let them go" (cf. [Exo 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#002)),
is followed by the words, "and wilt hold them (the Israelites) still"
(עוד still further, even after Jehovah has so emphatically declared His
will).

[Exodus 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 9:3</span></span>

"The hand of Jehovah will be (הויה, which only occurs here, as the
participle of היה, generally takes its form from הוה, [Neh
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#006); [Ecc
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#022)) against thy cattle...as a very
severe plague (דּבר that which sweeps away, a plague), i.e., will smite
them with a severe plague. A distinction was again made between the
Israelites and the Egyptians. "Of all (the cattle) belonging to the
children of Israel, not one (דּבּר [Exo
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#004), = אחד [Exo
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006)) shall die." A definite time was
also fixed for the coming of the plague, as in the case of the previous
one ([Exo 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#023)), in order that,
whereas murrains occasionally occur in Egypt, Pharaoh might discern in
his one the judgment of Jehovah.

[Exodus 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 9:6</span></span>

In the words "all the cattle of the Egyptians died," all is not to be
taken in an absolute sense, but according to popular usage, as denoting
such a quantity, that what remained was nothing in comparison; and,
according to [Exo 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#003), it must be
entirely restricted to the cattle in the field. For, according to [Exo
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009) and [Exo
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019), much of the cattle of the
Egyptians still remained even after this murrain, though it extended to
all kinds of cattle, horses, asses, camels, oxen, and sheep, and
differed in this respect from natural murrains.

[Exodus 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 9:7</span></span>

But Pharaoh's heart still continued hardened, though he convinced
himself by direct inquiry that the cattle of the Israelites had been
spared.

[Exodus 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 9:8</span></span>

The sixth plague smote man and beast with Boils Breaking Forth in
Blisters. - שׁחין (a common disease in Egypt, [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027)) from the unusual word שׁחן
(incaluit) signifies inflammation, then an abscess or boil ([Lev
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#018).; [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007)). אבעבּעת, from בּוּע, to spring
up, swell up, signifies blisters, φλυκτίδες (lxx), pustulae. The natural
substratum of this plague is discovered by most commentators in the
so-called Nile-blisters, which come out in innumerable little pimples
upon the scarlet-coloured skin, and change in a short space of time into
small, round, and thickly-crowded blisters. This is called by the
Egyptians Hamm el Nil, or the heat of the inundation. According to Dr.
Bilharz, it is a rash, which occurs in summer, chiefly towards the close
at the time of the overflowing of the Nile, and produces a burning and
pricking sensation upon the skin; or, in Seetzen's words, "it consists
of small, red, and slightly rounded elevations in the skin, which give
strong twitches and slight stinging sensations, resembling those of
scarlet fever". The cause of this eruption, which occurs only in men and
not in animals, has not been determined; some attributing it to the
water, and others to the heat. Leyrer, in Herzog's Cyclopaedia, speaks
of the "Anthrax which stood in a causal relation to the fifth plague; a
black, burning abscess, which frequently occurs after a murrain,
especially the cattle distemper, and which might be called to mind by
the name ἄνθραξ, coal, and the symbolical sprinkling of the soot of the
furnace." In any case, the manner in which this plague was produced was
significant, though it cannot be explained with positive certainty,
especially as we are unable to decide exactly what was the natural
disease which lay at the foundation of the plague. At the command of
God, Moses and Aaron took "handfuls of soot, and sprinkled it towards
the heaven, so that it became dust over all the land of Egypt," i.e.,
flew like dust over the land, and became boils on man and beast. הכּבשׁן
פּיח: soot or ashes of the smelting-furnace or lime-kiln. כּבשׁן is not
an oven or cooking stove, but, as Kimchi supposes, a smelting-furnace or
lime-kiln; not so called, however, a metallis domandis, but from כּבשׁ
in its primary signification to press together, hence (a) to soften, or
melt, (b) to tread down. Burder's view seems inadmissible; namely, that
this symbolical act of Moses had some relation to the expiatory rites of
the ancient Egyptians, in which the ashes of sacrifices, particularly
human sacrifices, were scattered about. For it rests upon the
supposition that Moses took the ashes from a fire appropriated to the
burning of sacrifices - a supposition to which neither כּבשׁן nor פּיח
is appropriate. For the former does not signify a fire-place, still less
one set apart for the burning of sacrifices, and the ashes taken from
the sacrifices for purifying purposes were called אפר, and not פּיח
([Num 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#010)). Moreover, such an
interpretation as this, namely, that the ashes set apart for purifying
purposes produced impurity in the hands of Moses, as a symbolical
representation of the thought, that "the religious purification promised
in the sacrificial worship of Egypt was really a defilement," does not
answer at all to the effect produced. The ashes scattered in the air by
Moses did not produce defilement, but boils or blisters; and we have no
ground for supposing that they were regarded by the Egyptians as a
religious defilement. And, lastly, there was not one of the plagues in
which the object was to pronounce condemnation upon the Egyptian worship
or sacrifices; since Pharaoh did not wish to force the Egyptian idolatry
upon the Israelites, but simply to prevent them from leaving the
country.

The ashes or soot of the smelting-furnace or lime-kiln bore, no doubt,
the same relation to the plague arising therefrom, as the water of the
Nile and the dust of the ground to the three plagues which proceeded
from them. As Pharaoh and his people owed their prosperity, wealth, and
abundance of earthly goods to the fertilizing waters of the Nile and the
fruitful soil, so it was from the lime-kilns, so to speak, that those
splendid cities and pyramids proceeded, by which the early Pharaohs
endeavoured to immortalize the power and glory of their reigns. And
whilst in the first three plagues the natural sources of the land were
changed by Jehovah, through His servants Moses and Aaron, into sources
of evil, the sixth plague proved to the proud king that Jehovah also
possessed the power to bring ruin upon him from the workshops of those
splendid edifices, for the erection of which he had made use of the
strength of the Israelites, and oppressed them so grievously with
burdensome toil as to cause Egypt to become like a furnace for smelting
iron ([Deu 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020)), and that He could
make the soot or ashes of the lime-kiln, the residuum of that fiery heat
and emblem of the furnace in which Israel groaned, into a seed which,
when carried through the air at His command, would produce burning boils
on man and beast throughout all the land of Egypt. These boils were the
first plague which attacked and endangered the lives of men; and in this
respect it was the first foreboding of the death which Pharaoh would
bring upon himself by his continued resistance. The priests were so far
from being able to shelter the king from this plague by their secret
arts, that they were attacked by them themselves, were unable to stand
before Moses, and were obliged to give up all further resistance. But
Pharaoh did not take this plague to heart, and was given up to the
divine sentence of hardening.

[Exodus 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 9:13</span></span>

As the plagues had thus far entirely failed to bend the unyielding heart
of Pharaoh under the will of the Almighty God, the terrors of that
judgment, which would infallibly come upon him, were set before him in
three more plagues, which were far more terrible than any that had
preceded them. That these were to be preparatory to the last decisive
blow, is proved by the great solemnity with which they were announced to
the hardened king ([Exo 9:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#013)). This
time Jehovah was about to "send all His strokes at the heart of Pharaoh,
and against his servants and his people" ([Exo
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#014)). אל־לבּך does not signify
"against thy person," for לב is not used for נפשׁ, and even the latter
is not a periphrasis for "person;" but the strokes were to go to the
king's heart, "It announces that they will be plagues that will not only
strike the head and arms, but penetrate the very heart, and inflict a
mortal wound" (Calvin). From the plural "strokes," it is evident that
this threat referred not only to the seventh plague, viz., the hail, but
to all the other plagues, through which Jehovah was about to make known
to the king that "there was none like Him in all the earth,;" i.e., that
not one of the gods whom the heathen worshipped was like Him, the only
true God. For, in order to show this, Jehovah had not smitten Pharaoh
and his people at once with pestilence and cut them off from the earth,
but had set him up to make him see, i.e., discern or feel His power, and
to glorify His name in all the earth ([Exo
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#015), [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016)). In [Exo
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#015) וגו שׁלחתּי (I have stretched
out, etc.) is to be taken as the conditional clause: "If I had now
stretched out My hand and smitten thee...thou wouldest have been cut
off." העמדתּיך forms the antithesis to תּכּהד, and means to cause to
stand or continue, as in [Kg1 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#004);
[Ch2 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#008) (διετηρήθης lxx). Causing to
stand presupposes setting up. In this first sense the Apostle Paul has
rendered it ἐξήγειρα in [Rom 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017), in
accordance with the purport of his argument, because "God thereby
appeared still more decidedly as absolutely determining all that was
done by Pharaoh" (Philippi on [Rom
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)). The reason why God had not
destroyed Pharaoh at once was twofold: (1) that Pharaoh himself might
experience (הראת to cause to see, i.e., to experience) the might of
Jehovah, by which he was compelled more than once to give glory to
Jehovah ([Exo 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#027); [Exo
10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#016); [Exo
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#031)); and (2) that the name of
Jehovah might be declared throughout all the earth. As both the
rebellion of the natural man against the word and will of God, and the
hostility of the world-power to the Lord and His people, were
concentrated in Pharaoh, so there were manifested in the judgments
suspended over him the patience and grace of the living God, quite as
much as His holiness, justice, and omnipotence, as a warning to
impenitent sinners, and a support to the faith of the godly, in a manner
that should by typical for all times and circumstances of the kingdom of
God in conflict with the ungodly world. The report of this glorious
manifestation of Jehovah spread at once among all the surrounding
nations (cf. [Exo 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014).), and
travelled not only to the Arabians, but to the Greeks and Romans also,
and eventually with the Gospel of Christ to all the nations of the earth
(vid., Tholuck on [Rom 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017)).

[Exodus 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 9:17</span></span>

The seventh plague. - To break down Pharaoh's opposition, Jehovah
determined to send such a Hail as had not been heard of since the
founding of Egypt, accompanied by thunder and masses of fire, and to
destroy every man and beast that should be in the field. מסתּולל עודך:
"thou still dammest thyself up against My people." הסתּולל: to set one's
self as a dam, i.e., to oppose; from סלל, to heap up earth as a dam or
rampart. "To-morrow about this time," to give Pharaoh time for
reflection. Instead of "from the day that Egypt was founded until now,"
we find in [Exo 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#024) "since it became
a nation," since its existence as a kingdom or nation.

[Exodus 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 9:19</span></span>

The good advice to be given by Moses to the king, to secure the men and
cattle that were in the field, i.e., to put them under shelter, which
was followed by the God-fearing Egyptians ([Exo
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#021)), was a sign of divine mercy,
which would still rescue the hardened man and save him from destruction.
Even in Pharaoh's case the possibility still existed of submission to
the will of God; the hardening was not yet complete. But as he paid no
heed to the word of the Lord, the predicted judgment was fulfilled ([Exo
9:22-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#022)). "Jehovah gave voices" (קלת);
called "voices of God" in [Exo 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#028).
This term is applied to the thunder (cf. [Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016); [Exo
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018); [Psa
29:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#003)), as being the mightiest
manifestation of the omnipotence of God, which speaks therein to men
([Rev 10:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#003)), and warns them of the
terrors of judgment. These terrors were heightened by masses of fire,
which came down from the sky along with the hail that smote man and
beast in the field, destroyed the vegetables, and shattered the trees.
"And fire ran along upon the ground;" תּהלך is a Kal, though it sounds
like Hithpael, and signifies grassari, as in [Psa
73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009).

[Exodus 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 9:24</span></span>

"Fire mingled;" lit., collected together, i.e., formed into balls (cf.
[Eze 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#004)). "The lightning took the
form of balls of fire, which came down like burning torches."

[Exodus 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 9:25</span></span>

The expressions, "every herb," and "every tree," are not to be taken
absolutely, just as in [Exo 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#006), as we
may see from [Exo 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#005). Storms are not
common in Lower or Middle Egypt, but they occur most frequently between
the months of December and April; and hail sometimes accompanies them,
though not with great severity. In themselves, therefore, thunder,
lightning, and hail were not unheard of. They also came at the time of
year when they usually occur, namely, when the cattle were in the field,
i.e., between January and April, the only period in which cattle are
turned out for pasture (for proofs, see Hengstenberg, Egypt and the
Books of Moses). The supernatural character of this plague was
manifested, not only in its being predicted by Moses, and in the
exemption of the land of Goshen, but more especially in the terrible
fury of the hail-storm, which made a stronger impression upon Pharaoh
than all the previous plagues. For he sent for Moses and Aaron, and
confessed to them, "I have sinned this time: Jehovah is righteous; I and
my people are the sinners" ([Exo
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#027).). But the very limitation "this
time" showed that his repentance did not go very deep, and that his
confession was far more the effect of terror caused by the majesty of
God, which was manifested in the fearful thunder and lightning, than a
genuine acknowledgment of his guilt. This is apparent also from the
words which follow: "Pray to Jehovah for me, and let it be enough (רב
satis, as in [Gen 45:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#028)) of the being
(מהית) of the voices of God and of the hail;" i.e., there has been
enough thunder and hail, they may cease now.

[Exodus 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 9:29</span></span>

Moses promised that his request should be granted, that he might know
"that the land belonged to Jehovah," i.e., that Jehovah ruled as Lord
over Egypt (cf. [Exo 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#018)); at the
same time he told him that the fear manifested by himself and his
servants was no true fear of God. יי מפּני ירא denotes the true fear of
God, which includes a voluntary subjection to the divine will. Observe
the expression, Jehovah, Elohim: Jehovah, who is Elohim, the Being to be
honoured as supreme, the true God.

[Exodus 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 9:31</span></span>

The account of the loss caused by the hail is introduced very
appropriately in [Exo 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#031) and [Exo
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#032), to show how much had been lost,
and how much there was still to lose through continued refusal. "The
flax and the barley were smitten, for the barley was ear, and the flax
was גּבעל (blossom); i.e., they were neither of them quite ripe, but
they were already in ear and blossom, so that they were broken and
destroyed by the hail. "The wheat," on the other hand, "and the spelt
were not broken down, because they were tender, or late" (אפילת); i.e.,
they had no ears as yet, and therefore could not be broken by the hail.
These accounts are in harmony with the natural history of Egypt.
According to Pliny, the barley is reaped in the sixth month after the
sowing-time, the wheat in the seventh. The barley is ripe about the end
of February or beginning of March; the wheat, at the end of March or
beginning of April. The flax is in flower at the end of January. In the
neighbourhood of Alexandria, and therefore quite in the north of Egypt,
the spelt is ripe at the end of April, and farther south it is probably
somewhat earlier; for, according to other accounts, the wheat and spelt
ripen at the same time (vid., Hengstenberg, p. 119). Consequently the
plague of hail occurred at the end of January, or at the latest in the
first half of February; so that there were at least eight weeks between
the seventh and tenth plagues. The hail must have smitten the half,
therefore, of the most important field-produce, viz., the barley, which
was a valuable article of food both for men, especially the poorer
classes, and for cattle, and the flax, which was also a very important
part of the produce of Egypt; whereas the spelt, of which the Egyptians
preferred to make their bread (Herod. 2, 36, 77), and the wheat were
still spared.

[Exodus 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 9:33</span></span>

But even this plague did not lead Pharaoh to alter his mind. As soon as
it had ceased on the intercession of Moses, he and his servants
continued sinning and hardening their hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 10](exo010)

</div>
