<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo026)  [Next](exo028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001)

[Exodus 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 27:1</span></span>

The Altar of Burnt-Offering (cf. [Exo
38:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)). - "Make the altar (the altar
of burnt-offering, according to [Exo
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#001)) of acacia-wood, five cubits
long, and five cubits broad (רבוּע "foured," i.e., four-sided or
quadrangular), and three cubits high. At its four corners shall its
horns be from (out of) it," i.e., not removable, but as if growing out
of it. These horns were projections at the corners of the altar, formed
to imitate in all probability the horns of oxen, and in these the whole
force of the altar was concentrated. The blood of the sin-offering was
therefore smeared upon them ([Lev
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007)), and those who fled to the altar
to save their lives laid hold of them (vid., [Exo
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014), and [Kg1
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050); also my commentary on the
passage). The altar was to be covered with copper or brass, and all the
things used in connection with it were to be made of brass. These were,
- (1) the pans, to cleanse it of the ashes of the fat ([Exo
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#003) : דּשּׁן, a denom. verb from
דּשׁן the ashes of fat, that is to say, the ashes that arose from
burning the flesh of the sacrifice upon the altar, has a privative
meaning, and signifies "to ash away," i.e., to cleanse from ashes); (2)
יעים shovels, from יעה to take away ([Isa
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#017)); (3) מזרקות, things used for
sprinkling the blood, from fzarq to sprinkle; (4) מזלגות forks,
flesh-hooks (cf. מזלג [Sa1 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#013)); (5)
מחתּת coal-scoops (cf. [Exo 25:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#038)).
וגו לכל־כּליו: either "for all the vessels thereof thou shalt make
brass," or "as for all its vessels, thou shalt make (them) of brass."

[Exodus 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 27:4</span></span>

The altar was to have מכבּר a grating, רשׂת מעשׂה net-work, i.e., a
covering of brass made in the form of a net, of larger dimensions that
the sides of the altar, for this grating was to be under the "compass"
(כּרכּב) of the altar from beneath, and to reach to the half of it
(half-way up, [Exo 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#005)); and in it,
i.e., at the four ends (or corners) of it, four brass rings were to be
fastened, for the poles to carry it with. כּרכּב (from כּרכּב
circumdedit) only occurs here and in [Exo
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#004), and signifies a border (סבבא
Targums), i.e., a projecting framework or bench running round the four
sides of the altar, about half a cubit or a cubit broad, nailed to the
walls (of the altar) on the outside, and fastened more firmly to them by
the copper covering which was common to both. The copper grating was
below this bench, and on the outside. The bench rested upon it, or
rather it hung from the outer edge of the bench and rested upon the
ground, like the inner chest, which it surrounded on all four sides, and
in which there were no perforations. It formed with the bench or carcob
a projecting footing, which caused the lower half of the altar to look
broader than the upper on every side. The priest stood upon this carcob
or bench when offering sacrifice, or when placing the wood, or doing
anything else upon the altar. This explains Aaron's coming down (ירד)
from the altar ([Lev 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022)); and there
is no necessity to suppose that there were steps to the altar, as Knobel
does in opposition to [Exo 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#026). For
even if the height of the altar, viz., three cubits, would be so great
that a bench half-way up would be too high for any one to step up to,
the earth could be slightly raised on one side so as to make the ascent
perfectly easy; and when the priest was standing upon the bench, he
could perform all that was necessary upon the top of the altar without
any difficulty.

[Exodus 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 27:6</span></span>

The poles were to be made of acacia-wood, and covered with brass, and to
be placed in the rings that were fixed in the two sides for the purpose
of carrying the altar. The additional instructions in [Exo
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#008), "hollow with tables shalt thou
make it, as it was showed thee in the mount" (cf. [Exo
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#009)), refer apparently, if we judge
from [Exo 20:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024), simply to the
wooden framework of the altar, which was covered with brass, and which
was filled with earth, or gravel and stones, when the altar was about to
be used, the whole being levelled so as to form a hearth. The shape thus
given to the altar of burnt-offering corresponded to the other objects
in the sanctuary. It could also be carried about with ease, and fixed in
any place, and could be used for burning the sacrifices without the
wooden walls being injured by the fire.

[Exodus 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 27:9</span></span>

(cf. [Exo 38:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#009)). The Court of the
dwelling was to consist of קלעים "hangings" of spun byssus, and pillars
with brass (copper) sockets, and hooks and fastenings for the pillars of
silver. The pillars were of course made of acacia-wood; they were five
cubits high, with silvered capitals ([Exo
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#017), [Exo
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#019)), and carried the hangings,
which were fastened to them by means of the hooks and fastenings. There
were twenty of them on both the southern and northern sides, and the
length of the drapery on each of these sides was 100 cubits (באמּה מאה,
100 sc., measured by the cubit), so that the court was a hundred cubits
long ([Exo 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#018)).

[Exodus 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 27:12</span></span>

"As for the breadth of the court on the west side, (there shall be)
curtains fifty cubits; their pillars twenty; and the breadth of the
court towards the front, on the east side, fifty cubits." The front is
divided in [Exo 27:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#014) into two
כּתף, lit., shoulders, i.e., sides or side-pieces, each consisting of 15
cubits of hangings and three pillars with their sockets, and a doorway
(שׁער), naturally in the middle, which was covered by a curtain (מסך)
formed of the same material as the covering at the entrance to the
dwelling, of 20 cubits in length, with four pillars and the same number
of sockets. The pillars were therefore equidistant from one another,
viz., 5 cubits apart. Their total number was 60 (not 56), which was the
number required, at the distance mentioned, to surround a quadrangular
space of 100 cubits long and 50 cubits broad.

(Note: Although any one may easily convince himself of the correctness
of these numbers by drawing a figure, Knobel has revived Philo's
erroneous statement about 56 pillars and the double reckoning of the
pillars in the corner. And the statement in [Exo
27:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#014), that three pillars were to
be made in front to carry the hangings on either side of the door, and
four to carry the curtain which covered the entrance, may be easily
shown to be correct, notwithstanding the fact that, as every drawing
shows, four pillars would be required, and not three only, to carry 15
cubits of hangings, and five (not four) to carry a curtain 20 cubits
broad, if the pillars were to be placed 5 cubits apart; for the corner
pillars, as belonging to both sides, and the pillars which stood between
the hangings and the curtain on either side, could only be reckoned as
halves in connection with each side or each post; and in reckoning the
number of pillars according to the method adopted in every other case,
the pillar from which you start would not be reckoned at all. Now, if
you count the pillars of the eastern side upon this principle (starting
from a corner pillar, which is not reckoned, because it is the
starting-point and is the last pillar of the side wall), you have 1, 2,
3, then 1, 2, 3, 4, and then again 1, 2, 3; that is to say, 3 pillars
for each wing and 4 for the curtain, although the hangings of each wing
would really be supported by 4 pillars, and the curtain in the middle by
5.)

[Exodus 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 27:17</span></span>

"All the pillars of the court round about (shall be) bound with
connecting rods of silver." As the rods connecting the pillars of the
court were of silver, and those connecting the pillars at the entrance
to the dwelling were of wood overlaid with gold, the former must have
been intended for a different purpose from the latter, simply serving as
rods to which to fasten the hangings, whereas those at the door of the
dwelling formed an architrave. The height of the hangings of the court
and the covering of the door is given in [Exo
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#017) as 5 cubits, corresponding to
the height of the pillars given in [Exo
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#018) of the chapter before us; but
the expression in [Exo 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#018), "the
height in the breadth," is a singular one, and רחב is probably to be
understood in the sense of רחב door-place or door-way, - the meaning of
the passage being, "the height of the covering in the door-way." In [Exo
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#018), "50 everywhere," πεντήκοντα ἐπὶ
πεντήκοντα (lxx), lit., 50 by 50, is to be understood as relating to the
extent towards the north and south; and the reading of the Samaritan
text, viz., באמּה for בחמשּׁים, is merely the result of an arbitrary
attempt to bring the text into conformity with the previous באמּה מאה,
whilst the lxx, on the other hand, by an equally arbitrary change, have
rendered the passage ἑκατὸν εφ ̓ ἑκατὸν.

[Exodus 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 27:19</span></span>

"All the vessels of the dwelling in all the work thereof (i.e., all the
tools needed for the tabernacle), and all its pegs, and all the pegs of
the court, (shall be of) brass or copper." The vessels of the dwelling
are not the things required for the performance of worship, but the
tools used in setting up the tabernacle and taking it down again.

If we inquire still further into the design and meaning of the court,
the erection of a court surrounding the dwelling on all four sides is to
be traced to the same circumstance as that which rendered it necessary
to divide the dwelling itself into two parts, viz., to the fact, that on
account of the unholiness of the nation, it could not come directly into
the presence of Jehovah, until the sin which separates unholy man from
the holy God had been atoned for. Although, by virtue of their election
as the children of Jehovah, or their adoption as the nation of God, it
was intended that the Israelites should be received by the Lord into His
house, and dwell as a son in his father's house; yet under the economy
of the law, which only produced the knowledge of sin, uncleanness, and
unholiness, their fellowship with Jehovah, the Holy One, could only be
sustained through mediators appointed and sanctified by God: viz., at
the institution of the covenant, through His servant Moses; and during
the existence of this covenant, through the chosen priests of the family
of Aaron. It was through them that the Lord was to be approached, and
the nation to be brought near to Him. Every day, therefore, they entered
the holy place of the dwelling, to offer to the Lord the sacrifices of
prayer and the fruits of the people's earthly vocation. But even they
were not allowed to go into the immediate presence of the holy God. The
most holy place, where God was enthroned, was hidden from them by the
curtain, and only once a year was the high priest permitted, as the head
of the whole congregation, which was called to be the holy nation of
God, to lift this curtain and appear before God with the atoning blood
of the sacrifice and the cloud of incense (Lev 16). The access of the
nation to its God was restricted to the court. There it could receive
from the Lord, through the medium of the sacrifices which it offered
upon the altar of burnt-offering, the expiation of its sins, His grace
and blessing, and strength to live anew. Whilst the dwelling itself
represented the house of God, the dwelling-place of Jehovah in the midst
of His people ([Exo 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019); [Jos
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#024); [Sa1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#007), [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024), etc.), the palace of the
God-King, in which the priestly nation drew near to Him ([Sa1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009); [Sa1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#003); [Psa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008); [Psa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004), [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)); the court which surrounded the
dwelling represented the kingdom of the God-King, the covenant land or
dwelling-place of Israel in the kingdom of its God. In accordance with
this purpose, the court was in the form of an oblong, to exhibit its
character as part of the kingdom of God. But its pillars and hangings
were only five cubits high, i.e., half the height of the dwelling, to
set forth the character of incompleteness, or of the threshold to the
sanctuary of God. All its vessels were of copper-brass, which, being
allied to the earth in both colour and material, was a symbolical
representation of the earthly side of the kingdom of God; whereas the
silver of the capitals of the pillars, and of the hooks and rods which
sustained the hangings, as well as the white colour of the
byssus-hangings, might point to the holiness of this site for the
kingdom of God. On the other hand, in the gilding of the capitals of the
pillars at the entrance to the dwelling, and the brass of their sockets,
we find gold and silver combined, to set forth the union of the court
with the sanctuary, i.e., the union of the dwelling-place of Israel with
the dwelling-place of its God, which is realized in the kingdom of God.

The design and significance of the court culminated in the altar of
burnt-offering, the principal object in the court; and upon this the
burnt-offerings and slain-offerings, in which the covenant nation
consecrated itself as a possession to its God, were burnt. The heart of
this altar was of earth or unhewn stones, having the character of earth,
not only on account of its being appointed as the place of sacrifice and
as the hearth for the offerings, but because the earth itself formed the
real or material sphere for the kingdom of God in the Old Testament
stage of its development. This heart of earth was elevated by the square
copper covering into a vessel of the sanctuary, a place where Jehovah
would record His name, and come to Israel and bless them ([Exo
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024), cf. [Exo
29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042), [Exo
29:44](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#044)), and was consecrated as a place
of sacrifice, by means of which Israel could raise itself to the Lord,
and ascend to Him in the sacrifice. And this significance of the altar
culminated in its horns, upon which the blood of the sin-offering was
smeared. Just as, in the case of the horned animals, their strength and
beauty are concentrated in the horns, and the horn has become in
consequence a symbol of strength, or of fulness of vital energy; so the
significance of the altar as a place of the saving and life-giving power
of God, which the Lord bestows upon His people in His kingdom, was
concentrated in the horns of the altar.

[Exodus 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 27:20</span></span>

The instructions concerning the Oil For the Candlestick, and the daily
trimming of the lamps by the priests, form a transition from the fitting
up of the sanctuary to the installation of its servants.

[Exo 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020)

The sons of Israel were to bring to Moses (lit., fetch to thee) olive
oil, pure (i.e., prepared from olives "which had been cleansed from
leaves, twigs, dust, etc., before they were crushed"), beaten, i.e.,
obtained not by crushing in oil-presses, but by beating, when the oil
which flows out by itself is of the finest quality and a white colour.
This oil was to be "for the candlestick to set up a continual light."

[Exo 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021)

Aaron and his sons were to prepare this light in the tabernacle outside
the curtain, which was over the testimony (i.e., which covered or
concealed it), from evening to morning, before Jehovah. "The tabernacle
of the congregation," lit., tent of assembly: this expression is applied
to the sanctuary for the first time in the preset passage, but it
afterwards became the usual appellation, and accords both with its
structure and design, as it was a tent in style, and was set apart as
the place where Jehovah would meet with the Israelites and commune with
them ([Exo 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022)). The ordering of the
light from evening to morning consisted, according to [Exo
30:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007), and [Lev
24:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#003), in placing the lamps upon the
candlestick in the evening and lighting them, that they might give light
through the night, and then cleaning them in the morning and filling
them with fresh oil. The words "a statute for ever unto their
generations (see at [Exo 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)) on the
part of the children of Israel," are to be understood as referring not
merely to the gift of oil to be made by the Israelites for all time, but
to the preparation of the light, which was to be regarded as of
perpetual obligation and worth. "For ever," in the same sense as in [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007) and [Gen
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 28](exo028)

</div>
