<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze013)  [Next](eze015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 14:0</span></span>

Attitude of God Towards the Worshippers of Idols, and Certainty of the
Judgments

This chapter contains two words of God, which have obviously an internal
connection with each other. The first ([Eze
14:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001)) announces to the elders, who
have come to the prophet to inquire of God, that the Lord will not allow
idolaters to inquire of Him, but will answer all who do not turn from
idolatry with severe judgments, and will even destroy the prophets who
venture to give an answer to such inquirers. The second ([Eze
14:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#012)) denounces the false hope
that God will avert the judgment and spare Jerusalem because of the
righteousness of the godly men therein.

[Ezekiel 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 14:1</span></span>

The Lord Gives No Answer to the Idolaters

[Eze 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001) narrates the occasion for
this and the following words of God: There came to me men of the elders
of Israel, and sat down before me. These men were not deputies from the
Israelites in Palestine, as Grotius and others suppose, but elders of
the exiles among whom Ezekiel had been labouring. They came to visit the
prophet (v. 3), evidently with the intention of obtaining, through him,
a word of God concerning the future of Jerusalem, or the fate of the
kingdom of Judah. But Hvernick is wrong in supposing that we may infer,
from either the first or second word of God in this chapter, that they
had addressed to the prophet a distinct inquiry of this nature, to which
the answer is given in vv. 12-23. For although their coming to the
prophet showed that his prophecies had made an impression upon them, it
is not stated in v. 1 that they had come to inquire of God, like the
elders in [Eze 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001), and there is no
allusion to any definite questions in the words of God themselves. The
first ([Eze 14:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#002)) simply assumes
that they have come with the intention of asking, and discloses the
state of heart which keeps them from coming to inquire; and the second
([Eze 14:12-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#012)) points out the
worthlessness of their false confidence in the righteousness of certain
godly men.

[Eze 14:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#002)

And the word of Jehovah came to me, saying, [Eze
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003). Son of man, these men have let
their idols rise up in their heart, and have set the stumbling-block to
guilt before their face: shall I allow myself to be inquired of by them?
[Eze 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#004). Therefore speak to them,
and say to them, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Every man of the house of
Israel who lifteth up his idols in his heart, and setteth the
stumbling-block to his sin before his face, and cometh to the prophet,
to him do I, Jehovah, show myself, answering according thereto,
according to the multitude of his idols; [Eze
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#005). To grasp the house of Israel by
their heart, because they have turned away from me, all of them through
their idols. - We have not to picture these elders to ourselves as given
up to gross idolatry. העלה על לב means, to allow anything to come into
the mind, to permit it to rise up in the heart, to be mentally busy
therewith. "To set before one's face" is also to be understood, in a
spiritual sense, as relating to a thing which a man will not put out of
his mind. מכשׁול , stumbling-block to sin and guilt (cf. [Eze
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019)), i.e., the idols. Thus the two
phrases simply denote the leaning of the heart and spirit towards false
gods. God does not suffer those whose heart is attached to idols to seek
and find Him. The interrogative clause 'האדּרשׁ וגו contains a strong
negation. The emphasis lies in the infinitive absolute אדּרשׁ et placed
before the verb, in which the ה is softened into א, to avoid writing ה
twice. נדרשׁ, to allow oneself to be sought, involves the finding of
God; hence in [Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001) we have נדרשׁ
as parallel to נמצא. In [Eze 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#004),
[Eze 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#005), there follows a positive
declaration of the attitude of God towards those who are devoted to
idolatry in their heart. Every such Israelite will be answered by God
according to the measure of the multitude of his idols. The Niphal נענה
has not the signification of the Kal, and does not mean "to be
answerable," as Ewald supposes, or to converse; but is generally used in
a passive sense, "to be answered," i.e., to find or obtain a hearing
([Job 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#002); [Job
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007)). It is employed here in a
reflective sense, to hold or show oneself answering. בה, according to
the Chetib בהּ, for which the Keri suggests the softer gloss בא, refers
to 'בּרב גל which follows; the nominative being anticipated, according
to an idiom very common in Aramaean, by a previous pronoun. It is
written here for the sake of emphasis, to bring the following object
into more striking prominence. ב is used here in the sense of secundum,
according to, not because, since this meaning is quite unsuitable for
the ב in [Eze 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#007), where it occurs in
the same connection (בּי). The manner in which God will show Himself
answering the idolatry according to their idols, is reserved till [Eze
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#008). Here, in [Eze
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#005), the design of this procedure on
the part of God is given: viz., to grasp Israel by the heart; i.e., not
merely to touch and to improve them, but to bring down their heart by
judgments (cf. [Lev 26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041)), and thus
move them to give up idolatry and return to the living God. נזרוּ, as in
[Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004), to recede, to draw away from
God. כּלּם is an emphatic repetition of the subject belonging to נזרוּ.

[Eze 14:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#006)

In these verses the divine threat, and the summons to repent, are
repeated, expanded, and uttered in the clearest words. - [Eze
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#006). Therefore say to the house of
Israel, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Repent, and turn away from your
idols; and turn away your face from all your abominations. V.7. For
every one of the house of Israel, and of the foreigners who sojourn in
Israel, if he estrange himself from me, and let his idols rise up in his
heart, and set the stumbling-block to his sin before his face, and come
to the prophet to seek me for himself; I will show myself to him,
answering in my own way. [Eze 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#008). I
will direct my face against that man, and will destroy him, for a sign
and for proverbs, and will cut him off out of my people; and ye shall
learn that I am Jehovah. - לכן in [Eze
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#006) is co-ordinate with the לכן in
[Eze 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#004), so far as the thought is
concerned, but it is directly attached to [Eze
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#005): because they have estranged
themselves from God, therefore God requires them to repent and turn. For
God will answer with severe judgments every one who would seek God with
idols in his heart, whether he be an Israelite, or a foreigner living in
the midst of Israel. שׁוּבוּ, turn, be converted, is rendered still more
emphatic by the addition of פניכם... השׁיבוּ. This double call to
repentance corresponds to the double reproof of their idolatry in [Eze
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003), viz., שׁוּבוּ, to על לב 'העלה
גל; and השׁיבוּ פניכם, to their setting the idols נכח פּניהם. השׁיבוּ is
not used intransitively, as it apparently is in [Eze
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#030), but is to be taken in
connection with the object פניכם, which follows at the end of the verse;
and it is simply repeated before פניכם for the sake of clearness and
emphasis. The reason for the summons to repent and give up idolatry is
explained in [Eze 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#007), in the threat
that God will destroy every Israelite, and every foreigner in Israel,
who draws away from God and attaches himself to idols. The phraseology
of [Eze 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#007) is adopted almost
verbatim from [Lev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008), [Lev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010),[Lev
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013). On the obligation of foreigners
to avoid idolatry and all moral abominations, vid., [Lev
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002); [Lev
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#026); [Lev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010); [Exo
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019), etc. The ו before ינּזר and יעל
does not stand for the Vav relat., but simply supposes a case: "should
he separate himself from my followers, and let his idols rise up, etc."
לדרשׁ־לו בּי does not mean, "to seek counsel of him (the prophet) from
me," for לו cannot be taken as referring to the prophet, although דּרשׁ
with ל does sometimes mean to seek any one, and ל may therefore indicate
the person to whom one goes to make inquiry (cf. [Ch2
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#013); [Ch2
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#004); [Ch2
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#021)), because it is Jehovah who is
sought in this case; and Hvernick's remark, that "דּרשׁ with ל merely
indicates the external object sought by a man, and therefore in this
instance the medium or organ through whom God speaks," is proved to be
erroneous by the passages just cited. לו is reflective, or to be taken
as a dat. commodi, denoting the inquirer or seeker. The person
approached for the purpose of inquiring or seeking, i.e., God, is
indicated by the preposition בּ, as in [Ch1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014) (דּרשׁ ); and also frequently,
in the case of idols, when either an oracle or help is sought from them
([Sa1 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007); [Kg2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002).). It is only in this way that לו
and בּי can be made to correspond to the same words in the apodosis:
Whosoever seeks counsel of God, to him will God show Himself answering
בּי, in Him, i.e., in accordance with His nature, in His own way, -
namely, in the manner described in [Eze
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#008). The threat is composed of
passages in the law: 'נתתּי and 'הכרתּי וגו, after [Lev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#003), [Lev
20:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#005); and 'וחשׁמותיהוּ וגו, though
somewhat freely, after [Deu 28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)
('היה לשׁמּה למשׁל). There is no doubt, therefore, that השׁמותי is to be
derived from שׁמם, and stands for השׁמּותי, in accordance with the
custom in later writings of resolving the Dagesh forte into a long
vowel. The allusion to [Deu 28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037),
compared with היה in v. 46 of the same chapter, is sufficient to set
aside the assumption that השׁמותי is to be derived from שׂים, and
pointed accordingly; although the lxx, Targ., Syr., and Vulg. have all
renderings of שׂים (cf. [Psa 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#016)).
Moreover, שׂים in the perfect never takes the Hiphil form; and in [Eze
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#026) we have אשׁמּם in a similar
connection. The expression is a pregnant one: I make him desolate, so
that he becomes a sign and proverbs.

[Eze 14:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#009)

No prophet is to give any other answer. - [Eze
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#009). But if a prophet allow himself
to be persuaded, and give a word, I have persuaded this prophet, and
will stretch out my hand against him, and cut him off out of my people
Israel. [Eze 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#010). They shall bear
their guilt: as the guilt of the inquirer, so shall the guilt of the
prophet be; [Eze 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#011). In order that
the house of Israel may no more stray from me, and may no more defile
itself with all its transgressions; but they may be my people, and I
their God is the saying of the Lord Jehovah. - The prophet who allows
himself to be persuaded is not a prophet מלּבּו ([Eze
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#002)), but one who really thinks that
he has a word of God. פּתּה, to persuade, to entice by friendly words
(in a good sense, [Hos 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#016)); but
generally sensu malo, to lead astray, or seduce to that which is
unallowable or evil. "If he allow himself to be persuaded:" not
necessarily "with the hope of payment from the hypocrites who consult
him" (Michaelis). This weakens the thought. It might sometimes be done
from unselfish good-nature. And "the word" itself need not have been a
divine oracle of his own invention, or a false prophecy. The allusion is
simply to a word of a different character from that contained in [Eze
14:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#006), which either demands
repentance or denounces judgment upon the impenitent: every word,
therefore, which could by any possibility confirm the sinner in his
security. - By אני יהוה ([Eze 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#009))
the apodosis is introduced in an emphatic manner, as in [Eze
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#004) and [Eze
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#007); but פּתּיתי cannot be taken in a
future sense ("I will persuade"). It must be a perfect; since the
persuading of the prophet would necessarily precede his allowing himself
to be persuaded. The Fathers and earlier Lutheran theologians are wrong
in their interpretation of פּתּיתי, which they understand in a
permissive sense, meaning simply that God allowed it, and did not
prevent their being seduced. Still more wrong are Storr and Schmieder,
the former of whom regards it as simply declaratory, "I will declare him
to have gone astray from the worship of Jehovah;" the latter, "I will
show him to be a fool, by punishing him for his disobedience." The words
are rather to be understood in accordance with [Kg1
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020)., where the persuading (pittâh)
is done by a lying spirit, which inspires the prophets of Ahab to
predict success to the king, in order that he may fall. As Jehovah sent
the spirit in that case, and put it into the mouth of the prophets, so
is the persuasion in this instance also effected by God: not merely
divine permission, but divine ordination and arrangement; though this
does not destroy human freedom, but, like all "persuading," presupposes
the possibility of not allowing himself to be persuaded. See the
discussion of this question in the commentary on [Kg1
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020). The remark of Calvin on the
verse before us is correct: "it teaches that neither impostures nor
frauds take place apart from the will of God" (nisi Deo volente). But
this willing on the part of God, or the persuading of the prophets to
the utterance of self-willed words, which have not been inspired by God,
only takes place in persons who admit evil into themselves, and is
designed to tempt them and lead them to decide whether they will
endeavour to resist and conquer the sinful inclinations of their hearts,
or will allow them to shape themselves into outward deeds, in which case
they will become ripe for judgment. It is in this sense that God
persuades such a prophet, in order that He may then cut him off out of
His people. But this punishment will not fall upon the prophet only. It
will reach the seeker or inquirer also, in order if possible to bring
Israel back from its wandering astray, and make it into a people of God
purified from sin ([Eze 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#010) and [Eze
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#011)). It was to this end that, in
the last times of the kingdom of Judah, God allowed false prophecy to
prevail so mightily, - namely, that it might accelerate the process of
distinguishing between the righteous and the wicked; and then, by means
of the judgment which destroyed the wicked, purify His nation and lead
it on to the great end of its calling.

[Ezekiel 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 14:12</span></span>

The Righteousness of the Godly will not Avert the Judgment

The threat contained in the preceding word of God, that if the idolaters
did not repent, God would not answer them in any other way than with an
exterminating judgment, left the possibility still open, that He would
avert the destruction of Judah and Jerusalem for the sake of the
righteous therein, as He had promised the patriarch Abraham that He
would do in the case of Sodom and Gomorrah ([Gen
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#023).). This hope, which might be
cherished by the people and by the elders who had come to the prophet,
is now to be taken from the people by the word of God which follows,
containing as it does the announcement, that if any land should sin so
grievously against God by its apostasy, He would be driven to inflict
upon it the punishments threatened by Moses against apostate Israel
([Lev 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#022), [Lev
26:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#025), and elsewhere), namely, to
destroy both man and beast, and make the land a desert; it would be of
no advantage to such a land to have certain righteous men, such as Noah,
Daniel, and Job, living therein. For although these righteous men would
be saved themselves, their righteousness could not possibly secure
salvation for the sinners. The manner in which this thought is carried
out in [Eze 14:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013) is, that four
exterminating punishments are successively supposed to come upon the
land and lay it waste; and in the case of every one, the words are
repeated, that even righteous men, such as Noah, Daniel, and Job, would
only save their own souls, and not one of the sinners. And thus,
according to [Eze 14:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021), will the
Lord act when He sends His judgments against Jerusalem; and He will
execute them in such a manner that the necessity and righteousness of
His acts shall be made manifest therein. - This word of God forms a
supplementary side-piece to [Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)
-43, where the Lord replies to the intercession of the prophet, that
even the intercession of a Moses and a Samuel on behalf of the people
would not avert the judgments which were suspended over them.

[Eze 14:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#012)

[Eze 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#012). And the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, [Eze 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013). Son of
man, if a land sin against me to act treacherously, and I stretch out my
hand against it, and break in pieces for it the support of bread, and
send famine into it, and cut off from it man and beast: [Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014). And there should be these three
men therein, Noah, Daniel, and Job, they would through their
righteousness deliver their soul, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah.
[Eze 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#015). If I bring evil beasts
into the land, so that they make it childless, and it become a desert,
so that no one passeth through it because of the beasts: [Eze
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016). These three men therein, as I
live, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah, would not deliver sons and
daughters; they only would be delivered, but the land would become a
desert. [Eze 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#017). Or I bring the
sword into that land, and say, Let the sword go through the land; and I
cut off from it man and beast: [Eze
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#018). These three men therein, as I
live, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah, would not deliver sons and
daughters, but they only would be delivered. [Eze
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#019). Or I send pestilence into that
land, and pour out my fury upon it in blood, to cut off from it man and
beast: [Eze 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020). Verily, Noah,
Daniel, and Job, in the midst of it, as I live, is the saying of the
Lord Jehovah, would deliver neither son nor daughter; they would only
deliver their own soul through their righteousness. - ארץ in [Eze
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013) is intentionally left
indefinite, that the thought may be expressed in the most general
manner. On the other hand, the sin is very plainly defined as למעל־מעל.
מעל, literally, to cover, signifies to act in a secret or treacherous
manner, especially towards Jehovah, either by apostasy from Him, in
other words, by idolatry, or by withholding what is due to Him (see
comm. on [Lev 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015)). In the passage
before us it is the treachery of apostasy from Him by idolatry that is
intended. As the epithet used to denote the sin is taken from [Lev
26:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#040) and [Deu
32:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#051), so the four punishments
mentioned in the following verses, as well as in [Eze
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017), are also taken from Lev 26, -
viz. the breaking up of the staff of bread, from v. 26; the evil beasts,
from [Eze 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022); and the sword and
pestilence, from v. 25. The three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, are named
as examples of true righteousness of life, or צדקה ([Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014), [Eze
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020)); i.e., according to Calvin's
correct explanation, quicquid pertinet ad regulam sancte et juste
vivendi. Noah is so described in [Gen
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009); and Job, in the Book of [Job
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001); [Job
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#004), etc.; and Daniel, in like
manner, is mentioned in [Dan 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#008).,
[Eze 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#011)., as faithfully confessing
his faith in his life. The fact that Daniel is named before Job does not
warrant the conjecture that some other older Daniel is meant, of whom
nothing is said in the history, and whose existence is merely
postulated. For the enumeration is not intended to be chronological, but
is arranged according to the subject-matter; the order being determined
by the nature of the deliverance experienced by these men for their
righteousness in the midst of great judgments. Consequently, as Hvernick
and Kliefoth have shown, we have a climax here: Noah saved his family
along with himself; Daniel was able to save his friends ([Dan
2:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017)); but Job, with his
righteousness, was not even able to save his children. - The second
judgment ([Eze 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#015)) is introduced
with לוּ, which, as a rule, supposes a case that is not expected to
occur, or even regarded as possible; here, however, לוּ is used as
perfectly synonymous with אם. שׁכּלתה has no Mappik, because the tone is
drawn back upon the penultima (see comm. on [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011)). In [Eze
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#019), the expression "to pour out my
wrath in blood" is a pregnant one, for to pour out my wrath in such a
manner that it is manifested in the shedding of blood or the destruction
of life, for the life is in the blood. In this sense pestilence and
blood were also associated in [Eze
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017).

If we look closely at the four cases enumerated, we find the following
difference in the statements concerning the deliverance of the
righteous: that, in the first instance, it is simply stated that Noah,
Daniel, and Job would save their soul, i.e., their life, by their
righteousness; whereas, in the three others, it is declared that as
truly as the Lord liveth they would not save either sons or daughters,
but they alone would be delivered. The difference is not merely a
rhetorical climax or progress in the address by means of asseveration
and antithesis, but indicates a distinction in the thought. The first
case is only intended to teach that in the approaching judgment the
righteous would save their lives, i.e., that God would not sweep away
the righteous with the ungodly. The three cases which follow are
intended, on the other hand, to exemplify the truth that the
righteousness of the righteous will be of no avail to the idolaters and
apostates; since even such patterns of righteousness as Noah, Daniel,
and Job would only save their own lives, and would not be able to save
the lives of others also. This tallies with the omission of the
asseveration in [Eze 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014). The first
declaration, that God would deliver the righteous in the coming
judgments, needed no asseveration, inasmuch as this truth was not called
in question; but it was required in the case of the declaration that the
righteousness of the righteous would bring no deliverance to the sinful
nation, since this was the hope which the ungodly cherished, and it was
this hope which was to be taken from them. The other differences which
we find in the description given of the several cases are merely formal
in their nature, and do not in any way affect the sense; e.g., the use
of לא, in [Eze 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#018), instead of the
particle אם, which is commonly employed in oaths, and which we find in
[Eze 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016) and [Eze
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020); the choice of the singular been
בּן and בּת, in [Eze 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020), in the
place of the plural בּנים וּבנות, used in [Eze
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016) and [Eze
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#018); and the variation in the
expressions, ינצּלוּ נפשׁם ([Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)), יצּילוּ נפשׁם ([Eze
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020)), and המּה לבדּם ינּצלוּ ([Eze
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016) and [Eze
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#018)), which Hitzig proposes to
remove by altering the first two forms into the third, though without
the slightest reason. For although the Piel occurs in [Exo
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#036) in the sense of taking away or
spoiling, and is not met with anywhere else in the sense of delivering,
it may just as well be used in this sense, as the Hiphil has both
significations.

[Eze 14:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021)

The rule expounded in [Eze 14:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013) is
here applied to Jerusalem. - [Eze
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021). For thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, How much more when I send my four evil judgments, sword, and
famine, and evil beasts, and pestilence, against Jerusalem, to cut off
from it man and beast? [Eze 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022).
And, behold, there remain escaped ones in her who will be brought out,
sons and daughters; behold, they will go out to you, that ye may see
their walk and their works; and console yourselves concerning the evil
which I have brought upon Jerusalem. [Eze
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023). And they will console you, when
ye see their walk and their works: and ye will see that I have not done
without cause all that I have done to her, is the saying of the Lord
Jehovah. - By כּי in [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021) the
application of the general rule to Jerusalem is made in the form of a
reason. The meaning, however, is not, that the reason why Jehovah was
obliged to act in this unsparing manner was to be found in the corrupt
condition of the nation, as Hvernick supposes, - a thought quite foreign
to the context; but כּי indicates that the judgments upon Jerusalem will
furnish a practical proof of the general truth expressed in [Eze
14:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013), and so confirm it. This כּי
is no more an emphatic yea than the following "אף is a forcible
introduction to the antithesis formed by the coming fact, to the merely
imaginary cases mentioned above" (Hitzig). אף has undoubtedly the force
of a climax, but not of an asseveration, "verily" (Hv.); a meaning which
this particle never has. It is used here, as in [Job
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019), in the sense of אף כּי; and the
כּי which follows אף swollof hcihw in this case is a conditional
particle of time, "when." Consequently כי ought properly to be written
twice; but it is only used once, as in [Eze
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze015.htm#005); [Job
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#014), etc. The thought is this: how
much more will this be the case, namely, that even a Noah, Daniel, and
Job will not deliver either sons or daughters when I send my judgments
upon Jerusalem. The perfect שׁלּחתּי is used, and not the imperfect, as
in [Eze 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#013), because God has
actually resolved upon sending it, and does not merely mention it as a
possible case. The number four is significant, symbolizing the
universality of the judgment, or the thought that it will fall on all
sides, or upon the whole of Jerusalem; whereby it must also be borne in
mind that Jerusalem as the capital represents the kingdom of Judah, or
the whole of Israel, so far as it was still in Canaan. At the same time,
by the fact that the Lord allows sons and daughters to escape death, and
to be led away to Babylon, He forces the acknowledgment of the necessity
and righteousness of His judgments among those who are in exile. This is
in general terms the thought contained in [Eze
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022) and [Eze
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023), to which very different
meanings have been assigned by the latest expositors. Hvernick, for
example, imagines that, in addition to the four ordinary judgments laid
down in the law, [Eze 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022) announces
a new and extraordinary one; whereas Hitzig and Kliefoth have found in
these two verses the consolatory assurance, that in the time of the
judgments a few of the younger generation will be rescued and taken to
those already in exile in Babylon, there to excite pity as well as to
express it, and to give a visible proof of the magnitude of the judgment
which has fallen upon Israel. They differ so far from each other,
however, that Hitzig regards those of the younger generation who are
saved as צדּיקים, who have saved themselves through their innocence, but
not their guilty parents, and who will excite the commiseration of those
already in exile through their blameless conduct; whilst Kliefoth
imagines that those who are rescued are simply less criminal than the
rest, and when they come to Babylon will be pitied by those who have
been longer in exile, and will pity them in return.

Neither of these views does justice to the words themselves or to the
context. The meaning of. [Eze 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022) is
clear enough; and in the main there has been no difference of opinion
concerning it. When man and beast are cut off out of Jerusalem by the
four judgments, all will not perish; but פּליטה, i.e., persons who have
escaped destruction, will be left, and will be led out of the city.
These are called sons and daughters, with an allusion to [Eze
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#016), [Eze
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#018), and [Eze
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#020); and consequently we must not
take these words as referring to the younger generation in contrast to
the older. They will be led out of Jerusalem, not to remain in the land,
but to come to "you," i.e., those already in exile, that is to say, to
go into exile to Babylon. This does not imply either a modification or a
sharpening of the punishment; for the cutting off of man and beast from
a town may be effected not only by slaying, but by leading away. The
design of God in leaving some to escape, and carrying them to Babylon,
is explained in the clauses which follow from וּראיתם onwards, the
meaning of which depends partly upon the more precise definition of
דּרכּם and עלילותם, and partly upon the explanation to be given of
נחמתּם and ונחמוּ אתכם. The ways and works are not to be taken without
reserve as good and righteous works, as Kliefoth has correctly shown in
his reply to Hitzig. Still less can ways and works denote their
experience or fate, which is the explanation given by Kliefoth of the
words, when expounding the meaning and connection of [Eze
14:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021). The context certainly points
to wicked ways and evil works. And it is only the sight of such works
that could lead to the conviction that it was not חנּם, in vain, i.e.,
without cause, that God had inflicted such severe judgments upon
Jerusalem. And in addition to this effect, which is mentioned in [Eze
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023) as produced upon those who were
already in exile, by the sight of the conduct of the פּליטה that came to
Babylon, the immediate design of God is described in [Eze
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022) as 'ונחמתּם על־הרעה וגו. The
verb נחם with על cannot be used here in the sense of to repent of, or be
sorry for, a judgment which God has inflicted upon him, but only of evil
which he himself has done; and נחם does not mean to pity a person,
either when construed in the Piel with an accusative of the person, or
in the Niphal c. על, rei. נחמתּם is Niphal, and signifies here to
console oneself, as in [Gen 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012) with
על, concerning anything, as in [Sa2
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#039); [Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015), etc.; and נחמוּ ([Eze
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023)), with the accusative of the
person, to comfort any one, as in Gen. 51:21; [Job
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011), etc. But the works and doings of
those who came to Babylon could only produce this effect upon those who
were already there, from the fact that they were of such a character as
to demonstrate the necessity for the judgments which had fallen upon
Jerusalem. A conviction of the necessity for the divine judgments would
cause them to comfort themselves with regard to the evil inflicted by
God; inasmuch as they would see, not only that the punishment endured
was a chastisement well deserved, but that God in His righteousness
would stay the punishment when it had fulfilled His purpose, and restore
the penitent sinner to favour once more. But the consolation which those
who were in exile would derive from a sight of the works of the sons and
daughters who had escaped from death and come to Babylon, is attributed
in [Eze 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023) (נחמוּ אתכם) to the
persons themselves. It is in this sense that it is stated that "they
will comfort you;" not by expressions of pity, but by the sight of their
conduct. This is directly affirmed in the words, "when ye shall see
their conduct and their works." Consequently [Eze
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#023) does not contain a new thought,
but simply the thought already expressed in [Eze
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022), which is repeated in a new form
to make it the more emphatic. And the expression את כּל־אשׁר , in [Eze
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#022), serves to increase the force;
whilst את, in the sense of quoad, serves to place the thought to be
repeated in subordination to the whole clause (cf. Ewald, 277a, p. 683).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 15](eze015)

</div>
