<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze025)  [Next](eze027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 26:0</span></span>

Against Tyre and Sidon - Ezekiel 26-28

The greater portion of these three chapters is occupied with the
prophecy concerning Tyre, which extends from [Eze
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001) to [Eze
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#019). The prophecy against Sidon is
limited to [Eze 28:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#020). The reason
for this is, that the grandeur and importance of Phoenicia were
concentrated at that time in the power and rule of Tyre, to which Sidon
had been obliged to relinquish the hegemony, which it had formerly
possessed over Phoenicia. The prophecy against Tyre consists of four
words of God, of which the first (Ezekiel 26) contains the threat of
destruction to the city and state of Tyre; the second (Ezekiel 27), a
lamentation over this destruction; the third ([Eze
28:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#001)), the threat against the king
of Tyre; the fourth ([Eze 28:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#011)), a
lamentation over his fall.

[Ezekiel 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 26:1</span></span>

In four sections, commencing with the formula, "thus saith the Lord,"
Tyre, the mistress of the sea, is threatened with destruction. In the
first strophe ([Eze 26:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002)) there is a
general threat of its destruction by a host of nations. In the second
([Eze 26:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007)), the enemy is mentioned
by name, and designated as a powerful one; and the conquest and
destruction emanating from his are circumstantially described. In the
third ([Eze 26:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#015)), the impression
which this event would produce upon the inhabitants of the islands and
coast-lands is depicted. And in the fourth ([Eze
26:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#019)), the threat is repeated in
an energetic manner, and the prophecy is thereby rounded off.

This word of God bears in the introduction to the date of its delivery
to the prophet and enunciation by him. - [Eze
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001). It came to pass in the eleventh
year, on the first of the month, that the word of Jehovah came to me,
saying. - The eleventh year of the exile of Jehoiachin was the year of
the conquest and destruction of Jerusalem ([Jer
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#006), [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012)), the occurrence of which is
presupposed in [Eze 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002) also. There
is something striking in the omission of the number of the month both
here and in [Eze 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#017), as the day of
the month is given. The attempt to discover in the words בּאחד an
indication of the number of the month, by understanding לחדשׁ as
signifying the first month of the year: "on the first as regards the
month," equivalent to, "in the first month, on the first day of it"
(lxx, Luther, Kliefoth, and others), is as forced and untenable as the
notion that that particular month is intended which had peculiar
significance for Ezekiel, namely, the month in which Jerusalem was
conquered and destroyed. The first explanation is proved to be erroneous
by [Eze 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002), where the destruction of
Jerusalem, which occurred in the fifth month of the year named, is
assumed to have already happened. The second view is open to the
objection that the conquest of Jerusalem happened in the fourth month,
and the destruction in the fifth ([Jer
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#006) and [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012)); and it cannot be affirmed that
the conquest was of less importance to Ezekiel than the destruction. We
cannot escape the conclusion, therefore, that the number of the month
has been dropped through a corruption of the text, which has occurred in
copying; but in that case we must give up all hope of being able to
determine what the month really was. The conjecture offered by Ewald and
Hitzig, that one of the last months of the year is intended, because
Ezekiel could not have known before then what impression the conquest of
Jerusalem had made upon Tyre, stands or falls with the naturalistic view
entertained by these writers with regard to prophecy.

[Ezekiel 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 26:2</span></span>

Tyre shall be broken and utterly destroyed

[Eze 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002). Son of man, because Tyre
saith concerning Jerusalem, "Aha, the door of the nations is broken; it
turneth to me; I shall become full; she is laid waste;" [Eze
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#003). Therefore thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, Behold, I will come upon thee, O Tyre, and will bring up
against thee many nations, as the sea bringing up its waves. [Eze
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004). They will destroy the walls of
Tyre, and throw down her towers; and I will sweep away her dust from
her, and make her a bare rock. [Eze
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#005). She shall become a place for the
spreading of nets in the midst of the sea, for I have spoken it, is the
saying of the Lord Jehovah; and she shall become booty for the nations.
[Eze 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#006). And her daughters which are
in the land shall be slain with the sword; and they shall learn that I
am Jehovah. - Tyre, as in the prophecy of Isaiah (Ezekiel 23), is not
the city of that name upon the mainland, ἡ πάλαι Τύρος or Παλαίτυρος,
Old Tyre, which was taken by Shalmaneser and destroyed by Alexander (as
Perizon., Marsh, Vitringa, J. D. Michaelis, and Eichhorn supposed), but
Insular Tyre, which was three-quarters of a mile farther north, and only
1200 paces from the land, being built upon a small island, and separated
from the mainland by a strait of no great depth (vid., Movers,
Phoenizier, II p. 288ff.). This Insular Tyre had successfully resisted
the Assyrians (Josephus, Antt. ix. 14. 2), and was at that time the
market of the nations; and in Ezekiel's day it had reached the summit of
its greatness as mistress of the sea and the centre of the commerce of
the world. That it is against this Tyre that our prophecy is chiefly
directed, is evident from [Eze 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#005)
and [Eze 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#014), according to which
Tyre is to become a bare rock in the midst of the sea, and from the
allusion to the daughter cities, בּשּׂדה, in the field, i.e., on the
mainland (in [Eze 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#006)), as contrasted
with the position occupied by Tyre upon a rocky island in the sea; and,
lastly, from the description given in Ezekiel 27 of the maritime trade
of Tyre with all nations, to which Old Tyre never attained, inasmuch as
it possessed no harbour (vid., Movers, l.c. p. 176). This may easily be
reconciled with such passages as [Eze
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#006), [Eze
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#008), and Ezekiel 27, 28, in which
reference is also made to the continental Tyre, and the conquest of Tyre
is depicted as the conquest of a land-city (see the exposition of these
verses). - The threat against Tyre commences, as in the case of the
nations threatened in Ezekiel 25, with a brief description of its sin.
Tyre gave expression to its joy at the fall of Jerusalem, because it
hoped to derive profit therefrom through the extension of its commerce
and increase of its wealth. Different explanations have been given of
the meaning of the words put into the mouth of Tyre. "The door of the
nations is broken in pieces." The plural דּלתות indicates the folding
doors which formed the gate, and are mentioned in its stead. Jerusalem
is the door of the nations, and is so called according to the current
opinion of expositors, because it was the centre of the commerce of the
nations, i.e., as a place of trade. But nothing is known to warrant the
idea that Jerusalem was ever able to enter into rivalry with Tyre as a
commercial city. The importance of Jerusalem with regard to other
nations was to be found, not in its commerce, nor in the favourable
situation which it occupied for trade, in support of which Hvernick
refers to Herodotus, iii. 5, and Hitzig to [Eze
23:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040), but in its sanctuary, or the
sacred calling which it had received for the whole world of nations.
Kliefoth has therefore decided in favour of the following view: That
Jerusalem is called a gate of the nations, not because it had hitherto
been open to the nations for free and manifold intercourse, but for the
very opposite reason, namely, because the gate of Jerusalem had hitherto
been closed and barred against the nations, but was now broken in pieces
through the destruction of the city, and thereby opened to the nations.
Consequently the nations, and notably Tyre, would be able to enter now;
and from this fact the Tyrians hoped to derive advantage, so far as
their commercial interests were concerned. But this view is not in
harmony with the text. Although a gate is opened by being broken in
pieces, and one may force an entrance into a house by breaking the door
([Gen 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#009)), yet the expression "door
of the nations" cannot signify a door which bars all entrance on the
part of the nations, inasmuch as doors and gates are not made to secure
houses and cities against the forcible entrance of men and nations, but
to render it possible for them to go out and in. Moreover, the
supposition that "door of the nations" is equivalent to shutting against
the nations, is not in harmony with the words נסבּא אלי which follow.
The expression "it has turned to me," or it is turned to me, has no
meaning unless it signifies that through the breaking of the door the
stream of the nations would turn away from Jerusalem to Tyre, and
therefore that hitherto the nations had turned to Jerusalem. נסבּה is
the 3rd pers. perf. Niphal of סבב, for נסבּה , formed after the analogy
of נמס, etc. The missing subject to נסבּה is to be found ad sensum in
דּלתות העמּים. It is not the door itself, but the entrance and streaming
in of the nations, which had previously been directed towards Jerusalem,
and would now turn to Tyre. There is no necessity, therefore, for
Hitzig's conjecture, that אמּלאה should be altered into מלאהּ, and the
latter taken as the subject.

Consequently we must understand the words of the Tyrians as signifying
that they had regarded the drawing of the nations to Jerusalem, i.e.,
the force of attraction which Jerusalem had hitherto exerted upon the
nations, as the seat of the divine revelation of mercy, or of the law
and judgment of the Lord, as interfering with their endeavour to draw
all nations to themselves and gain them over to their purposes, and that
they rejoiced at the destruction of Jerusalem, because they hoped that
henceforth they would be able to attract the nations to themselves and
enrich themselves with their possessions. This does not require that we
should accredit the Tyrians with any such insight into the spiritual
calling of Jerusalem as would lie beyond their heathen point of view.
The simple circumstance, that the position occupied by Jerusalem in
relation to the world apparently interfered with the mercantile
interests of the Tyrians, would be quite sufficient to excite a
malignant pleasure at the fall of the city of God, as the worship of God
and the worship of Mammon are irreconcilably opposed. The source from
which the envy and the enmity manifesting itself in this malicious
pleasure took their rise, is indicated in the last words: "I shall fill
myself, she (Jerusalem) is laid waste," which Jerome has correctly
linked together thus: quia illa deserta est, idcirco ego implebor.
המּלא, to be filled with merchandise and wealth, as in [Eze
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#025). On account of this disposition
toward the kingdom of God, which led Tyre to expect an increase of power
and wealth from its destruction, the Lord God would smite it with ruin
and annihilation. הנני עליך, behold, I will come upon thee, as in [Eze
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#008); [Jer
50:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#031); [Nah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005). God will lead a powerful army
against Tyre, which shall destroy its walls and towers. Instead of the
army, "many nations" are mentioned, because Tyre is hoping to attract
more nations to itself in consequence of the destruction of Jerusalem.
This hope is to be fulfilled, though in a different sense from that
which Tyre intended. The comparison of the advancing army to the
advancing waves of the sea is very significant when the situation of
Tyre is considered. היּם is the subject to כּהעלות, and the Hiphil is
construed with ל instead of the accusative (compare Ewald, 292c with
277e). According to Arrian, ii. 18. 3, and Curtius, iv. 2. 9, 12, and 3.
13, Insular Tyre was fortified all round with lofty walls and towers,
which were certainly in existence as early as Nebuchadnezzar's time.
Even the dust of the demolished buildings (עפרהּ) God would sweep away
(סחיתי, ἁπ. λεγ., with a play upon שׁחתוּ), so that the city, i.e., the
site on which it had stood, would become a bare and barren rock (צחיח
סלע, as in [Eze 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#007)), a place where
fishermen would spread out their nets to dry. "Her daughters" also, that
is to say, the towns dependent upon Tyre, "on the field," i.e., the open
country - in other words, their inhabitants - would be slain with the
sword.

In [Eze 26:7-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007) the threat is carried
still further. - [Eze 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007). For thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold, I will bring against Tyre
Nebuchadnezzar, the king of Babylon, from the north, the king of kings,
with horses, and chariots, and horsemen, and a multitude of much people.
[Eze 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#008). Thy daughters in the field
he will slay with the sword, and he will erect siege-towers against
thee, and throw up a rampart against thee, and set up shields against
thee, [Eze 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#009). And direct his
battering-rams against thy walls, and throw down thy towers with his
swords. [Eze 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#010). From the multitude
of his horses their dust will cover thee; from the noise of the
horsemen, wheels, and chariots, thy walls will shake when he shall enter
into thy gates, as they enter a city broken open. [Eze
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#011). With the hoofs of his horses he
will tread down all thy streets; thy people he will slay with the sword,
and thy glorious pillars will fall to the ground. [Eze
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#012). They will make booty of thy
possessions, and plunder thy merchandise, destroy thy walls, and throw
down thy splendid mansions, and sink thy stones, thy wood, and thy dust
in the water. [Eze 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#013). I will put
an end to the sound of thy songs, and the music of thy harps shall be
heard no more. [Eze 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#014). I will make
thee a bare rock; thou shalt be a place for the spreading of nets, and
be built no more; for I Jehovah have spoken it, is the saying of the
Lord Jehovah. - Nebuchadnezzar, the great king of Babylon, - this is the
meaning of the rhetorical description in these verses, - will come with
a powerful army ([Eze 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007)), smite
with the sword the inland cities dependent upon Tyre. ([Eze
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#008), compare [Eze
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#006)), then commence the siege of
Tyre, destroy its walls and towers ([Eze
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#008) and [Eze
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#009)), enter with his army the city in
which breaches have been made, put the inhabitants to death ([Eze
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#010) and [Eze
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#011)), plunder the treasures, destroy
walls and buildings, and cast the ruins into the sea ([Eze
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#012)). Nebuchadrezzar, or
Nebuchadnezzar (for the name see the comm. on [Kg2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010), is called king of kings, as the
supreme ruler of the Babylonian empire, because the kings of conquered
provinces and lands were subject to him as vassals (see the comm. on
[Isa 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#008)).

His army consists of war-chariots, and cavalry, and a great multitude of
infantry. קהל are co-ordinate, so far as the rhetorical style is
concerned; but in reality עם־רב is subordinate to קהל , as in [Eze
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024), inasmuch as the קהל consisted
of עם־רב. On the siege-works mentioned in [Eze
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#008), see the comm. on [Eze
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002). הקים צנּה signifies the
construction of a roof with shields, by which the besiegers were
accustomed to defend themselves from the missiles of the defenders of
the city wall while pursing their labours. Herodotus repeatedly mentions
such shield-roofs as used by the Persians (ix. 61. 99, 102), though,
according to Layard, they are not to be found upon the Assyrian
monuments (see the comm. on [Nah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006)).
There is no doubt that מחי קב signifies the battering-ram, called כּר in
[Eze 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027), though the meaning of the
words is disputed. מחי , literally, thrusting or smiting. קבלו, from
קבל, to be pointed either קבלּו or קבלּו (the form קבלּו adopted by v.
d. Hooght and J. H. Michaelis is opposed to the grammatical rules), has
been explained by Gesenius and others as signifying res opposita, that
which is opposite; hence מחי קבלו, the thrusting or demolishing of that
which stands opposite. In the opinion of others, קבל is an instrument
employed in besieging; but there is nothing in the usage of the language
to sustain either this explanation or that adopted by Hvernick,
"destruction of his defence." הרבותיו, his swords, used figuratively for
his weapons or instruments of war, "his irons," as Ewald has very aptly
rendered it. The description in [Eze
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#010) is hyperbolical. The number of
horses is so great, that on their entering the city they cover it with
dust, and the walls shake with the noise of the horsemen and chariots.
'כּמבואי עיר מב, literally, as the marchings into a broken city, i.e., a
city taken by storm, generally are. The simile may be explained from the
peculiar situation of Insular Tyre. It means that the enemy will enter
it as they march into a land-fortress into which a breach has been made
by force. The words presuppose that the besieger has made a road to the
city by throwing up an embankment or dam. מצּבות עזּך, the memorial
pillars of thy might, and the pillars dedicated to Baal, two of which
are mentioned by Herodotus (ii. 44) as standing in the temple of
Hercules at Tyre, one of gold, the other of emerald; not images of gods,
but pillars, as symbols of Baal. These sink or fall to the ground before
the overwhelming might of the foe (compare [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001); [Isa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009), and [Sa1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#003)). After the slaughter of the
inhabitants and the fall of the gods, the plundering of the treasures
begins, and then follows the destruction of the city. בּתּי המדּה are
not pleasure-houses ("pleasure-towers, or garden-houses of the wealthy
merchants," as Ewald supposes), for there was not space enough upon the
island for gardens (Strabo, xvi. 2. 23), but the lofty, magnificent
houses of the city, the palaces mentioned in [Isa
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013). Yea, the whole city shall be
destroyed, and that so completely that they will sweep stones, wood, and
rubbish into the sea. - Thus will the Lord put an end to the exultation
and rejoicing in Tyre ([Eze 26:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#013);
compare [Isa 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#011) and [Amo
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#023)). - The picture of the
destruction of this powerful city closes with the repetition of the
thought from [Eze 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#005), that Tyre
shall be turned into a bare rock, and shall never be built again.

[Ezekiel 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 26:15</span></span>

The tidings of the destruction of Tyre will produce great commotion in
all her colonies and the islands connected with her. - [Eze
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#015). Thus saith the Lord Jehovah to
Tyre, Will not the islands tremble at the noise of thy fall, at the
groaning of the wounded, at the slaughter in the midst of thee? [Eze
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#016). And all the princes of the sea
will come down from their thrones, and will lay aside their robes and
take off their embroidered clothes, and dress themselves in terrors, sit
upon the earth, and they will tremble every moment, and be astonished at
thee. [Eze 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017). They will raise a
lamentation for thee, and say to thee: How hast thou perished, thou who
wast inhabited from out of the sea, thou renowned city, she who was
mighty upon the sea, she and her inhabitants, who inspired all her
inhabitants with fear of her! [Eze
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#018). Now do the islands tremble on
the day of thy fall, and the islands in the sea are confounded at thy
departure. - הלא, nonne, has the force of a direct affirmation. קול
מפּלה, the noise of the fall, stands for the tidings of the noise, since
the noise itself could not be heard upon the islands. The fall takes
place, as is added for the purpose of depicting the terrible nature of
the event, at or amidst the groaning of the wounded, and the slaughter
in the midst of thee. בּהרג is the infinitive Niphal, with the accent
drawn back on account of the following Milel, and should be pointed
בּהרג . The word איּים, islands, is frequently used so as to embrace the
coast lands of the Mediterranean Sea; we have therefore to understand it
here as applied to the Phoenician colonies on the islands and coasts of
that sea. The "princes of the sea" are not kings of the islands, but,
according to [Isa 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008), the merchants
presiding over the colonies of Tyre, who resembled princes. כּסאות, not
royal thrones, but chairs, as in [Sa1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#013), etc. The picture of their
mourning recalls the description in [Jon
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006); it is not derived from that
passage, however, but is an independent description of the mourning
customs which commonly prevailed among princes. The antithesis
introduced as a very striking one: clothing themselves in terrors,
putting on terrors in the place of the robes of state which they have
laid aside (see the similar trope in [Eze
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#027)). The thought is rendered still
more forcible by the closing sentences of the verse: they tremble
לרנעים, by moments, i.e., as the moments return - actually, therefore,
"every moment" (vid., [Isa 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003)). - In
the lamentation which they raise ([Eze
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017)), they give prominence to the
alarming revolution of all things, occasioned by the fact that the
mistress of the seas, once so renowned, has now become an object of
horror and alarm. נושׁבת מיּמּים, inhabited from the seas. This is not
to be taken as equivalent to "as far as the seas," in the sense of,
whose inhabitants spread over the seas and settle there, as Gesenius
(Thes.) and Hvernick suppose; for being inhabited is the very opposite
of sending the inhabitants abroad. If מן were to be taken in the
geographical sense of direction or locality, the meaning of the
expression could only be, whose inhabitants spring from the seas, or
have migrated thither from all seas; but this would not apply to the
population of Tyre, which did not consists of men of all nations under
heaven. Hitzig has given the correct interpretation, namely, from the
sea, or out of the seas, which had as it were ascended as an inhabited
city out of the bosom of the sea. It is not easy to explain the last
clause of [Eze 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017) : who inspired
all her inhabitants with their terror, or with terror of them (of
themselves); for if the relative אשׁר is taken in connection with the
preceding ישׁביה, the thought arises that the inhabitants of Tyre
inspired her inhabitants, i.e., themselves, with their terror, or terror
of themselves. Kimchi, Rosenmller, Ewald, Kliefoth, and others, have
therefore proposed to take the suffix in the second יושׁביה as referring
to היּם ot gnirre, all the inhabitants of the sea, i.e., all her
colonies. But this is open to the objection, that not only is ים of the
masculine gender, but it is extremely harsh to take the same suffix
attached to the two ישׁביה as referring to different subjects. We must
therefore take the relative אשׁר and the suffix in חתּיתם as both
referring to היא וישׁביה: the city with its population inspired all its
several inhabitants with fear or itself. This is not to be understood,
however, as signifying that the inhabitants of Tyre kept one another in
a state of terror and alarm; but that the city with its population,
through its power upon the sea, inspired all the several inhabitants
with fear of this its might, inasmuch as the distinction of the city and
its population was reflected upon every individual citizen. This
explanation of the words is confirmed by the parallel passages in [Eze
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#024) and [Eze
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#026). - This city had come to so
appalling an end, that all the islands trembled thereat. The two
hemistichs in [Eze 26:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#018) are
synonymous, and the thought returns by way of conclusion to [Eze
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#015). איּין has the Aramaean form of
the plural, which is sometimes met with even in the earlier poetry
(vid., Ewald, 177a). צאת, departure, i.e., destruction.

[Ezekiel 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 26:19</span></span>

Thus will Tyre, covered by the waves of the sea, sink into the region of
the dead, and vanish for ever from the earth. - [Eze
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#019). For thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, When I make thee a desolate city, like the cities which are no
longer inhabited, when I cause the deep to rise over thee, so that the
many waters cover thee, [Eze 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#020). I
cast thee down to those who have gone into the grave, to the people of
olden time, and cause thee to dwell in the land of the lower regions, in
the ruins from the olden time, with those who have gone into the grave,
that thou mayest be no longer inhabited, and I create that which is
glorious in the land of the living. [Eze
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#021). I make thee a terror, and thou
art no more; they will seek thee, and find thee no more for ever, is the
saying of the Lord Jehovah. - Not only will ruin and desolation come
upon Tyre, but it will sink for ever into the region of the dead. In
this concluding thought the whole threat is summed up. The infinitive
clauses of [Eze 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#019) recapitulate the
leading thoughts of the previous strophes, for the purpose of appending
the closing thought of banishment to the under-world. By the rising of
the deep we are to understand, according to [Eze
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#012), that the city in its ruins will
be sunk into the depths of the sea. יורדי , those who go down into the
pit or grave, are the dead. They are described still further as עם עולם,
not "those who are sleeping the long sleep of death," or the generation
of old whom all must join; but the people of the "old world" before the
flood ([Pe2 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005)), who were buried by
the waters of the flood, in accordance with [Job
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015), where עולם denotes the
generations of the primeval world, and after the analogy of the use of
עם עולם in [Isa 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#007), to describe the
human race as existing from time immemorial.

In harmony with this, חרבות are the ruins of the primeval world which
perished in the flood. As עם עולם adds emphasis to the idea of יורדי
בור, so also does בּחרבות מעולם to that of ארץ תּחתּיּות. Tyre shall not
only descend to the dead in Sheol, but be thrust down to the people of
the dead, who were sunk into the depths of the earth by the waters of
the flood, and shall there receive its everlasting dwelling-place among
the ruins of the primeval world which was destroyed by the flood, beside
that godless race of the olden time. ארץ תּחתּיּות, land of the lowest
places (cf. [Eze 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#018), [Eze
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#024)), is a periphrasis for Sheol,
the region of the dead (compare [Eph
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009), "the lower parts of the earth").
On 'ונתתּי צבי וגו Hitzig has observed with perfect correctness: "If we
retain the pointing as the first person, with which the place assigned
to the Athnach (-) coincides, we must at any rate not regard the clause
as still dependent upon למען, and the force of the לא as continued. We
should then have to take the clause as independent and affirmative, as
the accentuators and the Targum have done." But as this would give rise
to a discrepancy between the two halves of the verse, Hitzig proposes to
alter נתתּי retla ot seso into the second person ונתּתי, so that the
clause would still be governed by למען לא. But the want of agreement
between the two halves of the verse does not warrant an alteration of
the text, especially if it lead to nothing better than the forced
rendering adopted by Hitzig, "and thou no longer shinest with glory in
the land of the living," which there is nothing in the language to
justify. And even the explanation proposed by Hvernick and Kliefoth,
"that I no longer produce anything glorious from thee (Tyre) in the land
of the living," is open to this objection, that "from thee" is
arbitrarily interpolated into the text; and if this were what Ezekiel
meant, he would either have added לך or written נתתּיך. Moreover, the
change of the person is a sufficient objection to our taking נתתּי as
dependent upon למען, and supplying לא. ונתתּי is evidently a simple
continuation of והושׁבתּיך. And nothing but the weightiest objections
should lead us to give up a view which so naturally suggests itself. But
no such objections exist. Neither the want of harmony between the two
halves of the verse, nor the context, - according to which Tyre and its
destruction are referred to both before and immediately after, - forces
us to the adoption of explanations at variance with the simple meaning
of the words. We therefore adhere to the natural interpretation of the
words, "and I set (establish) glory in the land of the living;" and
understand by the land of the living, not the theocracy especially, but
the earth, in contrast to the region of the dead. The words contain the
general thought, that on and after the overthrow of the glory of the
ungodly power of the world, He will create that which is glorious on the
earth to endure for ever; and this He really does by the establishing of
His kingdom. - Tyre, on the contrary, shall become, through its fate, an
object of terror, or an example of sudden destruction, and pass away
with all its glory, not leaving a trace behind. For [Eze
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#021), compare [Isa
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#012) and [Psa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#036). וּתבקשׁי, imperf. Pual, has
Chateph-patach between the two u, to indicate emphatically that the
syllable is only a very loosely closed one (vid., Ewald, 31b, p. 95).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 27](eze027)

</div>
