<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze022)  [Next](eze024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 23:0</span></span>

Oholah and Oholibah, the Harlots Samaria and Jerusalem

Samaria and Jerusalem, as the capitals and representatives of the two
kingdoms of Israel and Judah, are two sisters, who have practised
whoredom from the days of Egypt onwards ([Eze
23:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#002)). Samaria has carried on this
whoredom with Assyria and Egypt, and has been given up by God into the
power of the Assyrians as a consequent punishment ([Eze
23:5-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005)). But Jerusalem, instead of
allowing this to serve as a warning, committed fornication still more
grievously with Assyria and the Chaldeans, and, last of all, with Egypt
again ([Eze 23:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#011)). In consequence
of this, the Lord will permit the Chaldeans to make war upon them, and
to plunder and put them to shame, so that, as a punishment for their
whoredom and their forgetfulness of God, they may, in the fullest
measure, experience Samaria's fate ([Eze
23:22-35](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#022)). In conclusion, both
kingdoms are shown once more, and in still severer terms, the guilt of
their idolatry ([Eze 23:36-44](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#036)), whilst
the infliction of the punishment for both adultery and murder is
foretold ([Eze 23:45-49](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#045)).

In its general character, therefore, this word of God is co-ordinate
with the two preceding ones in Ezekiel 21 and 22, setting forth once
more in a comprehensive way the sins and the punishment of Israel. But
this is done in the form of an allegory, which closely resembles in its
general features the allegorical description in Ezekiel 16; though, in
the particular details, it possesses a character peculiarly its own, not
only in certain original turns and figures, but still more in the
arrangement and execution of the whole. The allegory in Ezekiel 16
depicts the attitude of Israel towards the Lord in the past, the
present, and the future; but in the chapter before us, the guilt and
punishment of Israel stand in the foreground of the picture throughout,
so that a parallel is drawn between Jerusalem and Samaria, to show that
the punishment of destruction, which Samaria has brought upon itself
through its adulterous intercourse with the heathen, will inevitably
fall upon Jerusalem and Judah also.

[Ezekiel 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 23:1</span></span>

The Sisters Oholah and Oholibah

[Eze 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#001). And the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, [Eze 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#002). Son of
man, two women, daughters of one mother were they, [Eze
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#003). They committed whoredom in
Egypt, in their youth they committed whoredom; there were their breasts
pressed, and there men handled their virgin bosom. [Eze
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#004). Their names are Oholah, the
greater, and Oholibah her sister; and they became mine, and bare sons
and daughters. But their names are: Samaria is Oholah, and Jerusalem is
Oholibah. - The name אהליבה is formed from אהלי בהּ, "my tent in her;"
and, accordingly, אהלה is to be derived from אהלהּ, "her tent," and not
to be regarded as an abbreviation of אהלהּ בהּ, "her tent in her," as
Hitzig and Kliefoth maintain. There is no ground for this assumption, as
"her tent," in contrast with "my tent in her," expresses the thought
with sufficient clearness, that she had a tent of her own, and the place
where her tent was does not come into consideration. The "tent" is the
sanctuary: both tabernacle and temple. These names characterize the two
kingdoms according to their attitude toward the Lord. Jerusalem had the
sanctuary of Jehovah; Samaria, on the other hand, had her own sanctuary,
i.e., one invented by herself. Samaria and Jerusalem, as the historical
names of the two kingdoms, represent Israel of the ten tribes and Judah.
Oholah and Oholibah are daughters of one mother, because they were the
two halves of the one Israel; and they are called women, because Jehovah
had married them ([Eze 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#004)). Oholah
is called הגּדולה, the great, i.e., the greater sister (not the elder,
see the comm. on [Eze 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046)); because
ten tribes, the greater portion of Israel, belonged to Samaria, whereas
Judah had only two tribes. They committed whoredom even in Egypt in
their youth, for even in Egypt the Israelites defiled themselves with
Egyptian idolatry (see the comm. on [Eze
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007)). מיעך, to press, to crush: the
Pual is used here to denote lewd handling. In a similar manner the Piel
עשּׂה is used to signify tractare, contrectare mammas, in an obscene
sense.

[Ezekiel 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 23:5</span></span>

Samaria's Whoredom and Punishment

[Eze 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005). And Oholibah played the
harlot under me, and burned towards her lovers, even as far as Assyria,
standing near; [Eze 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006). Clothed in
purple, governors and officers, all of them choice men of good
deportment, horsemen riding upon horses. [Eze
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#007). And she directed her whoredom
toward them, to the choice of the sons of Assyria all of them, and with
all towards whom she burned, with all their idols she defiled herself.
[Eze 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#008). Also her whoredom from
Egypt she did not give up; for they had lain with her in her youth, and
they had handled her virgin bosom, and had poured out their lust upon
her. [Eze 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#009). Therefore I have given
her into the hand of her lovers, into the hand of the sons of Assyria,
towards whom she was inflamed. [Eze
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#010). They uncovered her nakedness,
took away her sons and her daughters, and slew her with the sword, so
that she became a legend among the women, and executed judgments upon
her. - Coquetting and whoring with Assyria and Egypt denote religious
and political leaning towards and connection with these nations and
kingdoms, including idolatry and the formation of alliances with them,
as in Ezekiel 16. תּחתּי is to be interpreted in accordance with תּחת
אישׁהּ ([Eze 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#032)). עגּב, which only
occurs in Ezekiel and once in Jeremiah, denotes the eager desire kindled
by passionate love towards any one. By the words אל־אשּׁוּר the lovers
are more precisely defined. קרובים without an article is not an
adjective, belonging to מאהביה, but in apposition, which is continued in
the next verse. In these appositions the particular features, which
excited the ardent passion towards the lovers, are pointed out. קרוב is
not to be taken in an outward or local sense, but as signifying inward
or spiritual nearness: standing near, equivalent to inwardly related, as
in [Psa 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012); [Job
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#014). The description given of the
Assyrians in [Eze 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006) contains the
thought that Israel, dazzled by Assyria's splendour, and overpowered by
the might of that kingdom, had been drawn into intercourse with the
Assyrians, which led her astray into idolatry. The predicate, clothed in
purple, points to the splendour and glory of this imperial power; the
other predicates, to the magnitude of its military force. פחות וּסגנים
are rulers of higher and lower grades (cf. [Jer
51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057)). "Here the expression is a
general one, signifying the different classes of office-bearers in the
kingdom" (Hvernick). With regard to פּחה, see my comm. on [Hag
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001); and for סגן, see Delitzsch on
[Isa 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025). "Riding upon horses" is
added to פּרשׁים to denote the noblest horsemen, in contrast to riders
upon asses and camels (cf. [Isa 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)).
In [Eze 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#007) בּכּל־גּלּוּליהםhem is in
apposition to בּכל אשׁר־עגבה, and defines more precisely the instigation
to pollution: with all towards whom she burned in love, namely, with all
their (the lovers') idols. The thought is as follows: it was not merely
through her intercourse with the Assyrians that Israel defiled herself,
but also through their idols. At the same time, Samaria did not give up
the idolatry which it had derived from Egypt. It was from Egypt that the
worship of God under the image of the golden calves had been imported.
The words are much too strong for us to understand them as relating
simply to political intercourse, as Hitzig has done. We have already
observed at [Eze 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007), that even in
Egypt itself the Israelites had defiled themselves with Egyptian
idolatry, as is also stated in [Eze
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#008). - [Eze
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#009), [Eze
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#010). As a punishment for this, God
gave Samaria into the power of the Assyrians, so that they executed
judgment upon the harlot. In [Eze
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#010) the prophecy passes from the
figure to the fact. The uncovering of the nakedness consisted in the
transportation of the sons and daughters, i.e., the population of
Samaria, into exile by the Assyrians, who slew the woman herself with
the sword; in other words, destroyed the kingdom of Samaria. Thus did
Samaria become a name for women; that is to say, her name was circulated
among the nations, her fate became an object of conversation and
ridicule to the nations, not "a nickname for the nations," as Hvernick
supposes (vid., [Eze 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#003)). שׁפוּטים,
a later form for שׁפטים (cf. [Eze
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041)).

[Ezekiel 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 23:11</span></span>

Whoredom of Judah

[Eze 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#011). And her sister Oholibah
saw it, and carried on her coquetry still more wantonly than she had
done, and her whoredom more than the whoredom of her sister. [Eze
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012). She was inflamed with lust
towards the sons of Asshur, governors and officers, standing near,
clothed in perfect beauty, horsemen riding upon horses, choice men of
good deportment. [Eze 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#013). And I saw
that she had defiled herself; they both went one way. [Eze
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014). And she carried her whoredom
still further; she saw men engraved upon the wall, figures of Chaldeans
engraved with red ochre, [Eze 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#015).
Girded about the hips with girdles, with overhanging caps upon their
heads, all of them knights in appearance, resembling the sons of Babel,
the land of whose birth is Chaldea: [Eze
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#016). And she was inflamed with lust
toward them, when her eyes saw them, and sent messengers to them to
Chaldea. [Eze 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017). Then the sons of
Babylon came to her to the bed of love, and defiled her with their
whoredom; and when she had defiled herself with them, her soul tore
itself away from them. [Eze 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#018). And
when she uncovered her whoredom, and uncovered her nakedness, my soul
tore itself away from her, as my soul had torn itself away from her
sister. [Eze 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#019). And she increased
her whoredom, so that she remembered the days of her youth, when she
played the harlot in the land of Egypt. [Eze
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#020). And she burned toward their
paramours, who have members like asses and heat like horses. [Eze
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#021). Thou lookest after the lewdness
of thy youth, when they of Egypt handled thy bosom because of thy virgin
breasts. - The train of thought in these verses is the following: -
Judah went much further than Samaria. It not only indulged in sinful
intercourse with Assyria, which led on to idolatry as the latter had
done, but it also allowed itself to be led astray by the splendour of
Chaldea, to form alliances with that imperial power, and to defile
itself with her idolatry. And when it became tired of the Chaldeans, it
formed impure connections with the Egyptians, as it had done once before
during its sojourn in Egypt. The description of the Assyrians in [Eze
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012) coincides with that in [Eze
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005) and [Eze
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006), except that some of the
predicates are placed in a different order, and לבשׁי is substituted for
לבשׁי תכלת. The former expression, which occurs again in [Eze
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004), must really mean the same as
תכלת 'לב. But it does not follow from this that מכלול signifies purple,
as Hitzig maintains. The true meaning is perfection; and when used of
the clothing, it signifies perfect beauty. The Septuagint rendering,
εὺπάρυφα, with a beautiful border - more especially a variegated one -
merely expresses the sense, but not the actual meaning of מכלול. The
Chaldee rendering is לבשׁי גמר, perfecte induti. - There is great
obscurity in the statement in [Eze
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014) as to the way in which Judah was
seduced to cultivate intercourse with the Chaldeans. She saw men
engraved or drawn upon the wall (מחקּה, a participle Pual of חקק,
engraved work, or sculpture). These figures were pictures of Chaldeans,
engraved (drawn) with שׁשׁר, red ochre, a bright-red colour. חגורי, an
adjective form חגור, wearing a girdle. טבוּלים, coloured cloth, from
טבל, to colour; here, according to the context, variegated head-bands or
turbans. סרוּח, the overhanging, used here of the cap. The reference is
to the tiarae tinctae (Vulgate), the lofty turbans or caps, as they are
to be seen upon the monuments of ancient Nineveh. שׁלישׁים, not
chariot-warriors, but knights: "tristatae, the name of the second grade
after the regal dignity" (Jerome. See the comm. on [Exo
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007) and [Sa2
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)).

The description of these engravings answers perfectly to the sculptures
upon the inner walls of the Assyrian palaces in the monuments of Nimrud,
Khorsabad, and Kouyunjik (see Layard's Nineveh and its Remains, and
Vaux, Nineveh and Persepolis). The pictures of the Chaldeans are not
mythological figures (Hvernick), but sculptures depicting war-scenes,
triumphal processions of Chaldean rulers and warriors, with which the
Assyrian palaces were adorned. We have not to look for these sculptures
in Jerusalem or Palestine. This cannot be inferred from [Eze
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010), as Hvernick supposes; nor
established by Hitzig's argument, that the woman must have been in
circumstances to see such pictures. The intercourse between Palestine
and Nineveh, which was carried on even in Jonah's time, was quite
sufficient to render it possible for the pictures to be seen. When
Israelites travelled to Nineveh, and saw the palaces there, they could
easily make the people acquainted with the glory of Nineveh by the
accounts they would give on their return. It is no reply to this, to
state that the woman does not send ambassadors till afterwards ([Eze
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#016)), as Hitzig argues; for Judah
sent ambassadors to Chaldea not to view the glories of Assyria, but to
form alliances with the Chaldeans, or to sue for their favour. Such an
embassy, for example, was sent to Babylon by Zedekiah ([Jer
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#003)); and there is no doubt that in
v. 16b Ezekiel has this in his mind. Others may have preceded this,
concerning which the books of Kings and Chronicles are just as silent as
they are concerning that of Zedekiah. The thought in these verses is
therefore the following: - The acquaintance made by Israel (Judah) with
the imperial splendour of the Chaldeans, as exhibited in the sculptures
of their palaces, incited Judah to cultivate political and mercantile
intercourse with this imperial power, which led to its becoming
entangled in the heathen ways and idolatry of the Chaldeans. The
Chaldeans themselves came and laid the foundation for an intercourse
which led to the pollution of Judah with heathenism, and afterwards
filled it with disgust, because it was brought thereby into dependence
upon the Chaldeans. The consequence of all this was, that the Lord
became tired of Judah ([Eze 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017),
[Eze 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#018)). For instead of returning
to the Lord, Judah turned to the other power of the world, namely, to
Egypt; and in the time of Zedekiah renewed its ancient coquetry with
that nation ([Eze 23:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#019) compared
with [Eze 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#008)). The form ותּעגּבה in
[Eze 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#020), which the Keri also gives
in [Eze 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#018), has taken ah as a
feminine termination (not the cohortative ah), like תּרגּה in [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); [Pro
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001) (vid., Delitzsch, Comm. on Job, en
loc.). פּלּגשׁים are scorta mascula (here (Kimchi) - a drastically
sarcastic epithet applied to the sârisim, the eunuchs, or courtiers. The
figurative epithet answers to the licentious character of the Egyptian
idolatry. The sexual heat both of horses and asses is referred to by
Aristotle, Hist. anim. vi. 22, and Columella, de re rust. vi. 27; and
that of the horse has already been applied to the idolatry of the people
by Jeremiah (vid., [Jer 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#008)). בּשׂר,
as in [Eze 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#026). פּקד ([Eze
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#021)), to look about for anything,
i.e., to search for it; not to miss it, as Hvernick imagines.

[Ezekiel 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 23:22</span></span>

Punishment of the Harlot Jerusalem

[Eze 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#022). Therefore, Oholibah, thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, Behold, I raise up thy lovers against thee, from
whom thy soul has torn itself away, and cause them to come upon thee
from every side; [Eze 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023). The sons
of Babel, and all the Chaldeans, rulers, lords, and nobles, all the sons
of Assyria with them: chosen men of graceful deportment, governors and
officers together, knights and counsellors, all riding upon horses. [Eze
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024). And they will come upon thee
with weapons, chariots, and wheels, and with a host of peoples; target
and shield and helmet will they direct against thee round about: and I
commit to them the judgment, that they may judge thee according to their
rights. [Eze 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#025). And I direct my
jealousy against thee, so that they shall deal with thee in wrath: nose
and ears will they cut off from thee; and thy last one shall fall by the
sword: they will take thy sons and thy daughters; and thy last one will
be consumed by fire. [Eze 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#026). They
will strip off thy clothes from thee, and take thy splendid jewellery.
[Eze 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#027). I will abolish thy
lewdness from thee, and thy whoredom from the land of Egypt: that thou
mayest no more lift thine eyes to them, and no longer remember Egypt.
[Eze 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#028). For thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, Behold, I give thee into the hand of those whom thou hatest,
into the hand of those from whom thy soul has torn itself away: [Eze
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#029). And they shall deal with thee
in hatred, and take all thy gain, and leave thee naked and bare; that
thy whorish shame may be uncovered, and thy lewdness and thy whoredom.
[Eze 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#030). This shall happen to thee,
because thou goest whoring after the nations, and on account of thy
defiling thyself with their idols. [Eze
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#031). In the way of thy sister hast
thou walked; therefore I give her cup into thy hand. [Eze
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#032). Thus saith the Lord Jehovah,
The cup of thy sister thou shalt drink, the deep and broad one; it will
be for laughter and for derision, because it contains so much. [Eze
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#033). Thou wilt become full of
drunkenness and misery: a cup of desolation and devastation is the cup
of thy sister Samaria. [Eze 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#034).
Thou wilt drink it up and drain it, and gnaw its fragments, and tear thy
breasts (therewith); for I have spoken it, is the saying of the Lord
Jehovah. [Eze 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#035). Therefore thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, Because thou hast forgotten me, and hast cast me
behind thy back, thou shalt also bear thy lewdness and thy whoredom. -
As Jerusalem has given herself up to whoredom, like her sister Samaria,
she shall also share her sister's fate. The paramours, of whom she has
become tired, God will bring against her as enemies. The Chaldeans will
come with all their might, and execute the judgment of destruction upon
her. - For the purpose of depicting their great and powerful forces,
Ezekiel enumerates in [Eze 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023) and
[Eze 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024) the peoples and their
military equipment: viz., the sons of Babel, i.e., the inhabitants of
Babylonia, the Chaldeans - the ruling people of the empire at that time
- and all the sons of Asshur, i.e., the inhabitants of the eastern
portions of the empire, the former rulers of the world. There is some
obscurity in the words פּקוד ושׁוע , which the older theologians have
almost unanimously taken to be the names of different tribes in the
Chaldean empire. Ewald also adopts this view, but it is certainly
incorrect; for the words are in apposition to וכל־כּשׂדּים, as the
omission of the copula ו before פּקוד is sufficient to show. This is
confirmed by the fact that שׁוע is used, in [Isa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005) and [Job
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#019), in the sense of the man of high
rank, distinguished for his prosperity, which is quite in harmony with
the passage before us. Consequently פּקוד is not to be taken in the
sense of visitation or punishment, after [Jer
50:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#021); but the meaning is to be sought
in the verb פּקד, to exercise supervision, or lead; and the abstract
oversight is used for overseer, or ruler, as an equivalent to פּקיד.
Lastly, according to Rabbins, the Vulgate, and others, קוע signifies
princes, or nobles. The predicates in [Eze
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023) are repeated from [Eze
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006) and [Eze
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012), and קרוּאים alone is added.
This is a word taken from the Pentateuch, where the heads of the tribes
and families, as being members of the council of the whole congregation
of Israel, are called קרוּאי or קרוּאי מועד, persons called or summoned
to the meeting ([Num 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016); [Num
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002)). As Michaelis has aptly
observed, "he describes them sarcastically in the very same way in which
he had previously described those upon whom she doted."

There is a difficulty in explaining the ἁπ. λεγ.. הצן - for which many
MSS read חצן - as regards not only its meaning, but its position in the
sentence. The fact that it is associated with רכב וגלגּל would seem to
indicate that הצן is also either an implement of war or some kind of
weapon. At the same time, the words cannot be the subject to וּבאוּ; but
as the expression וּבקהל עמּים, which follows, clearly shows, they
simply contain a subordinate definition of the manner in which, or the
things with which, the peoples mentioned in [Eze
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023), [Eze
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024) will come, while they are
governed by the verb in the freest way. The attempts which Ewald and
Hitzig have made to remove the difficulty, by means of conjectures, are
forced and extremely improbable. נתתּי לפּניהם, I give up to them (not,
I place before them); נתן, as in [Kg1
8:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#046), to deliver up, or give a thing
into a person's hand or power. לפני is used in this sense in [Gen
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#009) and [Gen
24:51](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#051). - In [Eze
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#025), [Eze
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#026), the execution of the judgment
is depicted in detail. The words, "they take away thy nose and ears,"
are not to be interpreted, as the earlier expositors suppose, from the
custom prevalent among the Egyptians and other nations of cutting off
the nose of an adulteress; but depict, by one particular example, the
mutilation of prisoners captured by their enemies. אחרית: not posterity,
which by no means suits the last clause of the verse, and cannot be
defended from the usage of the language (see the comm. on [Amo
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#002)); but the last, according to the
figure employed in the first clause, the trunk; or, following the second
clause, the last thing remaining in Jerusalem, after the taking away of
the sons and daughters, i.e., after the slaying and the deportation of
the inhabitants - viz. the empty houses. For [Eze
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#026), compare [Eze
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039). - In [Eze
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#027), "from the land of Egypt" is not
equivalent to "dating from Egypt;" for according to the parallel ממּך,
from thee, this definition does not belong to זנוּתך, "thy whoredom,"
but to השׁבּתּי, "I cause thy whoredom to cease from Egypt" (Hitzig). -
For [Eze 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#028), compare [Eze
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#037); for [Eze
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#028), vid., [Eze
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017) above; and for [Eze
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#029), see [Eze
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#025) and [Eze
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#026), and [Eze
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#039). - [Eze
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#031) looks back to [Eze
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#013); and [Eze
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#031) is still further expanded in
[Eze 23:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#032). Judah shall drink the
cup of the wrathful judgment of God, as Samaria has done. For the figure
of the cup, compare [Isa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017) and
[Jer 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015). This cup is described in
[Eze 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#032) as deep and wide, i.e.,
very capacious, so that whoever exhausts all its contents must be
thoroughly intoxicated. תּהיה is the third person; but the subject is
מרבּה, and not כּוס. The greatness or breadth of the cup will be a
subject of laughter and ridicule. It is very arbitrary to supply "to
thee," so as to read: will be for laughter and ridicule to thee, which
does not even yield a suitable meaning, since it is not Judah but the
nations who laugh at the cup. Others regard תּהיה as the second person,
thou wilt become; but apart from the anomaly in the gender, as the
masculine would stand for the feminine, Hitzig has adduced the forcible
objection, that according to this view the words would not only
anticipate the explanation give of the figure in the next verse, but
would announce the consequences of the שׁכּרון ויגון mentioned there.
Hitzig therefore proposes to erase the words from תּהיה to וּללעג as a
gloss, and to alter מרבּה into מרבּה : which contains much, is very
capacious. But there is not sufficient reason to warrant such critical
violence as this. Although the form מרבּה is ἁπ λεγ.., it is not to be
rejected as a nomen subst.; and if we take מרבּה להכיל, the magnitude to
hold, as the subject of the sentence, it contains a still further
description of the cup, which does not anticipate what follows, even
though the cup will be an object of laughter and ridicule, not so much
for its size, as because of its being destined to be drunk completely
empty. In [Eze 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#033) the figure and
the fact are combined - יגון, lamentation, misery, being added to
שׁכּרון, drunkenness, and the cup being designated a cup of devastation.
The figure of drinking is expanded in the boldest manner in [Eze
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#034) into the gnawing of the
fragments of the cup, and the tearing of the breasts with the fragments.
- In [Eze 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#035) the picture of the
judgment is closed with a repetition of the description of the nation's
guilt. For [Eze 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#035), compare [Eze
16:52](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#052) and [Eze
16:58](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#058).

[Ezekiel 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">eze 23:36</span></span>

Another Summary of the Sins and Punishment of the Two Women

[Eze 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#036). And Jehovah said to me,
Son of man, wilt thou judge Oholah and Oholibah, then show them their
abominations; [Eze 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037). For they
have committed adultery, and blood is in their hands; and they have
committed adultery with their idols; and their sons also whom they bare
to me they have caused to pass through to them to be devoured. [Eze
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#038). Yea more, they have done this
to me; they have defiled my sanctuary the same day, and have desecrated
my Sabbaths. [Eze 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039). When they
slaughtered their sons to their idols, they came into my sanctuary the
same day to desecrate it; and, behold, they have acted thus in the midst
of my house. [Eze 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040). Yea, they
have even sent to men coming from afar; to them was a message sent, and,
behold, they came, for whom thou didst bathe thyself, paint thine eyes,
and put on ornaments, [Eze 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041). And
didst seat thyself upon a splendid cushion, and a table was spread
before them, thou didst lay thereon my incense and my oil. [Eze
23:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#042). And the loud noise became still
thereat, and to the men out of the multitude there were brought topers
out of the desert, and they put armlets upon their hands, and glorious
crowns upon their heads. [Eze 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#043).
Then I said to her who was debilitated for adultery, Now will her
whoredom itself go whoring, [Eze
23:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#044). And they will go in to her as
they go in to a shore; so did they go in to Oholah and Oholibah, the
lewd women. [Eze 23:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#045). But righteous
men, these shall judge them according to the judgment of adulteresses
and according to the judgment of murderesses; for they are adulteresses,
and there is blood in their hands. [Eze
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#046). For thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, I will bring up against them an assembly, and deliver them up
for maltreating and for booty. [Eze
23:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#047). And the assembly shall stone
them, and cut them in pieces with their swords; their sons and their
daughters shall they kill, and burn their houses with fire. [Eze
23:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#048). Thus will I eradicate lewdness
from the land, that all women may take warning and not practise lewdness
like you. [Eze 23:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#049). And they shall
bring your lewdness upon you, and ye shall bear the sins of your idols,
and shall learn that I am the Lord Jehovah. - The introductory words
'התשׁפּוט point back not only to [Eze
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#002), but also to [Eze
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#004), and show that this section is
really a summary of the contents of the whole group ([Eze
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#023)). The actual subject-matter of
these verses is closely connected with [Eze
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#016), more especially in the
designation of the sins as adultery and bloodshed (compare [Eze
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037) and [Eze
23:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#045) with [Eze
16:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038)). נאף, to commit adultery with
the idols, whereby the idols are placed on a par with Jehovah as the
husband of Israel (compare [Jer 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008)
and [Jer 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)). For the Moloch-worship
in [Eze 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037), compare [Eze
16:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#020), and [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031). The desecration of the
sanctuary ([Eze 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#038)) is more
minutely defined in [Eze 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039). בּיּום
ההוּא in [Eze 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#038), which has so
offended the lxx and Hitzig that it is omitted by the former, while the
latter proposes to strike it out as a gloss, is added for the purpose of
designating the profanation of the sanctuary as contemporaneous with the
Moloch-worship of [Eze 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037), as is
evident from [Eze 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039). For the fact
itself, compare [Kg2 21:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#004), [Kg2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#007). The desecration of the Sabbaths,
as in [Eze 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#013), [Eze
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#016). For [Eze
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039), compare [Eze
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021). The words are not to be
understood as signifying that they sacrificed children to Moloch in the
temple, but simply that immediately after they had sacrificed children
to Moloch, they went into the temple of Jehovah, that there they might
worship Jehovah also, and thus placed Jehovah upon a par with Moloch.
This was a profanation (חלּל) of His sanctuary.

In [Eze 23:40-44](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040) the allusion is not
to actual idolatry, but to the ungodly alliance into which Judah had
entered with Chaldea. Judah sent ambassadors to Chaldea, and for the
purpose of receiving the Chaldeans, adorned herself as a woman would do
for the reception of her paramours. She seated herself upon a splendid
divan, and in front of this there was a table spread, upon which stood
the incense and the oil that she ought to have offered to Jehovah. This
is the explanation which Kliefoth has correctly given of [Eze
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040) and [Eze
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041). The emphatic ואף כּי in [Eze
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040) is sufficient to show that the
reference is to a new crime deserving of punishment. This cannot be
idolatry, because the worship of Moloch has already been mentioned in
[Eze 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#038) and [Eze
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039) as the worst of all the
idolatrous abominations. Moreover, sending for (or to) men who come from
afar does not apply to idolatry in the literal sense of the word; for
men to whom the harlot sent messengers to invite them to come to her
could not be idols for which she sent to a distant land. The allusion is
rather to Assyrians or Chaldeans, and, according to [Eze
23:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#042), it is the former who are
referred to here (compare [Isa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#003)).
There is no force in Hitzig's objection, namely, that the one woman sent
to these, and that their being sent for and coming have already been
disposed of in [Eze 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#016). For the
singulars in the last clause of [Eze
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040) show that even here only one
woman is said to have sent for the men. Again, תּשׁלחנה might even be
the third person singular, as this form does sometimes take the
termination נה (vid., Ewald, 191c, and Ges. 47, Anm. 3). At the same
time, there is nothing in the fact that the sending to Chaldea has
already been mentioned in [Eze 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#016)
to preclude another allusion to the same circumstance from a different
point of view. The woman adorned herself that she might secure the
favour of the men for whom she had sent. כּהל is the Arabic khl, to
paint the eyes with stibium (kohol). For the fact itself, see the
remarks on [Kg2 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030). She then seated
herself upon a cushion (not lay down upon a bed; for ישׁב does not mean
to lie down), and in front of this there was a table, spread with
different kinds of food, upon which she placed incense and oil. The
suffix to עליה refers to שׁלחן, and is to be taken as a neuter, which
suits the table as a thing, whilst שׁלחן generally takes the termination
ות in the plural. In [Eze 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041), Ewald
and Hvernick detect a description of the lectisternia of the licentious
worship of the Babylonian Mylitta. But neither the sitting (ישׁב) upon a
cushion (divan), nor the position taken by the woman behind the table,
harmonizes with this. As Hitzig has correctly observed, "if she has
taken her seat upon a cushion, and has a table spread before her, she
evidently intends to dine, and that with the men for whom she has
adorned herself. The oil is meant for anointing at meal-time ([Amo
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006); [Pro
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#017); cf. [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005)), and the incense for burning."
"My incense and my oil" are the incense and oil given to her by God,
which she ought to have devoted to His service, but had squandered upon
herself and her foreign friends (cf. [Eze
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#018); [Hos
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#010)). The oil, as the produce of the
land of Palestine, was the gift of Jehovah; and although incense was not
a production of Palestine, yet as the money with which Judah purchased
it, or the goods bartered for it, were the fists of God, Jehovah could
also call it His incense.

[Eze 23:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#042) is very obscure. Such
renderings of the first clause as et vox multitudinis exultantis in ea
(Vulg)., and "the voice of a careless multitude within her" (Hvernick),
can hardly be sustained. In every other passage in which קול occurs, it
does not signify the voice of a multitude, but a loud tumult; compare
[Isa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004); [Isa
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#003); [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), and [Sa1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#014), where קול ההמון is used as
synonymous with קול. Even in cases where המון is used for a multitude,
it denotes a noisy, boisterous, tumultuous crowd. Consequently שׁלו
cannot be taken as an adjective connected with המון, because a quiet
tumult is a contradiction, and שׁלו does not mean either exultans or
recklessly breaking loose (Hvernick), but simply living in quiet,
peaceful and contented. שׁלו must therefore be the predicate to קול
המון; the sound of the tumult or the loud noise was (or became) quiet,
still. בהּ, thereat (neuter, like בהּ, thereby, [Gen
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#014)). The words which follow, 'ואל
אנשׁים וגו, are not to be taken with the preceding clause, as the
connection would yield no sense. They belong to what follows. אנשׁים מרב
אדם .swollof tah can only be the men who came from afar ([Eze
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040)). In addition to these, there
were brought, i.e., induced to come, topers from the desert. The Chetib
סובאים is no doubt a participle of סבא, drinkers, topers; and the Hophal
מוּבאים is chosen instead of the Kal בּאים, for the sake of the
paronomasia, with סובאים. The former, therefore, can only be the
Assyrians (בּני אשּׁוּר, [Eze 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005) and
[Eze 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#007)), the latter (the topers)
the Chaldeans (בּני בבל( sn, [Eze
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#015)). The epithet drinkers is a very
appropriate one for the sons of Babylon; as Curtius ([Eze
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#001)) describes the Babylonians as
maxime in vinum et quae ebrietatem sequuntur effusi. The phrase "from
the desert" cannot indicate the home of these men, although ממּדבּר
corresponds to ממּרחק in [Eze 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040),
but simply the place from which they came to Judah, namely, from the
desert of Syria and Arabia, which separated Palestine from Babylon.
These peoples decorated the arms of the harlots with clasps, and their
heads with splendid wreaths (crowns). The plural suffixes indicate that
the words apply to both women, and this is confirmed by the fact that
they are both named in [Eze 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#044). The
subject to ויּתּנוּ is not merely the סובאים, but also the אנשׁים ממּרחק
eht osla in [Eze 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040). The thought is
simply that Samaria and Judah had attained to wealth and earthly glory
through their intercourse with these nations; the very gifts with which,
according to [Eze 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#011)., Jehovah
Himself had adorned His people. The meaning of the verse, therefore,
when taken in its connection, appears to be the following: - When the
Assyrians began to form alliances with Israel, quiet was the immediate
result. The Chaldeans were afterwards added to these, so that through
their adulterous intercourse with both these nations Israel and Judah
acquired both wealth and glory. The sentence which God pronounced upon
this conduct was, that Judah had sunk so deeply into adultery that it
would be impossible for it ever to desist from the sin.

This is the way in which we understand [Eze
23:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#043), connecting לבּלה with ואמר: "I
said concerning her who was debilitated with whoredom." בּלה, feminine
of בּלה fo enini, used up, worn out; see, for example, [Jos
9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#004), where it is applied to clothes;
here it is transferred to persons decayed, debilitated, in which sense
the verb occurs in [Gen 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012). נאפּים,
which is co-ordinated with בּלה, does not indicate the means by which
the strength has been exhausted, but is an accusative of direction or
reference, debilitated with regard to adultery, so as no longer to be
capable of practising it.

(Note: The proposal of Ewald to take לבּלה נאפּים as an independent
clause, "adultery to the devil," cannot be defended by the usage of the
language; and that of Hitzig, "the withered hag practises adultery," is
an unnatural invention, inasmuch as ל, if taken as nota dativi, would
give this meaning: the hag has (possesses) adultery as her property -
and there is nothing to indicate that it should be taken as a question.)

In the next clause עתּ , תּזנוּתיה is the subject to יזנה, and the
Chetib is correct, the Keri being erroneous, and the result of false
exposition. If תזנותיה were the object to יזנה, so that the woman would
be the subject, we should have the feminine תּזנה. But if, on the other
hand, תזנותיה is the subject, there is no necessity for this, whether we
regard the word as a plural, from תּזנוּתים, or take it as a singular,
as Ewald (259a) has done, inasmuch as in either case it is still an
abstract, which might easily be preceded by the verb in the masculine
form. והיא gives greater force, not only to the suffix, but also the
noun - and that even she (her whoredom). The sin of whoredom is
personified, or regarded as רוּח זנוּנים ([Hos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#012)), as a propensity to whoredom,
which continues in all its force after the capacity of the woman herself
is gone. - [Eze 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#044) contains the
result of the foregoing description of the adulterous conduct of the two
women, and this is followed in [Eze
23:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#045). by an account of the attitude
assumed by God, and the punishment of the sinful women. ויּבוא, with an
indefinite subject, they (man, one) went to her. אליה, the one woman,
Oholibah. It is only in the apodosis that what has to be said is
extended to both women. This is the only interpretation of [Eze
23:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#044) which does justice both to the
verb ויּבוא (imperfect with Vav consec. as the historical tense) and the
perfect בּאוּ. The plural אשּׁת does not occur anywhere else. Hitzig
would therefore alter it into the singular, as "unheard of," and confine
the attribute to Oholibah, who is the only one mentioned in the first
clause of the verse, and also in [Eze
23:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#043), [Eze
23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040), and [Eze
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041). The judgment upon the two
sisters is to be executed by righteous men ([Eze
23:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#045)). The Chaldeans are not
designated as righteous in contrast to the Israelites, but as the
instruments of the punitive righteousness of God in this particular
instance, executing just judgment upon the sinners for adultery and
bloodshed (vid., [Eze 16:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#038)). The
infinitives העלה and נתון in [Eze
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#046) stand for the third person
future. For other points, compare the commentary on [Eze
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040) and [Eze
16:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#041). The formula נתן לזעוה is
derived from [Deu 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025), and has been
explained in the exposition of that passage. וּברא is the inf. abs.
Piel. For the meaning of the word, see the comm. on [Eze
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#024). From this judgment all women,
i.e., all nations, are to take warning to desist from idolatry. נוּסּרוּ
is a mixed form, compounded of the Niphal and Hithpael, for התוסּרוּ,
like נכּפּר in [Deu 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#008) (see the
comm. in loc.). - For [Eze 23:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#049),
vid., [Eze 16:58](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#058). - The punishment is
announced to both the women, Israel and Judah, as still in the future,
although Oholah (Samaria) had been overtaken by the judgment a
considerable time before. The explanation of this is to be found in the
allegory itself, in which both kingdoms are represented as being sisters
of one mother; and it may also be defended on the ground that the
approaching destruction of Jerusalem and the kingdom of Judah affected
the remnants of the kingdom of the ten tribes, which were still to be
found in Palestine; whilst, on the other hand, the judgment was not
restricted to the destruction of the two kingdoms, but also embraced the
later judgments which fell upon the entire nation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 24](eze024)

</div>
