<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze003)  [Next](eze005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 4:0</span></span>

1-3

[Ezekiel 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 4:4</span></span>

The second symbolical act. - [Eze 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#004).
And do thou lay thyself upon thy left side, and lay upon it the evil
deeds of the house of Israel; for the number of the days during which
thou liest thereon shalt thou bear their evil deeds. [Eze
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#005). And I reckon to thee the years of
their evil deeds as a number of days; three hundred and ninety days
shalt thou bear the evil deeds of the house of Israel. [Eze
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#006). And (when) thou hast completed
these, thou shalt then lay thyself a second time upon thy right side,
and bear the evil deeds of the house of Judah forty days; each day I
reckon to thee as a year. [Eze 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#007).
And upon the siege of Jerusalem shalt thou stedfastly direct thy
countenance, and thy naked arm, and shalt prophesy against it. [Eze
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#008). And, lo, I lay cords upon thee,
that thou stir not from one side to the other until thou hast ended the
days of thy siege. - Whilst Ezekiel, as God's representative, carries
out in a symbolical manner the siege of Jerusalem, he is in this
situation to portray at the same time the destiny of the people of
Israel beleaguered in their metropolis. Lying upon his left side for 390
days without turning, he is to bear the guilt of Israel's sin; then,
lying 40 days more upon his right side, he is to bear the guilt of
Judah's sin. In so doing, the number of the days during which he
reclines upon his sides shall be accounted as exactly equal to the same
number of years of their sinning. נשׂא עון, "to bear the evil deeds,"
i.e., to take upon himself the consequence of sin, and to stone for
them, to suffer the punishment of sin; cf. [Num
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#034), etc. Sin, which produces guilt
and punishment, is regarded as a burden or weight, which Ezekiel is to
lay upon the side upon which he reclines, and in this way bear it. This
bearing, however, of the guilt of sin is not to be viewed as vicarious
and mediatorial, as in the sacrifice of atonement, but is intended as
purely epideictic and symbolical; that is to say, Ezekiel, by his lying
so long bound under the burden of Israel and Judah which was laid upon
his side, is to show to the people how they are to be cast down by the
siege of Jerusalem, and how, while lying on the ground, without the
possibility of turning or rising, they are to bear the punishment of
their sins. The full understanding of this symbolical act, however,
depends upon the explanation of the specified periods of time, with
regard to which the various views exhibit great discrepancy.

In the first place, the separation of the guilt into that of the house
of Israel and that of the house of Judah is closely connected with the
division of the covenant people into the two kingdoms of Israel and
Judah. That Ezekiel now is to bear the sin of Israel upon the left, that
of Judah on the right side, is not fully explained by the circumstance
that the kingdom of the ten tribes lay to the left, i.e., to the north,
the kingdom of Judah to the right, i.e., to the south of Jerusalem, but
must undoubtedly point at the same time to the pre-eminence of Judah
over Israel; cf. [Ecc 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#002). This
pre-eminence of Judah is manifestly exhibited in its period of
punishment extending only to 40 days = 40 years; that of Israel, on the
contrary, 390 days = 390 years. These numbers, however, cannot be
satisfactorily explained from a chronological point of view, whether
they be referred to the time during which Israel and Judah sinned, and
heaped upon themselves guilt which was to be punished, or to the time
during which they were to atone, or suffer punishment for their sins. Of
themselves, both references are possible; the first, viz., in so far as
the days in which Ezekiel is to bear the guilt of Israel, might be
proportioned to the number of the years of their guilt, as many Rabbins,
Vatablus, Calvin, Lightfoot, Vitringa, J. D. Michaelis, and others
suppose, while in so doing the years are calculated very differently;
cf. des Vignoles, Chronol. I. p. 479ff., and Rosenmller, Scholia,
Excurs. to ch. iv. All these hypotheses, however, are shattered by the
impossibility of pointing out the specified periods of time, so as to
harmonize with the chronology. If the days, reckoned as years,
correspond to the duration of their sinning, then, in the case of the
house of Israel, only the duration of this kingdom could come into
consideration, as the period of punishment began with the captivity of
the ten tribes. But this kingdom lasted only 253 years. The remaining
137 years the Rabbins have attempted to supply from the period of the
Judges; others, from the time of the destruction of the ten tribes down
to that of Ezekiel, or even to that of the destruction of Jerusalem.
Both are altogether arbitrary. Still less can the 40 years of Judah be
calculated, as all the determinations of the beginning and the end are
mere phantoms of the air. The fortieth year before our prophecy would
nearly coincide with the eighteenth year of Josiah's reign, and
therefore with the year in which this pious king effected the
reformation of religion. Ezekiel, however, could not represent this year
as marking the commencement of Judah's sin. We must therefore, as the
literal meaning of the words primarily indicates, regard the specified
periods of time as periods of punishment for Israel and Judah. Since
Ezekiel, then, had to maintain during the symbolical siege of Jerusalem
this attitude of reclining for Israel and Judah, and after the
completion of the 390 days for Israel must lie a second time (שׁנית,
[Eze 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#006)) 40 days for Judah, he had to
recline in all 430 (390 + 40) days. To include the forty days in the
three hundred and ninety is contrary to the statements in the text. But
to reckon the two periods together has not only no argument against it,
but is even suggested by the circumstance that the prophet, while
reclining on his left and right sides, is to represent the siege of
Jerusalem. Regarded, however, as periods of punishment, both the numbers
cannot be explained consistently with the chronology, but must be
understood as having a symbolical signification. The space of 430 years,
which is announced to both kingdoms together as the duration of this
chastisement, recalls the 430 years which in the far past Israel had
spent in Egypt in bondage ([Exo
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040)). It had been already intimated
to Abraham ([Gen 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013)) that the
sojourn in Egypt would be a period of servitude and humiliation for his
seed; and at a later time, in consequence of the oppression which the
Israelites then experienced on account of the rapid increase of their
number, it was - upon the basis of the threat in [Deu
28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068), that God would punish Israel
for their persistent declension, by bringing them back into ignominious
bondage in Egypt - taken by the prophet as a type of the banishment of
rebellious Israel among the heathen. In this sense Hosea already
threatens ([Hos 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013); [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003), [Hos
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006)) the ten tribes with being carried
back to Egypt; see on [Hos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003). Still
more frequently, upon the basis of this conception, is the redemption
from Assyrian and Babylonian exile announced as a new and miraculous
exodus of Israel from the bondage of Egypt, e.g., [Hos
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002); [Isa
11:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015). - This typical meaning lies
also at the foundation of the passage before us, as, in accordance with
the statement of Jerome,

(Note: Alii vero et maxime Judaei a secundo anno Vespasiani, quando
Hierusalem a Romanis capta templumque subversum est, supputari volunt in
tribulatione et angustia et captivitatis jugo populi constitui annos
quadringentos triginta, et sic redire populum ad pristinum statum ut
quomodo filii Israel 430 annis fuerunt in Aegypto, sic in eodem numero
finiatur: scriptumque esse in [Exo
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040). - Hieronymus.)

it was already accepted by the Jews of his time, and has been again
recognised in modern times by Hvernick and Hitzig. That Ezekiel looked
upon the period during which Israel had been subject to the heathen in
the past as "typical of the future, is to be assumed, because only then
does the number of 430 cease to be arbitrary and meaningless, and at the
same time its division into 390 + 40 become explicable." - Hitzig.

This latter view is not, of course, to be understood as Hitzig and
Hvernick take it, i.e., as if the 40 years of Judah's chastisement were
to be viewed apart from the 40 years' sojourn of the Israelites in the
wilderness, upon which the look of the prophet would have been turned by
the sojourn in Egypt. For the 40 years in the wilderness are not
included in the 430 years of the Egyptian sojourn, so that Ezekiel could
have reduced these 430 years to 390, and yet have added to them the 40
years of the desert wanderings. For the coming period of punishment,
which is to commence for Israel with the siege of Jerusalem, is fixed at
430 years with reference to the Egyptian bondage of the Israelites, and
this period is divided into 390 and 40; and this division therefore must
also have, if not its point of commencement, at least a point of
connection, in the 430 years of the Egyptian sojourn. The division of
the period of chastisement into two parts is to be explained probably
from the sending of the covenant people into the kingdom of Israel and
Judah, and the appointment of a longer period of chastisement for Israel
than for Judah, from the greater guilt of the ten tribes in comparison
with Judah, but not the incommensurable relation of the divisions into
390 and 40 years. The foundation of this division can, first of all,
only lie in this, that the number forty already possessed the symbolical
significance of a measured period of divine visitation. This
significance it had already received, not through the 40 years of the
desert wandering, but through the 40 days of rain at the time of the
deluge ([Gen 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#017)), so that, in
conformity with this, the punishment of dying in the wilderness,
suspended over the rebellious race of Israel at Kadesh, is already
stated at 40 years, although it included in reality only 38 years; see
on [Num 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#032). If now, however, it
should be supposed that this penal sentence had contributed to the
fixing of the number 40 as a symbolical number to denote a longer period
of punishment, the 40 years of punishment for Judah could not yet have
been viewed apart from this event. The fixing of the chastisement for
Israel and Judah at 390 + 40 years could only in that case be measured
by the sojourn of the Israelites in Egypt, if the relations of this
sojourn presented a point of connection for a division of the 430 years
into 390 and 40, i.e., if the 40 last years of the Egyptian servitude
could somehow be distinguished from the preceding 390. A point of
contact for this is offered by an event in the life of Moses which falls
within that period, and was fertile in results for him as well as for
the whole of Israel, viz., his flight from Egypt in consequence of the
slaughter of an Egyptian who had ill-treated an Israelite. As the
Israelites, his brethren, did not recognise the meaning of this act, and
did not perceive that God would save them by his hand, Moses was
necessitated to flee into the land of Midian, and to tarry there 40
years as a stranger, until the Lord called him to be the saviour of his
nation, and sent him as His messenger to Pharaoh (Ex 2:11-3:10; [Act
7:23-30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023)). These 40 years were for
Moses not only a time of trial and purification for his future vocation,
but undoubtedly also the period of severest Egyptian oppression for the
Israelites, and in this respect quite fitted to be a type of the coming
time of punishment for Judah, in which was to be repeated what Israel
had experienced in Egypt, that, as Israel had lost their helper and
protector with the flight of Moses, so now Judah was to lose her king,
and be given over to the tyranny of the heathen world-power.

(Note: Another ingenious explanation of the numbers in question has been
attempted by Kliefoth, Comment. p. 123. Proceeding from the symbolical
signification of the number 40 as a measure of time for divine
visitation and trial, he supposes that the prescription in [Deu
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#003) - that if an Israelite were to be
subject to corporal punishment, he was not to receive more than 40
stripes - is founded upon this symbolical signification - a prescription
which, according to [Co2 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024), was in
practice so carried out that only 39 were actually inflicted. From the
application and bearing thus given to the number 40, the symbolical
numbers in the passage before us are to be explained. Every year of
punishment is equivalent to a stripe of chastisement. To the house of
Israel 10 x 39 years = stripes, were adjudged, i.e., to each of the ten
tribes 39 years = stripes; the individual tribes are treated as so many
single individuals, and each receives the amount of chastisement usual
in the case of one individual. Judah, on the contrary, is regarded as
the one complete historical national tribe, cause in the two faithful
tribes of Judah and Benjamin the people collectively were represented.
Judah, then, may receive, not the number of stripes falling to
individuals, but that only which fell upon one, although, as a fair
compensation, not the usual number of 40, but the higher number -
compatible with the Torah - of 40 stripes = years. To this explanation
we would give our assent, if only the transformation into stripes or
blows of the days of the prophet's reclining, or of the years of
Israel's punishment, could be shown to be probable through any analogous
Biblical example, and were not merely a deduction from the modern law of
punishment, in which corporal punishment and imprisonment hold the same
importance. The assumption, then, is altogether arbitrary irrespective
of this, that in the case of the house of Israel the measure of
punishment is fixed differently from that of Judah; in the former case,
according to the number of the tribes; in the latter, according to the
unity of the kingdom: in the former at 39, in the latter at 40 stripes.
Finally, the presupposition that the later Jewish practice of inflicting
only 30 instead of 40 stripes - in order not to transgress the letter of
the law in the enumeration which probably was made at the infliction of
the punishment - goes back to the time of the exile, is extremely
improbable, as it altogether breathes the spirit of Pharisaic
micrology.)

While Ezekiel thus reclines upon one side, he is to direct his look
unchangingly upon the siege of Jerusalem, i.e., upon the picture of the
besieged city, and keep his arm bare, i.e., ready for action ([Isa
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#010)), and outstretched, and prophesy
against the city, especially through the menacing attitude which he had
taken up against it. To be able to carry this out, God will bind him
with cords, i.e., fetter him to his couch (see on [Eze
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#025)), so that he cannot stir from one
side to another until he has completed the time enjoined upon him for
the siege. In this is contained the thought that the siege of Jerusalem
is to be mentally carried on until its capture; but no new symbol of the
state of prostration of the besieged Jerusalem is implied. For such a
purpose the food of the prophet ([Eze
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009).) during this time is employed.

[Ezekiel 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 4:9</span></span>

The third symbolical act. - [Eze 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009).
And do thou take to thyself wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles,
and millet, and spelt, and put them in a vessel, and prepare them as
bread for thyself, according to the number of the days on which thou
liest on thy side; three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat it. [Eze
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#010). And thy food, which thou eatest,
shall be according to weight, twenty shekels for a day; from time to
time shalt thou eat it. [Eze 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#011). And
water shalt thou drink according to measure, a sixth part of the hin,
from time to time shalt thou drink it. [Eze
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012). And as barley cakes shalt thou
eat it, and shalt bake it before their eyes with human excrement. [Eze
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#013). And Jehovah spake; then shall
the children of Israel eat their bread polluted amongst the heathen,
whither I shall drive them. [Eze 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#014).
Then said I: Ah! Lord, Jehovah, my soul has never been polluted; and of
a carcase, and of that which is torn, have I never eaten from my youth
up until now, and abominable flesh has not come into my mouth. [Eze
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#015). Then said He unto me: Lo, I
allow thee the dung of animals instead of that of man; therewith mayest
thou prepare thy bread. [Eze 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016). And
He said to me, Son of man, lo, I will break the staff of bread in
Jerusalem, so that they will eat bread according to weight, and in
affliction, and drink water by measure, and in amazement. [Eze
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#017). Because bread and water shall
fail, and they shall pine away one with another, and disappear in their
guilt. - For the whole duration of the symbolical siege of Jerusalem,
Ezekiel is to furnish himself with a store of grain corn and leguminous
fruits, to place this store in a vessel beside him, and daily to prepare
in the form of bread a measured portion of the same, 20 shekels in
weight (about 9 ounces), and to bake this as barley cakes upon a fire,
prepared with dried dung, and then to partake of it at the different
hours for meals throughout the day. In addition to this, he is, at the
hours appointed for eating, to drink water, in like manner according to
measure, a sixth part of the hin daily, i.e., a quantity less than a
pint (cf. Biblisch. Archol. II. p. 141). The Israelites, probably,
generally prepared the עגּות from wheat flour, and not merely when they
had guests ([Gen 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006)). Ezekiel,
however, is to take, in addition, other kinds of grain with leguminous
fruits, which were employed in the preparation of bread when wheat was
deficient; barley - baked into bread by the poor ([Jdg
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#013); [Kg2
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#042); [Joh
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#009); see on [Kg1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#008)); פּול, "beans," a common food of
the Hebrews ([Sa2 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#028)), which
appears to have been mixed with other kinds of grain for the purpose of
being baked into bread.

(Note: Cf. Plinii Histor. Natur. xviii. 30: "Inter legumina maximus
honos fabae, quippe ex qua tentatus sit etiam panis...Frumento etiam
miscetur apud plerasque gentes et maxime panico solida ac delicatius
fracta.")

This especially holds true of the lentiles, a favourite food of the
Hebrews ([Gen 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029).), from which, in
Egypt at the present day, the poor still bake bread in times of severe
famine (Sonnini, R. II. 390; ἄρτος φάκινος, Athenaeus, IV. 158). דּחן,
"millet," termed by the Arabs "Dochn" (Arab. dchn), panicum, a fruit
cultivated in Egypt, and still more frequently in Arabia (see Wellsted,
Arab. I. 295), consisting of longish round brown grain, resembling rice,
from which, in the absence of better fruits, a sort of bad bread is
baked. Cf. Celsius, Hierobotan, i. 453ff.; and Gesen. Thesaur. p. 333.
כּסּמים, "spelt or German corn" (cf. [Exo
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#032)), a kind of grain which produces
a finer and whiter flour than wheat flour; the bread, however, which is
baked from it is somewhat dry, and is said to be less nutritive than
wheat bread; cf. Celsius, Hierobotan, ii. 98f. Of all these fruits
Ezekiel is to place certain quantities in a vessel - to indicate that
all kinds of grain and leguminous fruits capable of being converted into
bread will be collected, in order to bake bread for the appeasing of
hunger. In the intermixture of various kinds of flour we are not, with
Hitzig, to seek a transgression of the law in [Lev
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#019); [Deu
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#009). מספּר is the accusative of
measure or duration. The quantity is to be fixed according to the number
of the days. In [Eze 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009) only the 390
days of the house of Israel's period of punishment are mentioned - quod
plures essent et fere universa summa (Prado); and because this was
sufficient to make prominent the hardship and oppression of the
situation, the 40 days of Judah were omitted for the sake of brevity.

(Note: Kliefoth's supposition is untenable, that what is required in
[Eze 4:9-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009) refers in reality only to
the 390 days of Israel, and not also to the 40 days of Judah, so that so
long as Ezekiel lay and bore the sins of Israel, he was to eat his food
by measure, and unclean. For this is in contradiction with the distinct
announcement that during the whole time that he lay upon the one side
and the other, he was besieging Jerusalem; and by the scanty and unclean
food, was to portray both the deficiency of bread and water which
occurred in the besieged city ([Eze
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#017)), as well as the eating of
unclean bread, which impended over the Israelites when among the heathen
nations. The famine which took place in Jerusalem during the siege did
not affect the ten tribes, but that of Judah; while unclean bread had to
be eaten among the heathen not only by the Israelites, but also by the
Jews transported to Babylon. By the limitation of what is prescribed to
the prophet in [Eze 4:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009) to the time
during which the sin of Israel was to be borne, the significance of this
symbolical act for Jerusalem and Judah is taken away.)

'מאכלך וגו, "thy food which thou shalt eat," i.e., the definite portion
which thou shalt have to eat, shall be according to weight (between
subject and predicate the substantive verb is to be supplied). Twenty
shekels = 8 or 9 ounces of flour, yield 11 or 12 ounces of bread, i.e.,
at most the half of what a man needs in southern countries for his daily
support.

(Note: In our climate (Germany) we count 2 lbs. of bread for the daily
supply of a man; but in warm countries the demand for food is less, so
that scarcely 1 1/2 lbs. are required. Wellsted (Travels in Arabia, II.
p. 200) relates that "the Bedoweens will undertake a journey of 10 to 12
days without carrying with them any nutriment, save a bottle full of
small cakes, baked of white flour and camel or goat's milk, and a
leather bag of water. Such a cake weighs about 5 ounces. Two of them,
and a mouthful of water, the latter twice within 24 hours, is all which
they then partake of.")

The same is the case with the water. A sixth part of a hin, i.e., a
quantity less than a pint, is a very niggardly allowance for a day.
Both, however - eating the bread and drinking the water - he shall do
from time to time, i.e., "not throughout the entire fixed period of 390
days" (Hvernick); but he shall not eat the daily ration at once, but
divided into portions according to the daily hours of meals, so that he
will never be completely satisfied. In addition to this is the pollution
([Eze 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012).) of the scanty allowance
of food by the manner in which it is prepared. ענּת שׂערים is predicate:
"as barley cakes," shalt thou eat them. The suffix in תּאכלנּה is
neuter, and refers to לחם in [Eze 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009),
or rather to the kinds of grain there enumerated, which are ground and
baked before them: לחם, i.e., "food." The addition שׂערים is not to be
explained from this, that the principal part of these consisted of
barley, nor does it prove that in general no other than barley cakes
were known (Hitzig), but only that the cakes of barley meal, baked in
the ashes, were an extremely frugal kind of bread, which that prepared
by Ezekiel was to resemble. The עגּה was probably always baked on hot
ashes, or on hot stones ([Kg1 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#006)),
not on pans, as Kliefoth here supposes. The prophet, however, is to bake
them in (with) human ordure. This is by no means to be understood as if
he were to mix the ordure with the food, for which view [Isa
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#012) has been erroneously appealed
to; but - as עליהם in [Eze 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#015)
clearly shows - he is to bake it over the dung, i.e., so that dung forms
the material of the fire. That the bread must be polluted by this is
conceivable, although it cannot be proved from the passages in [Lev
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#003); [Lev
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#021), and [Deu
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#013) that the use of fire composed of
dung made the food prepared thereon levitically unclean. The use of fire
with human ordure must have communicated to the bread a loathsome smell
and taste, by which it was rendered unclean, even if it had not been
immediately baked in the hot ashes. That the pollution of the bread is
the object of this injunction, we see from the explanation which God
gives in [Eze 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#013) : "Thus shall the
children of Israel eat their defiled bread among the heathen." The heart
of the prophet, however, rebels against such food. He says he has never
in his life polluted himself by eating food forbidden in the law; from
his youth up he has eaten no unclean flesh, neither of a carcase, nor of
that which was torn by wild beasts (cf. [Exo
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030); [Deu
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021)), nor flesh of sacrifices
decayed or putrefying (פּגּוּל, see on [Lev
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#018); [Isa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004)). On this God omits the
requirement in [Eze 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012), and permits
him to take for firing the dung of oxen instead of that of men.

(Note: The use of dung as a material for burning is so common in the
East, that it cannot be supposed that Ezekiel first became acquainted
with it in a foreign country, and therefore regarded it with peculiar
loathing. Human ordure, of course, so far as our knowledge goes, is
never so employed, although the objection raised by Hitzig, on the other
hand, that it would not yield so much heat as would be necessary for
roasting without immediate contact, i.e., through the medium of a brick,
rests upon an erroneous representation of the matter. But the employment
of cattle-dung for firing could not be unknown to the Israelites, as it
forms in the Huaran (the ancient Bashan) the customary firing material;
cf. Wetzstein's remarks on Delitzsch's Job, vol. I. pp. 377, 8 (Eng.
trn.), where the preparation of the g'elle - this prevalent material for
burning in the Hauran - from cow-dung mixed with chopped straw is
minutely described; and this remark is made among others, that the flame
of the g'elle, prepared and dried from the dung of oxen that feed at
large, is entirely without smoke, and that the ashes, which retain their
heat for a lengthened time, are as clean as those of wood.)

In [Eze 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016)., finally, is given the
explanation of the scanty allowance of food meted out to the prophet,
namely, that the Lord, at the impending siege of Jerusalem, is to take
away from the people the staff of bread, and leave them to languish in
hunger and distress. The explanation is in literal adherence to the
threatenings of the law ([Lev 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026)
and [Lev 26:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#039)), which are now to pass
into fulfilment. Bread is called "staff of bread" as being indispensable
for the preservation of life. To בּמשׁקל, [Lev
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026), בּדאגה, "in sorrow," is added;
and to the water, בּשׁמּמון, "in astonishment," i.e., in fixed, silent
pain at the miserable death, by hunger and thirst, which they see before
them. נמקּוּ בּעונם as [Lev 26:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#039). If
we, finally, cast a look over the contents of this first sign, it says
that Jerusalem is soon to be besieged, and during the siege is to suffer
hunger and terror as a punishment for the sins of Israel and Judah; that
upon the capture of the city of Israel (Judah) they are to be dispersed
among the heathen, and will there be obliged to eat unclean bread. To
this in Ezekiel 5 is joined a second sign, which shows further how it
shall fare with the people at and after the capture of Jerusalem ([Eze
4:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001)); and after that a longer
oracle, which developes the significance of these signs, and establishes
the necessity of the penal judgment ([Eze
4:5-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#005)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 5](eze005)

</div>
