<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze044)  [Next](eze046) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001)

[Ezekiel 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 45:1</span></span>

The determination of the means of support for the priesthood is followed
still further by an explanation of the manner in which Jehovah will be
their inheritance and possession; in other words, assign to the priests
and Levites that portion of the land which was requisite for their
abode. This is to be done by His causing a definite tract of land to be
set apart for Himself, for the sanctuary, and for His servants, and for
the capital, when the country is distributed among the tribes of Israel
([Eze 45:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001)). On both sides of this
domain the prince is also to receive a possession in land, to guard
against all exaction on the part of the princes in time to come. And
everywhere unrighteousness is to cease, just weight and measure are to
be observed ([Eze 45:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#009)), and the
people are to pay certain heave-offerings to provide for the sacrifices
binding upon the prince ([Eze
45:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#013)).

[Eze 45:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001)

The Holy Heave from the Land. - [Eze
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001). And when ye divide the land by
lot for an inheritance, ye shall lift a heave for Jehovah as a holy
(portion) from the land; five and twenty thousand the length, and the
breadth ten (? twenty) thousand. It shall be holy in all its
circumference round about. [Eze 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#002).
Of this five hundred shall belong to the Holy by five hundred square
round about, and fifty cubits open space thereto round about. [Eze
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#003). And from this measured space
thou shalt measure a length of five and twenty thousand, and a breadth
of ten thousand, and in this shall be the sanctuary, a holy of holies.
[Eze 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#004). A holy (portion) of the
land shall this be; to the priests, the servants of the sanctuary, shall
it belong who draw near to serve Jehovah, and it shall be to them the
place for houses and a sanctuary for the sanctuary. [Eze
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#005). And five and twenty thousand in
length and ten thousand in breadth shall belong to the Levites, the
servants of the house, for a possession to them as gates to dwell in.
[Eze 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#006). And as a possession for the
city, ye shall give five thousand in breadth and five and twenty
thousand in length, parallel to the holy heave; it shall belong to the
whole house of Israel. [Eze 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#007). And
to the prince (ye shall give) on both sides of the holy heave and of the
possession of the city, along the holy heave and along the possession of
the city, on the west side westwards and on the east side eastwards, and
in length parallel to one of the tribe-portions, from the western border
to the eastern border. [Eze 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#008). It
shall belong to him as land, as a possession in Israel; and my princes
shall no more oppress my people, but shall leave the land to the house
of Israel according to its tribes. - The domain to be first of all set
apart from the land at the time of its distribution among the tribes is
called תּרוּמה, heave, not in the general sense of the lifting or taking
of a portion from the whole, but as a portion lifted or taken by a
person from his property as an offering for God; for תּרוּמה comes from
הרים, which signifies in the case of the minchah the lifting of a
portion which was burned upon the altar as אזכּרה for Jehovah (see the
comm. on [Lev 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#009)). Consequently
everything that was offered by the Israelites, either voluntarily or in
consequence of a precept from the Lord for the erection and maintenance
of the sanctuary and its servants, was called תּרוּמה (see [Exo
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#002)., [Eze
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#015); [Lev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#014); [Num
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#019), etc.). Only the principal
instructions concerning the heave from the land are given here, and
these are repeated in [Eze 48:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#008), in
the section concerning the division of the land, and to some extent
expanded there. The introductory words, "when ye divide the land by lot
for an inheritance," point to this. (See the map on Plate IV.) הפּיל,
sc. גּירל ([Pro 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#014)), to cast the
lot, to divide by lot, as in [Jos
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006). Then shall ye lift, set apart, a
heave for Jehovah as a holy (portion) from the land. מן is to be closely
connected with קדשׁ, as shown by [Eze
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#004). In the numbers mentioned the
measure to be employed is not given. But it is obvious that cubits are
not meant, as Bttcher, Hitzig, and others assume, but rods; partly from
a comparison of [Eze 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#002) with [Eze
42:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#016), where the space of the
sanctuary, which is given here as 500 by 500 square, is described as
five hundred rods on every side; and partly also from the fact that the
open space around the sanctuary is fixed at fifty cubits, and in this
case אמּה is added, because rods are not to be understood there as in
connection with the other numbers. The correctness of this view, which
we meet with in Jerome and Raschi, cannot be overthrown by appealing to
the excessive magnitude of a τέμενος of twenty-five thousand rods in
length and ten thousand rods in breadth; for it will be seen in Ezekiel
48 that the measurements given answer to the circumstances in rods, but
not in cubits. The ארך before and after the number is pleonastic: "as
for the length, twenty-five thousand rods in length." Length here is the
measurement from east to west, and breadth from north to south, as we
may clearly see from [Eze 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#010). No
regard, therefore, is paid to the natural length and breadth of the
land; and the greater extent of the portions to be measured is
designated as length, the smaller as breadth. The expression אשׂרה אלף
is a remarkable one, as עשׂרת אלפים is constantly used, not only in [Eze
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#003) and [Eze
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#005), but also in [Eze
48:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#009),[Eze
48:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#013), [Eze
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#018). The lxx have εἴκοσι χιλιάδας,
twenty thousand breadth. This reading appears more correct than the
Masoretic, as it is demanded by [Eze
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#003) and [Eze
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#005). For according to [Eze
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#003), of the portion measured in [Eze
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001) twenty-five thousand rods in
length and ten thousand in breadth were to be measured for the sanctuary
and for the priests' land; and according to [Eze
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#005), the Levites were also to receive
twenty-five thousand rods in length and ten thousand in breadth for a
possession. The first clause of [Eze
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#003) is unintelligible if the breadth
of the holy terumah is given in [Eze
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001) as only ten thousand rods,
inasmuch as one cannot measure off from an area of twenty-five thousand
rods in length and ten thousand rods in breadth another space of the
same length and breadth. Moreover, [Eze
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001) requires the reading עשׂרים אלף,
as the "holy terumah" is not only the portion set apart for the
sanctuary and the priests' land, but also that which was set apart for
the Levites.

According to [Eze 48:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#014), this was also
"holy to Jehovah;" whereas the portion measured off for the city was
"common" ([Eze 48:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#015)). This is borne
out by the fact that in the chapter before us the domain appointed for
the city is distinguished from the land of the priests and Levites by
the verb תּתּנוּ ([Eze 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#006)), whilst
the description of the size of the Levites' land in [Eze
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#005) is closely connected with that of
the land of the priests; and further, that in [Eze
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#007), in the description of the land
of the prince, reference is made only to the holy terumah and the
possession of the city, from which it also follows that the land of the
Levites is included in the holy terumah. Consequently [Eze
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001) treats of the whole of the
תּרוּמת קדשׁ, i.e., the land of the priests and Levites, which was
twenty-five thousand rods long and twenty thousand rods broad. This is
designated in the last clause of the verse as a holy (portion) in its
entire circumference, and then divided into two domains in [Eze
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#002) and [Eze
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#003). - [Eze
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#002). Of this (מזּה, of the area
measured in [Eze 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001)) there shall
come, or belong, to the holy, i.e., to the holy temple domain, five
hundred rods square, namely, the domain measured in [Eze
42:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#015) round about the temple, for a
separation between holy and common; and round this domain there is to be
a מגרשׁ, i.e., an open space of fifty cubits on every side, that the
dwellings to the priests may not be built too near to the holy square of
the temple building. - [Eze 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#003).
המּדּה, this measure (i.e., this measured piece of land), also points
back to [Eze 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001), and מן cannot be
taken in any other sense than in מזּה ([Eze
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#002)). From the whole tract of land
measured in [Eze 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001) a portion is to
be measured off twenty-five thousand rods in length and ten thousand
rods in breadth, in which the sanctuary, i.e., the temple with its
courts, is to stand as a holy of holies. This domain, in the midst of
which is the temple, is to belong to the priests, as the sanctified
portion of the land, as the place or space for their houses, and is to
be a sanctuary for the sanctuary, i.e., for the temple. [Eze
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#005). A portion equally large is to be
measured off to the Levites, as the temple servants, for their
possession. The Keri יהיה is formed after the והיה of [Eze
45:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#004), and the Chetib יהיה is
indisputably correct. There is great difficulty in the last words of
this verse, עשׂרים לשׁכת, "for a possession to them twenty cells;" for
which the lxx give αὐτοῖς εἰς κατάσχεσιν πόλεις τοῦ κατοικεῖν, and which
they have therefore read, or for which they have substituted by
conjecture, ערים לשׁבת. We cannot, in fact, obtain from the עשׂרים לשׁכת
of the Masoretic text any meaning that will harmonize with the context,
even if we render the words, as Rosenmller does, in opposition to the
grammar, cum viginti cubiculis, and understand by לשׁכת capacious
cell-buildings. For we neither expect to find in this connection a
description of the number and character of the buildings in which the
Levites lived, nor can any reason be imagined why the Levites, with a
domain of twenty-five thousand rods in length and ten thousand rods in
breadth assigned to them, should live together in twenty cell-buildings.
Still less can we think of the "twenty cells" as having any connection
with the thirty cells in the outer court near to the gate-buildings
([Eze 40:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#017)), as these temple
cells, even though they were appointed for the Levites during their
service in the temple, were not connected in any way with the holy
terumah spoken of here. Hvernick's remark, that "the prophet has in his
eye the priests' cells in the sanctuary, - and the dwellings of the
Levites during their service, which were only on the outside of the
sanctuary, were to correspond to these," is not indicated in the
slightest degree by the words, but is a mere conjecture. There is no
other course open, therefore, than to acknowledge a corruption of the
text, and either to alter לשׁכת \`srym עשׂרים into לערים לשׁבת, as
Hitzig proposes (cf. [Num 35:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#002); [Jos
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#002)), or to take עשׂרים as a mistake
for שׁערים: "for a possession to them as gates to dwell in," according
to the frequent use of שׁערים, gates, for ערים, cities, e.g., in what
was almost a standing phrase, "the Levites who is in thy gates" (=
cities; [Deu 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018); [Deu
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#027); [Deu
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011); cf. [Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010); [Deu
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#014), etc.). In that case the faulty
reading would have arisen from the transposition of עש into שע, and the
change of ב into כ.

Beside the holy terumah for sanctuary, priests, and Levites, they are
also ([Eze 45:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#006)) to give a tract of
twenty-five thousand rods in length and five thousand rods in breadth as
the property of the city (i.e., of the capital). לעמּת: parallel to the
holy heave, i.e., running by the longer side of it. This portion of
land, which was set apart for the city, was to belong to all Israel, and
not to any single tribe. The more precise directions concerning this,
and concerning the situation of the whole terumah in the land, are not
given till [Eze 48:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#008). Here, in the
present chapter, this heave is simply mentioned in connection with the
privileges which the servants of the Lord and of His sanctuary were to
enjoy. These included, in a certain sense, also the property assigned to
the prince in [Eze 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#007) as the head of
the nation, on whom the provision of the sacrifices for the nation
devolved, and who, apart from this, also needed for his subsistence a
portion of the land, which should be peculiarly his own, in accordance
with his rank. They were to give him as his property (the verb תּתּנוּ
is to be supplied to לנּשׂיא from [Eze
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#006)) the land on this side and that
side of the holy terumah and of the city-possession, and that in front
(אל־פּני) of these two tracts of land, that is to say, adjoining them,
extending to their boundaries, 'מפּאת ים , "from" (i.e., according to
our view, "upon") the west side westward, and from (upon) the east side
eastward; in other words, the land which remained on the eastern and
western boundary of the holy terumah and of the city domain, both toward
the west as far as the Mediterranean Sea, and toward the east as far as
the Jordan, the two boundaries of the future Canaan. The further
definition 'וארך לעמּות וגו is not quite clear; but the meaning of the
words is, that "the length of the portions of land to be given to the
prince on the east and west side of the terumah shall be equal to the
length of one of the tribe-portions," and not that the portions of land
belonging to the prince are to be just as long from north to south as
the length of one of the twelve tribe-possessions. "Length" throughout
this section is the extent from east to west. It is so in the case of
all the tribe-territories (cf. [Eze
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#008)), and must be taken in this sense
in connection with the portion of land belonging to the prince also. The
meaning is therefore this: in length (from east to west) these portions
shall be parallel to the inheritance of one of the twelve tribes from
the western boundary to the eastern. Two things are stated here: first,
that the prince's portion is to extend on the eastern and western sides
of the terumah as far as the boundary of the land allotted to the
tribes, i.e., on the east to the Jordan, and on the west to the
Mediterranean (cf. [Eze 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#008)); and
secondly, that on the east and west it is to run parallel (לעמּות) to
the length of the separate tribe-territories, i.e., not to reach farther
toward either north or south than the terumah lying between, but to be
bounded by the long sides of the tribe-territories which bound the
terumah on the north and south. ארך is the accusative of direction; אחד,
some one (cf. [Jdg 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#007); [Psa
82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)). - In [Eze
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#008), לארץ with the article is to be
retained, contrary to Hitzig's conjecture לארץ: "to the land belonging
to him as a possession shall it (the portion marked off in [Eze
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#007)) be to him." ארץ, as in [Kg1
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#018), of property in land. In [Eze
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#008), the motive for these
instructions is given. The former kings of Israel had no land of their
own, no domain; and this had driven them to acquire private property by
violence and extortion. That this may not occur any more in the future,
and all inducement to such oppression of the people may be taken from
the princes, in the new kingdom of God the portion of land more
precisely defined in [Eze 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#007) is to
be given to the prince as his own property. The plural, "my princes,"
does not refer to several contemporaneous princes, nor can it be
understood of the king and his sons, i.e., of the royal family, on
account of [Eze 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016); but it is to be
traced to the simple fact "that Ezekiel was also thinking of the past
kings, and that the whole series of princes, who had ruled over Israel,
and still would rule, was passing before his mind" (Kliefoth), without
our being able to conclude from this that there would be a plurality of
princes succeeding one another in time to come, in contradiction to [Eze
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#025). - "And the land shall they (the
princes) leave to the people of Israel" (נתן in the sense of concedere;
and הארץ, the land, with the exception of the portion set apart from it
in [Eze 45:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#001)). - The warning against
oppression and extortion, implied in the reason thus assigned, is
expanded into a general exhortation in the following verses.

[Eze 45:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#009)

General Exhortation to Observe Justice and Righteousness in their
Dealings. - [Eze 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#009). Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah, Let it suffice you, ye princes of Israel: desist from
violence and oppression, and observe justice and righteousness, and
cease to thrust my people out of their possession, is the saying of the
Lord Jehovah. [Eze 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#010). Just scales,
and a just ephah, and a just bath, shall ye have. [Eze
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#011). The ephah and the bath shall be
of one measure, so that the bath holds the tenth part of the homer, and
the ephah the tenth part of the homer: after the homer shall its
standard be. [Eze 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012). And the
shekel shall have twenty gerahs; twenty shekels, five and twenty
shekels, fifteen shekels, shall the mina be with you. - The exhortation
in [Eze 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#009) is similar to that in
[Eze 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#006), both in form and substance.
As the Levites and priests are to renounce the idolatry to which they
have been previously addicted, and to serve before the Lord in purity
and holiness of life, so are the princes to abstain from the acts of
oppression which they have formerly practised, and to do justice and
righteousness; for example, to liberate the people of the Lord from the
גּרשׁות. גּרוּשׁה is unjust expulsion from one's possession, of which
Ahab's conduct toward Naboth furnished a glaring example (1 Kings 21).
These acts of violence pressed heavily upon the people, and this burden
is to be removed (הרים מעל). In [Eze
45:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#010) the command to practise
justice and righteousness is expanded; and it is laid as a duty upon the
whole nation to have just weights and measures. This forms the
transition to the regulation, which follows from [Eze
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#013) onwards, of the taxes to be paid
by the people to the prince to defray the expenses attendant upon the
sacrificial worship. - For [Eze 45:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#010),
see [Lev 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036) and [Deu
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013). Instead of the hin ([Lev
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036)), the bath, which contained six
hins, is mentioned here as the measure for liquids. The בּת is met with
for the first time in [Isa 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#010), and
appears to have been introduced as a measure for liquids after the time
of Moses, having the same capacity as the ephah for dry goods (see my
Bibl. Archol. II pp. 139ff.). This similarity is expressly stated in
[Eze 45:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#011). Both of them, the ephah as
well as the bath, are to contain the tenth of a homer (לשׂאת, to carry,
for להכיל, to contain, to hold; compare [Gen
36:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#007) with [Amo
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#010)), and to be regulated by the
homer. [Eze 45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012) treats of the
weights used for money. The first clause repeats the old legal provision
([Exo 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013); [Lev
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#025); [Num
3:47](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#047)), that the shekel, as the
standard weight for money, which was afterwards stamped as a coin, is to
contain twenty gerahs. The regulations which follow are very obscure:
"twenty shekels, twenty-five shekels, fifteen shekels, shall the mina be
to you." The mina, המּנה, occurs only here and in [Kg1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#017); [Ezr
2:69](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#069); and [Neh
7:71-72](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#071), - that is to say, only in
books written during the captivity of subsequent to it. If we compare
[Kg1 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#017), according to which three
minas of gold were used for a shield, with [Ch2
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#016), where three hundred (shekels) of
gold are said to have been used for a similar shield, it is evident that
a mina was equal to a hundred shekels. Now as the talent (כּכּר)
contained three thousand (sacred or Mosaic) shekels (see the comm. on
[Exo 38:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#025)), the talent would only
have contained thirty minas, which does not seem to answer to the
Grecian system of weights. For the Attic talent contained sixty minas,
and the mina a hundred drachms; so that the talent contained six
thousand drachms, or three thousand didrachms. But as the Hebrew shekel
was equal to a δίδραχμον, the Attic talent with three thousand didrachms
corresponded to the Hebrew talent with three thousand shekels; and the
mina, as the sixtieth part of the talent, with a hundred drachms or
fifty didrachms, ought to correspond to the Hebrew mina with fifty
shekels, as the Greek name μνᾶ is unquestionably derived from the
Semitic מנה. The relation between the mina and the shekel, resulting
from a comparison of [Kg1 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#017) with
[Ch2 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#016), can hardly be made to
square with this, by the assumption that the shekels referred to in [Ch2
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#016) are not Mosaic shekels, but
so-called civil shekels, the Mosaic half-shekel, the beka, בּקע, having
acquired the name of shekel in the course of time, as the most
widely-spread silver coin of the larger size. A hundred such shekels or
bekas made only fifty Mosaic shekels, which amounted to one mina; while
sixty minas also formed one talent (see my Bibl. Archol. II pp. 135,
136).

But the words of the second half of the verse before us cannot be
brought into harmony with this proportion, take them how we will. If,
for example, we add the three numbers together, 20 + 25 + 15 shekels
shall the mina be to you, Ezekiel would fix the mina at sixty shekels.
But no reason whatever can be found for such an alteration of the
proportion between the mina and the talent on the one hand, or the
shekel on the other, if the shekel and talent were to remain unchanged.
And even apart from this, the division of the sixty into twenty,
twenty-five, and fifteen still remains inexplicable, and can hardly be
satisfactorily accounted for in the manner proposed by the Rabbins,
namely, that there were pieces of money in circulation of the respective
weights of twenty, twenty-five, and fifteen shekels, for the simple
reason that no historical trace of the existence of any such pieces can
be found, apart from the passage before us.

(Note: It is true that Const. l'Empereur has observed, in the Discursus
ad Lectorem prefixed to the Paraphrasis Joseph. Jachiadae in Danielem,
that "as God desired that justice should be preserved in all things, He
noticed the various coins, and commanded that they should have their
just weight. One coin, according to Jewish testimony, was of twenty
shekels, a second of twenty-five, and a third of fifteen shekels; and as
these together made one mina, according to the command of God, in order
that it might be manifest that each had its proper quantity, He directed
that they should be weighed against the mina, so that it might be known
whether each had its own weight by means of the mina, to which they
ought to be equal." But the Jewish witnesses (Judaei testes) are no
other than the Rabbins of the Middle Ages, Sal. Jarchi (Raschi), Dav.
Kimchi, and Abrabanel, who attest the existence of these pieces of
money, not on the ground of historical tradition, but from an inference
drawn from this verse. The much earlier Targumist knows nothing whatever
of them, but paraphrases the words thus: "the third part of a mina has
twenty shekels; a silver mina, five and twenty shekels; the fourth part
of a mina, fifteen shekels; all sixty are a mina; and a great mina
(i.e., probably one larger than the ordinary, or civil mina) shall be
holy to you;" from which all that can be clearly learned is, that he
found in the words of the prophet a mina of sixty shekels. A different
explanation is given by the lxx, whose rendering, according to the Cod.
Vatic. (Tischendorf), runs as follows: πέντε σίκλοι, πέντε καὶ σίκλοι,
δέκα καὶ πεντήκοντα σίκλοι ἡ μνᾶ ἔσται ὑμῖν; and according to the Cod.
Al.: οἱ πεντε σικλοι πεντε και ὁι δεκα σικλοι δεκα και πεντηκοντα κ.τ.λ.
Boeckh (Metrol. Untersuch. pp. 54ff.) and Bertheau (Zur Gesch. der Isr.
pp. 9ff.) regard the latter as the original text, and punctuate it thus:
οἱ πέντε σίκλοι πέντε, καὶ οἱ δέκα σίκλοι δέκα, καὶ πεντήκοντα σίκλοι ἡ
μνᾶ ἔσται ὑμῖν, - interpreting the whole verse as follows: "the weight
once fixed shall remain unaltered, and unadulterated in its original
value: namely, a shekel shall contain ten gerahs; five shekels, or a
five-shekel piece, shall contain exactly five; and so also a ten-shekel
piece, exactly ten shekels; and the mina shall contain fifty shekels."
But however this explanation may appear to commend itself, and although
for this reason it has been adopted by Hvernick and by the author of
this commentary in his Bibl. Archol., after a repeated examination of
the matter I cannot any longer regard it as well-founded, but am obliged
to subscribe to the view held by Hitzig and Kliefoth, "that this
rendering of the lxx carries on the face of it the probability of its
resting upon nothing more than an attempt to bring the text into harmony
with the ordinary value of the mina." For apart from the fact that
nothing is known of the existence of five and ten shekel pieces, it is
impossible to get any intelligible meaning from the words, that five
shekels are to be worth five shekels, and ten shekels worth ten shekels,
as it was self-evident that five shekels could not be worth either four
shekels or six.)

And the other attempts that have been made to explain the difficult
words are no satisfactory. The explanation given by Cocceius and J. D.
Michaelis (Supplem. ad lex. p. 1521), that three different minas are
mentioned, - a smaller one of fifteen Mosaic shekels, a medium size of
twenty shekels, and a large one of twenty-five-is open to the objection
justly pointed out by Bertheau, that in an exact definition of the true
weight of anything we do not expect three magnitudes, and the purely
arbitrary assumption of three different minas is an obvious subterfuge.
The same thing applies to Hitzig's explanation, that the triple
division, twenty, twenty-five, and fifteen shekels, has reference to the
three kinds of metal used for coinage, viz., gold, silver, and copper,
so that the gold mina was worth, or weighed, twenty shekels; the silver
mina, twenty-five; and the copper mina, fifteen, - which has no tenable
support in the statement of Josephus, that the shekel coined by Simon
was worth four drachms; and is overthrown by the incongruity in the
relation in which it places the gold to the silver, and both these
metals to the copper. - There is evidently a corruption of very old
standing in the words of the text, and we are not in possession of the
requisite materials for removing it by emendation.

[Eze 45:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#013)

The Heave-offerings of the People. - [Eze
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#013). This is the heave-offering
which ye shall heave: The sixth part of the ephah from the homer of
wheat, and ye shall give the sixth part of the ephah from the homer of
barley; [Eze 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#014). And the proper
measure of oil, from the bath of oil a tenth of the bath from the cor,
which contains ten baths or a homer; for ten baths are a homer; [Eze
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#015). And one head from the flock
from two hundred from the watered land of Israel, for the meat-offering,
and for the burnt-offering, and for the peace-offerings, to make
atonement for them, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah. [Eze
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#016). All the people of the land
shall be held to this heave-offering for the prince in Israel. [Eze
45:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#017). And upon the prince shall
devolve the burnt-offerings, and the meat-offering, and the
drink-offering at the feasts, the new moons, and the Sabbaths, at all
the festivals of the house of Israel; he shall provide the sin-offering,
and the meat-offering, and the burnt-offering, and the peace-offerings,
to make atonement for the house of Israel. - The introductory precepts
to employ just measures and weights are now followed by the regulations
concerning the productions of nature to be paid by the Israelites to the
prince for the sacrificial worship, the provision for which was to
devolve on him. Fixed contributions are to be levied for this purpose,
of wheat, barley, oil, and animals of the flock - namely, according to
[Eze 45:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#013), of corn the sixtieth
part, of oil the hundredth part, and of the flock the two hundredth
head. There is no express mention made of wine for the drink-offering,
or of cattle, which were also requisite for the burnt-offering and
peace-offering, in addition to animals from the flock. The enumeration
therefore is not complete, but simply contains the rule according to
which they were to act in levying what was required for the sacrifices.
The word שׁשּׁיתם in [Eze 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#013) must
not be altered, as Hitzig proposes; for although this is the only
passage in which שׁשּׁה occurs, it is analogous to חמּשׁ in [Gen
41:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#034), both in its formation and its
meaning, "to raise the sixth part." A sixth of an ephah is the sixtieth
part of a homer. חק, that which is fixed or established, i.e., the
proper quantity. הבּת השּׁמן is in apposition to השּׁמן (for the
article, see the comm. on [Eze 43:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#021)),
the fixed quantity of oil, namely of the bath of oil-i.e., the measure
of that which is to be contributed from the oil, and that from the bath
of oil-shall be the tenth part of the bath from the cor, i.e., the
hundredth part of the year's crop, as the cor contained ten baths. The
cor is not mentioned in the preceding words ([Eze
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#011)), nor does it occur in the
Mosaic law. It is another name for the homer, which is met with for the
first time in the writings of the captivity ([Kg1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002), 25; [Ch2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#009); [Ch2
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#005)). For this reason its capacity is
explained by the words which are appended to מכּור: 'עשׂרת הבּתּים וגו,
from the cor (namely) of ten baths, one homer; and the latter definition
is still further explained by the clause, "for ten baths are one homer."
- [Eze 45:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#015). ממּשׁקה, from the
watered soil (cf. [Gen 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010)), that is
to say, not a lean beast, but a fat one, which has been fed upon good
pasture. לכפּר עליהם indicates the general purpose of the sacrifices
(vid., [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)). - [Eze
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#016). The article in העם, as in הבּת
ni sa ,העם ni in [Eze 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#014). היה אל,
to be, i.e., to belong, to anything - in other words, to be held to it,
under obligation to do it; היה על ([Eze
45:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#017)), on the other hand, to be upon
a person, i.e., to devolve upon him. In בּכל־מועדי the feast and days of
festival, which have been previously mentioned separately, are all
grouped together. 'עשׂה את החטּאת וגו' .rehtegot, to furnish the
sin-offering, etc., i.e., to supply the materials for them.

So far as the fact is concerned, the Mosaic law makes no mention of any
contributions to the sanctuary, with the exception of the first-born,
the first-fruits and the tithes, which could be redeemed with money,
however. Besides these, it was only on extraordinary occasions - e.g.,
the building of the tabernacle - that the people were called upon for
freewill heave-offerings. But the Mosaic law contains no regulation as
to the sources from which the priests were to meet the demands for the
festal sacrifices. So far, the instructions in the verses before us are
new. What had formerly been given for this object as a gift of
spontaneous love, is to become in the future a regular and established
duty, to guard against that arbitrary and fitful feeling from which the
worship of God might suffer injury. - To these instructions there are
appended, from [Eze 45:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#018) onwards, the
regulations concerning the sacrifices to be offered at the different
festivals.

[Ezekiel 45:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 45:18</span></span>

The Sin-Offerings in the First Month

[Eze 45:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#018). Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, In the first (month), on the first of the month, thou shalt
take a bullock, a young ox without blemish, and absolve the sanctuary.
[Eze 45:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#019). And the priest shall take
of the blood of the sin-offering, and put it upon the door-posts of the
house, and upon the four corners of the enclosure of the altar, and upon
the door-posts at the gate of the inner court. [Eze
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#020). And so shalt thou do on the
seventh of the month, for the sake of erring men and of folly, that so
ye may make atonement for the house. - The Mosaic law had prescribed for
the new moons generally the sin-offering of a he-goat, in addition to
the burnt-offerings and meat-offerings ([Num
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#015)); and, besides, this, had also
distinguished the new-moon's day of the seventh month by a special
feast-offering to be added to the regular new-moon's sacrifices, and
consisting of a sin-offering of a he-goat, and burnt-offerings and
meat-offerings ([Num 29:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#002)). This
distinguishing of the seventh month by a special new-moon's sacrifice is
omitted in Ezekiel; but in the place of it the first month is
distinguished by a sin-offering to be presented on the first and seventh
days. Nothing is said in [Eze 45:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#018)
about burnt-offerings for these days; but as the burnt-offering is
appointed in [Eze 46:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#006) for the
new-moon's day without any limitation, and the regulations as to the
connection between the meat-offering and the burnt-offerings are
repeated in [Eze 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#011) for the holy
days and feast days (הגּים וּמועדים) generally, and the new-moon's day
is also reckoned among the מועדים, there is evidently good ground for
the assumption that the burnt-offering and meat-offering prescribed for
the new moon in [Eze 46:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#006) were also
to be offered at the new moon of the first month. On the other hand, no
special burnt-offering or meat-offering is mentioned for the seventh day
of the first month; so that in all probability only the daily
burnt-offering and meat-offering were added upon that day ([Eze
46:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#013).) to the sin-offering appointed
for it. Moreover, the sin-offerings prescribed for the first and seventh
days of the first month are distinguished from the sin-offerings of the
Mosaic law, partly by the animal selected (a young bullock), and partly
by the disposal of the blood. According to the Mosaic law, the
sin-offering for the new moons, as well as for all the feast days of the
year, the Passover, Pentecost, day of trumpets, day of atonement, and
feast of tabernacles (all eight days), was to be a he-goat ([Num
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#015); [Num
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#030); [Num
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#005), [Num
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#011), [Num
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#016), [Num
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#019), [Num
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#022), [Num
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#025), [Num
29:28](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#028), [Num
29:31](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#031), [Num
29:34](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#034), [Num
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#038)). Even the sin-offering for the
congregation of Israel on the great day of atonement simply consisted in
a he-goat (or two he-goats, [Lev
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005)); and it was only for the
sin-offering for the high priest, whether on that day ([Lev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003)), or when he had sinned so as to
bring guilt upon the nation ([Lev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003)), or when the whole congregation
had sinned ([Lev 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#014)), that a bullock
was required. On the other hand, according to Ezekiel, the sin-offering
both on the first and seventh days of the first month, and also the one
to be brought by the prince on the fourteenth day of that month, i.e.,
on the day of the feast of Passover ([Eze
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#022)), for himself and for all the
people, were to consist of a bullock and only the sin-offering on the
seven days of the feast of Passover and tabernacles of a he-goat ([Eze
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#023), [Eze
45:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#025)). The Mosaic law contains no
express instructions concerning the sprinkling of the blood of the
sin-offering at the new moons and feasts (with the exception of the
great atoning sacrifice on the day of atonement), because it was
probably the same as in the case of the sin-offerings for the high
priest and the whole congregation, when the blood was first of all to be
sprinkled seven times against the curtain in front of the capporeth, and
then to be applied to the horns of the altar of incense, and the
remainder to be poured out at the foot of the altar of burnt-offering
([Lev 4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#006), [Lev
4:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#017)); whereas, in the case of the
great atoning sacrifice on the day of atonement, some of the blood was
first of all to be sprinkled at or upon the front side of the capporeth
and seven times upon the ground, and after that it was to be applied to
the horns of the altar of incense and of the altar of burnt-offering
([Lev 16:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)). But according to
Ezekiel, some of the blood of the sin-offerings on the first and seventh
days of the first month, and certainly also on the same days of the
feasts of Passover and tabernacles, was to be smeared upon the posts of
the house - that is to say, the posts mentioned in [Eze
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#021), not merely those of the היכל,
the door into the holy place, but also those of the קדשׁ, the door
leading into the most holy place, upon the horns and the four corners of
the enclosure of the altar of burnt-offering ([Eze
43:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#020)), and upon the posts of the gate
of the inner court. It is a point in dispute here whether שׁער החצר is
only one door, and in that case whether the east gate of the inner court
is to be understood as in [Eze 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#002)
(מזוּזת השּׁער), as Hitzig and others suppose, or whether שׁער rehtehw
is to be taken in a collective sense as signifying the three gates of
the inner court (Kliefoth and others). The latter view is favoured by
the collective use of the word מזוּזה by itself, and also by the
circumstance that if only one of the three gates were intended, the
statement which of the three would hardly have been omitted (cf. [Eze
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001); [Eze
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001), etc.).

According to [Eze 45:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#018), these
sin-offerings were to serve for the absolving of the sanctuary; and
according to [Eze 45:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#020), to make
atonement for the temple on account of error or folly. Both directions
mean the same thing. The reconciliation of the temple was effected by
its absolution or purification from the sins that had come upon it
through the error and folly of the people. Sins בּשׁגגה are sins
occasioned by the weakness of flesh and blood, for which expiation could
be made by sin-offerings (see the comm. on [Lev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#002) and [Num
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#022).). מאישׁ שׁגה, lit., away from
the erring man, i.e., to release him from his sin. This expression is
strengthened by מפּתי, away from simplicity or folly; here, as in [Pro
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#007), as abstractum pro concreto, the
simple man. - The great expiatory sacrifice on the day of atonement
answered the same purpose, the absolution of the sanctuary from the sins
of the people committed בּשׁגגה ([Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016).).

[Ezekiel 45:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 45:21</span></span>

Sacrifices at the Passover and Feast of Tabernacles

[Eze 45:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#021). In the first (month), on
the fourteenth day of the month, ye shall keep the Passover, a feast of
a full week; unleavened shall be eaten. [Eze
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#022). And the prince shall prepare on
that day for himself and for all the people of the land a bullock as a
sin-offering. [Eze 45:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#023). And for the
seven days of the feast he shall prepare as a burnt-offering for Jehovah
seven bullocks and seven rams without blemish daily, the seven days, and
as a sin-offering a he-goat daily. [Eze
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#024). And as a meat-offering, he
shall prepare an ephah for the bullock, and an ephah for the ram, and a
hin of oil for the ephah. [Eze 45:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#025).
In the seventh (month), on the fifteenth day of the month, at the feast
he shall do the same for seven days with regard to the sin-offering, as
also the burnt-offering, and the meat-offering, as also the oil. - In
the words, "shall the Passover be to you," there lies the thought that
the Passover is to be celebrated in the manner appointed in Ex 12, with
the paschal meal in the evening of the 14th Abib. - There is
considerable difficulty connected with the following words, חג שׁבעות
ימים, which all the older translators have rendered "a feast of seven
days." שׁבעות ".syad neves fo signifies periods of seven days or weeks.
A feast of heptads of days, or weeks of days, cannot possibly mean a
feast which lasted only seven days, or a week. חג שׁבעות is used
elsewhere for the feast of weeks ([Exo
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#022); [Deu
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#010)), because they were to reckon
seven weeks from the second day of the Passover, the day of the sheaf of
first-fruits, and then to keep the feast of the loaves of first-fruits,
or the feast of harvest ([Deu 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#009)).
Kliefoth retains this well-established meaning of the words in this
passage also, and give the following explanation: If the words חג stood
alone without ימים, it would mean that in future the Passover was to be
kept like the feast of seven weeks, as the feast of the loaves of
first-fruits. But the addition of ימים, which is to be taken in the same
sense as in [Dan 10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002); [Gen
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#014), etc., gives this turn to the
thought, that in future the Passover is to be kept as a feast of seven
weeks long, "a feast lasting seven weeks." According to this
explanation, the meaning of the regulation is, "that in future not only
the seven days of sweet loaves, but the whole of the seven weeks
intervening between the feast of the wave-sheaf and the feast of the
wave-loaves, was to be kept as a Passover, that the whole of the
quinquagesima should be one Easter חג, and the feast of weeks be one
with the Passover." To this there is appended the further regulation,
that unleavened bread is to be eaten, not merely for the seven days
therefore, but for the whole of the seven weeks, till the feast of the
loaves of first-fruits. This explanation is a very sagacious one, and
answers to the Christian view of the Easter-tide. But it is open to
objections which render it untenable. In the first place, that ימים,
when used in the sense of lasting for days, is not usually connected
with the preceding noun in the construct state, but is attached as an
adverbial accusative; compare שׁלשׁה in [Dan
10:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002), and שׁנתים ימים in [Gen
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#001); [Jer
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#003), [Jer
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#011), etc. But a still more important
objection is the circumstance that the words שׁבעת ימי החג in [Eze
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#023) unquestionably point back to חג
שׁבעות ימים, as there is no other way in which the article in החג ni
elcitra eht h can be explained, just as בּיּום ההוּא in [Eze
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#022) points back to the fourteenth
day mentioned in [Eze 45:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#021) as the
time of the pesach feast. It follows from this, however, that שׁבעות
ימים can only signify a seven days' feast. It is true that the plural
שׁבעות appears irreconcilable with this; for Kimchi's opinion, that
שׁבעות is a singular, written with Cholem instead of Patach, is purely a
result of perplexity, and the explanation given by Gussetius, that
Ezekiel speaks in the plural of weeks, because the reference is "to the
institution of the Passover as an annual festival to be celebrated many
times in the series of times and ages," is no better. The plural שׁבעות
must rather be taken as a plural of genus, as in ערי, [Gen
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#012) and [Jdg
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#007); בּהן, [Gen
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#029); or בּנים, [Gen
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#007); [Isa
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#003); so that Ezekiel speaks
indefinitely of heptads of days, because he assumes that the fact is
well known that the feast only lasted one heptad of days, as he
expressly states in [Eze 45:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#023). If
this explanation of the plural does not commend itself, we must take
שׁבעות as a copyist's error for שׁבעת, feast of a heptad of days, i.e.,
a feast lasting a full week, and attribute the origin of this copyist's
error to the fact that חג שׁבעת naturally suggested the thought of חג
שׁבעות, feast of weeks, or Pentecost, not merely because the feast of
Pentecost is always mentioned in the Pentateuch along with the feasts of
Passover and tabernacles, but also because the only singular form of
שׁבעות that we meet with elsewhere is שׁבוּע ([Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027)), or in the construct state שׁבע
([Gen 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#027)), not שׁבעה and שׁבעת.

The word הפּסח is used here as in [Deu
16:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001), so that it includes the seven
days' feast of unleavened bread. The Niphal יאכל is construed with the
accusative in the olden style: mazzoth shall men eat. - In [Eze
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#022) and [Eze
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#023) there follow the regulations
concerning the sacrifices of this festival, and first of all concerning
the sin-offering to be presented on the fourteenth day, on the evening
of which the paschal lamb was slaughtered and the paschal meal was held
([Eze 45:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#022)). The Mosaic legislation
makes no allusion to this, but simply speaks of festal sacrifices for
the seven days of mazzoth, the 15th to the 21st Abib ([Lev
23:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); [Num
28:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#016)), with regard to which fresh
regulations are also given here. The Mosaic law prescribes for each of
these seven days as burnt-offerings two bullocks, a ram, and seven
yearling lambs, as a meat-offering; three-tenths of an ephah of meal
mixed with oil for each bullock, two-tenths for the ram, and one-tenth
for each lamb, and a he-goat for the sin-offering ([Num
28:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#019)). The new law for the feasts,
on the other hand, also requires, it is true, only one he-goat daily for
a sin-offering on the seven feast days, but for the daily
burnt-offerings seven bullocks and seven rams reach; and for the
meat-offering, an ephah of meal and a hin of oil for every bullock, and
for every ram. In the new thorah, therefore, the burnt-offerings and
meat-offerings are much richer and more copious, and the latter in far
greater measure than the former. - [Eze
45:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#025). The same number of sacrifices
is to be offered throughout the feast of seven days falling upon the
fifteenth day of the seventh month. This feast is the feast of
tabernacles, but the name is not mentioned, doubtless because the
practice of living in tabernacles (booths) would be dropped in the time
to come. And even with regard to the sacrifices of this feast, the new
thorah differs greatly from the old. According to the Mosaic law, there
were to be offered, in addition to the daily sin-offering of a he-goat,
seventy bullocks in all as burnt-offerings for the seven days; and these
were to be so distributed that on the first day thirteen were to be
offered, and the number was to be reduced by one on each of the
following days, so that there would be only seven bullocks upon the
seventh day; moreover, every day two rams and fourteen yearling lambs
were to be offered, together with the requisite quantity of meal and oil
for a meat-offering according to the number of the animals (Num
29:12-34). According to Ezekiel, on the other hand, the quantity of
provision made for the sacrifices remained the same as that appointed
for the feast of Passover; so that the whole cost of the burnt-offerings
and meat-offerings did not reach the amount required by the Mosaic law.
In addition to all this, there was an eighth day observed as a closing
festival in the Mosaic feast of tabernacles, with special sacrifices;
and this also is wanting in Ezekiel. - But the following is still more
important than the points of difference just mentioned: Ezekiel only
mentions the two yearly feats of seven days in the first and seventh
months, and omits not only the Pentecost, or feast of weeks, but also
the day of trumpets, on the first of the seventh month, and the day of
atonement on the tenth; from which we must infer that the Israeli of the
future would keep only the two first named of all the yearly feasts. The
correctness of this conclusion is placed beyond the reach of doubt by
the fact that he practically transfers the feasts of the day of trumpets
and of the day of atonement, which were preparatory to the feast of
tabernacles, to the first month, by the appointment of special
sin-offerings for the first and seventh days of that month ([Eze
45:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#018)), and of a sin-offering on
the day of the paschal meal ([Eze
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#022)). This essentially transforms
the idea which lies at the foundation of the cycle of Mosaic feasts, as
we intend subsequently to show, when discussing the meaning and
significance of the whole picture of the new kingdom of God, as shown in
Ezekiel 40-48.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 46](eze046)

</div>
