<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze010)  [Next](eze012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 11:0</span></span>

Threatening of Judgment and Promise of Mercy. Conclusion of the Vision -
[Eze 11:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)

This chapter contains the concluding portion of the vision; namely,
first, the prediction of the destruction of the ungodly rulers ([Eze
11:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)); secondly, the consolatory
and closing promise, that the Lord would gather to Himself a people out
of those who had been carried away into exile, and would sanctify them
by His Holy Spirit ([Eze 11:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014));
and, thirdly, the withdrawal of the gracious presence of God from the
city of Jerusalem, and the transportation of the prophet back to Chaldea
with the termination of his ecstasy ([Eze
11:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022)).

[Ezekiel 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 11:1</span></span>

Judgment upon the rulers of the nation. - [Eze
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001). And a wind lifted me up, and
took me to the eastern gate of the house of Jehovah, which faces towards
the east; and behold, at the entrance of the gate were five and twenty
men, and I saw among them Jaazaniah the son of Azzur, and Pelatiah the
son of Benaiah, the chiefs of the nation. [Eze
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#002). And he said to me: Son of man,
these are the men who devise iniquity, and counsel evil counsel in this
city; [Eze 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003). Who say, It is not
near to build houses; it is the pot, and we are the flesh. [Eze
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#004). Therefore prophesy against them;
prophesy, son of man. - Ezekiel is once more transported from the inner
court ([Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016)) to the outer
entrance of the eastern gate of the temple (תּשּׂא רוּח, as in [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003)), to which, according to [Eze
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019), the vision of God had removed.
There he sees twenty-five men, and among them two of the princes of the
nation, whose names are given. These twenty-five men are not identical
with the twenty-five priests mentioned in [Eze
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016), as Hvernick supposes. This is
evident, not only from the difference in the locality, the priests
standing between the porch and the altar, whereas the men referred to
here stood at the outer eastern entrance to the court of the temple, but
from the fact that the two who are mentioned by name are called שׂרי העם
(princes of the people), so that we may probably infer from this that
all the twenty-five were secular chiefs. Hvernick's opinion, that שׂרי
העם is a term that may also be applied to princes among the priests, is
as erroneous as his assertion that the priest-princes are called
"princes" in [Ezr 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#020); [Neh
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#001), and [Jer
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#004), whereas it is only to national
princes that these passages refer. Hvernick is equally incorrect in
supposing that these twenty-five men take the place of the seventy
mentioned in [Eze 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#011); for those
seventy represented the whole of the nation, whereas these twenty-five
(according to [Eze 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#002)) were simply
the counsellors of the city - not, however, the twenty-four duces of
twenty-four divisions of the city, with a prince of the house of Judah,
as Prado maintains, on the strength of certain Rabbinical assertions; or
twenty-four members of a Sanhedrim, with their president (Rosenmller);
but the twelve tribe-princes (princes of the nation) and the twelve
royal officers, or military commanders (1 Chron 27), with the king
himself, or possibly with the commander-in-chief of the army; so that
these twenty-five men represent the civil government of Israel, just as
the twenty-four priest-princes, together with the high priest, represent
the spiritual authorities of the covenant nation. The reason why two are
specially mentioned by name is involved in obscurity, as nothing further
is known of either of these persons. The words of God to the prophet in
[Eze 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#002) concerning them are
perfectly applicable to representatives of the civil authorities or
temporal rulers, namely, that they devise and give unwholesome and evil
counsel. This counsel is described in [Eze
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003) by the words placed in their
mouths: "house-building is not near; it (the city) is the caldron, we
are the flesh."

These words are difficult, and different interpretations have
consequently been given. The rendering, "it (the judgment) is not near,
let us build houses," is incorrect; for the infinitive construct בּנות
cannot stand for the imperative or the infinitive absolute, but must be
the subject of the sentence. It is inadmissible also to take the
sentence as a question, "Is not house-building near?" in the sense of
"it is certainly near," as Ewald does, after some of the ancient
versions. For even if an interrogation is sometimes indicated simply by
the tone in an energetic address, as, for example, in [Sa2
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#005), this cannot be extended to cases
in which the words of another are quoted. Still less can לא בקרוב mean
non est tempus, it is not yet time, as Maurer supposes. The only way in
which the words can be made to yield a sense in harmony with the
context, is by taking them as a tacit allusion to [Jer
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#005). Jeremiah had called upon those
in exile to build themselves houses in their banishment, and prepare for
a lengthened stay in Babylon, and not to allow themselves to be deceived
by the words of false prophets, who predicted a speedy return; for
severe judgments had yet to fall upon those who had remained behind in
the land. This word of Jeremiah the authorities in Jerusalem ridiculed,
saying "house-building is not near," i.e., the house-building in exile
is still a long way off; it will not come to this, that Jerusalem should
fall either permanently or entirely into the hands of the king of
Babylon. On the contrary, Jerusalem is the pot, and we, its inhabitants,
are the flesh. The point of comparison is this: as the pot protects the
flesh from burning, so does the city of Jerusalem protect us from
destruction.

(Note: "This city is a pot, our receptacle and defence, and we are the
flesh enclosed therein; as flesh is preserved in its caldron till it is
perfectly boiled, so shall we continue here till an extreme old age." -
Hlsemann in CaloV. Bibl. Illustr.)

On the other hand, there is no foundation for the assumption that the
words also contain an allusion to other sayings of Jeremiah, namely, to
[Jer 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013), where the judgment about to
burst in from the north is represented under the figure of a smoking
pot; or to [Jer 19:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001), where
Jerusalem is depicted as a pot about to be broken in pieces by God; for
the reference in [Jer 19:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#001) is
simply to an earthen pitcher, not to a meat-caldron; and the words in
the verse before us have nothing at all in common with the figure in
[Jer 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013). The correctness of our
explanation is evident both from [Eze
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#003), [Eze
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#006), where the figure of pot and
flesh is met with again, though differently applied, and from the reply
which Ezekiel makes to the saying of these men in the verses that follow
([Eze 11:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007)). This saying expresses
not only false confidence in the strength of Jerusalem, but also
contempt and scorn of the predictions of the prophets sent by God.
Ezekiel is therefore to prophesy, as he does in [Eze
11:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005), against this pernicious
counsel, which is confirming the people in their sins.

[Ezekiel 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 11:5</span></span>

And the Spirit of Jehovah fell upon me, and said to me: Say, Thus saith
Jehovah, So ye say, O house of Israel, and what riseth up in your
spirit, that I know. [Eze 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#006). Ye
have increased your slain in this city, and filled its streets with
slain. [Eze 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007). Therefore, thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, Your slain, whom ye have laid in the midst of
it, they are the flesh, and it is the pot; but men will lead you out of
it. [Eze 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#008). The sword you fear; but
the sword shall I bring upon you, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah.
[Eze 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#009). I shall lead you out of it
and give you into the hand of foreigners, and shall execute judgments
upon you. [Eze 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#010). By the sword
shall ye fall: on the frontier of Israel shall I judge you; and ye shall
learn that I am Jehovah. [Eze 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011).
It shall not be as a pot to you, so that you should be flesh therein: on
the frontier of Israel shall I judge. [Eze
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012). And ye shall learn that I am
Jehovah, in whose statutes ye have not walked, and my judgments ye have
not done, but have acted according to the judgments of the heathen who
are round about you. - For תּפּל עלי , compare [Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001). Instead of the "hand" ([Eze
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001)), the Spirit of Jehovah is
mentioned here; because what follows is simply a divine inspiration, and
there is no action connected with it. The words of God are directed
against the "house of Israel,' whose words and thoughts are discerned by
God, because the twenty-five men are the leaders and counsellors of the
nation. מעלות, thoughts, suggestions of the mind, may be explained from
the phrase עלה על לב, to come into the mind. Their actions furnish the
proof of the evil suggestions of their heart. They have filled the city
with slain; not "turned the streets of the city into a battle-field,"
however, by bringing about the capture of Jerusalem in the time of
Jeconiah, as Hitzig would explain it. The words are to be understood in
a much more general sense, as signifying murder, in both the coarser and
the more refined signification of the word.

(Note: Calvin has given the correct explanation, thus: "He does not mean
that men had been openly assassinated in the streets of Jerusalem; but
under this form of speech he embraces all kinds of injustice. For we
know that all who oppressed the poor, deprived men of their possessions,
or shed innocent blood, were regarded as murderers in the sight of
God.")

מלּאתים is a copyist's error for מלּאתם. Those who have been murdered by
you are the flesh in the caldron ([Eze
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007)). Ezekiel gives them back their
own words, as words which contain an undoubted truth, but in a different
sense from that in which they have used them. By their bloodshed they
have made the city into a pot in which the flesh of the slain is
pickled. Only in this sense is Jerusalem a pot for them; not a pot to
protect the flesh from burning while cooking, but a pot into which the
flesh of the slaughtered is thrown. Yet even in this sense will
Jerusalem not serve as a pot to these worthless counsellors ([Eze
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011)). They will lead you out of the
city (הוציא, in [Eze 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007), is the 3rd
pers. sing. with an indefinite subject). The sword which ye fear, and
from which this city is to protect you, will come upon you, and cut you
down - not in Jerusalem, but on the frontier of Israel. על־גּבוּל, in
[Eze 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#010), cannot be taken in the
sense of "away over the frontier," as Kliefoth proposes; if only because
of the synonym אל־גּבוּל in [Eze
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011). This threat was literally
fulfilled in the bloody scenes at Riblah ([Jer
52:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024)). It is not therefore a
vaticinium ex eventu, but contains the general thought, that the wicked
who boasted of security in Jerusalem or in the land of Israel as a
whole, but were to be led out of the land, and judged outside. This
threat intensifies the punishment, as Calvin has already shown.

(Note: "He threatens a double punishment; first, that God will cast them
out of Jerusalem, in which they delight, and where they say that they
will still make their abode for a long time to come, so that exile may
be the first punishment. He then adds, secondly, that He will not be
content with exile, but will send a severer punishment, after they have
been cast out, and both home and land have spued them out as a stench
which they could not bear. I will judge you at the frontier of Israel,
i.e., outside the holy land, so that when one curse shall have become
manifest in exile, a severer and more formidable punishment shall still
await you.")

In [Eze 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011) the negation (לא) of the
first clause is to be supplied in the second, as, for example, in [Deu
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006). For [Eze
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012), compare the remarks on [Eze
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007). The truth and the power of this
word are demonstrated at once by what is related in the following verse.

[Ezekiel 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 11:13</span></span>

And it came to pass, as I was prophesying, that Pelatiah the son of
Benaiah died: then I fell upon my face, and cried with a loud voice, and
said: Alas! Lord Jehovah, dost Thou make an end of the remnant of
Israel? - The sudden death of one of the princes of the nation, while
Ezekiel was prophesying, was intended to assure the house of Israel of
the certain fulfilment of this word of God. So far, however, as the fact
itself is concerned, we must bear in mind, that as it was only in spirit
that Ezekiel was at Jerusalem, and prophesied to the men whom he saw in
spirit there, so the death of Pelatiah was simply a part of the vision,
and in all probability was actually realized by the sudden death of this
prince during or immediately after the publication of the vision. But
the occurrence, even when the prophet saw it in spirit, made such an
impression upon his mind, that with trembling and despair he once more
made an importunate appeal to God, as in [Eze
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008), and inquired whether He meant to
destroy the whole of the remnant of Israel. עשׂה כלה, to put an end to a
thing, with את before the object, as in [Zep
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018) (see the comm. on [Nah
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008)). The Lord then gives him the
comforting assurance in [Eze 11:14-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014),
that He will preserve a remnant among the exiles, and make them His
people once more.

[Ezekiel 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 11:14</span></span>

Promise of the Gathering of Israel out of the Nations

[Eze 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014). And the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, [Eze 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#015). Son of
man, thy brethren, thy brethren are the people of thy proxy, and the
whole house of Israel, the whole of it, to whom the inhabitants of
Jerusalem say, Remain far away from Jehovah; to us the land is given for
a possession. [Eze 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016). Therefore
say, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Ye, I have sent them far away, and
have scattered them in the lands, but I have become to them a sanctuary
for a little while in the lands whither they have come. [Eze
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017). Therefore say, Thus saith the
Lord Jehovah, And I will gather you from the nations, and will collect
you together from the lands in which ye are scattered, and will give you
the land of Israel. [Eze 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#018). And
they will come thither, and remove from it all its detestable things,
and all its abominations. [Eze 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019).
And I will give them one heart, and give a new spirit within you; and
will take the heart of stone out of their flesh, and give them a heart
of flesh; [Eze 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020). That they may
walk in my statutes, and preserve my rights, and do them: and they will
be my people, and I will be their God. [Eze
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021). But those whose heart goeth to
the heart of their detestable things and their abominations, I will give
their way upon their head, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah. - The
prophet had interceded, first of all for the inhabitants of Jerusalem
([Eze 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008)), and then for the rulers of
the nation, and had asked God whether He would entirely destroy the
remnant of Israel. To this God replies that his brethren, in whom he is
to interest himself, are not these inhabitants of Jerusalem and these
rulers of the nation, but the Israelites carried into exile, who are
regarded by these inhabitants at Jerusalem as cut off from the people of
God. The nouns in [Eze 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#015) are not
"accusatives, which are resumed in the suffix to הרחקתּים in [Eze
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016)," as Hitzig imagines, but form
an independent clause, in which אחיך is the subject, and אנשׁי גאלּתך as
well as כּל־בּית ישׂראל sa llew sa the predicates. The repetition of
"thy brethren" serves to increase the force of the expression: thy true,
real brethren; not in contrast to the priests, who were lineal relations
(Hvernick), but in contrast to the Israelites, who had only the name of
Israel, and denied its nature.

These brethren are to be the people of his proxy; and toward these he is
to exercise גּאלּה. גּאלּה is the business, or the duty and right, of
the Gol. According to the law, the Gol was the brother, or the nearest
relation, whose duty it was to come to the help of his impoverished
brother, not only by redeeming (buying back) his possession, which
poverty had compelled him to sell, but to redeem the man himself, if he
had been sold to pay his debts (vid., [Lev
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025), [Lev
25:48](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#048)). The Gol therefore became the
possessor of the property of which his brother had been unjustly
deprived, if it were not restored till after his death ([Num
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008)). Consequently he was not only the
avenger of blood, but the natural supporter and agent of his brother;
and גּאלּה signifies not merely redemption or kindred, but proxy, i.e.,
both the right and obligation to act as the legal representative, the
avenger of blood, the hair, etc., of the brother. The words "and the
whole of the house of Israel" are a second predicate to "thy brethren,"
and affirm that the brethren, for whom Ezekiel can and is to intercede,
form the whole of the house of Israel, the term "whole" being rendered
more emphatic by the repetition of כּל in כּלּה. A contrast is drawn
between this "whole house of Israel" and the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
who say to those brethren, "Remain far away from Jehovah, to us is the
land given for a possession." It follows from this, first of all, that
the brethren of Ezekiel, towards whom he was to act as Gol, were those
who had been taken away from the land, his companions in exile; and,
secondly, that the exiles formed the whole of the house of Israel, that
is to say, that they alone would be regarded by God as His people, and
not the inhabitants of Jerusalem or those left in the land, who regarded
the exiles as no longer a portion of the nation: simply because, in
their estrangement from God, they looked upon the mere possession of
Jerusalem as a pledge of participation in the grace of God. This shows
the prophet where the remnant of the people of God is to be found. To
this there is appended in [Eze 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016).
a promise of the way in which the Lord will make this remnant His true
people. לכן, therefore, viz., because the inhabitants of Jerusalem
regard the exiles as rejected by the Lord, Ezekiel is to declare to them
that Jehovah is their sanctuary even in their dispersion (v. 16); and
because the others deny that they have any share in the possession of
the land, the Lord will gather them together again, and give them the
land of Israel ([Eze 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017)). The two
לכן are co-ordinate, and introduce the antithesis to the disparaging
sentence pronounced by the inhabitants of Jerusalem upon those who have
been carried into exile. The כּי before the two leading clauses in [Eze
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016) does not mean "because," serving
to introduce a protasis, to which [Eze
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017) would form the apodosis, as
Ewald affirms; but it stands before the direct address in the sense of
an assurance, which indicates that there is some truth at the bottom of
the judgment pronounced by their opponents, the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. The thought is this: the present position of affairs is
unquestionably that Jehovah has scattered them (the house of Israel)
among the Gentiles; but He has not therefore cast them off. He has
become a sanctuary to them in the lands of their dispersion. Migdâsh
does not mean either asylum or an object kept sacred (Hitzig), but a
sanctuary, more especially the temple. They had, indeed, lost the
outward temple (at Jerusalem); but the Lord Himself had become their
temple. What made the temple into a sanctuary was the presence of
Jehovah, the covenant God, therein. This even the exiles were to enjoy
in their banishment, and in this they would possess a substitute for the
outward temple. This thought is rendered still more precise by the word
מעט, which may refer either to time or measure, and signify "for a short
time," or "in some measure." It is difficult to decide between these two
renderings. In support of the latter, which Kliefoth prefers (after the
lxx and Vulgate), it may be argued that the manifestation of the Lord,
both by the mission of prophets and by the outward deliverances and
inward consolations which He bestowed upon the faithful, was but a
partial substitute to the exile for His gracious presence in the temple
and in the holy land. Nevertheless, the context, especially the promise
in [Eze 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017), that He will gather
them again and lead them back into the land of Israel, appears to favour
the former signification, namely, that this substitution was only a
provisional one, and was only to last for a short time, although it also
implies that this could not and was not meant to be a perfect substitute
for the gracious presence of the Lord. For Israel, as the people of God,
could not remain scattered abroad; it must possess the inheritance
bestowed upon it by the Lord, and have its God in the midst of it in its
own land, and that in a manner more real than could possibly be the case
in captivity among the Gentiles. This will be fully realized in the
heavenly Jerusalem, where the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb will be a
temple to the redeemed ([Rev 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022)).
Therefore will Jehovah gather together the dispersed once more, and lead
them back into the land of Israel, i.e., into the land which He designed
for Israel; whereas the inhabitants of Jerusalem, who boast of their
possession of Canaan ([Eze 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#015)),
will lose what they now possess. Those who are restored will then remove
all idolatrous abominations ([Eze
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017)), and receive from God a new and
feeling heart ([Eze 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019)), so that
they will walk in the ways of God, and be in truth the people of God
([Eze 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020)).

The fulfilment of this promise did, indeed, begin with the return of a
portion of the exiles under Zerubbabel; but it was not completed under
either Zerubbabel or Ezra, or even in the Maccabean times. Although
Israel may have entirely relinquished the practice of gross idolatry
after the captivity, it did not then attain to that newness of heart
which is predicted in [Eze 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019), [Eze
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020). This only commenced with the
Baptist's preaching of repentance, and with the coming of Christ; and it
was realized in the children of Israel, who accepted Jesus in faith, and
suffered Him to make them children of God. Yet even by Christ this
prophecy has not yet been perfectly fulfilled in Israel, but only in
part, since the greater portion of Israel has still in its hardness that
stony heart which must be removed out of its flesh before it can attain
to salvation. The promise in [Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019) has for its basis the prediction
in [Deu 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006). "What the circumcision
of the heart is there, viz., the removal of all uncleanliness, of which
outward circumcision was both the type and pledge, is represented here
as the giving of a heart of flesh instead of one of stone"
(Hengstenberg). I give them one heart. לב אחד, which Hitzig is wrong in
proposing to alter into לב , another heart, after the lxx, is supported
and explained by [Jer 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039), "I give
them one heart and one way to fear me continually" (cf. [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009) and [Act
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)). One heart is not an upright,
undivided heart (לב ), but a harmonious, united heart, in contrast to
the division or plurality of hearts which prevails in the natural state,
in which every one follows his own heart and his own mind, turning
"every one to his own way" ([Isa
53:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#006)). God gives one heart, when He
causes all hearts and minds to become one. This can only be effected by
His giving a "new spirit," taking away the stone-heart, and giving a
heart of flesh instead. For the old spirit fosters nothing but egotism
and discord. The heart of stone has no susceptibility to the impressions
of the word of God and the drawing of divine grace. In the natural
condition, the heart of man is as hard as stone. "The word of God, the
external leadings of God, pass by and leave no trace behind. The latter
may crush it, and yet not break it. Even the fragments continue hard;
yea, the hardness goes on increasing" (Hengstenberg). The heart of flesh
is a tender heart, susceptible to the drawing of divine grace (compare
[Eze 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026), where these figures, which
are peculiar to Ezekiel, recur; and for the substance of the prophecy,
[Jer 31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033)). The fruit of this renewal
of heart is walking in the commandments of the Lord; and the consequence
of the latter is the perfect realization of the covenant relation, true
fellowship with the Lord God. But judgment goes side by side with this
renewal. Those who will not forsake their idols become victims to the
judgment ([Eze 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021)). The first
hemistich of [Eze 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021) is a relative
clause, in which אשׁר is to be supplied and connected with לבּם: "Whose
heart walketh after the heart of their abominations." The heart, which
is attributed to the abominations and detestations, i.e., to the idols,
is the inclination to idolatry, the disposition and spirit which
manifest themselves in the worship of idols. Walking after the heart of
the idols forms the antithesis to walking after the heart of God ([Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014)). For 'דּרכּם וגו, "I will give
their way," see [Eze 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#010).

[Ezekiel 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 11:22</span></span>

The promise that the Lord would preserve to Himself a holy seed among
those who had been carried away captive, brought to a close the
announcement of the judgment that would fall upon the ancient Israel and
apostate Jerusalem. All that is now wanting, as a conclusion to the
whole vision, is the practical confirmation of the announcement of
judgment. This is given in the two following verses. - [Eze
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022). And the cherubim raised their
wings, and the wheels beside them; and the glory of the God of Israel
was up above them. [Eze 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#023). And the
glory of Jehovah ascended from the midst of the city, and took its stand
upon the mountain which is to the east of the city. [Eze
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#024). And wind lifted me up, and
brought me to Chaldea to the exiles, in the vision, in the Spirit of
God; and the vision ascended away from me, which I had seen. [Eze
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#025). And I spoke to the exiles all
the words of Jehovah, which He had shown to me. - The manifestation of
the glory of the Lord had already left the temple, after the
announcement of the burning of Jerusalem, and had taken its stand before
the entrance of the eastern gate of the outer court, that is to say, in
the city itself ([Eze 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019); [Eze
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001)). But now, after the announcement
had been made to the representatives of the authorities of their removal
from the city, the glory of the God of Israel forsook the devoted city
also, as a sign that both temple and city had ceased to be the seats of
the gracious presence of the Lord. The mountain on the east of the city
is the Mount of Olives, which affords a lofty outlook over the city.
There the glory of God remained, to execute the judgment upon Jerusalem.
Thus, according to [Zac 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004), will
Jehovah also appear at the last judgment on the Mount of Olives above
Jerusalem, to fight thence against His foes, and prepare a way of escape
for those who are to be saved. It was from the Mount of Olives also that
the Son of God proclaimed to the degenerate city the second destruction
([Luk 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#021); [Mat
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)); and from the same mountain He
made His visible ascension to heaven after His resurrection ([Luk
24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050); cf. [Act
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012)); and, as Grotius has observed,
"thus did Christ ascend from this mountain into His kingdom, to execute
judgment upon the Jews."

After this vision of the judgments of God upon the ancient people of the
covenant and the kingdom of God, Ezekiel was carried back in the spirit
into Chaldea, to the river Chaboras. The vision then vanished; and he
related to the exiles all that he had seen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 12](eze012)

</div>
