<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze032)  [Next](eze034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 33:0</span></span>

Second Half

The Announcement of Salvation - Ezekiel 33-48

In the first half of his book, Ezekiel has predicted severe judgments,
both to the covenant nation and to the heathen nations. But to the
people of Israel he has also promised the turning of its captivity,
after the judgment of the destruction of the kingdom and the dispersion
of the refractory generation in the heathen lands; not merely their
restoration to their own land, but the setting up of the covenant made
with the fathers, and the renewing of the restored nation by the Spirit
of God, so that it will serve the Lord upon His holy mountain with
offerings acceptable to Him (compare [Eze
11:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016); [Eze
16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060), and [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040).). On the other hand, he has
threatened the heathenish peoples and kingdoms of the world with
devastation and everlasting destruction, so that they will be remembered
no more (compare Ezekiel 21:36-37; [Eze
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#007), [Eze
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#010),[Eze
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016); [Eze
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#021); [Eze
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#036), and [Eze
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#019)), or rather with the lasting
humiliation and overthrow of their glory in the nether world (compare
[Eze 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#013)., [Eze
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#015)., and [Eze
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#017).); whilst God will create a
glorious thing in the land of the living, gather Israel from its
dispersion, cause it to dwell safely and happily in the land given to
His servant Jacob, and a horn to grow thereto ([Eze
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#020); [Eze
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#025)., and [Eze
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#021)). - This announcement is carried
out still further in the second half of the book, where first of all the
pardon, blessing, and glorification promised to the covenant nation,
after its sifting by the judgment of exile, are unfolded according to
their leading features, and the destruction of its foes is foretold
(Ezekiel 34-39); and then, secondly, there is depicted the establishment
of the renovated kingdom of God for everlasting continuance (Ezekiel
40-48). The prophet's mouth was opened to make the announcement when a
fugitive brought the tidings of the destruction both of Jerusalem and of
the kingdom to the captives by the Chaboras; and this constitutes the
second half of the prophetic ministry of Ezekiel. The introduction to
this is contained in Ezekiel 33, whilst the announcement itself is
divisible into two parts, according to its contents, as just indicated,
- namely, first, the promise of the restoration and glorification of
Israel (Ezekiel 34-39); and secondly, the apocalyptic picture of the new
constitution of the kingdom of God (Ezekiel 40-48).

The Calling of the Prophet, and His Future Attitude towards the People -
Ezekiel 33

This chapter is divided into two words of God of an introductory
character, which are separated by the historical statement in [Eze
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021) and [Eze
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022), though substantially they are
one. The first (vv. 1-20) exhibits the calling of the prophet for the
time to come; the second ([Eze
33:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023)) sets before him his own
attitude towards the people, and the attitude of the people towards his
further announcement. The first precedes the arrival of the messenger,
who brought to the prophet and the exiles the tidings of the conquest
and destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans ([Eze
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021)). The second was uttered
afterwards. The fall of the holy city formed a turning-point in the
prophetic work of Ezekiel. Previous to this catastrophe, God had
appointed him to be a watchman over Israel: to show the people their
sins, and to proclaim the consequent punishment, namely, the destruction
of Jerusalem and Judah, together with the dispersion of the people among
the heathen. But after the city had fallen, and the judgment predicted
by him had taken place, the object to be aimed at was to inspire those
who were desponding and despairing of salvation with confidence and
consolation, by predicting the restoration of the fallen kingdom of God
in a new and glorious form, to show them the way to new life, and to
open the door for their entrance into the new kingdom of God. The two
divisions of our chapter correspond to this, which was to be henceforth
the task imposed upon the prophet. In the first (vv. 1-20), his calling
to be the spiritual watchman over the house of Israel is renewed ([Eze
33:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002)), with special instructions to
announce to the people, who are inclined to despair under the burden of
their sins, that the Lord has no pleasure in the death of the sinner,
but will give life to him who turns from his iniquity ([Eze
33:10-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010)). The kernel and central
point of this word of God are found in the lamentation of the people:
"Our transgressions and sins lie upon us, and we are pining away through
them; how then can we live?" ([Eze
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010)), together with the reply given
by the Lord: "By my life, I have no pleasure in the death of the
wicked...turn ye, turn yourselves; why do ye wish to die?" ([Eze
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)). The way is prepared for this
by [Eze 33:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002), whilst [Eze
33:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012) carry out this promise of God
still further, and assign the reason for it. - The thoughts with which
the promise of the Lord, thus presented as an antidote to despair, is
introduced and explained are not new, however, but repetitions of
earlier words of God. The preparatory introduction in [Eze
33:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002) is essentially a return to the
word in [Eze 3:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017), with which the
Lord closes the prophet's call by pointing out to him the duty and
responsibility connected with his vocation. And the reason assigned in
[Eze 33:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012), together with the
divine promise in [Eze 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011), is taken
from Ezekiel 18, where the prophet unfolds the working of the
righteousness of God; and more precisely from [Eze
18:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020) of that chapter, where the
thought is more fully expanded, that the judgments of God can be averted
by repentance and conversion. From all this it is indisputably evident
that the first section of this chapter contains an introduction to the
second half of the prophecies of Ezekiel; and this also explains the
absence of any date at the head of the section, or the "remarkable" fact
that the date ([Eze 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021) and [Eze
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022)) is not given till the middle of
the chapter, where it stands between the first and second of the words
of God contained therein. - The word of God in [Eze
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023). was no doubt addressed to the
prophet after the fugitive had arrived with the tidings of the fall of
Jerusalem; whereas the word by which the prophet was prepared for his
further labours (vv. 1-20) preceded that event, and coincided in point
of time with the working of God upon the prophet on the evening
preceding the arrival of the fugitive, through which his mouth was
opened for further speaking ([Eze
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022)); and it is placed before this
historical statement because it was a renewal of his call.

(Note: It is incomprehensible how Kliefoth could find "no sign of
introductory thoughts" in this section, or could connect it with the
preceding oracles against the foreign nations, for no other reason than
to secure fourteen words of God for that portion of the book which
contains the prophecies against the foreign nations. For there is no
force in the other arguments which he adduces in support of this
combination; and the assertion that "the section, Ezekiel 33:1-20,
speaks of threatenings and warnings, and of the faithfulness with which
Ezekiel is to utter them, and of the manner in which Israel is to
receive them," simply shows that he has neither correctly nor perfectly
understood the contents of this section and its train of thought.)

[Ezekiel 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 33:1</span></span>

Calling of the Prophet for the Future - Ezekiel 33:1-20

The prophet's office of watchman. [Eze
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#001). And the word of Jehovah came to
me, saying, [Eze 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002). Son of man,
speak to the sons of thy people, and say to them, When I bring the sword
upon a land, and the people of the land take a man from their company
and set him for a watchman, [Eze 33:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#003).
And he seeth the sword come upon the land, and bloweth the trumpet, and
warneth the people; [Eze 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#004). If,
then, one should hear the blast of the trumpet and not take warning, so
that the sword should come and take him away, his blood would come upon
his own head. [Eze 33:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#005). He heard the
blast of the trumpet, and took not warning; his blood will come upon
him: whereas, if he had taken warning, he would have delivered his soul.
[Eze 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#006). But if the watchman seeth
the sword come, and bloweth not the trumpet, and the people is not
warned; and the sword should come and take away a soul from them, he is
taken away through his guilt; but his blood will I demand from the
watchman's hand. [Eze 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007). Thou,
then, son of man, I have set thee for the watchman to the house of
Israel; thou shalt hear the word from my mouth, and warn them for me.
[Eze 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#008). If I say to the sinner,
Sinner, thou wilt die the death; and thou speakest not to warn the
sinner from his way, he, the sinner, will die for his iniquity, and his
blood I will demand from thy hand. [Eze
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#009). But if thou hast warned the
sinner from his way, to turn from it, and he does not turn from his way,
he will die for his iniquity; but thou hast delivered thy soul. - [Eze
33:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007), with the exception of slight
deviations which have little influence upon the sense, are repeated
verbatim from [Eze 3:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017). The
repetition of the duty binding upon the prophet, and of the
responsibility connected therewith, is introduced, however, in [Eze
33:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002), by an example taken from life,
and made so plain that every one who heard the words must see that
Ezekiel was obliged to call the attention of the people to the judgment
awaiting them, and to warn them of the threatening danger, and that this
obligation rested upon him still. In this respect the expansion, which
is wanting in Ezekiel 3, serves to connect the following prophecies of
Ezekiel with the threats of judgment contained in the first part. The
meaning of it is the following: As it is the duty of the appointed
watchman of a land to announce to the people the approach of the enemy,
and if he fail to do this he is deserving of death; so Ezekiel also, as
the watchman of Israel appointed by God, not only is bound to warn the
people of the approaching judgment, in order to fulfil his duty, but has
already warned them of it, so that whoever has not taken warning has
been overtaken by the sword because of his sin. As, then, Ezekiel has
only discharged his duty and obligation by so doing, so has he the same
duty still further to perform. - In [Eze
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002) ארץ is placed at the head in an
absolute form; and 'כּי אביא וגו, "if I bring the sword upon a land," is
to be understood with this restriction: "so that the enemy is on the way
and an attack may be expected" (Hitzig). מקציהם, from the end of the
people of the land, i.e., one taken from the whole body of the people,
as in [Gen 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#002) (see the comm. on [Gen
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#004)). Blowing the trumpet is a signal
of alarm on the approach of an enemy (compare [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006); [Jer
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005)). נזהר in [Eze
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#005) is a participle; on the other
hand, both before and afterwards it is a perfect, pointed with Kametz on
account of the tone. For [Eze 33:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007),
see the exposition of [Eze 3:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017).

[Ezekiel 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 33:10</span></span>

As watchman over Israel, Ezekiel is to announce to those who are
despairing of the mercy of God, that the Lord will preserve from
destruction those who turn from their sin, and lead them into life. -
[Eze 33:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010). Thou then, son of man, say
to the house of Israel, Ye rightly say, Our transgressions and our sins
lie upon us, and in them we vanish away; how, then, can we live? [Eze
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011). Say to them, As truly as I
live, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah, I have no pleasure in the death
of the sinner; but when the sinner turneth from his way, he shall live.
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways! for why will ye die, O house of
Israel? [Eze 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012). And thou, son of
man, say to the sons of thy people, The righteousness of the righteous
man will not deliver him in the day of his transgression, and the sinner
will not fall through his sin in the day that he turneth from his sin,
and the righteous man will not be able to live thereby in the day that
he sinneth. [Eze 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#013). If I say to
the righteous man that he shall live, and he relies upon his
righteousness and does wrong, all his righteousnesses will not be
remembered; and for his wrong that he has done, he will die. [Eze
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#014). If I say to the sinner, Thou
shalt die, and he turns from his sin, and does justice and
righteousness, [Eze 33:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#015). So that the
wicked returns the pledge, restores what has been robbed, walks in the
statutes of life without doing wrong, he will live, not die. [Eze
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#016). All his sins which he has
committed shall not be remembered against him; he has done justice and
righteousness, he will live. [Eze
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#017). And the sons of thy people say,
The way of the Lord is not right; but they - their way is not right.
[Eze 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#018). If the righteous man
turneth from his righteousness and doeth wrong, he shall die thereby;
[Eze 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#019). But if the wicked man
turneth from his wickedness and doeth right and righteousness, he will
live thereby. [Eze 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#020). And yet ye
say, The way of the Lord is not right. I will judge you every one
according to his ways, O house of Israel. - In [Eze
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#010) and [Eze
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011) the prophet's calling for the
future is set before him, inasmuch as God instructs him to announce to
those who are in despair on account of their sins the gracious will of
the Lord. The threat contained in the law ([Lev
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#039)), ימּקּוּ בּעונם, of which
Ezekiel had repeatedly reminded the people with warning, and, last of
all, when predicting the conquest and destruction of Jerusalem by the
Chaldeans (compare [Eze 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#017) and [Eze
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#023)), had pressed heavily upon their
heart, when the threatened judgment took place, so that they quote the
words, not "in self-defence," as Hvernick erroneously supposes, but in
despair of any deliverance. Ezekiel is to meet this despair of little
faith by the announcement that the Lord has no pleasure in the death of
the sinner, but desires his conversion and his life. Ezekiel had already
set this word of grave before the people in [Eze
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023), [Eze
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032), accompanied with the summons to
salvation for them to lay to heart: there, it was done to overthrow the
delusion that the present generation had to atone for the sins of the
fathers; but here, to lift up the hearts of those who were despairing of
salvation; and for this reason it is accompanied with the asseveration
(wanting in [Eze 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023) and [Eze
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032)): "as truly as I live, saith the
Lord," and with the urgent appeal to repent and turn. But in order to
preclude the abuse of this word of consolation by making it a ground of
false confidence in their own righteousness, Ezekiel repeats in [Eze
33:12-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012) the principal thoughts
contained in that announcement ([Eze
18:20-32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#020)) - namely, first of all, in
[Eze 33:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012), the thought that the
righteousness of the righteous is of no avail to him if he gives himself
up to the unrighteousness, and that the sinner will not perish on
account of his sin if he turns from his wickedness and strives after
righteousness (יכּשׁל , [Eze 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#012), as
in [Hos 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#005); [Jer
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015); compare [Eze
18:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#024), and [Eze
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#021), [Eze
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#022); and for [Eze
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#014) and [Eze
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#015), more especially [Eze
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#005) and [Eze
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#007)); and then, secondly, in [Eze
33:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#017), the reproof of those who
find fault with the way of the Lord (compare [Eze
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#025), [Eze
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#027), [Eze
18:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#029)).

[Ezekiel 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 33:21</span></span>

Tidings of the Fall of Jerusalem, and the Consequences with Regard to
the Prophet

[Eze 33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021). And it came to pass in the
twelfth year, in the tenth (month), on the fifth of the month after our
being taken captive, there came to me a fugitive from Jerusalem, and
said, The city is smitten. [Eze 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022).
And the hand of Jehovah had come upon me in the evening before the
arrival of the fugitive, and He opened my mouth, till he came to me in
the morning; and so was my mouth opened, and I was silent no more. - In
these verses the fulfilment of the promise made by God to the prophet in
[Eze 24:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#025), after the prediction of
the destruction of Jerusalem, is recorded. The chronological datum, as
to the precise time at which the messenger arrived with the account of
the destruction of Jerusalem, serves to mark with precision the point of
time at which the obstacle was removed, and the prophet was able to
speak and prophesy without restraint. - The fact that the tidings of the
destruction of Jerusalem, which took place in the fifth month of the
eleventh year, are said to have only reached the exiles in the tenth
month of the twelfth year, that is to say, nearly a year and a half
after it occurred, does not warrant our following the Syriac, as
Doederlein and Hitzig have done, calling in question the correctness of
the text and substituting the eleventh year for the twelfth. With the
distance at which Ezekiel was living, namely, in northern Mesopotamia,
and with the fearful confusion which followed the catastrophe, a year
and a half might very easily pass by before a fugitive arrived with the
information. But Hitzig's assertion, that Ezekiel would contradict
himself, inasmuch as, according to [Eze
26:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#001), he received intelligence of
the affair in the eleventh year, is founded upon a misinterpretation of
the passage quoted. It is not stated there that Ezekiel received this
information through a fugitive or any man whatever, but simply that God
had revealed to him the fall of Jerusalem even before it occurred.
לגלוּתינוּ, after our being led away ([Eze
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#021) and [Eze
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#001)), coincides with לגלוּת המּלך in
[Eze 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002). הכּתה, smitten, i.e.,
conquered and destroyed, exterminated. In the clause 'ויד יהוה , the
verb היתה is a pluperfect, and אלי stands for עלי, according to the
later usage. The formula indicates the translation of the prophet into
an ecstatic state (see the comm. on [Eze
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#003)), in which his mouth was opened to
speak, that is to say, the silence imposed upon him was taken away. The
words, "till he came to me in the morning," etc., are not to be
understood as signifying that the prophet's mouth had only been opened
for the time from evening till morning; for this would be opposed to the
following sentence. They simply affirm that the opening of the mouth
took place before the arrival of the fugitive, the night before the
morning of his arrival. ויּפּתח פּי, which follows, is an emphatic
repetition, introduced as a link with which to connect the practically
important statement that from that time forward he was not speechless
any more. - It was in all probability shortly afterwards that Ezekiel
was inspired with the word of God which follows in [Eze
33:23-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023), as we may infer from the
contents of the word itself, which laid the foundation for the prophet's
further prophesying. But nothing can be gathered from [Eze
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022) with regard to the time when
this and the following words of God (as far as Ezekiel 39), of which no
chronological data are given, were communicated to the prophet and
uttered by him. His being "silent no more" by no means involves
immediate or continuous speaking, but simply recalls the command to be
speechless. There is no ground for the assumption that all these words
of God were communicated to him in one night (Hvernick, Hengstenberg,
and others), either in [Eze 33:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#022) or
in the contents of these divine revelations.

[Ezekiel 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 33:23</span></span>

Preaching of Repentance after the Fall of Jerusalem

The first word of God, which Ezekiel received after the arrival of the
fugitive with the intelligence of the destruction of Jerusalem, was not
of a consolatory, but of a rebuking nature, and directed against those
who, while boasting in an impenitent state of mind of the promise given
to the patriarchs of the everlasting possession of the Holy Land,
fancied that they could still remain in possession of the promised land
even after the destruction of Jerusalem and of the kingdom of Judah.
This delusion the prophet overthrows by the announcement that the
unrighteous are to have no share in the possession of the land of
Israel, but are to perish miserably, and that the land is to be utterly
waste and without inhabitants ([Eze
33:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023)). The Lord then shows him
that his countrymen will indeed come to him and listen to his words, but
will only do that which is pleasant to themselves; that they will still
seek after gain, and not do his words; and that it will not be till
after his words have been fulfilled that they will come to the knowledge
of the fact that he really was a prophet ([Eze
33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030)). We perceive from these last
verses that the threat uttered in [Eze
33:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#024) was to form the basis for
Ezekiel's further prophecies, so that the whole of this word of God has
only the force of an introduction to his further labours. But however
the two halves of this word of God may appear to differ, so far as their
contents are concerned, they are nevertheless closely connected. The
state of heart disclosed in the first half, with reference to the
judgment that has already fallen upon the land and kingdom, is to
preclude the illusion, that the fact of the people's coming to the
prophet to hear his words is a sign of penitential humiliation under the
punishing hand of God, and to bring out the truth, that the salvation
which he is about to foretell to the people is only to be enjoyed by
those who turn with sincerity to the Lord.

[Eze 33:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023)

False reliance upon God's Promises

[Eze 33:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023). And the word of Jehovah
came to me, saying, [Eze 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#024). Son of
man, the inhabitants of these ruins in the land of Israel speak thus:
Abraham was one, and received the land for a possession; but we are
many, the land is given to us for a possession. [Eze
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#025). Therefore say to them, Thus
saith the Lord Jehovah, Ye eat upon the blood, and lift up your eyes to
your idols, and shed blood, and would ye possess the land? [Eze
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#026). Ye rely upon your sword, do
abomination, and one defileth another's wife, and would ye possess the
land? [Eze 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#027). Speak thus to them,
Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, By my life, those who are in the ruins
shall fall by the sword, and whoever is in the open field him do I give
to the beasts to devour, and those who are in the fortresses and caves
shall die of the pestilence. [Eze
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#028). And I make the land devastation
and waste, and its proud might shall have an end, and the mountains of
Israel shall be waste, so that no one passeth through. [Eze
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#029). And they shall know that I am
Jehovah, when I make the land devastation and waste because of all the
abominations which they have done. - This threat is directed against the
people who remained behind in the land of Judah after the destruction of
Jerusalem. ישׁבי are the Israelites who dwelt amidst the ruins of the
Holy Land, the remnant of the people left behind in the land. For it is
so evident as to need no proof that Kliefoth is wrong in asserting that
by החרבות we are to understand the district bordering on the Chaboras,
which was not properly cultivated; and by the inhabitants thereof, the
exiles who surrounded Ezekiel. It is only by confounding אמר and דּבּר
that Kliefoth is able to set aside the more precise definition of the
inhabitants of these ruins contained in the words על אדמת ישׂראל, and to
connect ישׂ 'על אד with אמרים, "they speak concerning the land of
Israel;" and in [Eze 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#027) it is only
in a forced manner that he can generalize החרבות and take it as
referring to the waste places both in the Holy Land and on the Chaboras.
The fact, moreover, that [Eze 33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030)
treat of the Israelites by the Chaboras, is no proof whatever that they
must also be referred to in [Eze
33:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#024). For the relation in which
the two halves of this word of God stand to one another is not that
"[Eze 33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030) depict the impression
made upon the hearers by the words contained in [Eze
33:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#024)," so that "the persons
alluded to in [Eze 33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030) must
necessarily be the hearers of [Eze
33:24-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#024)." [Eze
33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030) treat in quite a general
manner of the attitude which the prophet's countrymen would assume
towards his words - that is to say, not merely to his threats, but also
to his predictions of salvation; they would only attend to that which
had a pleasant sound to them, but they would not do his words ([Eze
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031), [Eze
33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032)). It is quite in harmony with
this, that in [Eze 33:23-29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#023) these
people should be told of the state of heart of those who had remained
behind on the ruins of the Holy Land, and that it should be announced to
them that the fixed belief in the permanent possession of the Holy Land,
on which those who remained behind in the land relied, was a delusion,
and that those who were victims of this delusion should be destroyed by
sword and pestilence. Just as in the first part of this book Ezekiel
uttered the threatened prophecies concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem and Judah in the presence of his countrymen by the Chaboras,
and addressed them to these, because they stood in the same internal
relation to the Lord as their brethren in Jerusalem and Judah; so here
does he hold up this delusion before them as a warning, in order that he
may disclose to them the worthlessness of such vain hope, and preach
repentance and conversion as the only way to lie.

The meaning of the words spoken by these people, "Abraham was one,"
etc., is, that if Abraham, as one solitary individual, received the land
of Canaan or a possession by the promise of God, the same God could not
take this possession away from them, the many sons of Abraham. The
antithesis of the "one" and the "many" derived its significance, in
relation to their argument, from the descent of the many from the one,
which is taken for granted, and also from the fact, which is assumed to
be well know from the book of Genesis, that the land was not promised
and given to the patriarch for his own possession, but for his seed or
descendants to possess. They relied, like the Jews of the time of Christ
([Joh 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033), [Joh
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#039)), upon their corporeal descent
from Abraham (compare the similar words in [Eze
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#015)). Ezekiel, on the other hand,
simply reminds them of their own sinful conduct ([Eze
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#025), [Eze
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#026)), for the purpose of showing
them that they have thereby incurred the loss of this possession. Eating
upon the blood, is eating flesh in which the blood is still lying, which
has not been cleansed from blood, as in [Lev
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026) and [Sa1
14:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032); an act the prohibition of
which was first addressed to Noah ([Gen
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004)), and is repeatedly urged in the
law (cf. [Lev 7:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#026)). This is also
the case with the prohibition of idolatry, lifting up the eyes to idols
(cf. [Eze 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#006)), and the shedding of
blood (cf. [Eze 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#010); [Eze
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#003), etc.). עמד, to support oneself,
or rely (עמד, used as in [Eze 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#014))
upon the sword, i.e., to put confidence in violence and bloodshed. In
this connection we are not to think of the use of the sword in war. To
work abomination, as in [Eze 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#012).
עשׂיתן is not a feminine, "ye women," but ן is written in the place of מ
on account of the ת which follows, after the analogy of פּדיון for
פּדיום (Hitzig). On the defiling of a neighbour's wife, see the comm. on
[Eze 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#006). Such daring sinners the
Lord would destroy wherever they might be. In v. 37 the punishment is
individualized (cf. [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021)). Those
in the חרבות shall fall by the חרב (the play upon the word is very
obvious); those in the open country shall perish by wild beasts (compare
[Kg2 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#025); [Exo
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#019); [Lev
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#022)); those who are in mountain
fastnesses and caves, where they are safe from the sword and ravenous
beasts, shall perish by plague and pestilence. This threat is not to be
restricted to the acts of the Chaldeans in the land after the
destruction of Jerusalem, but applies to all succeeding times. Even the
devastation and utter depopulation of the land, threatened in [Eze
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#028), are not to be taken as
referring merely to the time of the Babylonian captivity, but embrace
the devastation which accompanied and followed the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans. For גּאון ע, see the comm. on [Eze
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#024). For [Eze
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#029), compare [Eze
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014).

[Eze 33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030)

Behaviour of the People Towards the prophet

[Eze 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030). And thou, son of man, the
sons of thy people converse about thee by the walls and in the
house-doors; one talketh to another, every one to his brother, saying,
Come and let us hear what kind of word goeth out from Jehovah. [Eze
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031). And they will come to thee,
like an assembly of the people, and sit before thee as my people, and
will hear thy words, but not do them; but that which is pleasant in
their mouth they do; their heart goeth after their gain. [Eze
33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032). And, behold, thou art unto them
like a pleasant singer, beautiful in voice and playing well; they will
hear thy words, but they will not do them. [Eze
33:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#033). But when it cometh - behold, it
cometh - they will know that a prophet was in the midst of them. - This
addition to the preceding word of God, which is addressed to Ezekiel
personally, applies to the whole of the second half of his ministry, and
stands in obvious connection with the instructions given to the prophet
on the occasion of his first call ([Eze
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016).), and repeated, so far as their
substance is concerned, in [Eze
33:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007), as Kliefoth himself
acknowledges, in opposition to his assumption that vv. 1-20 of this
chapter belong to the prophecies directed against the foreign nations.
As God had directed the prophet's attention, on the occasion of his
call, to the difficulties connected with the discharge of the duties of
a watchman with which he was entrusted, by setting before him the object
and the responsibility of his vocation, and had warned him not to allow
himself to be turned aside by the opposition of the people; so here in
[Eze 33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030), at the commencement of
the second section of his ministry, another word is addressed to him
personally, in order that he may not be influenced in the further
prosecution of his calling by either the pleasure or displeasure of men.

His former utterances had already induced the elders of the people to
come to him to hear the word of God (cf. [Eze
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#001) and [Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001)). But now that his prophecies
concerning Jerusalem had been fulfilled, the exiles could not fail to be
still more attentive to his words, so that they talked of him both
secretly and openly, and encouraged one another to come and listen to
his discourses. God foretells this to him, but announces to him at the
same time that this disposition on the part of his countrymen to listen
to him is even now no sign of genuine conversion to the word of God, in
order that he may not be mistaken in his expectations concerning the
people. Kliefoth has thus correctly explained the contents, design, and
connection of these verses as a whole. In [Eze
33:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030) the article before the
participle נדבּרים takes the place of the relative אשׁר, and the words
are in apposition to בּני עמך, the sons of thy people who converse about
thee. נדבּר is reciprocal, as in [Mal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#013), [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016), and [Psa
119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012). But ב is to be understood, not
in a hostile sense, as in the passage cited from the Psalms, but in the
sense of concerning, like דּבּר ב in [Sa1
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#003) as contrasted with דּבּר ב in
[Num 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#007), to speak against a person.
The participle is continued by the finite ודּבּר, and the verb belonging
to בּני follows, in the ויבאוּ of [Eze
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031), in the form of an apodosis.
There is something monstrous in Hitzig's assumption, that the whole
passage from [Eze 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#030) to [Eze
33:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#033) forms but one clause, and that
the predicate to בּני עמך does not occur till the וידעוּ of [Eze
33:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#033). - אצל , by the side of the
walls, i.e., sitting against the walls, equivalent to secretly; and in
the doors of the houses, in other words publicly, one neighbour
conversing with another. חד, Aramean for אחד, and אישׁ by the side of
אחד, every one; not merely one here or there, but every man to his
neighbour. כּמבוא־עם, lit., as the coming of a people, i.e., as when a
crowd of men flock together in crowds or troops. עמּי is a predicate, as
my people, i.e., as if they wished, like my people, to hear my word from
thee. But they do not think of doing thy words, i.e., what thou dost
announce to them as my word. עגבים are things for which one cherishes an
eager desire, pleasant things in their mouth, i.e., according to their
taste (cf. [Gen 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#028)). Hvernick is
wrong in taking עגבים to mean illicit love. The word בּפיהם is quite
inapplicable to such a meaning. The rendering, they do it with their
mouth, is opposed both to the construction and the sense. בּצעם .esnes ,
their gain, the source from which they promise themselves advantage or
gain. In [Eze 33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032) a clearer
explanation is given of the reason why they come to the prophet,
notwithstanding the fact that they do not wish to do his words. "Thou
art to them כּשיּר עגבים;" this cannot mean like a pleasant song, but,
as מטב נגּן (one who can play well) clearly shows, like a singer of
pleasant songs. The abstract שׁיּר stands for the concrete שׁר, a
singer, a man of song (Hitzig). In [Eze
33:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#032), "they hear thy words, but do
them not," is repeated with emphasis, for the purpose of attaching the
threat in [Eze 33:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#033). But when it
cometh - namely, what thou sayest, or prophesiest - behold, it cometh,
i.e., it will come as surely as thy prophecies concerning the
destruction of Jerusalem; then will they know that a prophet was among
them (cf. [Eze 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005)), that is to say,
that he proclaimed God's word to them. Therefore Ezekiel is not to be
prevented, by the misuse which will be made of his words, from preaching
the truth. - This conclusion of the word of God, which points back to
[Eze 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005), also shows that it forms the
introduction to the prophecies which follow.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 34](eze034)

</div>
