<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze037)  [Next](eze039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 38:0</span></span>

Destruction of Gog with His Great Army of Nations - Ezekiel 38 and 39

Gog, in the land of Magog, prince of Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, will
invade the restored land of Israel from the far distant northern land by
the appointment of God in the last times, and with a powerful army of
numerous nations ([Eze 38:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001)), with
the intention of plundering Israel, now dwelling in security, that the
Lord may sanctify Himself upon him before all the world ([Eze
38:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010)). But when Gog, of whom
earlier prophets have already prophesied, shall fall upon Israel, he is
to be destroyed by a wrathful judgment from the Lord, that the nations
may know that God is the Lord ([Eze
38:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017)). On the mountains of Israel
will Gog with all his hosts and nations succumb to the judgment of God
([Eze 39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#001)). The inhabitants of the
cities of Israel will spend seven years in burning the weapons of the
fallen foe, and seven months in burying the corpses in a valley, which
will receive its name from this, so as to purify the land ([Eze
38:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009)); whilst in the meantime all
the birds and wild beasts will satiate themselves with the flesh and
blood of the fallen ([Eze 38:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017)).
By this judgment will all the nations as well as Israel know that it was
on account of its sins that the Lord formerly gave up Israel into the
power of the heathen, but that now He will no more forsake His redeemed
people, because He has poured out His Spirit upon it ([Eze
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#021) -29).

[Ezekiel 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 38:1</span></span>

Introduction

Preparation of Gog and his army for the invasion of the restored land of
Israel. - [Eze 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001). And the word of
Jehovah came to me, saying, [Eze 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#002).
Son of man, set thy face toward Gog in the land of Magog, the prince of
Rosh, Meshech, and Tubal, and prophesy against him, [Eze
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003). And say, Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, Behold, I will deal with thee, Gog, thou prince of Rosh,
Meshech, and Tubal, [Eze 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004). And
will mislead thee, and will put rings in thy jaws, and lead thee out,
and all thine army, horses, and riders, all clothed in perfect beauty, a
great assembly, with buckler and shield, all wielding swords; [Eze
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005). Persian, Ethiopian, and Libyan
with them, all of them with shield and helmet; [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006). Gomer and all his hosts, the
house of Togarmah in the uttermost north with all his hosts; many
peoples with thee. [Eze 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#007). Be
prepared and make ready, thou and all thine assembly, who have assembled
together to thee, and be thou their guard. [Eze
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#008). After many days shalt thou be
visited, at the end of the years shalt thou come into the land, which is
brought back from the sword, gathered out of many peoples, upon the
mountains of Israel, which were constantly laid waste, but now it is
brought out of the nations, and they dwell together in safety; [Eze
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009). And thou shalt come up, come
like a storm, like a cloud to cover the land, thou and all thy hosts and
many peoples with thee. - [Eze 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#001)
and [Eze 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#002). Command to prophesy
against God. גּוג, Gog, the name of the prince against whom the prophecy
is directed, is probably a name which Ezekiel has arbitrarily formed
from the name of the country, Magog; although Gog does occur in [Ch1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#004) as the name of a Reubenite, of
whom nothing further is known. The construction גּוג ארץ מגוג, Gog of
the land of Magog, is an abbreviated expression for "Gog from the land
of Magog;" and 'ארץ מג is not to be taken in connection with שׂים פּניך,
as the local object ("toward Gog, to the land of Magog"), as Ewald and
Hvernick would render it; since it would be very difficult in that case
to explain the fact that גּוג is afterwards resumed in the apposition
'נשׂיא וגו.

מגוג, Magog, is the name of a people mentioned in [Gen
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002) as descended from Japhet,
according to the early Jewish and traditional explanation, the great
Scythian people; and here also it is the name of a people, and is
written with the article (המגוג), to mark the people as one well known
from the time of Genesis, and therefore properly the land of the Magog
(-people). Gog is still further described as the prince of Rosh,
Meshech, and Tubal. It is true that Ewald follows Aquila, the Targum,
and Jerome, and connects ראשׁ with נשׂיא as an appellative in the sense
of princeps capitis, chief prince. But the argument used in support of
this explanation, namely, that there is no people of the name of Rosh
mentioned either in the Old Testament or by Josephus, is a very weak
one; whilst, on the other hand, the appellative rendering, though
possible, no doubt, after the analogy of הכּהן ראשׁ in [Ch1
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#005), is by no means probable, for the
simple reason that the נשׂיא occurs again in [Eze
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003) and [Eze
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#001), and in such repetitions
circumstantial titles are generally abbreviated. The Byzantine and
Arabic writers frequently mention a people called ̔Ρῶς, Arab. Ru=s,
dwelling in the country of the Taurus, and reckoned among the Scythian
tribes (for the passages, see Ges. Thesaurus, p. 1253), so that there is
no reason to question the existence of a people known by the name of
Rosh; even though the attempt of Bochart to find a trace of such a
people in the ̔Ρωξαλᾶνοι (Ptol. iii. 5) and Roxalani (Plin. h. n. iv.
12), by explaining this name as formed from a combination of Rhos (Rhox)
and Alani, is just as doubtful as the conjecture, founded upon the
investigations of Frhn (Ibn Foszlan, u. a. Araber Berichte ber die
Russen lterer Zeit, St. Petersburg 1823), that the name of the Russians
is connected with this ̔Ρῶς, Arab. ru=s, and our ראשׁ. Meshech and Tubal
(as in [Eze 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013) and [Eze
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#026)), the Moschi and Tibareni of
classical writers (see the comm. on [Gen
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002)), dwelt, according to the passage
before us, in the neighbourhood of Magog. There were also found in the
army of Gog, according to [Eze 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005),
Pharas (Persians), Cush, and Phut (Ethiopians and Libyans, see the comm.
on [Eze 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005) and [Eze
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010)), and, according to [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006), Gomer and the house of Togarmah.
From a comparison of this list with [Gen
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002), Kliefoth draws the conclusion
that Ezekiel omits all the peoples mentioned in [Gen
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002) as belonging to the family of
Japhet, who had come into historical notice in his time, or have done so
since, namely, the Medes, Greeks, and Thracians; whilst, on the other
hand, he mentions all the peoples enumerated, who have never yet
appeared upon the stage of history. But this remark is out of place, for
the simple reason that Ezekiel also omits the Japhetic tribes of
Ashkenaz and Riphath ([Gen 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#003)), and
still more from the fact that he notices not only the פּרס, or Persians,
who were probably related to the מדי, but also the Hamitic peoples Cush
and Phut, two African families. Consequently the army of Gog consisted
not only of wild Japhetic tribes, who had not yet attained historical
importance, but of Hamitic tribes also, that is to say, of peoples
living at the extreme north (ירכּתי צפון, [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006)) and east (Persians) and south
(Ethiopians), i.e., on the borders of the then known world. These are
all summoned by Gog, and gathered together for an attack upon the people
of God. This points to a time when their former foes, Ammon, Moab, Edom,
Philistines, and Syrians, and the old imperial powers, Egypt, Asshur,
Babel, Javan, will all have passed away from the stage of history, and
the people of God will stand in the centre of the historical life of the
world, and will have spread so widely over the earth, that its foes will
only be found on the borders of the civilised world (compare [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008)).

[Eze 38:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003) contain in general terms
the determinate counsel of God concerning Gog. - [Eze
38:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003). Jehovah is about to mislead
Gog to a crusade against His people Israel, and summons him to prepare
for the invasion of the restored land of Israel. The announcement of the
purpose for which Jehovah will make use of Gog and his army, and the
summons addressed to him to make ready, form two strophes, which are
clearly marked by the similarity of the conclusion in [Eze
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006) and [Eze
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009). - [Eze
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#003). God will deal with Gog, to
sanctify Himself upon him by means of judgment (cf. [Eze
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010)). He therefore misleads him to
an attack upon the people of Israel. שׁובב, an intensive form from
שׁוּב, may signify, as vox media, to cause to return ([Eze
39:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#027)), and to cause to turn away, to
lead away from the right road or goal, to lead astray ([Isa
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#010)). Here and in [Eze
39:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#002) it means to lead or bring away
from his previous attitude, i.e., to mislead or seduce, in the sense of
enticing to a dangerous enterprise; according to which the Chaldee has
rendered it correctly, so far as the actual sense is concerned,
אשׁדלנּך, alliciam te. In the words, "I place rings in thy jaws" (cf.
[Eze 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#004)), Gog is represented as an
unmanageable beast, which is compelled to follow its leader (cf. [Isa
37:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#029)); and the thought is thereby
expressed, that Gog is compelled to obey the power of God against his
will. הוציא, to lead him away from his land, or natural soil. The
passage in [Rev 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008), "to deceive the
nations (πλανῆσαι τὰ ἔθνη), Gog and Magog, to gather them together to
battle," corresponds to these words so far as the material sense is
concerned; with this exception, that Satan is mentioned as the seducer
of the nations in the Apocalypse, whereas Ezekiel gives prominence to
the leading of God, which controls the manifestations even of evil, "so
that these two passages stand in the same relation to one another as
[Sa2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#001) and [Ch1
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001)" (Hv.). In [Eze
38:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004) the army is depicted as one
splendidly equipped and very numerous. For לבשׁי מכלול, see the comm. on
[Eze 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012), where the Assyrian satraps
are so described. קהל , as in [Eze
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#017). The words buckler and shield
are loosely appended in the heat of the discourse, without any logical
subordination to what precedes. Besides the defensive arms, the greater
and smaller shield, they carried swords as weapons of offence. In the
case of the nations in [Eze 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#005), only
the shield and helmet are mentioned as their equipment, for the sake of
variation, as in [Eze 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010); and in
[Eze 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#006) two other nations of the
extreme north with their hosts are added. Gomer: the Cimmerians; and the
house of Togarmah: the Armenians (see the comm. on [Eze
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#014)). For אגפּים, see the comm. on
[Eze 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014). The description is finally
rounded off with עמּים רבּים . In [Eze
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#007), the infin. abs. Niphal הכּון,
which occurs nowhere else except in [Amo
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#012), is used emphatically in the
place of the imperative. The repetition of the same verb, though in the
imperative Hiphil, equip, i.e., make ready, sc. everything necessary
(cf. [Eze 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#014)), also serves to
strengthen the thought. Be thou to them למשׁמר, for heed, or watch,
i.e., as abstr. pro concr., one who gives heed to them, keeps watch over
them (cf. [Job 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#012) and [Neh
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#003), [Neh
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#016)), in actual fact their leader.

[Eze 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#008) and [Eze
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#009) indicate for what Gog was to hold
himself ready. The first clause reminds so strongly of מרוב ימים in [Isa
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#022), that the play upon this passage
cannot possibly be mistaken; so that Ezekiel uses the words in the same
sense as Isaiah, though Hvernick is wrong in supposing that הפּקד is
used in the sense of being missed or wanting, i.e., of perishing. The
word never has the latter meaning; and to be missed does not suit the
context either here or in Isaiah, where יפּקד means to be visited, i.e.,
brought to punishment. And here also this meaning, visitari (Vulg.), is
to be retained, and that in the sense of a penal visitation. The
objection raised, namely, that there is no reference to punishment here,
but that this is first mentioned in [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016) or 18, loses all its force if we
bear in mind that visiting is a more general idea than punishing; and
the visitation consisted in the fact of God's leading Gog to invade the
land of Israel, that He might sanctify Himself upon him by judgment.
This might very fittingly be here announced, and it also applies to the
parallel clause which follows: thou wilt come into the land, etc., with
which the explanation commences of the way in which God would visit him.
The only other meaning which could also answer to the parallelism of the
clauses, viz., to be commanded, to receive command (Hitzig and
Kliefoth), is neither sustained by the usage of the language, nor in
accordance with the context. In the passages quoted in support of this,
viz., [Neh 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#001) and [Neh
12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044), נפקד merely signifies to be
charged with the oversight of a thing; and it never means only to
receive command to do anything. Moreover, Gog has already been appointed
leader of the army in v.7, and therefore is not "to be placed in the
supreme command" for the first time after many days. מיּמים רבּים, after
many days, i.e., after a long time (cf. [Jos
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001)), is not indeed equivalent in
itself to בּאחרית השּׁנים, but signifies merely the lapse of a
lengthened period; yet this is defined here as occurring in the אחרית
השּׁנים. - אחרית השּׁנים, equivalent to אחרית היּמים ([Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016)), is the end of days, the last
time, not the future generally, but the final future, the Messianic time
of the completing of the kingdom of God (see the comm. on [Gen
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)). This meaning is also applicable
here. For Gog is to come up to the mountains of Israel, which have been
laid waste תּמיד, continually, i.e., for a long time, but are now
inhabited again. Although, for example, תּמיד signifies a period of time
relatively long, it evidently indicates a longer period than the seventy
or fifty years' desolation of the land during the Babylonian captivity;
more especially if we take it in connection with the preceding ad
following statements, to the effect that Gog will come into the land,
which has been brought back from the sword and gathered out of many
peoples. These predicates show that in ארץ the idea of the population of
the land is the predominant one; for this alone could be gathered out of
many nations, and also brought back from the sword, i.e., not from the
consequences of the calamity of war, viz., exile (Rosenmller), but
restored from being slain and exiled by the sword of the enemy. משׁובבת,
passive participle of the Pilel שׁובב, to restore (cf. [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)); not turned away from the
sword, i.e., in no expectation of war (Hitzig), which does not answer to
the parallel clause, and cannot be sustained by [Mic
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#008). מעמּים , gathered out of many
peoples, points also beyond the Babylonian captivity to the dispersion
of Israel in all the world, which did not take place till the second
destruction of Jerusalem, and shows that תּמיד denotes a much longer
devastation of the land than the Chaldean devastation was. והיא
introduces a circumstantial clause; and היא points back to ארץ, i.e., to
the inhabitants of the land. These are now brought out of the nations,
i.e., at the time when Gog invades the land, and are dwelling in their
own land upon the mountains of Israel in untroubled security. עלה
signifies the advance of an enemy, as in [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001), etc. שׁואה, a tempest, as in [Pro
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#027), from שׁאה, to roar. The
comparison to a cloud is limited to the covering; but this does not
alter the signification of the cloud as a figurative representation of
severe calamity.

[Ezekiel 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 38:10</span></span>

Account of the motive by which Gog was induced to undertake his warlike
expedition, and incurred guilt, notwithstanding the fact that he was led
by God, and in consequence of which he brought upon himself the judgment
of destruction that was about to fall upon him. - [Eze
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010). Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, It
shall come to pass in that day, that things will come up in thy heart,
and thou wilt devise an evil design, [Eze
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011). And say, I will go up into the
open country, I will come upon the peaceful ones, who are all dwelling
in safety, who dwell without walls, and have not bars and gates, [Eze
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012). To take plunder and to gather
spoil, to bring back thy hand against the ruins that are inhabited
again, and against a people gathered out of the nations, carrying on
trade and commerce, who dwell on the navel of the earth. [Eze
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#013). Sabaea and Dedan, and the
merchants of Tarshish, and all her young lions, will say to thee, Dost
thou come to take plunder? Hast thou gathered thy multitude of people to
take spoil? Is it to carry away gold and silver, to take possession and
gain, to plunder a great spoil? [Eze
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014). Therefore prophesy, son of man,
and say to Gog, Thus saith the Lord Jehovah, Is it not so? On that day,
when my people Israel dwelleth in security, thou wilt observe it, [Eze
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#015). And come from thy place from
the extreme north, thou and many peoples with thee, all riding upon
horses, a great crowd and a numerous army, [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016). And wilt march against my
people Israel, to cover the land like a cloud; at the end of the days it
will take place; then shall I lead thee against my land, that the
nations may know me, when I sanctify myself upon thee before their eyes,
O Gog. - In [Eze 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#010) דּברים are not
words, but things which come into his mind. What things these are, we
learn from [Eze 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#011) and [Eze
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012); but first of all, these things
are described as evil thoughts or designs. Gog resolves to fall upon
Israel, now living in peace and security, and dwelling in open
unfortified places, and to rob and plunder it. ארץ , literally, land of
plains, i.e., a land which has no fortified towns, but only places lying
quite exposed (see the comm. on [Zac
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)); because its inhabitants are
living in undisturbed peace and safe repose, and therefore dwell in
places that have no walls with gates and bars (cf. [Jdg
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#007); [Jer
49:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#031)). This description of Israel's
mode of life also points beyond the times succeeding the Babylonian
captivity to the Messianic days, when the Lord will have destroyed the
horses and war-chariots and fortresses ([Mic
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#009)), and Jerusalem will be inhabited
as an open country because of the multitude of the men and cattle, and
the Lord will be a wall of fire round about her ([Zac
2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008)). For [Eze
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#012), compare [Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006). להשׁיב ידך is not dependent upon
אעלה, like the preceding infinitives, but is subordinate to אמרתּ אעלה
וגו: "thou sayest, I will go up...to turn thy hand." השׁיב, to bring
back, is to be explained from the fact that the heathen had already at
an earlier period turned their hand against the towns of Israel, and
plundered their possessions and goods. חרבות נושׁבות in this connection
are desolate places which are inhabited again, and therefore have been
rebuilt (cf. [Eze 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#020); [Eze
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#019)). מקנה and קנין are synonyms;
and מקנה does not mean flocks or herds, but gain, possession (cf. [Gen
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#006); [Gen
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#018); [Gen
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#023)). One motive of Gog for making
the attack was to be found in the possessions of Israel; a second is
given in the words: who dwell upon the navel of the earth. This
figurative expression is to be explained from [Eze
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005) : "Jerusalem in the midst of the
nations." This navel is not a figure denoting the high land, but
signifies the land situated in the middle of the earth, and therefore
the land most glorious and most richly blessed; so that they who dwell
there occupy the most exalted position among the nations. A covetous
desire for the possessions of the people of God, and envy at his exalted
position in the centre of the world, are therefore the motives by which
Gog is impelled to enter upon his predatory expedition against the
people living in the depth of peace. This covetousness is so great, that
even the rich trading populations of Sabaea, Dedan, and Tarshish (cf.
[Eze 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022), [Eze
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020), and [Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012)) perceive it, and declare that
it is this alone which has determined Gog to undertake his expedition.
The words of these peoples ([Eze
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#013)) are not to be taken as
expressing their sympathies (Kliefoth), but serve to give prominence to
the obvious thirst for booty which characterizes the multitude led by
Gog. כּפיריה, their young lions, are the rapacious rulers of these
trading communities, according to [Eze
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#003) and [Eze
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002). - [Eze
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014) introduces the announcement of
the punishment, which consists of another summary account of the daring
enterprise of Gog and his hosts (cf. [Eze
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014), [Eze
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#015), and [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016) with [Eze
38:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004)), and a clear statement of the
design of God in leading him against His people and land. תּדע ([Eze
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#014), close), of which different
renderings have been given, does not mean, thou wilt experience, or be
aware of, the punishment; but the object is to be taken from the
context: thou wilt know, or perceive, sc. that Israel dwells securely,
not expecting any hostile invasion. The rendering of the lxx (ἐγερθήσῃ)
does not furnish any satisfactory ground for altering תּדע into תער =
תּעור (Ewald, Hitzig). With the words 'והביאותיך וגו ([Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016)) the opening thought of the
whole picture ([Eze 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004)) is resumed
and defined with greater precision, for the purpose of attaching to it
the declaration of the design of the Lord in bringing Gog, namely, to
sanctify Himself upon him before the eyes of the nations (cf. [Eze
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#023) and [Eze
36:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023)).

[Ezekiel 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 38:17</span></span>

Announcement of the Wrathful Judgment upon Gog, as a Proof of the
Holiness of the Lord

[Eze 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017). Thus saith the Lord
Jehovah, Art thou he of whom I spoke in the former days through my
servants the prophets of Israel, who prophesied for years in those days,
that I would bring thee over them? [Eze
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#018). And it cometh to pass in that
day, in the day when Gog cometh into the land of Israel, is the saying
of the Lord Jehovah, that my wrath will ascend into my nose. [Eze
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#019). And in my jealousy, in the fire
of my anger, have I spoken, Truly in that day will a great trembling
come over the land of Israel; [Eze
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#020). The fishes of the sea, and the
birds of heaven, and the beasts of the field, and every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the ground, and all the men that are upon the ground,
will tremble before me; and the mountains will be destroyed, and the
rocky heights fall, and every wall will fall to the ground. [Eze
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#021). I will call the sword against
him to all my holy mountains, is the saying of the Lord Jehovah: the
sword of the one will be against the other. [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022). And I will strive with him by
pestilence and by blood, and overflowing rain-torrents and hailstones;
fire and brimstone will I rain upon him and all his hosts, and upon the
many peoples that are with him; [Eze
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#023). And will prove myself great and
holy, and will make myself known before the eyes of many nations, that
they may know that I am Jehovah. - The announcement of the way in which
the Lord will sanctify Himself upon Gog ([Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016)) commences with the statement in
[Eze 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#017), that Gog is he of whom God
has already spoken by the earlier prophets. This assertion is clothed in
the form of a question: האתּה, not הלא אתּה, which is the interrogative
form used for an emphatic assurance; whereas האתּה does not set down the
point in question as indisputably certain, but suggests the inquiry for
the purpose of giving a definite answer. The affirmative reply to the
question asked is contained in the last clause of the verse: "to bring
thee upon them;" so that האתּה הוּא really means, thou art truly he. The
statement, that Gog is he of whom God had already spoken by the earlier
prophets, does not mean that those prophets had actually mentioned Gog,
but simply that Gog was the enemy of whose rising up against the people
of God the prophets of the former time had prophesied, as well as of his
destruction by a wrathful judgment of the Lord. שׁנים (for years, or
years long) is an accusative of measure, not asyndeton to baבּיּמים, as
the lxx and many of the commentators down to Hvernick have taken it to
be. The design of this remark is not to accredit the prophecy by
referring to the utterances of earlier prophets, but to show that the
attack of the peoples gathered together by Gog, upon the land and people
of the Lord, is not an unexpected event, or one at variance with the
promise of the restoration of Israel as a kingdom of peace. To what
utterances of the older prophets these words refer is a question
difficult to answer. Zechariah ([Zac
12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#002); [Zac
14:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#002)) is of course not to be thought
of, as Zechariah himself did not prophesy till after the captivity, and
therefore not till after Ezekiel. But we may recall Joel 4:2 and 11ff.;
[Isa 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#005), [Isa
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#010)., [Eze
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#021); [Jer
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023) and 25; and, in fact, all the
earlier prophets who prophesied of Jehovah's day of judgment upon all
the heathen.

(Note: Aug. Kueper (Jeremias librr. sacrr., interpr. atque vindex, p.
82) has correctly observed concerning this verse, that "it is evident
enough that there is no reference here to prophecies concerning Gog and
Magog, which have been lost; but those general prophecies, which are met
with on every hand directed against the enemies of the church, are here
referred to Gog." And before him, J. F. Starck had already said: "In my
opinion, we are to understand all those passages in the prophets which
treat of the enemies of the church and its persecutions...these
afflictions were preludes and shadows of the bloody persecution of
Gog.")

[Eze 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#018) and [Eze
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#019) do not contain words which
Jehovah spoke through the ancient prophets, and which Ezekiel now
transfers to Gog and the time of his appearing (Hitzig and Kliefoth).
The perfect דּבּרתּי in [Eze 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#019) by
no means warrants such an assumption; for this is purely prophetic,
expressing the certainty of the divine determination as a thing clearly
proved. Still less can 'נאם אד in [Eze
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#018) be taken as a preterite, as
Kliefoth supposes; nor can [Eze 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#018)
and [Eze 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#019) be regarded as a thing
long predicted, and so be separated from [Eze
38:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#020) as a word of God which is now
for the first time uttered. For the anthropopathetic expression, "my
wrath ascends in my nose," compare [Psa
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#009), "smoke ascends in His nose." The
outburst of wrath shows itself in the vehement breath which the wrathful
man inhales and exhales through his nose (see the comm. on the Psalm,
l.c.). The bursting out of the wrath of God is literally explained in
[Eze 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#019). In the jealousy of His
wrath God has spoken, i.e., determined, to inflict a great trembling
upon the land of Israel. בּקנאתי (cf. [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013)) is strengthened by בּאשׁ עברתי
(cf. Ezekiel 21:36; [Eze 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#021)). The
trembling which will come upon the land of Israel, so that all creatures
in the sea, in the air, and upon the ground, tremble before Jehovah
(מפּני), who appears to judgment, will rise in nature into an actual
earthquake, which overthrows mountains, hills, and walls. מדרגות are
steep heights, which can only be ascended by steps ([Sol
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014)). This picture of the trembling
of the whole world, with all the creatures, before the Lord who is
coming to judgment, both here and in Joel 4:16, [Zac
14:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004), rests upon the fact which
actually occurred in connection with the revelation of God upon Sinai,
when the whole mountain was made to quake ([Exo
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016).). The inhabitants of the land
of Israel tremble at the terrible phenomena attending the revelation of
the wrath of God, although the wrathful judgment does not apply to them,
but to their enemies, Gog and his hosts. The Lord calls the sword
against Gog, that his hosts may wound and slay one another. This feature
of the destruction of the enemy by wounds inflicted by itself, which we
meet with again in [Zac 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#013), has its
typical exemplar in the defeat of the Midianites in the time of Gideon
([Jdg 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#022)), and also in that of the
enemy invading Judah in the reign of Jehoshaphat ([Ch2
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#023)). In לכל־הרי the ל is not
distributive, but indicates the direction: "to all my mountains." The
overthrow of the enemy is intensified by marvellous plagues inflicted by
God - pestilence and blood (cf. [Eze
28:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#023)), torrents of rain and
hailstones (cf. [Eze 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#011)), and the
raining of fire and brimstone upon Gog, as formerly upon Sodom and
Gomorrah ([Gen 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)). - Thus will
Jehovah prove Himself to be the almighty God by judgment upon His
enemies, and sanctify Himself before all the nations ([Eze
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#023), compare [Eze
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#016) and [Eze
36:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#023)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 39](eze039)

</div>
