<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr003)  [Next](ezr005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

[Ezra 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 4:1</span></span>

The adversaries of the Jews prevent the building of the temple till the
reign of Darius ([Ezr 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001), [Ezr
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002)). When the adversaries of Judah
and Benjamin heard that the community which had returned from captivity
were beginning to rebuild the temple, they came to Zerubbabel, and to
the chiefs of the people, and desired to take part in this work, because
they also sacrificed to the God of Israel. These adversaries were,
according to [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002), the people whom
Esarhaddon king of Assyria had settled in the neighbourhood of Benjamin
and Judah. If we compare with this verse the information ([Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024)) that the kings of Assyria
brought men from Cuthah, and from Ava, and from Hamath, and from
Sepharvaim, and placed them in the cities of Samaria, and that they took
possession of the depopulated kingdom of the ten tribes, and dwelt
therein; then these adversaries of Judah and Benjamin are the
inhabitants of the former kingdom of Israel, who were called Samaritans
after the central-point of their settlement. הגּולה בּני, sons of the
captivity ([Ezr 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019), etc., [Ezr
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035); [Ezr
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#007), [Ezr
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#016)), also shortly into הגּולה,
e.g., [Ezr 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#011), are the Israelites
returned from the Babylonian captivity, who composed the new community
in Judah and Jerusalem. Those who returned with Zerubbabel, and took
possession of the dwelling-places of their ancestors, being, exclusive
of priests and Levites, chiefly members of the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, are called, especially when named in distinction from the
other inhabitants of the land, Judah and Benjamin. The adversaries give
the reason of their request to share in the building of the temple in
the words: "For we seek your God as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto Him
since the days of Esarhaddon king of Assyria, which brought us up
hither." The words זבחים אנחנוּ ולא are variously explained. Older
expositors take the Chethiv ולא as a negative, and make זבחים to mean
the offering of sacrifices to idols, both because לא is a negative, and
also because the assertion that they had sacrificed to Jahve would not
have pleased the Jews, quia deficiente templo non debuerint sacrificare;
and sacrifices not offered in Jerusalem were regarded as equivalent to
sacrifices to idols. They might, moreover, fitly strengthen their case
by the remark: "Since the days of Esarhaddon we offer no sacrifices to
idols." On the other hand, however, it is arbitrary to understand זבח,
without any further definition, of sacrificing to idols; and the
statement, "We already sacrifice to the God of Israel," contains
undoubtedly a far stronger reason for granting their request than the
circumstance that they do not sacrifice to idols. Hence we incline, with
older translators (lxx, Syr., Vulg., 1 Esdras), to regard לא as an
unusual form of לו, occurring in several places (see on [Exo
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)), the latter being also
substituted in the present instance as Keri. The position also of לא
before אנחנוּ points the same way, for the negative would certainly have
stood with the verb. On Esarhaddon, see remarks on [Kg2
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037) and [Isa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038).

[Ezra 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 4:3</span></span>

Zerubbabel and the other chiefs of Israel answer, "It is not for you and
for us to build a house to our God;" i.e., You and we cannot together
build a house to the God who is our God; "but we alone will build it to
Jahve the God of Israel, as King Cyrus commanded us." יחד אנחנוּ, we
together, i.e., we alone (without your assistance). By the emphasis
placed upon "our God" and "Jahve the God of Israel," the assertion of
the adversaries, "We seek your God as ye do," is indirectly refuted. If
Jahve is the God of Israel, He is not the God of those whom Esarhaddon
brought into the land. The appeal to the decree of Cyrus ([Ezr
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#003), comp. [Ezr
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#006), etc.) forms a strong argument for
the sole agency of Jews in building the temple, inasmuch as Cyrus had
invited those only who were of His (Jahve's) people ([Ezr
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#003)). Hence the leaders of the new
community were legally justified in rejecting the proposal of the
colonists brought in by Esarhaddon. For the latter were neither members
of the people of Jahve, nor Israelites, nor genuine worshippers of
Jahve. They were non-Israelites, and designated themselves as those whom
the king of Assyria had brought into the land. According to [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024), the king of Assyria brought
colonists from Babylon, Cuthah, and other places, and placed them in the
cities of Samaria instead of the children of Israel. Now we cannot
suppose that every Israelite, to the very last man, was carried away by
the Assyrians; such a deportation of a conquered people being unusual,
and indeed impossible. Apart, then, from the passage, [Ch2
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#006), etc., which many expositors
refer to the time of the destruction of the kingdom of the ten tribes,
we find that in the time of King Josiah ([Ch2
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009)), when the foreign colonists had
been for a considerable period in the country, there were still remnants
of Manasseh, of Ephraim, and of all Israel, who gave contributions for
the house of God at Jerusalem; and also that in [Kg2
23:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015) and [Ch2
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#006), a remnant of the Israelite
inhabitants still existed in the former territory of the ten tribes. The
eighty men, too, who ([Jer 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#005), etc.)
came, after the destruction of the temple, from Shechem, Shiloh, and
Samaria, mourning, and bringing offerings and incense to Jerusalem, to
the place of the house of God, which was still a holy place to them,
were certainly Israelites of the ten tribes still left in the land, and
who had probably from the days of Josiah adhered to the temple worship.
These remnants, however, of the Israelites inhabitants in the
territories of the former kingdom of the ten tribes, are not taken into
account in the present discussion concerning the erection of the temple;
because, however considerable their numbers might be, they formed no
community independent of the colonists, but were dispersed among them,
and without political influence. It is not indeed impossible "that the
colonists were induced through the influence exercised upon them by the
Israelites living in their midst to prefer to the Jews the request, 'Let
us build with you;' still those who made the proposal were not
Israelites, but the foreign colonists" (Bertheau). These were neither
members of the chosen people nor worshippers of the God of Israel. At
their first settlement ([Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024),
etc.) they evidently feared not the Lord, nor did they learn to do so
till the king of Assyria, at their request, sent them one of the priests
who had been carried away to teach them the manner of worshipping the
God of the land. This priest, being a priest of the Israelitish
calf-worship, took up his abode at Bethel, and taught them to worship
Jahve under the image of a golden calf. Hence arose a worship which is
thus described, [Kg2 17:29-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#029) : Every
nation made gods of their own, and put them in the houses of the high
places which the Samaritans, i.e., the former inhabitants of the kingdom
of the ten tribes, had made, every nation in their cities wherein they
dwelt. And besides their idols Nergal, Asima, Nibhaz, Tartak, they
feared Jahve; they sacrificed to all these gods as well as to Him. A
mixed worship which the prophet-historian ([Kg2
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#034)) thus condemns: "They fear not
the Lord, and do after their statutes and ordinances, not after the law
and commandment which the Lord commanded to the sons of Jacob." And so,
it is finally said ([Kg2 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#041)), do
also their children and children's children unto this day, i.e., about
the middle of the Babylonian captivity; nor was it will a subsequent
period that the Samaritans renounced gross idolatry. The rulers and
heads of Judah could not acknowledge that Jahve whom the colonists
worshipped as a local god, together with other gods, in the houses of
the high places at Bethel and elsewhere, to be the God of Israel, to
whom they were building a temple at Jerusalem. For the question was not
whether they would permit Israelites who earnestly sought Jahve to
participate in His worship at Jerusalem-a permission which they
certainly would have refused to none who sincerely desired to turn to
the Lord God-but whether they would acknowledge a mixed population of
Gentiles and Israelites, whose worship was more heathen than Israelite,
and who nevertheless claimed on its account to belong to the people of
God.

(Note: The opinion of Knobel, that those who preferred the request were
not the heathen colonists placed in the cities of Samaria by the
Assyrian king ([Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024)), but the
priests sent by the Assyrian king to Samaria ([Kg2
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#027)), has been rejected as utterly
unfounded by Bertheau, who at the same time demonstrates, against
Fritzsche on 1 Esdr. 5:65, the identity of the unnamed king of Assyria
([Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024)) with Esarhaddon.)

To such, the rulers of Judah could not, without unfaithfulness to the
Lord their God, permit a participation in the building of the Lord's
house.

[Ezra 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 4:4</span></span>

In consequence of this refusal, the adversaries of Judah sought to
weaken the hands of the people, and to deter them from building. הארץ
עם, the people of the land, i.e., the inhabitants of the country, the
colonists dwelling in the land, the same who in [Ezr
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001) are called the adversaries of
Judah and Benjamin. ויהי followed by the participle expresses the
continuance of the inimical attempts. To weaken the hands of any one,
means to deprive him of strength and courage for action; comp. [Jer
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004). יהוּדה עם are the inhabitants of
the realm of Judah, who, including the Benjamites, had returned from
captivity, Judah being now used to designate the whole territory of the
new community, as before the captivity the entire southern kingdom;
comp. [Ezr 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006). Instead of the Chethiv
מבלּהים, the Keri offer מבהלים, from בהל, Piel, to terrify, to alarm,
[Ch2 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#018); [Job
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#006), because the verb בלה nowhere
else occurs; but the noun בּלּהה, fear, being not uncommon, and
presupposing the existence of a verb בּלהּ, the correctness of the
Chethiv cannot be impugned.

[Ezra 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 4:5</span></span>

And they hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose (of
building the temple). וסכרים still depends on the ויהי of [Ezr
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004). סכר is a later orthography of
שׂכר, to hire, to bribe. Whether by the hiring of יועציט we are to
understand the corruption of royal counsellors or ministers, or the
appointment of legal agents to act against the Jewish community at the
Persian court, and to endeavour to obtain an inhibition against the
erection of the temple, does not appear. Thus much only is evident from
the text, that the adversaries succeeded in frustrating the continuance
of the building "all the days of Koresh," i.e., the yet remaining five
years of Cyrus, who was for the space of seven years sole ruler of
Babylon; while the machinations against the building, begun immediately
after the laying of its foundations in the second year of the return,
had the effect, in the beginning of the third year of Cyrus (judging
from [Dan 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#002)), of putting a stop to
the work until the reign of Darius, - in all, fourteen years, viz., five
years of Cyrus, seven and a half of Cambyses, seven months of the
Pseudo-Smerdis, and one year of Darius (till the second year of his
reign).

[Ezra 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 4:6</span></span>

Complaints against the Jews to Kings Ahashverosh and Artachshasta. - The
right understanding of this section depends upon the question, What
kings of Persia are meant by Ahashverosh and Artachshasta? while the
answer to this question is, in part at least, determined by the contents
of the letter, [Ezr 4:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008), sent by
the enemies of the Jews to the latter monarch.

[Ezr 4:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)

And in the reign of Ahashverosh, in the beginning of his reign, they
wrote an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem.
שׂטנה, not to mention the name of the well, [Gen
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#021), occurs here only, and means,
according to its derivation from שׂטן, to bear enmity, the enmity; hence
here, the accusation. ישׁבי על belongs to שׂטנה, not to כּתבוּ; the
letter was sent, not to the inhabitants of Judah, but to the king
against the Jews. The contents of this letter are not given, but may be
inferred from the designation שׂטנה. The letter to Artachshasta then
follows, [Ezr 4:7-16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007). In his days,
i.e., during his reign, wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest
of their companions. כּנותו, for which the Keri offers the ordinary form
כּנותיו mrof yra, occurs only here in the Hebrew sections, but more
frequently in the Chaldee (comp. [Ezr
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009), [Ezr
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017), [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023); [Ezr
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#003), and elsewhere), in the sense of
companions or fellow-citizens; according to Gesenius, it means those who
bear the same surname (Kunje) together with another, though Ewald is of
a different opinion; see 117, b, note. The singular would be written
כּנת (Ewald, 187, d). And the writing of the letter was written in
Aramaean (i.e., with Aramaean characters), and interpreted in (i.e.,
translated into) Aramaean. נשׁתּון is of Aryan origin, and connected
with the modern Persian nuwishten, to write together; it signifies in
Hebrew and Chaldee a letter: comp. [Ezr
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#018), where נשׁתּונא is used for
אגּרתּא of [Ezr 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011). Bertheau
translates הנּשׁתּון כּתב, copy of the letter, and regards it as quite
identical with the Chaldee אגּרתּא פּרשׁגן, [Ezr
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011); he can hardly, however, be in
the right. כּתב does not mean a transcript or copy, but only a writing
(comp. [Est 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008)). This, too, does away
with the inference "that the writer of this statement had before him
only an Aramaean translation of the letter contained in the state-papers
or chronicles which he made use of." It is not כּתב, the copy or
writing, but הנּשׁתּון, the letter, that is the subject of ארמית מתרגּם,
interpreted in Aramaean. This was translated into the Aramaean or Syrian
tongue. The passage is not to be understood as stating that the letter
was drawn up in the Hebrew or Samaritan tongue, and then translated into
Aramaean, but simply that the letter was not composed in the native
language of the writers, but in Aramaean. Thus Gesenius rightly asserts,
in his Thes. p. 1264, et lingua aramaea scripta erat; in saying which
תרגם does not receive the meaning concepit, expressit, but retains its
own signification, to interpret, to translate into another language. The
writers of the letter were Samaritans, who, having sprung from the
intermingling of the Babylonian settlers brought in by Esarhaddon and
the remnants of the Israelitish population, spoke a language more nearly
akin to Hebrew than to Aramaean, which was spoken at the Babylonian
court, and was the official language of the Persian kings and the
Persian authorities in Western Asia. This Aramaean tongue had also its
own characters, differing from those of the Hebrew and Samaritan. This
is stated by the words ארמית כּתוּב, whence Bertheau erroneously infers
that this Aramaean writing was written in other than the ordinary
Aramaean, and perhaps in Hebrew characters.

This letter, too, of Bishlam and his companions seems to be omitted.
There follows, indeed, in [Ezr 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008),
etc., a letter to King Artachshasta, of which a copy is given in [Ezr
4:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011); but the names of the writers
are different from those mentioned in [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007). The three names, Bishlam,
Mithredath, and Tabeel ([Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007)),
cannot be identified with the two names Rehum and Shimshai ([Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008)). When we consider, however, that
the writers named in [Ezr 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008) were
high officials of the Persian king, sending to the monarch a written
accusation against the Jews in their own and their associates' names, it
requires but little stretch of the imagination to suppose that these
personages were acting at the instance of the adversaries named in [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007), the Samaritans Bishlam,
Mithredath, and Tabeel, and merely inditing the complaints raised by
these opponents against the Jews. This view, which is not opposed by the
כּתב of [Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007), - this word not
necessarily implying an autograph, - commends itself to our acceptance,
first, because the notion that the contents of this letter are not given
finds no analogy in [Ezr 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006), where
the contents of the letter to Ahashverosh are sufficiently hinted at by
the word שׂטנה; while, with regard to the letter of [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007), we should have not a notion of
its purport in case it were not the same which is given in [Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008), etc.

(Note: The weight of this argument is indirectly admitted by Ewald
(Gesch. iv. p. 119) and Bertheau, inasmuch as both suppose that there is
a long gap in the narrative, and regard the Aramaean letter mentioned in
[Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007) to have been a petition, on
the part of persons of consideration in the community at Jerusalem, to
the new king, - two notions which immediately betray themselves to be
the expedients of perplexity. The supposed "long gaps, which the
chronicler might well leave even in transcribing from his documents"
(Ew.), do not explain the abrupt commencement of [Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008). If a petition from the Jewish
community to the king were spoken of in [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007), the accusation against the Jews
in [Ezr 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008) would certainly have been
alluded to by at least a ו adversative, or some other adversative
particle.)

Besides, the statement concerning the Aramaean composition of this
letter would have been utterly purposeless if the Aramaean letter
following in [Ezr 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008) had been an
entirely different one. The information concerning the language in which
the letter was written has obviously no other motive than to introduce
its transcription in the original Aramaean. This conjecture becomes a
certainty through the fact that the Aramaean letter follows in [Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008) without a copula of any kind. If
any other had been intended, the ו copulative would not more have been
omitted here than in [Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007). The
letter itself, indeed, does not begin till [Ezr
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009), while [Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008) contains yet another announcement
of it. This circumstance, however, is explained by the fact that the
writers of the letters are other individuals than those named in [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007), but chiefly by the consideration
that the letter, together with the king's answer, being derived from an
Aramaean account of the building of the temple, the introduction to the
letter found therein was also transcribed.

[Ezr 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008)

The writers of the letter are designated by titles which show them to
have been among the higher functionaries of Artachshasta. Rehum is
called טעם בּעל, dominus consilii v. decreti, by others consiliarius,
royal counsellor, probably the title of the Persian civil governor
(erroneously taken for a proper name in lxx, Syr., Arab.); Shimshai,
ספרא, the Hebrew סופר, scribe, secretary. כּנמא is interpreted by Rashi
and Aben Ezra by כּאשׁר נאמר, as we shall say; נמא is in the Talmud
frequently an abbreviation of נאמר or נימר, of like signification with
לאמר: as follows.

[Ezr 4:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009)

After this introduction we naturally look for the letter itself in [Ezr
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009), instead of which we have ([Ezr
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009) and [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010)) a full statement of who were the
senders; and then, after a parenthetical interpolation, "This is the
copy of the letter," etc., the letter itself in [Ezr
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011). The statement is rather a clumsy
one, the construction especially exhibiting a want of sequence. The verb
to אדין is wanting; this follows in [Ezr
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011), but as an anacoluthon, after an
enumeration of the names in [Ezr 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009)
and [Ezr 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010) with שׁלחוּ. The
sentence ought properly to run thus: "Then (i.e., in the days of
Artachshasta) Rehum, etc., sent a letter to King Artachshasta, of which
the following is a copy: Thy servants, the men on this side the river,"
etc. The names enumerated in [Ezr 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009)
and [Ezr 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010) were undoubtedly all
inserted in the superscription or preamble of the letter, to give weight
to the accusation brought against the Jews. The author of the Chaldee
section of the narrative, however, has placed them first, and made the
copy of the letter itself begin only with the words, "Thy servants,"
etc. First come the names of the superior officials, Rehum and Shimshai,
and the rest of their companions. The latter are then separately
enumerated: The Dinaites, lxx Δειναῖοι, - so named, according to the
conjecture of Ewald (Gesch. iii. p. 676), from the Median city long
afterwards called Deinaver (Abulf. Gegr. ed. Paris. p. 414); the
Apharsathchites, probably the Pharathiakites of Strabo (15:3. 12)
(Παρητακηνοί, Herod. i. 101), on the borders of Persia and Media,
described as being, together with the Elymaites, a predatory people
relying on their mountain fastnesses; the Tarpelites, whom Junius
already connects with the Τάπουροι dwelling east of Elymais (Ptol. vi.
2. 6); the Apharsites, probably the Persians (פרסיא with א prosthetic);
the Archevites, probably so called from the city ארך, [Gen
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010), upon inscriptions Uruk, the
modern Warka; the בּבליא, Babylonians, inhabitants of Babylon; the
Shushanchites, i.e., the Susanites, inhabitants of the city of Susa;
דּהוא, in the Keri דּהיא, the Dehavites, the Grecians (Δάοι, Herod. i.
125); and lastly, the Elamites, the people of Elam or Elymais. Full as
this enumeration may seem, yet the motive being to name as many races as
possible, the addition, "and the rest of the nations whom the great and
noble Osnapper brought over and set in the city of Samaria, and the rest
that are on this side the river," etc., is made for the sake of
enhancing the statement. Prominence being given both here and [Ezr
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017) to the city of Samaria as the
city in which Osnapper had settled the colonists here named, the
"nations brought in by Osnapper" must be identical with those who,
according to [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002), and [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024), had been placed in the cities
of Samaria by King Esarhaddon. Hence Osnapper would seem to be merely
another name for Esarhaddon. But the names Osnapper (lxx Ἀσσεναφάρ) and
Asarhaddon (lxx Ἀσαραδάν) being too different to be identified, and the
notion that Osnapper was a second name of Asarhaddon having but little
probability, together with the circumstance that Osnapper is not called
king, as Asarhaddon is [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002), but
only "the great and noble," it is more likely that he was some high
functionary of Asarhaddon, who presided over the settlement of eastern
races in Samaria and the lands west of the Euphrates. "In the cities,"
or at least the preposition ב, must be supplied from the preceding
בּקריה before נהרה עבר שׁאר: and in the rest of the territory, or in the
cities of the rest of the territory, on this side of Euphrates. עבר,
trans, is to be understood of the countries west of Euphrates; matters
being regarded from the point of view of the settlers, who had been
transported from the territories east, to those west of Euphrates.
וּכענת means "and so forth," and hints that the statement is not
complete.

On comparing the names of the nations here mentioned with the names of
the cities from which, according to [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024), colonists were brought to
Samaria, we find the inhabitants of most of the cities there named -
Babylon, Cuthah, and Ava - here comprised under the name of the country
as בּבליא, Babylonians; while the people of Hamath and Sepharvaim may
fitly be included among "the rest of the nations," since certainly but
few colonists would have been transported from the Syrian Hamath to
Samaria. The main divergence between the two passages arises from the
mention in our present verse, not only of the nations planted in the
cities of Samaria, but of all the nations in the great region on this
side of Euphrates (נהרה עבר). All these tribes had similar interests to
defend in opposing the Jewish community, and they desired by united
action to give greater force to their representation to the Persian
monarch, and thus to hinder the people of Jerusalem from becoming
powerful. And certainly they had some grounds for uneasiness lest the
remnant of the Israelites in Palestine, and in other regions on this
side the Euphrates, should combine with the Jerusalem community, and the
thus united Israelites should become sufficiently powerful to oppose an
effectual resistance to their heathen adversaries. On the anacoluthistic
connection of [Ezr 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011). פּרשׁגן, [Ezr
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011), [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023); [Ezr
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#006); [Ezr
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011), and frequently in the Targums
and the Syriac, written פּתשׁגן [Est
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#014) and [Est
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008), is derived from the Zendish paiti
(Sanscr. prati) and enghana (in Old-Persian thanhana), and signifies
properly a counterword, i.e., counterpart, copy. The form with ר is
either a corruption, or formed from a compound with fra; comp.
Gildemeister in the Zeitschr. fr die Kunde des Morgenl. iv. p. 210, and
Haug in Ewald's bibl. Jahrb. v. p. 163, etc. - The copy of the letter
begins with עבדּיך, thy servants, the men, etc. The Chethib עבדיך is the
original form, shortened in the Keri into עבדּך. Both forms occur
elsewhere; comp. [Dan 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#029); [Dan
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#012), and other passages. The וכענת,
etc., here stands for the full enumeration of the writers already given
in [Ezr 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009), and also for the
customary form of salutation.

[Ezr 4:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012)

The letter. [Ezr 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012) "Be it known
unto the king." On the form להוא for יהוא, peculiar to biblical Chaldee,
see remarks on [Dan 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#020). "Which are
come up from thee," i.e., from the territory where thou art tarrying; in
other words, from the country beyond Euphrates. This by no means leads
to the inference, as Schrader supposes, that these Jews had been
transported from Babylon to Jerusalem by King Artachshasta. מלק answers
to the Hebrew עלה, and is used like this of the journey to Jerusalem.
"Are come to us, to Jerusalem," עלינא, to us, that is, into the parts
where we dwell, is more precisely defined by the words "to Jerusalem."
"They are building the rebellious and bad city, and are setting up its
walls and digging its foundations." Instead of מרדתּא (with Kamets and
Metheg under )ר the edition of J. H. Mich. has מרדתּא, answering to the
stat. abs. מרדא, [Ezr 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015); on the
other hand, the edition of Norzi and several codices read מרדתּא, the
feminine of מרוד. For בּאוּשׁתּא Norzi has באישׁתּא, from בּישׁ, a
contraction of בּאישׁ. For אשׁכללוּ must be read, according to the Keri,
שׁכללוּ שׁוּריּא. The Shaphel שׁכלל from כּלל, means to complete, to
finish. אשּׁין, bases, foundations. יחיטוּ may be the imperf. Aphel of
חוּט, formed after the example of יקּים for יקים, omitting the
reduplication, יחיט. חוּט means to sew, to sew together, and may, like
רפא, be understood of repairing walls or foundations. But it is more
likely to be the imperf. Aphel of חטט, in Syriac hat, and in the Talmud,
to dig, to dig out, fodit, excavavit - to dig out the foundations for
the purpose of erecting new buildings.

[Ezr 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#013)

"Now be it known unto the king, that if this city be built up and ...
they will not pay toll, tribute, and custom, and it (the city) will at
last bring damage to the king." The three words מנדּה בלו והלך occur
again, [Ezr 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020) and [Ezr
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024), in this combination as
designating the different kinds of imposts. מנדּה, with resolved Dagesh
forte, for מדּה ([Ezr 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020)), signifies
measure, then tax or custom measured to every one. בּלו, probably a duty
on consumption, excise; הלך, a toll paid upon roads by travellers and
their goods. The word אפּהם, which occurs only here, and has not been
expressed by old translators, depends upon the Pehlevi word אודום: it is
connected with the Sanscrit apa, in the superl. apama, and signifies at
last, or in the future; comp. Haug, p. 156. מלכים, a Hebraized form for
מלכין, [Ezr 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015), is perhaps only an
error of transcription.

[Ezr 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#014)

"Now, because we eat the salt of the palace, and it does not become us
to see the damage of the king, we send (this letter) and make known to
the king." מלח מלח, to salt salt = to eat salt. To eat the salt of the
palace is a figurative expression for: to be in the king's pay. See this
interpretation vindicated from the Syriac and Persian in Gesen. thes. p.
790.

(Note: Luther, in translating "all we who destroyed the temple," follows
the Rabbis, who, from the custom of scattering salt upon destroyed
places, [Jdg 9:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#045), understood these
words as an expression figurative of destruction, and היכלא as the
temple.)

ערוה, deprivation, emptying, here injury to the royal power or revenue.
אריך, participle of ארך, answering to the Hebrew ערך, means fitting,
becoming.

[Ezr 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015)

"That search may be made in the book of the chronicles of thy fathers,
so shalt thou find in the book of the Chronicles that this city has been
a rebellious city, and hurtful to kings and countries, and that they
have from of old stirred up sedition within it, on which account this
city was (also) destroyed." יבקּר is used impersonally: let one seek,
let search be made. דּכרניּא ספר, book of records, is the public royal
chronicle in which the chief events of the history of the realm were
recorded, called [Est 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001) the book of
the records of daily events. Thy fathers are the predecessors of the
king, i.e., his predecessors in government; therefore not merely the
Median and Persian, but the Chaldean and Assyrian kings, to whose
dominions the Persian monarchs had succeeded. אשׁתּדּוּר, a verbal noun
from the Ithpeal of שׁדר, rebellion. עלמא יומת מן, from the days of
eternity, i.e., from time immemorial. יומת is in the constructive state,
plural, formed from the singular יומא. This form occurs only here and
[Ezr 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#019), but is analogous with the
Hebrew poetical form ימות for ימים.

[Ezr 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#016)

After thus casting suspicion upon the Jews as a seditious people, their
adversaries bring the accusation, already raised at the beginning of the
letter, to a climax, by saying that if Jerusalem is rebuilt and
fortified, the king will lose his supremacy over the lands on this side
the river. דּנה לקבל, on this account, for this reason, that the present
inhabitants of the fortified city Jerusalem are like its former
inhabitants, thou wilt have no portion west of Euphrates, i.e., thou
wilt have nothing more to do with the countries on this side the
river-wilt forfeit thy sway over these districts.

[Ezr 4:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017)

The royal answer to this letter. פּתגּמא - a word which has also passed
into the Hebrew, [Ecc 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#011); [Est
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#020) - is the Zend. patigama, properly
that which is to take place, the decree, the sentence; see on [Dan
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016). עבר וּשׁאר still depends upon
בּ: those dwelling in Samaria and the other towns on this side the
river. The royal letter begins with וּכעת שׁלם, "Peace," and so forth.
כּעת is abbreviated from כּענת.

[Ezr 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#018)

"The letter which you sent to us has been plainly read before me." מפרשׁ
part. pass. Peal, corresponds with the Hebrew part. Piel מפרשׁ, made
plain, adverbially, plainly, and does not signify "translated into
Persian."

[Ezr 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#019)

"And by me a command has been given, and search has been made; and it
has been found that this city from of old hath lifted itself (risen) up
against kings," etc. מתנשּׁא, lifted itself up rebelliously, as (in
Hebrew) in [Kg1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005).

[Ezr 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020)

"There have been powerful kings in Jerusalem, and (rulers) exercising
dominion over the whole region beyond the river" (westward of
Euphrates). This applies in its full extent only to David and Solomon,
and in a less degree to subsequent kings of Israel and Judah. On [Ezr
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020), comp. [Ezr
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#013).

[Ezr 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#021)

"Give ye now commandment to hinder these people (to keep them from the
work), that this city be not built until command (sc. to build) be given
from me." יתּשׂם, Ithpeal of שׂוּם.

[Ezr 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#022)

"And be warned from committing an oversight in this respect," i.e., take
heed to overlook nothing in this matter (זהיר, instructed, warned). "Why
should the damage become great (i.e., grow), to bring injury to kings?"

[Ezr 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023)

The result of this royal command. As soon as the copy of the letter was
read before Rehum and his associates, they went up in haste to Jerusalem
to the Jews, and hindered them by violence and force. אדרע with א
prosthetic only here, elsewhere דּרע (= זרוע), arm, violence. Bertheau
translates, "with forces and a host;" but the rendering of אדרע or זרוע
by "force" can neither be shown to be correct from [Eze
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#009) and [Dan
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#015), [Dan
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031), nor justified by the
translation of the lxx, ἐν ἵπποις καὶ δυνάμει.

[Ezra 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 4:24</span></span>

"Then ceased the work of the house of God at Jerusalem. So it ceased
unto the second year of Darius king of Persia." With this statement the
narrator returns to the notice in [Ezr
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005), that the adversaries of Judah
succeeded in delaying the building of the temple till the reign of King
Darius, which he takes up, and now adds the more precise information
that it ceased till the second year of King Darius. The intervening
section, [Ezr 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006), gives a more
detailed account of those accusations against the Jews made by their
adversaries to kings Ahashverosh and Artachshasta. If we read [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023) and [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024) as successive, we get an
impression that the discontinuation to build mentioned in [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024) was the effect and consequence of
the prohibition obtained from King Artachshasta, through the complaints
brought against the Jews by his officials on this side the river; the
בּאדין of [Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024) seeming to refer
to the אדין of [Ezr 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023). Under this
impression, older expositors have without hesitation referred the
contents of [Ezr 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006) to the
interruption to the building of the temple during the period from Cyrus
to Darius, and understood the two names Ahashverosh and Artachshasta as
belonging to Cambyses and (Pseudo) Smerdis, the monarchs who reigned
between Cyrus and Darius. Grave objections to this view have, however,
been raised by Kleinert (in the Beitrgen der Dorpater Prof. d. Theol.
8132, vol. i) and J. W. Schultz (Cyrus der Grosse, in Theol. Stud. u.
Krit. 1853, p. 624, etc.), who have sought to prove that none but the
Persian kings Xerxes and Artaxerxes can be meant by Ahashverosh and
Artachshasta, and that the section [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006) relates not to the building of the
temple, but to the building of the walls of Jerusalem, and forms an
interpolation or episode, in which the historian makes the efforts of
the adversaries of Judah to prevent the rebuilding of the walls of
Jerusalem under Xerxes and Artaxerxes follow immediately after his
statement of their attempt to hinder the building of the temple, for the
sake of presenting at one glance a view of all their machinations
against the Jews. This view has been advocated not only by Vaihinger,
"On the Elucidation of the History of Israel after the Captivity," in
the Theol. Stud. u. Krit. 1857, p. 87, etc., and Bertheau in his
Commentary on this passage, but also by Hengstenberg, Christol. iii. p.
143, Auberlen, and others, and opposed by Ewald in the 2nd edition of
his Gesch. Israels, iv. p. 118, where he embraces the older explanation
of these verses, and A. Koehler on Haggai, p. 20. On reviewing the
arguments advanced in favour of the more modern view, we can lay no
weight at all upon the circumstance that in [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006) the building of the temple is not
spoken of. The contents of the letter sent to Ahashverosh ([Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)) are not stated; in that to
Artachshasta ([Ezr 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011)) the writers
certainly accuse the Jews of building the rebellious and bad city
(Jerusalem), of setting up its walls and digging out its foundations
([Ezr 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012)); but the whole document is
so evidently the result of ardent hatred and malevolent suspicion, that
well-founded objections to the truthfulness of these accusations may
reasonably be entertained. Such adversaries might, for the sake of more
surely attaining their end of obstructing the work of the Jews, easily
represent the act of laying the foundations and building the walls of
the temple as a rebuilding of the town walls. The answer of the king,
too ([Ezr 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017)), would naturally treat
only of such matters as the accusers had mentioned.

The argument derived from the names of the kings is of far more
importance. The name אחשׁורושׁ (in [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)) occurs also in the book of
Esther, where, as is now universally acknowledged, the Persian king
Xerxes is meant; and in [Dan 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001), as
the name of the Median king Kyaxares. In the cuneiform inscriptions the
name is in Old-Persian Ksayarsa, in Assyrian Hisiarsi, in which it is
easy to recognise both the Hebrew form Ahashverosh, and the Greek forms
Ξέρξης and Κυαξάρης. On the other hand, the name Cambyses (Old-Persian
Kambudshja) offers no single point of identity; the words are radically
different, whilst nothing is known of Cambyses having ever borne a
second name or surname similar in sound to the Hebrew Ahashverosh. The
name Artachshasta, moreover, both in [Est
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001) and 8, and in the book of
Nehemiah, undoubtedly denotes the monarch known as Artaxerxes
(Longimanus). It is, indeed, in both these books written ארתּחשׁסתּא
with ס, and in the present section, and in [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014), ארתּחששׁתּא; but this slight
difference of orthography is no argument for difference of person,
ארתחשׁשׁתא seeming to be a mode of spelling the word peculiar to the
author of the Chaldee section, Ezra 4-6. Two other names, indeed, of
Smerdis, the successor of Cambyses, have been handed down to us.
According to Xenophon, Cyrop. viii. 7, and Ktesias, Pers. fr. 8-13, he
is said to have been called Tanyoxares, and according to Justini hist.
i. 9, Oropastes; and Ewald is of opinion that the latter name is
properly Ortosastes, which might answer to Artachshasta. It is also not
improbable that Smerdis may, as king, have assumed the name of
Artachshasta, Ἀρταξέρξης, which Herodotus (vi. 98) explains by μέγας
ἀρήΐος. But neither this possibility, nor the opinion of Ewald, that
Ortosastes is the correct reading for Oropastes in Just. hist. i. 9, can
lay any claim to probability, unless other grounds also exist for the
identification of Artachshasta with Smerdis. Such grounds, however, are
wanting; while, on the other hand, it is priori improbable that Ps.
Smerdis, who reigned but about seven months, should in this short period
have pronounced such a decision concerning the matter of building the
temple of Jerusalem, as we read in the letter of Artachshasta, [Ezr
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017), even if the adversaries of the
Jews should, though residing in Palestine, have laid their complaints
before him, immediately after his accession to the throne. When we
consider also the great improbability of Ahashverosh being a surname of
Cambyses, we feel constrained to embrace the view that the section [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006) is an episode inserted by the
historian, on the occasion of narrating the interruption to the building
of the temple, brought about by the enemies of the Jews, and for the
sake of giving a short and comprehensive view of all the hostile acts
against the Jewish community on the part of the Samaritans and
surrounding nations.

The contents and position of [Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)
may easily be reconciled with this view, which also refutes as unfounded
the assertion of Herzfeld, Gesch. des Volkes Israel, i. p. 303, and
Schrader, p. 469, that the author of the book of Ezra himself
erroneously refers the document given, [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006), to the erection of the temple,
instead of to the subsequent building of the walls of Jerusalem. For, to
say nothing of the contents of [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006), although it may seem natural to
refer the בּאדין of [Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024) to [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023), it cannot be affirmed that this
reference is either necessary or the only one allowable. The assertion
that בּאדין is "always connected with that which immediately precedes,"
cannot be strengthened by an appeal to [Ezr
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002); [Ezr
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001); [Dan
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014), [Dan
2:46](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#046); [Dan
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#003), and other passages. בּאדין, then
(= at that time), in contradistinction to אדין, thereupon, only refers a
narrative, in a general manner, to the time spoken of in that which
precedes it. When, then, it is said, then, or at that time, the work of
the house of God ceased ([Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)),
the then can only refer to what was before related concerning the
building of the house of God, i.e., to the narrative [Ezr
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001). This reference of [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024) to [Ezr
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001) is raised above all doubt, by the
fact that the contents of [Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)
are but a recapitulation of [Ezr 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005);
it being said in both, that the cessation from building the temple
lasted till the reign, or, as it is more precisely stated in [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024), till the second year of the
reign, of Darius king of Persia. With this recapitulation of the
contents of [Ezr 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005), the narrative,
[Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024), returns to the point which
it had reached at [Ezr 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005). What lies
between is thereby characterized as an illustrative episode, the
relation of which to that which precedes and follows it, is to be
perceived and determined solely by its contents. If, then, in this
episode, we find not only that the building of the temple is not spoken
of, but that letters are given addressed to the Kings Ahashverosh and
Artachshasta, who, as all Ezra's contemporaries would know, reigned not
before but after Darius, the very introduction of the first letter with
the words, "And in the reign of Ahashverosh" ([Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006)), after the preceding statement,
"until the reign of Darius king of Persia" ([Ezr
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005)), would be sufficient to obviate
the misconception that letters addressed to Ahashverosh and Artachshasta
related to matters which happened in the period between Cyrus and Darius
Hystaspis. Concerning another objection to this view of [Ezr
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006), viz., that it would be strange
that King Artaxerxes, who is described to us in Ezra 7 and in Nehemiah
as very favourable to the Jews, should have been for a time so
prejudiced against them as to forbid the building of the town and walls
of Jerusalem, we shall have an opportunity of speaking in our
explanations of [Neh 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001). - [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024), so far, then, as its matter is
concerned, belongs to the following chapter, to which it forms an
introduction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 5](ezr005)

</div>
