<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr007)  [Next](ezr009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001)

[Ezra 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 8:1</span></span>

A list of those heads of houses who returned with Ezra from Babylon to
Jerusalem. Compare the parallel list, 1 Esdr. 8:28-40. - [Ezr
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001) The tithe: "These are the heads of
the houses, and (this is) their genealogy, who went up with me." אבתיהם
ראשׁי for בּית־אבתיהם ראשׁי, as frequently. והתיחשׂם, "and their
genealogy," is added, because in the list following the heads of the
different houses are not merely enumerated according to their own names,
but the names of the races to which they belonged are also stated.

[Ezr 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#002)

Priests and descendants of David. Of priests, Gershom of the sons of
Phinehas, and Daniel of the sons of Ithamar. Gershom and Daniel are the
names of heads of priestly houses, and "sons of Phinehas and sons of
Ithamar" designations of races. Phinehas was the son of the high priest
Eleazar, the son of Aaron, and Ithamar a younger son of Aaron, [Ch1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004) and [Ch1
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#003). This does not signify that only
the two priests Gershom and Daniel went up with Ezra; for in [Ezr
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024) he chose twelve from among the
chief of the priests, who went up with him, to have charge of the gifts
(Bertheau). The meaning is, that Gershom and Daniel, two heads of
priestly houses, went up, and that the house of Gershom belonged to the
race of Phinehas, and that of Daniel to the race of Ithamar. A Daniel is
named among the priests in [Neh 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#007),
but whether he is identical with the Daniel in question does not appear.
Of the sons (descendants) of David (the king), Hattush, as head of a
house. A Hattush, son of Hashabniah, occurs [Neh
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#010), and a priest of this name [Neh
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#005) and [Neh
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#002). Hattush also holds the first
place among the sons of Shemaiah enumerated [Ch1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#022), who probably were among the
descendants of David. It seems strange that the numbers neither of the
priests nor of the sons of David who went up with Ezra should be given,
since from v. 3 onwards, in the case of the houses of lay races, the
numbers of those who returned to the home of their ancestors is
regularly stated.

[Ezr 8:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#003)

Twelve lay houses are named both in the present text and in 1 Esdr.
8:30-40. In ten cases the names of the races, which are uniformly
introduced with מבּני, are identical in both texts, viz., Parosh,
Pahath-Moab, Adin, Elam, Shephatiah, Joab, Bebai, Azgad, Adonikam, and
Bigvai. On the other hand, it appears surprising, 1st, that in the first
house mentioned, before the name זכריה, besides "of the sons of Parosh,"
we have also שׁכניה מבּני ([Ezr 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#003)),
while before all the other names we find only "of the sons of" one
individual; 2ndly, that in [Ezr 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#005),
after שׁכניה בּני, instead of a name of the head of a house, only Ben
Jahaziel follows; 3rdly, that in [Ezr
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#010) also, after שׁלומית וּמבּני, we
have merely Ben Josiphiah, the names themselves being apparently omitted
in these two last cases. This conjecture is corroborated by a comparison
with the lxx and 1 Esdr. 8, which shows, moreover, that it is not the
personal name of the head of the house, but the name of the race, which
has been lost. For מבני שׁכניה בן יחזיאל, [Ezr
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#005), we find in the lxx ἀπὸ τῶν υἱῶν
Ζαθόης Ζεχενίας υἱὸς Ἀζιήλ, and in 1 Esdr. 8:32, ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Ζαθόης
Σεχενίας Ἰεζήλου; and for ומבני שׁלומית בן יוספיה, [Ezr
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#010), in the lxx καὶ ἀπὸ τῶν υἱῶν
Βαανί Σελιμοὺθ υἱὸς Ἰωσεφία, and in 1 Esdr. 8:36, ἐκ τῶν υἱῶν Βανίας
Σαλιμὼθ Ἰωσαφίου. In Ζαθόης and Βαανί (Βανίας) we recognise זתּוּא and
בּני of [Ezr 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#008) and [Ezr
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#010). Hence the text of [Ezr
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#005) needs emendation, and should run
שׁכניה זתּוּא מבּני, and that of [Ezr
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#010), שׁלומית בני וּמבּני. It is more
difficult to decide concerning שׁכניה מבּני of [Ezr
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#003), though undoubtedly we have here
too a corruption of the text. For, first, there is no other instance in
the whole list of the sons of two men being cited before the proper name
of the house; and then, too, the absence of the ו copulative before
מבּני פ is opposed to the notion that the house of Zechariah was formed
by a union of the sons of Shecaniah and Parosh, since in this case the
and could not be omitted. It is true that we have in the lxx ἀπὸ υἱῶν
Σαχανία καὶ ἀπὸ υἱῶν Φόρος; but in this case the καὶ is certainly
derived from the translator, who was thus seeking to make sense of the
words. In 1 Esdr. 8 we read Δαττοὺς τοῦ Σεχευίου; and Δαττοὺς
corresponding with חטּוּשׁ, the words בני שׁכניה (or בן) are taken into
the preceding verse. This treatment of the words Bertheau considers
correct, because Hattush in [Ch1 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#022)
is reckoned among the descendants of Shecaniah. This conjecture is,
however, a very doubtful one. For, first, in [Ch1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#022) Hattush is said to be of the sons
of Shemaiah, and Shemaiah of the sons of Shecaniah; then we should as
little expect any further statement in the case of Hattush as in the
cases of Daniel and Gershom; and further, if he had been thus more
precisely designated by naming his father, we should undoubtedly read
שׁכניה בּן, not שׁ מבּני, and thus the Masoretic text would at any rate
be incorrect; and finally, 1 Esdras, where it differs from the lxx, is,
generally speaking, no critical authority upon which to base safe
conclusions. Under these circumstances, we must give up the hope of
restoring the original text, and explaining the words מבני שׁבניה.
התיחשׂ עמּו, "and with Zechariah, his genealogy of 150 males," i.e.,
with him his race, consisting of 150 males, registered in the genealogy
of the race. In the case of the names which follow, the number only is
given after the briefer expression עמּו.

A review, then, of the twelve races, according to the restoration of the
original text in [Ezr 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#005) and [Ezr
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#010), presents us with names already
occurring in the list of the races who came from Babylon with
Zerubbabel, [Ezr 2:3-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#003), with the
exception of the sons of Joab, [Ezr
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#009), who are wanting in Ezra 2, where,
on the other hand, several other races are enumerated. Bertheau seeks to
identify the sons of Joab, [Ezr 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#009),
with the sons of Joab who in [Ezr 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#006)
are reckoned with the sons of Pahath-Moab, and to explain their special
enumeration in the present list, by the conjecture that the one house
subsequently separated into the two houses of Pahath-Moab and Joab, This
is, indeed, possible; but it is quite a probable that only one portion
or branch of the sons (descendants) of Joab was combined with the race
of the sons of Pahath-Moab, and that the rest of the bne Joab formed a
separate house, no family of which returned with Zerubbabel. The
occurrence of the other races in both lists is to be explained by the
circumstance that portions of them returned with Zerubbabel, and that
the rest did not follow till Ezra's departure.

[Ezr 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#013)

The addition אחרנים, last (comp. [Sa2
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#012)), is thus explained by J. H.
Mich.: respectu eorum qui primum cum Zorobabele sub Cyro in patriam
redierunt c. ii. 13. Bertheau, however, considers this explanation
untenable, because אחרנים stands in the present series only with the
sons of Adonikam, while it is nevertheless certain, that many families
belonging also to other races than this had returned with Zerubbabel, in
comparison with whom all who returned with Ezra might be called last.
This reason, however, is not conclusive; for in [Ezr
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#013) the further statement also
differs, both in form and matter, from those in the former verses. Here,
instead of the name of the head of the house, we read the words "last,
and these their names;" whereupon three names are given, and not till
then וגו ועמּהם, "and with them sixty males." Here, then, it is not the
head of the house who is named, but in his place three heads of
families, amounting together to sixty males. Now, as these three
families did not form a house, these sixty sons of Adonikam who returned
with Ezra are, with regard to the six hundred and sixty-six sons of
Adonikam who returned with Zerubbabel, designated the last, or last
arrived, and thus comprised with them as one house.

[Ezr 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#014)

Of the sons of Bigvai also two heads are named, Uthai and Zabbud, and
with them seventy males. In 1 Esdr. 8:40, the names Uthai and Zabbud are
corrupted into Οὐθὶ ὁ τοῦ Ἰσταλκούρου. The total number of individuals
belonging to these twelve races, who returned with Ezra, amounts,
according to the Hebrew text, to 1496 males and fifteen heads; according
to 1 Esdras, to 1690 males, and the thirteen heads of the twelve races,
without reckoning the priests and sons of David, whose numbers are not
stated.

[Ezra 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 8:15</span></span>

Account of the journey. - [Ezr 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015)
The assembling of the expedition. When the Israelites who were about to
return to Jerusalem had assembled, and were ready for starting, Ezra
perceived that there were no Levites among them. He then sent for
certain chief men among them, and by means of the influence of Iddo, the
chief at the place Casiphia, induced a number of Levites and Nethinim to
determine on joining the expedition ([Ezr
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015)). He then proclaimed a fast at
the place of meeting, for the purpose of supplicating God to grant them
a prosperous journey ([Ezr 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021)).

[Ezr 8:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015)

The travellers assembled at the river Ahava, where they encamped three
days. In [Ezr 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015) the river is
designated אל־אהוא הבּא, i.e., either which comes (flows) towards Ahava,
or flows into Ahava; in [Ezr 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021) it
is more briefly called אהוא נהר, and in [Ezr
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031) אהוא נהר, which may mean the
river of Ahava, of the region or district called Ahava, or, after the
analogy of פּרת נהר, merely the river of the name of Ahava. It is
doubtful which of these meanings is correct, the name Ahava being still
unexplained. Comp. the various conjectures in A. G. F. Schirmer,
observationes exeg. crit. in libr. Esdrae, Vratisl. 1820, p. 28ff. The
connection points to a place or district in the neighbourhood of
Babylon; hence Bertheau is inclined to regard Ahava as a tributary or
canal of the Euphrates, flowing through a place, perhaps only a field or
open space, of the same name, in the immediate neighbourhood of Babylon;
while Ewald supposes it may be the river somewhat to the west or south
of Euphrates, called by the Greeks Pallacopas, whose situation would
suit the context, and whose name might arise from אהוא פלג, the river
Ahwa or Aba. The lxx gives the name Εὐί; in 1 Esdr. 8:40 and 61 we find
Θερά, evidently a false reading. Josephus says quite generally, εἰς τὸ
πέραν τοῦ Εύφράτου. - When Ezra, during the three days' encampment at
this place, directed his attention to the people and the priests (ב
הבין, to give heed, [Neh 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007); [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023), and elsewhere), he found no
Levites among those who had assembled. [Ezr
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#016) He then sent several chief men to
Iddo, the chief man in the place Casiphia, to beg him and his brethren
to bring him servants for the house of God. The lxx translates ל אשׁלחה,
"I sent to (or for) Eliezer," etc., which would mean to fetch them:
"that I might then send them to Iddo." The Vulgate, on the other hand,
and many expositors, understand ל as nota accus., like [Ch2
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007), which is simpler. Of the nine
men here designated as ראשׁים, the names of Eliezer, Shemaiah, Jarib,
Nathan, Zechariah, and Meshullam occur again in [Ezr
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#015), [Ezr
10:18-31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#018), though we cannot certainly
infer the identify of those who bear them. The appellation ראשׁים does
not determine whether they belonged to the priesthood or laity. The two
remaining are called מבינים, teachers; comp. [Neh
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007), [Neh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009); [Ch1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#022); [Ch1
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#008), and elsewhere. Although this
word is, in the passages cited, used of Levites, yet we cannot suppose
those here named to have been teaching Levites, because, according to
[Ezr 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#016), there were as yet no
Levites amongst the assemblage; hence, too, they could not be teachers
properly so called, but only men of wisdom and understanding. The
Chethiv ואוצאה must be read ואוצאה: I sent them to (על, according to
later usage, for אל); the Keri is ואצוּה, I despatched, sent them. Both
readings suit the sense. The place Casiphia is entirely unknown, but
cannot have been far from the river Ahava. Caspia, the region of the
Caspian Sea, is out of the question, being far too remote. "I put words
in their mouth to speak to Iddo," i.e., I told them exactly what they
should say to Iddo; comp. [Sa2 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#003),
[Sa2 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#019). The words אדּו אחיו
הנּתוּנים give no intelligible meaning; for אהיו we must, with the
Vulgate, 1 Esdras, and others, read ואחיו: to Iddo and his brethren, the
Nethinim, at the place Casiphia. This would seem to say that Iddo was
one of the Nethinim. Such an inference is not, however, a necessary one;
for the expression may also, like "Zadok the (high) priest and his
brethren, the (ordinary) priests," [Ch1
16:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#039), be understood to mean that
Iddo, the chief man of that place, was a Levite, and that the Nethinim
were, as a lower order of temple servants, called brethren of Iddo the
Levite. The circumstance that not only Nethinim, but also Levites, were
induced by Iddo to join the expedition ([Ezr
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#008)), requires us thus to understand
the words. אל לבית משׁרתים, servants for the house of God, are Levites
and Nethinim, the upper and lower orders of the temple ministers. From
[Ezr 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#017) it appears that both Levites
and Nethinim had settled in the place Casiphia, and that Iddo, as the
chief man of the place, held an influential position among them. No
further inferences, however, concerning their settlement and employment
can be drawn from this circumstance.

[Ezr 8:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#018)

The delegates sent to Iddo succeeded, through the gracious assistance of
God (אל בּיד, see [Ezr 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)), in
inducing forty Levites, and two hundred and twenty Nethinim, by means of
Iddo's influence, to join their fellow-countrymen in their journey to
Jerusalem. They brought to us ... לנוּ and עלינוּ refer to Ezra and his
fellow-travellers. שׂכל אישׁ, a man of understanding, seems to be a
proper name, being joined to Sherebiah, the name following, by a ו
copulative. He was one of the descendants of Mahli, the son, i.e.,
grandson, of Levi the son of Israel, i.e., Jacob: comp. [Exo
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#016), [Exo
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#019); [Ch1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004). Sherebiah occurs again in [Ezr
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024), and [Neh
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007); [Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004), etc., [Ezr
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#013); 12:24. The Levite Hashabiah,
[Ezr 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#019), is also named again, [Ezr
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024), [Neh
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#002), and [Neh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#024), while the name of the Levite
Jeshaiah, on the contrary, is not again met with in the books of either
Ezra or Nehemiah.

[Ezr 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#020)

With respect to the Nethinim, whom David and the princes (of Israel) had
given for the service of the Levites (i.e., made servants of the temple,
to perform the lowest offices for the Levites), comp. [Jos
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#021) and [Ezr
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#043). "They all were distinguished by
name," i.e., were men of note; comp. remarks on [Ch1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#031).

[Ezr 8:21-30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021)

The last preparations for the journey. - [Ezr
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021) Then the company of
fellow-travellers was thus completed, Ezra proclaimed a fast at the
place of meeting at the river Ahava, "that we might humble ourselves
before our God, to seek of Him a prosperous journey for ourselves, our
families, and our goods," Fasting, as a means of humbling themselves
before God, for the purpose of obtaining an answer to their petitions,
was an ancient custom with the Israelites: [Jdg
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026); [Sa1
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006); [Joe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014); [Ch2
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#003). ישׁרה דּרך, a straight way, a
way made level by the removal of obstructions, i.e., a prosperous
journey; comp. [Psa 112:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#007). טף, a noun
collective, properly the little children, more frequently denoted the
entire family, a man's wives and children; see remarks on [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037). רכוּשׁ, possessions in cattle
and other goods.

[Ezr 8:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#022)

For I was ashamed to request of the king a band of soldiers and horsemen
to help us against enemies in the way (i.e., to protect us from hostile
attacks during our journey); for we had said to the king: The hand of
our God is over all them that seek him for good (i.e., for their good),
and His power and His wrath against all them that forsake Him. עזּו in
connection with אפּו is not His powerful wrath, but His power and might
to conquer all enemies, evidencing itself in wrath against the wicked.
This confession, which they had uttered before the king, they desired to
make good by earnest humble supplication, that God would prove Himself
their help and defence against all their enemies. And for this - adds
Ezra, looking back on their prosperous journey after it was accomplished
- He was entreated of us. Because they had supplicated His assistance by
prayer and fasting, God granted them His protection by the way.

[Ezr 8:24-30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024)

Then Ezra delivered the gold, the silver, and the vessels, which he had
received as gifts for the temple, to twelve of the chiefs of the
priests, and twelve Levites, that they might take charge of them during
the journey, and bring them to Jerusalem. "I separated twelve of the
chief of the priests," i.e., from the whole company of priests who were
journeying with us. The following לשׁרביה does not suit the sense,
whether we take the ל as a sign of the dative (lxx) or of the accusative
(Vulgate, and several expositors). For Sherebiah and Hashabiah were
neither priests nor chiefs of priests, but Levites of the race of Merari
(v. 18), and cannot therefore be reckoned among the twelve chiefs of
priests. If we take לשׁרביה for a dative, and translate, "I separated
twelve of the chiefs of the priests for Sherebiah and Hashabiah," this
would place the priests in a servile relation to the Levites, contrary
to their true position. For לשׁרביה we must read ושׁרביה, and accept the
reading of 1 Esdras, καὶ Ἐσερεβίαν, as correct. Ezra separated twelve
chiefs of the priests and twelve Levites, for the purpose of delivering
to their custody the gifts of gold, silver, and implements for the
temple. Of the chiefs of the priests no names are mentioned; of the
Levites, the two names Sherebiah and Hashabiah are given as those of
heads of houses, with whom ten other Levites were associated.

[Ezr 8:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#025)

To these chief priests and Levites Ezra weighed the silver and the gold
and the vessels; שׁקל, to weigh, i.e., to deliver by weight. In the
Chethiv אשׁקולה the O sound is maintained, and consequently the Keri is
pointed -. On the other hand, in [Ezr
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#026) the וּ is dropped, and the form
pointed with -, though many MSS, followed by J. H. Michaelis, have ו-
here also. אל בּית תּרוּמת is in apposition with the before-named
objects: the gold, the silver, and the vessels, the offering for the
house of our God, which the king, his councillors ... had offered; comp.
[Ezr 7:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#015), [Ezr
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#019). In ההרימוּ the article
represents the relative pronoun; see on [Ch1
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#028). הנּמצאים, all Israelites who
were found, met with, in Babylon, and were not going with them to
Jerusalem; comp. [Ch1 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#017); [Ch2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2005.htm#011). ידם על, like יד על, [Ezr
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#008), to their hand, i.e., handed over
to their keeping. The gifts amounted to: six hundred and fifty talents
of silver, and silver vessels one hundred in talents, i.e., one hundred
talents in value, one hundred talents of gold, and twenty covered basins
of gold (comp. [Ezr 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#010)) one thousand
dariks in value, and two brazen vessels of fine golden brilliancy,
precious as gold. מצהב is an abstract noun, formed from the participle
Hophal of צהב, to glitter like gold, and constructed as a feminine. The
word, with its adjective, either depends upon נחשׁט, in the stat.
construct., or stands in apposition thereto, and is not, as a participle
Hophal, used adjectively and combined with נחשׁט, for then the two
adjectives מצהב and טובה would not be in different genders. חמוּדות,
like חמוּדות כּלי, [Ch2 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#025).

[Ezr 8:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#028)

On delivering these treasures, Ezra adds the admonition: Ye are holy to
the Lord, and the vessels are holy, and the gold and the silver are a
free-will offering unto the Lord God of your fathers; watch and keep
(that which is committed to you). Since they were themselves, as priests
and Levites, holy to the Lord, they were also to treat and keep the
gifts committed to their charge as holy gifts, until, on their arrival
at Jerusalem, they should weigh them (i.e., deliver them by weight)
before the priests, the Levites, and the princes of Israel, in the
chambers of the house of the Lord. The article to הלּשׁכוה (stat.
construct.) is among the incorrectnesses of the later Hebrew.

[Ezr 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#030)

Then they took the weight of the silver, ... i.e., received the silver,
etc., delivered to them by weight.

[Ezr 8:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031)

The start, the journey, and the arrival at Jerusalem. - [Ezr
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031) The start from the river Ahava
(comp. [Ezr 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015)) did not take place
till the twelfth day of the first month; while according to [Ezr
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009), the journey from Babylon was
appointed for the first day of the month, and according to [Ezr
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015), the bands of travellers who
assembled at the river Ahava encamped there three days. These statements
may be reconciled as follows: On the first day the company of travellers
began to assemble, and during the three days' encampment at the place of
meeting Ezra became aware that no Levites were found among the
travellers; upon which he took the measures mentioned, [Ezr
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#016), etc., to induce certain Levites
and Nethinim to accompany them. When these were afterwards present, Ezra
ordained a fast, to supplicate the divine protection for the journey,
and committed the sacred gifts to the care of the priests and Levites.
Eight days elapsed while these preparations for departure were being
made, so that the start from the river Ahava did not take place till the
twelfth day. The journey was successfully accomplished, God's gracious
protection delivering them from the hands of enemies and marauders;
comp. [Ezr 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#022).

[Ezr 8:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#032)

They arrived at Jerusalem, as stated [Ezr
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009), on the first day of the fifth
month, the journey consequently occupying three months and a half. The
particulars of the journey are not communicated; and as we do not even
know the locality of the place of meeting at the river Ahava, the length
of road to be traversed cannot be determined. After their arrival at
Jerusalem, they abode, i.e., remained, as Nehemiah subsequently did,
quiet and inactive three days, to recover from the fatigues and
hardships of the journey, [Neh 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#011),
before they undertook the arrangement of their affairs. On the fourth
day, the gifts they had brought with them were delivered in the house of
God (נשׁקל, like אשׁקלה, [Ezr 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#016))
into the hand of Meremoth and Eleazar the priests, and Jozabad and
Noadiah, two Levites, who took charge of them, the chiefs of the priests
and Levites being, according to [Ezr
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#029), also present. Meremoth Ben Uriah
reappears in [Neh 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004), [Neh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021), and is also intended [Neh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#003). Eleazar the son of Phinehas, and
the Levite Noadiah, are not again met with. Jozabad, of the sons of
Jeshua ([Ezr 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#040)), may be the Levite
Jozabad mentioned [Neh 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#023). Binnui
is named among the Levites, [Neh 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#010)
and [Neh 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#008).

[Ezr 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#034)

"By number, by weight, as to all," i.e., all was delivered by number and
weight; and the whole weight was written at that time, i.e., an
authentic list was made at the delivery which then took place.

[Ezr 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035)

After the delivery of the dedicated gifts, those who had come up out of
captivity (with Ezra), the sons of the captivity, offered
burnt-offerings and sin-offerings, out of gratitude for the favour shown
by God in the gracious restoration of His people Israel. This is implied
in the words: "burnt-offerings to the God of Israel, twelve bullocks for
all Israel" (the twelve tribes), and twelve he-goats for a sin-offering,
as in [Ezr 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#017). Ninety-six (8 x 12)
lambs and seventy-seven lambs (77, the intensified seven) were likewise
brought as a burnt-offering. "All this was a burnt-offering for the
Lord," of which, therefore, nothing could be eaten by the offerers. The
sin-offering preceded the burnt-offering, as the necessary basis of an
acceptable burnt-offering. The sin-offerings availed as an atonement for
the sins of all Israel, and the burnt-offerings typified the surrender
of the entire nation to the service of the Lord. Thus the fact that
these were offered for all Israel was an actual declaration that they
who had now returned were henceforth resolved, together with all Israel,
to dedicate their lives to the service of the Lord their God.

[Ezr 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#036)

Hereupon the royal decrees (the commission, [Ezr
7:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012)) were delivered to the satraps
of the king, and to the governors on this side the river; and they
furthered the people and the house of God, as Artaxerxes had commanded
in his edict, [Ezr 7:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#020). On
אחשׁדּרפּנים and פּחוות, see rem. on [Dan
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002). The satraps were the military
chiefs of the province, the פּחוות, the heads of the civil government.
נשּׂא, to lift up, to support, like [Ezr
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#004).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 9](ezr009)

</div>
