<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ch2036)  [Next](ezr001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 0:0</span></span>

The Book of Ezra

Introduction

1\. Name and Contents, Object and Plan of the Book of Ezra

The book of Ezra derives its name of עזרא in the Hebrew Bible, of Ἔσδρας
in the Septuagint, and of Liber Esdrae in the Vulgate, from Ezra, עזרא,
the priest and scribe who, in Ezra 7-10, narrates his return from
captivity in Babylon to Jerusalem, and the particulars of his ministry
in the latter city. For the sake of making the number of the books
contained in their canon of Scripture correspond with the number of
letters in the Hebrew alphabet, the Jews had from of old reckoned the
books of Ezra and Nehemiah as one; whilst an apocryphal book of Ezra,
composed of passages from the second book of Chronicles, the books of
Ezra and Nehemiah, and certain popular legends, had long been current
among the Hellenistic Jews together with the canonical book of Ezra.
Hence our book of Ezra is called, in the catalogues of the Old Testament
writings handed down to us by the Fathers (see the statements of Origen,
of the Council of Laodicea, Can. 60, of Cyril, Jerome, and others, in
the Lehrbuch der Einleitung, 216, Not. 11, 13), Ἔσδρας πρῶτος (α), and
the book of Nehemiah Ἔσδρας δεύτερος (β), and consequently separated as
I. Ezra from the book of Nehemiah as II. Ezra; while the Greek book of
Ezra is called III. Ezra, to which was subsequently added the falsely
so-called book of Ezra as IV. Ezra. In the Septuagint, the Vet. Itala,
and the Syriac, on the contrary (comp. Libri V. T. apocryphi syriace e
recogn. de Lagarde), we find the Greek book of Ezra placed as Ἔσδρας
πρῶτον before the canonical book, and the latter designated Ἔσδρας
δεύτερον.

The book of Ezra consists of two parts. The first part, comprising a
period anterior to Ezra, begins with the edict of Coresh (Cyrus), king
of Persia, permitting the return to their native land of such Jews as
were exiles in Babylon, and prescribing the rebuilding of the temple at
Jerusalem ([Ezr 1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)); and relates
that when the heads of the nation, the priests and Levites, and many of
the people, made preparations for returning, Cyrus had the sacred
vessels which Nebuchadnezzar had carried away from Jerusalem brought
forth and delivered to Sheshbazzar (Zerubbabel), prince of Judah ([Ezr
1:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005)). Next follows a list of the
names of those who returned from captivity (Ezra 2), and the account of
the building of the altar of burnt-offerings, the restoration of divine
worship, and the laying of the foundation of the temple ([Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001)). Then the manner in which the
rebuilding of the temple was hindered by the Samaritans is narrated; and
mention made of the written accusation sent by the adversaries of the
Jews to the kings Ahashverosh and Artachshasta ([Ezr
4:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)): the letter sent to the latter
monarch, and his answer thereto, in consequence of which the rebuilding
of the temple ceased till the second year of Darius, being inserted in
the Chaldee original ([Ezr 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024)). It
is then related (also in Chaldee) that Zerubbabel and Joshua,
undertaking, in consequence of the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah,
the rebuilding of the temple, were immediately interrogated by Tatnai
the Persian governor and his companions as to who had commanded such
rebuilding; that the reply of the Jewish rulers was reported in writing
to the king, whereupon the latter caused search to be made for the edict
of Cyrus, and gave command for the continuance and furtherance of the
building in compliance therewith (Ezra 5:1-6:13); that hence the Jews
were enabled to complete the work, solemnly to dedicate their now
finished temple ([Ezr 6:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014)), and
(as further related, [Ezr 6:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019), in
the Hebrew tongue) to celebrate their passover with rejoicing. In the
second part (Ezra 7-10), the return of Ezra the priest and scribe, in
the seventh year of Artaxerxes, from Babylon to Jerusalem, with a number
of priests, Levites, and Israelites, is related; and ([Ezr
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)) a copy of the royal decree, in
virtue of which Ezra was entrusted with the ordering of divine worship,
and of the administration of justice as prescribed in the law, given in
the Chaldee original (7:11-26), with a postscript by Ezra ([Ezr
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027).). Then follows a list of those
who went up with Ezra ([Ezr 8:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001));
and particulars given by Ezra himself concerning his journey, his
arrival at Jerusalem (8:14-36), and the energetic proceedings by which
he effected the separation of the heathen women from the congregation
(9:1-10:17); the book concluding with a list of those who were forced to
put away their heathen wives (10:18-44).

The first year of the rule of Cyrus king of Persia corresponding with
the year 536 b.c., and the seventh year of Artaxerxes (Longimanus) with
458 b.c., it follows that this book comprises a period of at least
eighty years. An interval of fifty-six years, extending from the seventh
year of Darius Hystaspis, in which the passover was celebrated after the
dedication of the new temple ([Ezr
6:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019)), to the seventh of
Artaxerxes, in which Ezra went up from Babylon ([Ezr
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)), separates the events of the
first part from those of the second. The narrative of the return of Ezra
from Babylon in [Ezr 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001) is
nevertheless connected with the celebration of the passover under Darius
by the usual formula of transition, "Now after these things," without
further comment, because nothing had occurred in the intervening period
which the author of the book felt it necessary, in conformity with the
plan of his work, to communicate.

Even this cursory notice of its contents shows that the object of Ezra
was not to give a history of the re-settlement in Judah and Jerusalem of
the Jews liberated by Cyrus from the Babylonian captivity, nor to relate
all the memorable events which took place from the departure and the
arrival in Judah of those who returned with Zerubbabel and Joshua, until
his own return and his ministry in Jerusalem. For he tells us nothing at
all of the journey of the first band of returning exiles, and so little
concerning their arrival in Jerusalem and Judah, that this has merely a
passing notice in the superscription of the list of their names; while
at the close of this list he only mentions the voluntary gifts which
they brought with them for the temple service, and then just remarks
that they-the priests, Levites, people, etc. - dwelt in their cities
([Ezr 2:70](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#070)). The following chapters
(Ezra 3-6), moreover, treat exclusively of the building of the altar of
burnt-offering and the temple, the hindrances by which this building was
delayed for years, and of the final removal of these hindrances, the
continuation and completion of the building, and the dedication of the
new temple, by means of which the tribe of Judah was enabled to carry on
the worship of God according to the law, and to celebrate the festivals
in the house of the Lord. In the second part, indeed, after giving the
decree he had obtained from Artaxerxes, he speaks in a comparatively
circumstantial manner of the preparations he made for his journey, of
the journey itself, and of his arrival at Jerusalem; while he relates
but a single incident of his proceedings there-an incident, indeed, of
the utmost importance with respect to the preservation of the returned
community as a covenant people, viz., the dissolution of the marriages
with Canaanites and other Gentile women, forbidden by the law, but
contracted in the period immediately following his arrival at Jerusalem.
Of his subsequent proceedings there we learn nothing further from his
own writings, although the king had given him authority, "after the
wisdom of his God, to set magistrates and judges" ([Ezr
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#025)); while the book of Nehemiah
testifies that he continued his ministry there for some years in
conjunction with Nehemiah, who did not arrive till thirteen years later:
comp. Neh 8-10 and [Neh 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036), [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038).

Such being the nature of the contents of this book, it is evident that
the object and plan of its author must have been to collect only such
facts and documents as might show the manner in which the Lord God,
after the lapse of the seventy years of exile, fulfilled His promise
announced by the prophets, by the deliverance of His people from
Babylon, the building of the temple at Jerusalem, and the restoration of
the temple worship according to the law, and preserved the re-assembled
community from fresh relapses into heathen customs and idolatrous
worship by the dissolution of the marriages with Gentile women.
Moreover, the restoration of the temple and of the legal temple worship,
and the separation of the heathen from the newly settled community, were
necessary and indispensable conditions for the gathering out of the
people of God from among the heathen, and for the maintenance and
continued existence of the nation of Israel, to which and through which
God might at His own time fulfil and realize His promises made to their
forefathers, to make their seed a blessing to all the families of the
earth, in a manner consistent both with His dealings with this people
hitherto, and with the further development of His promises made through
the prophets. The significance of the book of Ezra in sacred history
lies in the fact that it enables us to perceive how the Lord, on the one
hand, so disposed the hearts of the kings of Persia, the then rulers of
the world, that in spite of all the machinations of the enemies of God's
people, they promoted the building of His temple in Jerusalem, and the
maintenance of His worship therein; and on the other, raised up for His
people, when delivered from Babylon, men like Zerubbabel their governor,
Joshua the high priest, and Ezra the scribe, who, supported by the
prophets Haggai and Zechariah, undertook the work to which they were
called, with hearty resolution, and carried it out with a powerful hand.

2\. Unity and Composition of the Book of Ezra

Several modern critics (Zunz, Ewald, Bertheau, and others) have raised
objections both to the single authorship and to the independent
character of this book, and declared it to be but a fragment of a larger
work, comprising not only the book of Nehemiah, but that of Chronicles
also. The section of this work which forms our canonical book of Ezra is
said to have been composed and edited by some unknown author about 200
years after Ezra, partly from an older Chaldee history of the building
of the temple and of the walls of Jerusalem, partly from a record drawn
up by Ezra himself of his agency in Jerusalem, and from certain other
public documents. The evidence in favour of this hypothesis is derived,
first, from the fact that not only the official letters to the Persian
kings, and their decrees ([Ezr 4:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008);
[Ezr 5:6-17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#006); [Ezr
6:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#006); [Ezr
7:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012)), but also a still longer
section on the building of the temple (Ezra 4:23-6:18), are written in
the Chaldee, and the remaining portions in the Hebrew language; next,
from the diversity of its style, its lack of internal unity, and its
want of finish; and, finally, from the circumstance that the book of
Ezra had from of old been combined with that of Nehemiah as one book.
These reasons, however, upon closer consideration, prove too weak to
confirm this view. For, to begin with the historical testimony,
Ngelsback, in Herzog's Realencycl. iv. p. 166, justly finds it
"incomprehensible" that Bertheau should appeal to the testimony of the
Talmud, the Masora, the most ancient catalogues of Old Testament books
in the Christian church, the Cod. Alexandr., the Cod. Friderico Aug.,
and the lxx, because the comprehension of the two books in one in these
authorities is entirely owing to the Jewish mode of computing the books
of the Old Testament. Even Josephus (c. Ap. i. 8) reckons twenty-two
books, which he arranges, in a manner peculiar to himself, into five
books of Moses, thirteen of the prophets, and four containing hymns to
God and moral precepts for man; and Jerome says, in Prol. Gal., that the
Hebrews reckon twenty-two canonical books, whose names he cites, after
the number of the letters of their alphabet, but then adds that some
reckoned Ruth and Lamentations separately, thus making twenty-four,
because the Rabbis distinguished between שׁ and שׂ, and received a
double Jod (יי) into the alphabet for the sate of including in it the
name יהוה, which when abbreviated is written יי. The number twenty-four
is also found in Baba bathr. fol. 14. Hence we also find these numbers
and computations in the Fathers and in the resolutions of the councils,
but with the express distinction of I. and II. Ezra. This distinction is
not indeed mentioned in the Talmud; and Baba bathr., l.c., says: Esra
scripsit librum suum et genealogias librorum Chr. usque ad sua tempora.
But what authority can there be in such testimony, which also declares
Moses to have been the author not only of the Pentateuch, but also of
the book of Job, and Samuel the author of the books of Judges, Ruth, and
Samuel? The authority, too, of Cod. Alex. and Cod. Frid. Aug. is opposed
to that of Cod. Vatic. and of the lxx, in which the books Ezra and
Nehemiah are separated, as they likewise are in the Masoretic text,
although the Masoretes regarded and reckoned both as forming but one
book.

(Note: Though Zunz and Ewald appeal also to the Greek book of Ezra, in
which portions of Chronicles and of the books of Ezra and Nehemiah are
comprised, it is not really to be understood how any critical importance
can be attributed to this apocryphal compilation. Besides, even if it
possessed such importance, the circumstance that only the two last
chapters of Chronicles, and only Neh 7:73-8:13 of Nehemiah, are
comprised in it, says more against than in favour of the assumed single
authorship of the three canonical books.)

This mode of computation, however, affords no ground for the supposition
that the books of Ezra and Nehemiah originally formed one work. For in
this case we should be obliged to regard the books of the twelve minor
prophets as the work of one author. If the number of books was to be
reduced to twenty-two or twenty-four, it was necessary to combine
smaller works of similar character. The single authorship of the books
of Ezra and Nehemiah is most decidedly negatived, not only by the
superscription of the latter book, דּברי נחמיה בּן־חכליה, there being in
the entire Old Testament no other instance of a single portion or
section of a longer work being distinguished from its other portions by
a similar superscription, with the name of the author; but also by the
fact already brought forward in the introduction to Chronicles, Comm. on
Chron. p. 384, that no reason or motive whatever can be perceived for a
subsequent division of the historical work in question into three
separate books, on account of its reception into the canon.

The contents, too, and the form of this book, present us with nothing
incompatible either with its single authorship or independence. The use
of the Chaldee tongue for the official documents of the Persian kings
and their subordinates cannot surprise us, this being the official
language in the provinces of the Persian empire west of the Euphrates,
and as current with the returning Jews as their Hebrew mother tongue. It
is true that the use of the Chaldee language is not in this book
confined merely to official documents, but continued, [Ezr
4:8-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008), in the narrative of the
building of the temple down to the dedication of the rebuilt temple,
4:23-6:18; and that the Hebrew is not employed again till from [Ezr
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019) to the conclusion of the book,
with the exception of [Ezr 7:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012),
where the commission given by Artaxerxes to Ezra is inserted in the
Chaldee original. We also meet, however, with the two languages in the
book of Daniel, Dan 2, where the Magi are introduced, [Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004), as answering the king in Aramaic,
and where not only their conversation with the monarch, but also the
whole course of the event, is given in this dialect, which is again used
Dan 3-7. Hence it has been attempted to account for the use of the
Chaldee in the narrative portions of the book of Ezra, by the assertion
that the historian, after quoting Chaldee documents, found it convenient
to use this language in the narrative combined therewith, and especially
because during its course he had to communicate other Chaldee documents
([Ezr 5:6-17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#006) and [Ezr
6:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#003)) in the original. But this
explanation is not sufficient to solve the problem. Both here and in the
book of Daniel, the use of the two languages has a really deeper reason;
see [Dan 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#014).. With respect to the
book in question, this view is, moreover, insufficient; because, in the
first place, the use of the Chaldee tongue does not begin with the
communication of the Chaldee documents ([Dan
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#011)), but is used, [Dan
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#008), in the paragraph which introduces
them. And then, too, the narrator of the Chaldee historical section,
[Ezr 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#004), gives us to understand, by
his use of the first person, "Then said we unto them," that he was a
participator in the work of rebuilding the temple under Darius; and
this, Ezra, who returned to Jerusalem at a much later period, and who
relates his return ([Ezr 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027)) in the
first person, could not himself have been. These two circumstances show
that the Chaldee section, 4:8-6:18, was composed by an eye-witness of
the occurrences it relates; that it came into the hands of Ezra when
composing his own work, who, finding it adapted to his purpose as a
record by one who was contemporary with the events he related, and a
sharer in the building of the temple, included it in his own book with
very slight alteration. The mention of Artachshasta, besides Coresh and
Darjavesh, in [Ezr 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014), seems opposed
to this view. But since neither Ezra, nor a later author of this book,
contemporary with Darius Hystaspis, could cite the name of Artaxerxes as
contributing towards the building of the temple, while the position of
the name of Artaxerxes after that of Darius, as well as its very
mention, contradicts the notion of a predecessor of King Darius, the
insertion of this name in [Ezr 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014)
may be a later addition made by Ezra, in grateful retrospect of the
splendid gifts devoted by Artaxerxes to the temple, for the purpose of
associating him with the two monarchs whose favour rendered the
rebuilding of the temple possible (see on [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014)). In this case, the mention of
Artaxerxes in the passage just cited, offers no argument against the
above-mentioned view of the origin of the Chaldee section. Neither is
any doubt cast upon the single authorship of the whole book by the
notion that Ezra inserted in his book not only an authentic list of the
returned families, Ezra 2, but also a narrative of the building of the
temple, composed in the Chaldee tongue by an eye-witness.

All the other arguments brought forward against the unity of this book
are quite unimportant. The variations and discrepancies which Schrader,
in his treatise on the duration of the second temple, in the Theol.
Studien u. Kritiken, 1867, p. 460f., and in De Wette's Einleitung, 8th
edit. 235, supposes he has discovered in the Chaldee section, first
between Ezra 4:8-23 and [Ezr 5:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#001),
[Ezr 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014), [Ezr
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#015), on the one hand, and [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024) on the other, and then between
these passages and the remaining chapters of the first part, [Ezr
1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001), [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001), [Ezr
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001); [Ezr
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024), and [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014), [Ezr
6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016), [Ezr
6:19-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019), can have no force of argument
except for a criticism which confines its operations to the words and
letters of the text of Scripture, because incapable of entering into its
spiritual meaning. If the two public documents 4:8-23 differ from what
precedes and follows them, by the fact that they speak not of the
building of the temple but of the building of the walls of Jerusalem,
the reason may be either that the adversaries of the Jews brought a
false accusation before King Artachshashta, and for the sake of more
surely gaining their own ends, represented the building of the temple as
a building of the fortifications, or that the complaint of their enemies
and the royal decree really relate to the building of the walls, and
that section 4:8-23 is erroneously referred by expositors to the
building of the temple. In either case there is no such discrepancy
between these public documents and what precedes and follows them as to
annul the single authorship of this Chaldee section; see the explanation
of the passage. Still less does the circumstance that the narrative of
the continuation and completion of the temple-building, Ezra 5:1-6:15,
is in a simply historical style, and not interspersed with reflections
or devotional remarks, offer any proof that the notice, [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024), "Then ceased the work of the
house of God which is at Jerusalem, so it ceased unto the second year of
the reign of Darius king of Persia," and the information, [Ezr
6:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016), that the Jews brought
offerings at the dedication of the temple, and appointed priests and
Levites in their courses for the service of God, cannot proceed from the
same historian, who at the building of the temple says nothing of the
offerings and ministrations of the priests and Levites. Still weaker, if
possible, is the argument for different authorship derived from
characteristic expressions, viz., that in [Ezr
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008), [Ezr
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011), [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023); [Ezr
5:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#005), [Ezr
5:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013), [Ezr
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#017), and [Ezr
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001), [Ezr
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#003), [Ezr
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#012), the Persian kings are simply
called "the king," and not "king of Persia," as they are designated by
the historian in [Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007), [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024), and elsewhere. For a thoughtful
reader will scarcely need to be reminded that, in a letter to the king,
the designation king of Persia would be not only superfluous, but
inappropriate, while the king in his answer would have still less
occasion to call himself king of Persia, and that even the historian has
in several places - e.g., [Ezr 5:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#005);
[Ezr 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#001) and [Ezr
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#013) - omitted the addition "of
Persia" when naming the king. Nor is there any force in the remark that
in [Ezr 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#013) Coresh is called king of
Babylon. This epithet, דּי־בבל, would only be objected to by critics who
either do not know or do not consider that Coresh was king of Persia
twenty years before he became king of Babylon, or obtained dominion over
the Babylonian empire. The title king of Persia would here be
misleading, and the mere designation king inexact, - Cyrus having issued
the decree for the rebuilding of the temple not in the first year of his
reign or rule over Persia, but in the first year of his sway over
Babylon.

In Part II. (Ezra 7-10), which is connected with Part I. by the formula
of transition האלּה הדּברים אחר, it is not indeed found "striking" that
the historian should commence his narrative concerning Ezra by simply
relating his doings ([Ezr 7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)), his
object being first to make the reader acquainted with the person of
Ezra. It is also said to be easy to understand, that when the subsequent
royal epistles are given, Ezra should be spoken of in the third person;
that the transition to the first person should not be made until the
thanksgiving to God ([Ezr 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#027)); and
that Ezra should then narrate his journey to and arrival at Jerusalem,
and his energetic proceedings against the unlawful marriages, in his own
words (Ezra 8 and [Ezr 9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)). But it
is said to be "striking," that in the account of this circumstance Ezra
is, from [Ezr 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#001) onwards, again
spoken of in the third person. This change of the person speaking is
said to show that the second part of the book was not composed by Ezra
himself, but that some other historian merely made use of a record by
Ezra, giving it verbally in Ezra 8 and [Ezr
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001), and in Ezra 7 and 10 relating
Ezra's return from Babylon, and the conclusion of the transaction
concerning the unlawful marriages, in his own words, but with careful
employment of the said record. This view, however, does not
satisfactorily explain the transition from the first to the third person
in the narrative. For what could have induced the historian, after
giving Ezra's record verbally in Ezra 8 and [Ezr
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001), to break off in the midst of
Ezra's account of his proceedings against the unlawful marriages, and,
instead of continuing the record, to relate the end of the transaction
in his own words? Bertheau's solution of this question, that the author
did this for the sake of brevity, is of no force; for Ezra 10 shows no
trace of brevity, but, on the contrary, the progress and conclusion of
the affair are related with the same circumstantiality and attention to
details exhibited in its commencement in 8 and 9. To this must be added,
that in other historical portions of the Old Testament, in which the
view of different authorship is impossible, the narrator, as a person
participating in the transaction, frequently makes the transition from
the first to the third person, and vice versa. Compare, e.g., [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001). ("Then said the Lord unto Isaiah,
Go forth," etc.) with [Isa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)
("Moreover, the Lord said unto me, Take thee a great roll," etc.); [Jer
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#001), where Jeremiah relates of
himself in the third person, that he had been smitten by Pashur, and had
prophesied against him, with [Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007)., where, without further
explanation, he thus continues: "O Lord, Thou hast persuaded me, and I
was persuaded;" or [Jer 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#001)
("Hananiah ... spake unto me ... the Lord said to me") with [Jer
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#005) ("Then the prophet Jeremiah said
to the prophet Hananiah"), and also [Jer
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#006); while in [Jer
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#007) immediately following, Jeremiah
writes, "Hear thou now this word which I speak in thine ears." As
Jeremiah, when here narrating circumstances of his own ministry,
suddenly passes from the third to the first person, and then immediately
returns to the third; so, too, might Ezra, after speaking ([Ezr
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001)) of his return to Jerusalem in
the third person, proceed with a subsequent more circumstantial
description of his journey to and arrival at Jerusalem, and narrate his
acts and proceedings there in the first person (Ezra 8 and [Ezr
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)), and then, after giving his
prayer concerning the iniquity of his people ([Ezr
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)), take up the objective form of
speech in his account of what took place in consequence of this prayer;
and instead of writing, "Now when I had prayed," etc., continue, "Now
when Ezra had prayed," and maintain this objective form of statement to
the end of Ezra 10. Thus a change of author cannot be proved by a
transition in the narrative from the first to the third person. As
little can this be inferred from the remark ([Ezr
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006)) that "Ezra was a ready scribe in
the law of Moses," by which his vocation, and the import of his return
to Jerusalem, are alluded to immediately after the statement of his
genealogy.

The reasons, then, just discussed are not of such a nature as to cast
any real doubt upon the single authorship of this book; and modern
criticism has been unable to adduce any others. Neither is its
independence impeached by the circumstance that it breaks off
"unexpectedly" at Ezra 10, without relating Ezra's subsequent
proceedings at Jerusalem, although at [Ezr
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#010) it is said not only that "Ezra
had prepared his heart ... to teach in Israel statutes and judgments,"
but also that Artaxerxes in his edict ([Ezr
7:12-26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#012)) commissioned him to uphold
the authority of the law of God as the rule of action; nor by the fact
that in Neh 8-10 we find Ezra still a teacher of the law, and that these
very chapters form the necessary complement of the notices concerning
Ezra in the book of Ezra (Bertheau). For though the narrative in Neh
8-10 actually does complete the history of Ezra's ministry, it by no
means follows that the book of Ezra is incomplete, and no independent
work at all, but only a portion of a larger book, because it does not
contain this narrative. For what justifies the assumption that "Ezra
purposed to give an account of all that he effected at Jerusalem?" The
whole book may be sought through in vain for a single peg on which to
hang such a theory. To impute such an intention to Ezra, and to infer
that, because his ministry is spoken of in the book of Nehemiah also,
the book of Ezra is but a fragment, we should need far more weighty
arguments in proof of the single authorship of the books of Ezra and
Nehemiah than the defenders of this hypothesis are able to bring
forward. In respect of diction, nothing further has been adduced than
that the expression עלי אלחי כּיד, so frequently recurring in Ezra ([Ezr
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#028); compare [Ezr
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#006), [Ezr
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009); [Ezr
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#018), [Ezr
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#022), [Ezr
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031)), is also once found in Nehemiah
([Neh 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008)). But the single occurrence
of this one expression, common to himself and Ezra, in the midst of the
very peculiar diction and style of Nehemiah, is not the slightest proof
of the original combination of the two books; and [Neh
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008) simply shows that Nehemiah
appropriated words which, in his intercourse with Ezra, he had heard
from his lips. - With respect to other instances in which the diction
and matter are common to the books of Chronicles, Ezra, and Nehemiah, we
have already shown, in the introduction to Chronicles, that they are too
trifling to establish an identity of authorship in the case of these
three books; and at the same time remarked that the agreement between
the closing verses of Chronicles and the beginning of Ezra does but
render it probable that Ezra may have been the author of the former book
also.

3\. Composition and Historical Character of the Book of Ezra

If this book is a single one, i.e., the work of one author, there can be
no reasonable doubt that that author was Ezra, the priest and scribe,
who in Ezra 7-10 narrates his return from Babylon to Jerusalem, and the
circumstances of his ministry there, neither its language nor contents
exhibiting any traces of a later date. Its historical character, too,
was universally admitted until Schrader, in his beforenamed treatise, p.
399, undertook to dispute it with respect to the first part of this
book. The proofs he adduced were, first, that the statement made by the
author, who lived 200 years after the building of the temple, in this
book, i.e., in the chronicle of the foundation of the temple in the
second year after the return from Babylon, concerning the cessation of
the building till the second year of Darius, and its resumption in that
year, is unhistorical, and rests only upon the insufficiently confirmed
assumption that the exiles, penetrated as they were with ardent love for
their hereditary religion, full of joy that their deliverance from
Babylon was at last effected, and of heartfelt gratitude to God, should
have suffered fifteen years to elapse before they set to work to raise
the national sanctuary from its ruins; secondly, that the accounts both
of the rearing of the altar, [Ezr 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#002)
and [Ezr 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#003), and of the proceedings
at laying the foundations of the temple, together with the names, dates,
and other seemingly special details found in [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001), [Ezr
4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001), [Ezr
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024); [Ezr
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#014), are not derived from ancient
historical narratives, but are manifestly due to the imagination of the
chronicler drawing upon the documents given in the book of Ezra, upon
other books of the Old Testament, and upon his own combinations thereof.
This whole argument, however, rests upon the assertion, that neither in
[Ezr 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002) and [Ezr
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#016), in [Hag
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002), [Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004), [Hag
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#008), [Hag
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#014); [Hag
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#012), nor in [Zac
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016); [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009); [Zac
6:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012); [Zac
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009), is the resumption of the temple
building in the second year of the reign of Darius spoken of, but that,
on the contrary, the laying of its foundations in the said year of
Darius is in some of these passages assumed, in others distinctly
stated. Such a conclusion can, however, only be arrived at by a
misconception of the passages in question. When it is said, [Ezr
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002), "Then (i.e., when the prophets
Haggai and Zechariah prophesied) rose up Zerubbabel and Jeshua ... and
began to build the house of God" (שׁריו למבנא), there is no need to
insist that בּנא often signifies to rebuild, but the word may be
understood strictly of beginning to build. And this accords with the
fact, that while in [Ezr 3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001) and 4
nothing is related concerning the building of the temple, whose
foundations were laid in the second year of the return, it is said that
immediately after the foundations were laid the Samaritans came and
desired to take part in the building of the temple, and that when their
request was refused, they weakened the hands of the people, and deterred
them from building ([Ezr 4:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001)).
Schrader can only establish a discrepancy between [Ezr
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002) and [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001) and 4 by confounding building
with foundation-laying, two terms which neither in Hebrew nor German
have the same signification.

Still less can it be inferred from the statement of the Jewish elders
([Ezr 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#016)), when questioned by Tatnai
and his companions as to who had commanded them to build the temple,
"Then came the same Sheshbazzar and laid the foundation of the house of
God, which is in Jerusalem, and since that time even until now hath it
been in building," that the building of the temple proceeded without
intermission from the laying of its foundations under Cyrus till the
second year of Darius. For can we be justified in the supposition that
the Jewish elders would furnish Tatnai with a detailed statement of
matters for the purpose of informing him what had been done year by
year, and, by thus enumerating the hindrances which had for an interval
put a stop to the building, afford the Persian officials an excuse for
consequently declaring the question of resuming the building non-suited?
For Tatnai made no inquiry as to the length of time the temple had been
in building, or whether this had been going on uninterruptedly, but only
who had authorized them to build; and the Jewish elders replied that
King Cyrus had commanded the building of the temple, and delivered to
Sheshbazzar, whom he made governor, the sacred vessels which
Nebuchadnezzar had carried away to Babylon, whereupon Sheshbazzar had
begun the work of building which had been going on from then till now.
Moreover, Schrader himself seems to have felt that not much could be
proved from [Ezr 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#002) and [Ezr
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#016). Hence he seeks to construct the
chief support of his theory from the prophecies of Haggai and Zechariah.
In this attempt, however, he shows so little comprehension of prophetic
diction, that he expounds Haggai's reproofs of the indifference of the
people in building the temple, Hagg. [Hag
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002), [Hag
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#004), [Hag
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#008), as stating that as yet nothing
had been done, not even the foundations laid; transforms the words, [Hag
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#014), "they came and did work in the
house of the Lord" (יעשׂוּ מלאכה בב), into "they began to build;" makes
Hagg. [Ezr 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#018), by a tautological
view of the words למן היּום אשׁר יסּד, mean that the foundations of the
temple were not laid till the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month of
the second year of Darius (see the true meaning of the passage in the
commentary on Haggai); and finally, explains the prophecies of Zechariah
([Zac 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016); [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009); [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012); [Zac
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#009)) concerning the rearing of a
spiritual temple by Messiah as applying to the temple of wood and stone
actually erected by Zerubbabel. By such means he arrives at the result
that "neither does the Chaldee section of Ezra (Ezra 5), including the
official documents, say anything of a foundation of the temple in the
second year after the return from Babylon; nor do the contemporary
prophets Haggai and Zechariah make any mention of this earlier
foundation in their writings, but, on the contrary, place the foundation
in the second year of Darius: that, consequently, the view advocated by
the author of the book of Ezra, that the building of the temple began in
the days of Cyrus, and immediately after the return of the exiles, is
wholly without documentary proof." This result he seeks further to
establish by collecting all the words, expressions, and matters (such as
sacrifices, Levites, priests, etc.) in [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001) and 4 and [Ezr
6:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016), to which parallels may be
found in the books of Chronicles, for the sake of drawing from them the
further conclusion that "the chronicler," though he did not indeed
invent the facts related in [Ezr
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001), and [Ezr
6:16-22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#016), combined them from the
remaining chapters of the book of Ezra, and from other books of the Old
Testament, - a conclusion in which the chief stress is placed upon the
supposed fact that the chronicler was sufficiently known to have been a
compiler and maker up of history. Such handling of Scripture can,
however, in our days no longer assume the guise of "scientific
criticism;" this kind of critical produce, by which De Wette and his
follower Gramberg endeavoured to gain notoriety sixty years ago, having
long been condemned by theological science. Nor can the historical
character of this book be shaken by such frivolous objections. Three
events of fundamental importance to the restoration and continuance of
Israel as a separate people among the other nations of the earth are
contained in it, viz.: (1) The release of the Jews and Israelites from
the Babylonian captivity by Cyrus; (2) The re-settlement in Judah and
Jerusalem, with the rebuilding of the temple; (3) The ordering of the
re-settled flock according to the law of Moses, by Ezra. The actual
occurrence of these three events is raised above all doubt by the
subsequent historical development of the Jews in their own land; and the
narrative of the manner in which this development was rendered possible
and brought to pass, possesses as complete documentary authentication,
in virtue of the communication of the official acts of the Persian kings
Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes-acts of which the whole contents are given
after the manner, so to speak, of State papers-as any fact of ancient
history. The historical narrative, in fact, does but furnish a brief
explanation of the documents and edicts which are thus handed down.

For the exegetical literature, see Lehrb. der Einleitung, p. 455; to
which must be added, E. Bertheau, die Bcher Esra, Nehemia, und Ester
erkl., Lpz. (being the seventeenth number of the kurzgef. exeget.
Handbuchs zum A. T.).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 1](ezr001)

</div>
