<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen029)  [Next](gen031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

[Genesis 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 30:1</span></span>

Bilhah's Sons. - When Rachel thought of her own barrenness, she became
more and more envious of her sister, who was blessed with sons. But
instead of praying, either directly or through her husband, as Rebekah
had done, to Jehovah, who had promised His favour to Jacob ([Gen
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013).), she said to Jacob, in
passionate displeasure, "Get me children, or I shall die;" to which he
angrily replied, "Am I in God's stead (i.e., equal to God, or God), who
hath withheld from thee the fruit of the womb?" i.e., Can I, a powerless
man, give thee what the Almighty God has withheld? Almighty like God
Jacob certainly was not; but he also wanted the power which he might
have possessed, the power of prayer, in firm reliance upon the promise
of the Lord. Hence he could neither help nor advise his beloved wife,
but only assent to her proposal, that he should beget children for her
through her maid Bilhah (cf. [Gen
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002)), through whom two sons were born
to her. The first she named Dan, i.e., judge, because God had judged
her, i.e., procured her justice, hearkened to her voice (prayer), and
removed the reproach of childlessness; the second Naphtali, i.e., my
conflict, or my fought one, for "fightings of God, she said, have I
fought with my sister, and also prevailed." אלהים נפתּוּלי are neither
luctationes quam maximae, nor "a conflict in the cause of God, because
Rachel did not wish to leave the founding of the nation of God to Leah
alone" (Knobel), but "fightings for God and His mercy" (Hengstenberg),
or, what comes to the same thing, "wrestlings of prayer she had wrestled
with Leah; in reality, however, with God Himself, who seemed to have
restricted His mercy to Leah alone" (Delitzsch). It is to be noticed,
that Rachel speaks of Elohim only, whereas Leah regarded her first four
sons as the gift of Jehovah. In this variation of the names, the
attitude of the two women, not only to one another, but also to the
cause they served, is made apparent. It makes no difference whether the
historian has given us the very words of the women on the birth of their
children, or, what appears more probable, since the name of God is not
introduced into the names of the children, merely his own view of the
matter as related by him ([Gen 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031);
[Gen 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#017), [Gen
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022)). Leah, who had been forced upon
Jacob against his inclination, and was put by him in the background, was
not only proved by the four sons, whom she bore to him in the first
years of her marriage, to be the wife provided for Jacob by Elohim, the
ruler of human destiny; but by the fact that these four sons formed the
real stem of the promised numerous seed, she was proved still more to be
the wife selected by Jehovah, in realization of His promise, to be the
tribe-mother of the greater part of the covenant nation. But this
required that Leah herself should be fitted for it in heart and mind,
that she should feel herself to be the handmaid of Jehovah, and give
glory to the covenant God for the blessing of children, or see in her
children actual proofs that Jehovah had accepted her and would bring to
her the affection of her husband. It was different with Rachel, the
favourite and therefore high-minded wife. Jacob should give her, what
God alone could give. The faithfulness and blessing of the covenant God
were still hidden from her. Hence she resorted to such earthly means as
procuring children through her maid, and regarded the desired result as
the answer of God, and a victory in her contest with her sister. For
such a state of mind the term Elohim, God the sovereign ruler, was the
only fitting expression.

[Genesis 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 30:9</span></span>

Zilpah's Sons. - But Leah also was not content with the divine blessing
bestowed upon her by Jehovah. The means employed by Rachel to retain the
favour of her husband made her jealous; and jealousy drove her to the
employment of the same means. Jacob begat two sons by Zilpah her maid.
The one Leah named Gad, i.e., "good fortune," saying, בּגד, "with good
fortune," according to the Chethib, for which the Masoretic reading is
גּד בּא, "good fortune has come," - not, however, from any ancient
tradition, for the Sept. reads ἐν τύχῃ, but simply from a subjective and
really unnecessary conjecture, since בּגד = "to my good fortune," sc., a
son is born, gives a very suitable meaning. The second she named Asher,
i.e., the happy one, or bringer of happiness; for she said, בּאשׁרי, "to
my happiness, for daughters call me happy," i.e., as a mother with
children. The perfect אשּׁרני relates to "what she had now certainly
reached" (Del.). Leah did not think of God in connection with these two
births. They were nothing more than the successful and welcome result of
the means she had employed.

[Genesis 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 30:14</span></span>

The Other Children of Leah. - How thoroughly henceforth the two wives
were carried away by constant jealousy of the love and attachment of
their husband, is evident from the affair of the love-apples, which
Leah's son Reuben, who was then four years old, found in the field and
brought to his mother. דּוּדאים, μῆλα μανδραγορῶν (lxx), the yellow
apples of the alraun (Mandragora vernalis), a mandrake very common in
Palestine. They are about the size of a nutmeg, with a strong and
agreeable odour, and were used by the ancients, as they still are by the
Arabs, as a means of promoting child-bearing. To Rachel's request that
she would give her some, Leah replied ([Gen
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#015)): "Is it too little, that thou
hast taken (drawn away from me) my husband, to take also" (לקחת infin.),
i.e., that thou wouldst also take, "my son's mandrakes?" At length she
parted with them, on condition that Rachel would let Jacob sleep with
her the next night. After relating how Leah conceived again, and Rachel
continued barren in spite of the mandrakes, the writer justly observes
([Gen 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#017)), "Elohim hearkened unto
Leah," to show that it was not from such natural means as love-apples,
but from God the author of life, that she had received such
fruitfulness. Leah saw in the birth of her fifth son a divine reward for
having given her maid to her husband - a recompense, that is, for her
self-denial; and she named him on that account Issaschar, ישּׂשׂכר, a
strange form, to be understood either according to the Chethib שׂכר ישׁ
"there is reward," or according to the Keri שׁכר ישּׂא "he bears
(brings) reward." At length she bore her sixth son, and named him
Zebulun, i.e., "dwelling;" for she hoped that now, after God had endowed
her with a good portion, her husband, to whom she had born six sons,
would dwell with her, i.e., become more warmly attached to her. The name
is from זבל to dwell, with acc. constr. "to inhabit," formed with a play
upon the alliteration in the word זבד to present - two ἅπαξ λεγόμενα. In
connection with these two births, Leah mentions Elohim alone, the
supernatural giver, and not Jehovah, the covenant God, whose grace had
been forced out of her heart by jealousy. She afterwards bore a
daughter, Dinah, who is mentioned simply because of the account in Gen
34; for, according to [Gen 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035) and
[Gen 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#007), Jacob had several
daughters, though they were nowhere mentioned by name.

[Genesis 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 30:22</span></span>

Birth of Joseph. - At length God gave Rachel also a son, whom she named
Joseph, יוסף, i.e., taking away (= יאסף, cf. [Sa1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006); [Sa2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001); [Psa
104:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#029)) and adding (from יסף), because
his birth not only furnished an actual proof that God had removed the
reproach of her childlessness, but also excited the wish, that Jehovah
might add another son. The fulfilment of this wish is recorded in [Gen
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016). The double derivation of the
name, and the exchange of Elohim for Jehovah, may be explained, without
the hypothesis of a double source, on the simple ground, that Rachel
first of all looked back at the past, and, thinking of the earthly means
that had been applied in vain for the purpose of obtaining a child,
regarded the son as a gift of God. At the same time, the good fortune
which had now come to her banished from her heart her envy of her sister
([Gen 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001)), and aroused belief in
that God, who, as she had no doubt heard from her husband, had given
Jacob such great promises; so that in giving the name, probably at the
circumcision, she remembered Jehovah and prayed for another son from His
covenant faithfulness.

After the birth of Joseph, Jacob asked Laban to send him away, with the
wives and children for whom he had served him ([Gen
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025)). According to this, Joseph was
born at the end of the 14 years of service that had been agreed upon, or
seven years after Jacob had taken Leah and (a week later) Rachel as his
wives ([Gen 29:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#021)). Now if all the
children, whose births are given in Gen 29:32-30:24, had been born one
after another during the period mentioned, not only would Leah have had
seven children in 7, or literally 6 1/4 years, but there would have been
a considerable interval also, during which Rachel's maid and her own
gave birth to children. But this would have been impossible; and the
text does not really state it. When we bear in mind that the imperf. c.
ו consec. expresses not only the order of time, but the order of thought
as well, it becomes apparent that in the history of the births, the
intention to arrange them according to the mothers prevails over the
chronological order, so that it by no means follows, that because the
passage, "when Rachel saw that she bare Jacob no children," occurs after
Leah is said to have had four sons, therefore it was not till after the
birth of Leah's fourth child that Rachel became aware of her own
barrenness. There is nothing on the part of the grammar to prevent our
arranging the course of events thus. Leah's first four births followed
as rapidly as possible one after the other, so that four sons were born
in the first four years of the second period of Jacob's service. In the
meantime, not necessarily after the birth of Leah's fourth child,
Rachel, having discovered her own barrenness, had given her maid to
Jacob; so that not only may Dan have been born before Judah, but
Naphtali also not long after him. The rapidity and regularity with which
Leah had born her first four sons, would make her notice all the more
quickly the cessation that took place; and jealousy of Rachel, as well
as the success of the means she had adopted, would impel her to attempt
in the same way to increase the number of her children. Moreover, Leah
herself may have conceived again before the birth of her maid's second
son, and may have given birth to her last two sons in the sixth and
seventh years of their marriage. And contemporaneously with the birth of
Leah's last son, or immediately afterwards, Rachel may have given birth
to Joseph. In this way Jacob may easily have had eleven sons within
seven years of his marriage. But with regard to the birth of Dinah, the
expression "afterwards" ([Gen 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#021))
seems to indicate, that she was not born during Jacob's years of
service, but during the remaining six years of his stay with Laban.

[Genesis 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 30:25</span></span>

New Contract of Service Between Jacob and Laban. - As the second period
of seven years terminated about the time of Joseph's birth, Jacob
requested Laban to let him return to his own place and country, i.e., to
Canaan. Laban, however, entreated him to remain, for he had perceived
that Jehovah, Jacob's God, had blessed him for his sake; and told him to
fix his wages for further service. The words, "if I have found favour in
thine eyes" ([Gen 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#027)), contain an
aposiopesis, sc., then remain. נחשׁתּי "a heathen expression, like
augurando cognovi" (Delitzsch). עלי שׂכרך thy wages, which it will be
binding upon me to give. Jacob reminded him, on the other hand, what
service he had rendered him, how Jehovah's blessing had followed "at his
foot," and asked when he should begin to provide for his own house. But
when Laban repeated the question, what should he give him, Jacob offered
to feed and keep his flock still, upon one condition, which was founded
upon the fact, that in the East the goats, as a rule, are black or
dark-brown, rarely white or spotted with white, and that the sheep for
the most part are white, very seldom black or speckled. Jacob required
as wages, namely, all the speckled, spotted, and black among the sheep,
and all the speckled, spotted, and white among the goats; and offered
"even to-day" to commence separating them, so that "to-morrow" Laban
might convince himself of the uprightness of his proceedings. הסר ([Gen
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032)) cannot be imperative, because
of the preceding אעבר, but must be infinitive: "I will go through the
whole flock to-day to remove from thence all...;" and שׂכרי היה
signifies "what is removed shall be my wages," but not everything of an
abnormal colour that shall hereafter be found in the flock. This was no
doubt intended by Jacob, as the further course of the narrative shows,
but it is not involved in the words of [Gen
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#032). Either the writer has
restricted himself to the main fact, and omitted to mention that it was
also agreed at the same time that the separation should be repeated at
certain regular periods, and that all the sheep of an abnormal colour in
Laban's flock should also be set aside as part of Jacob's wages; or this
point was probably not mentioned at first, but taken for granted by both
parties, since Jacob took measures with that idea to his own advantage,
and even Laban, notwithstanding the frequent alteration of the contract
with which Jacob charged him ([Gen
31:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007), and [Gen
31:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#041)), does not appear to have
disputed this right.

[Genesis 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 30:34</span></span>

Laban cheerfully accepted the proposal, but did not leave Jacob to make
the selection. He undertook that himself, probably to make more sure,
and then gave those which were set apart as Jacob's wages to his own
sons to tend, since it was Jacob's duty to take care of Laban's flock,
and "set three days' journey betwixt himself and Jacob," i.e., between
the flock to be tended by himself through his sons, and that to be
tended by Jacob, for the purpose of preventing any copulation between
the animals of the two flocks. Nevertheless he was overreached by Jacob,
who adopted a double method of increasing the wages agreed upon. In the
first place ([Gen 30:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#037)), he took
fresh rods of storax, maple, and walnut-trees, all of which have a
dazzling white wood under their dark outside, and peeled white stripes
upon them, הלּבן מחשׂף (the verbal noun instead of the inf. abs. חשׂף),
"peeling the white naked in the rods." These partially peeled, and
therefore mottled rods, he placed in the drinking-troughs (רהטים lit.,
gutters, from רהט = רוּץ to run, is explained by המּים שׁקתות
water-troughs), to which the flock came to drink, in front of the
animals, in order that, if copulation took place at the drinking time,
it might occur near the mottled sticks, and the young be speckled and
spotted in consequence. ויּחמנה a rare, antiquated form for ותּחמנה from
חמם, and ויּחמוּ for ויּחמוּ imperf. Kal of יחם = חמם. This artifice was
founded upon a fact frequently noticed, particularly in the case of
sheep, that whatever fixes their attention in copulation is marked upon
the young (see the proofs in Bochart, Hieroz. 1, 618, and Friedreich zur
Bibel 1, 37ff.). - Secondly ([Gen
30:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#040)), Jacob separated the speckled
animals thus obtained from those of a normal colour, and caused the
latter to feed so that the others would be constantly in sight, in order
that he might in this way obtain a constant accession of mottled sheep.
As soon as these had multiplied sufficiently, he formed separate flocks
(viz., of the speckled additions), "and put them not unto Laban's
cattle;" i.e., he kept them apart in order that a still larger number of
speckled ones might be procured, through Laban's one-coloured flock
having this mottled group constantly in view.

[Genesis 30:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">gen 30:41</span></span>

He did not adopt the trick with the rods, however, on every occasion of
copulation, for the sheep in those countries lamb twice a year, but only
at the copulation of the strong sheep (המקשּׁרות the bound ones, i.e.,
firm and compact), - Luther, "the spring flock;" ליחמנּה inf. Pi. "to
conceive it (the young);" - but not "in the weakening of the sheep,"
i.e., when they were weak, and would produce weak lambs. The meaning is
probably this: he only adopted this plan at the summer copulation, not
the autumn; for, in the opinion of the ancients (Pliny, Columella),
lambs that were conceived in the spring and born in the autumn were
stronger than those born in the spring (cf. Bochart l.c. p. 582). Jacob
did this, possibly, less to spare Laban, than to avoid exciting
suspicion, and so leading to the discovery of his trick. - In [Gen
30:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#043) the account closes with the
remark, that the man increased exceedingly, and became rich in cattle
(רבּות צאן many head of sheep and goats) and slaves, without expressing
approbation of Jacob's conduct, or describing his increasing wealth as a
blessing from God. The verdict is contained in what follows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 31](gen031)

</div>
