<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen008)  [Next](gen010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001)

[Genesis 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 9:1</span></span>

These divine purposes of peace, which were communicated to Noah while
sacrificing, were solemnly confirmed by the renewal of the blessing
pronounced at the creation and the establishment of a covenant through a
visible sign, which would be a pledge for all time that there should
never be a flood again. In the words by which the first blessing was
transferred to Noah and his sons ([Gen
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002)), the supremacy granted to man
over the animal world was expressed still more forcibly than in [Gen
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026) and [Gen
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028); because, inasmuch as sin with
its consequences had loosened the bond of voluntary subjection on the
part of the animals to the will of man-man, on the one hand, having lost
the power of the spirit over nature, and nature, on the other hand,
having become estranged from man, or rather having rebelled against him,
through the curse pronounced upon the earth-henceforth it was only by
force that he could rule over it, by that "fear and dread" which God
instilled into the animal creation. Whilst the animals were thus placed
in the hand (power) of man, permission was also given to him to
slaughter them for food, the eating of the blood being the only thing
forbidden.

[Genesis 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 9:3</span></span>

"Every moving thing that liveth shall be food for you; even as the green
of the herb have I given you all (את־כּל = חכּל)." These words do not
affirm that man then first began to eat animal food, but only that God
then for the first time authorized, or allowed him to do, what probably
he had previously done in opposition to His will. "Only flesh in its
soul, its blood (דמו in apposition to בּנפשׁו), shall ye not eat;" i.e.,
flesh in which there is still blood, because the soul of the animal is
in the blood. The prohibition applies to the eating of flesh with blood
in it, whether of living animals, as is the barbarous custom in
Abyssinia, or of slaughtered animals from which the blood has not been
properly drained at death. This prohibition presented, on the one hand,
a safeguard against harshness and cruelty; and contained, on the other,
"an undoubted reference to the sacrifice of animals, which was
afterwards made the subject of command, and in which it was the blood
especially that was offered, as the seat and soul of life (see note on
[Lev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011), [Lev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014)); so that from this point of
view sacrifice denotes the surrender of one's own inmost life, of the
very essence of life, to God" (Ziegler). Allusion is made to the first
again in the still further limitation given in [Gen
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005) : "and only (ואך) your blood, with
regard to your souls (ל indicative of reference to an individual object,
Ewald, 310a), will I seek (demand or avenge, cf. [Psa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013)) from the hand of every beast,
and from the hand of man, from the hand of every one, his brother;"
i.e., from every man, whoever he may be, because he is his (the slain
man's) brother, inasmuch as all men are brethren. The life of man was
thus made secure against animals as well as men. God would avenge or
inflict punishment for every murder, - not directly, however, as He
promised to do in the case of Cain, but indirectly by giving the
command, "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed,"
and thus placing in the hand of man His own judicial power. "This was
the first command," says Luther, "having reference to the temporal
sword. By these words temporal government was established, and the sword
placed in its hand by God." It is true the punishment of the murderer is
enjoined upon "man" universally; but as all the judicial relations and
ordinances of the increasing race were rooted in those of the family,
and grew by a natural process out of that, the family relations
furnished of themselves the norm for the closer definition of the
expression "man." Hence the command does not sanction revenge, but lays
the foundation for the judicial rights of the divinely appointed "powers
that be" ([Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001)). This is evident
from the reason appended: "for in the image of God made He man." If
murder was to be punished with death because it destroyed the image of
God in man, it is evident that the infliction of the punishment was not
to be left to the caprice of individuals, but belonged to those alone
who represent the authority and majesty of God, i.e., the divinely
appointed rulers, who for that very reason are called Elohim in [Psa
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006). This command then laid the
foundation for all civil government,

(Note: Hic igitur fons est, ex quo manat totum just civile et just
gentium. Nam si Deus concedit homini potestatem super vitam et mortem,
profecto etiam concedit potestatem super id, quod minus est, ut sunt
fortunae, familia, uxor, liberi, servi, agri; Haec omnia vult certorum
hominum potestati esse obnoxia Deus, ut reos puniant. Luther.)

and formed a necessary complement to that unalterable continuance of the
order of nature which had been promised to the human race for its
further development. If God on account of the innate sinfulness of man
would no more bring an exterminating judgment upon the earthly creation,
it was necessary that by commands and authorities He should erect a
barrier against the supremacy of evil, and thus lay the foundation for a
well-ordered civil development of humanity, in accordance with the words
of the blessing, which are repeated in [Gen
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#007), as showing the intention and goal
of this new historical beginning.

[Genesis 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 9:8</span></span>

To give Noah and his sons a firm assurance of the prosperous continuance
of the human race, God condescended to establish a covenant with them
and their descendants, and to confirm this covenant by a visible sign
for all generations. בּרית הקים is not equivalent to בּרית כּרת; it does
not denote the formal conclusion of an actual covenant, but the "setting
up of a covenant," or the giving of a promise possessing the nature of a
covenant. In summing up the animals in [Gen
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#010), the prepositions are
accumulated: first בּ embracing the whole, then the partitive מן
restricting the enumeration to those which went out of the ark, and
lastly ל yl, "with regard to," extending it again to every individual.
There was a correspondence between the covenant ([Gen
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011)) and the sign which was to keep
it before the sight of men ([Gen
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012)): "I give (set) My bow in the
cloud" ([Gen 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#013)). When God gathers
(ענן [Gen 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#014), lit., clouds) clouds
over the earth, "the bow shall be seen in the cloud," and that not for
man only, but for God also, who will look at the bow, "to remember His
everlasting covenant." An "everlasting covenant" is a covenant "for
perpetual generations," i.e., one which shall extend to all ages, even
to the end of the world. The fact that God Himself would look at the bow
and remember His covenant, was "a glorious and living expression of the
great truth, that God's covenant signs, in which He has put His
promises, are real vehicles of His grace, that they have power and
essential worth not only with men, but also before God" (O. v. Gerlach).
The establishment of the rainbow as a covenant sign of the promise that
there should be no flood again, presupposes that it appeared then for
the first time in the vault and clouds of heaven. From this it may be
inferred, not that it did not rain before the flood, which could hardly
be reconciled with [Gen 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#005), but that
the atmosphere was differently constituted; a supposition in perfect
harmony with the facts of natural history, which point to differences in
the climate of the earth's surface before and after the flood. The fact
that the rainbow, that "coloured splendour thrown by the bursting forth
of the sun upon the departing clouds," is the result of the reciprocal
action of light, and air, and water, is no disproof of the origin and
design recorded here. For the laws of nature are ordained by God, and
have their ultimate ground and purpose in the divine plan of the
universe which links together both nature and grace. "Springing as it
does from the effect of the sun upon the dark mass of clouds, it
typifies the readiness of the heavenly to pervade the earthly; spread
out as it is between heaven and earth, it proclaims peace between God
and man; and whilst spanning the whole horizon, it teaches the
all-embracing universality of the covenant of grace" (Delitzsch).

[Genesis 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 9:18</span></span>

The second occurrence in the life of Noah after the flood exhibited the
germs of the future development of the human race in a threefold
direction, as manifested in the characters of his three sons. As all the
families and races of man descend from them, their names are repeated in
[Gen 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#018); and in prospective allusion
to what follows, it is added that "Ham was the father of Canaan." From
these three "the earth (the earth's population) spread itself out." "The
earth" is used for the population of the earth, as in [Gen
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025) and [Gen
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001), and just as lands or cities are
frequently substituted for their inhabitants. נפצה: probably Niphal for
נפצה, from פּוּץ to scatter ([Gen
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#004)), to spread out. "And Noah the
husbandman began, and planted a vineyard." As האדמה אישׁ cannot be the
predicate of the sentence, on account of the article, but must be in
apposition to Noah, ויטּע and ויּחל must be combined in the sense of
"began to plant" (Ges. 142, 3). The writer does not mean to affirm that
Noah resumed his agricultural operations after the flood, but that as a
husbandman he began to cultivate the vine; because it was this which
furnished the occasion for the manifestation of that diversity in the
character of his sons, which was so eventful in its consequences in
relation to the future history of their descendants. In ignorance of the
fiery nature of wine, Noah drank and was drunken, and uncovered himself
in his tent ([Gen 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#021)). Although
excuse may be made for this drunkenness, the words of Luther are still
true: "Qui excusant patriarcham, volentes hanc consolationem, quam
Spiritus S. ecclesiis necessariam judicavit, abjuciunt, quod scilicen
etiam summi sancti aliquando labuntur." This trifling fall served to
display the hearts of his sons. Ham saw the nakedness of his father, and
told his two brethren without. Not content with finding pleasure himself
in his father's shame, "nunquam enim vino victum patrem filius resisset,
nisi prius ejecisset animo illam reverentiam et opinionem, quae in
liberis de parentibus ex mandato Dei existere debet" (Luther), he just
proclaimed his disgraceful pleasure to his brethren, and thus exhibited
his shameless sensuality. The brothers, on the contrary, with
reverential modesty covered their father with a garment (השּׂמלה the
garment, which was at hand), walking backwards that they might not see
his nakedness ([Gen 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#023)), and thus
manifesting their childlike reverence as truly as their refined purity
and modesty. For this they receive their father's blessing, whereas Ham
reaped for his son Canaan the patriarch's curse. In [Gen
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#024) Ham is called הקּטן בּנו "his
(Noah's) little son," and it is questionable whether the adjective is to
be taken as comparative in the sense of "the younger," or as
superlative, meaning "the youngest." Neither grammar nor the usage of
the language will enable us to decide. For in [Sa1
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#014), where David is contrasted with
his brothers, the word means not the youngest of the four, but the
younger by the side of the three elder, just as in [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016) the sun is called "the great"
light, and the moon "the little" light, not to show that the sun is the
greatest and the moon the least of all lights, but that the moon is the
smaller of the two. If, on the other hand, on the ground of [Sa1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011), where "the little one"
undoubtedly means the youngest of all, any one would press the
superlative force here, he must be prepared, in order to be consistent,
to do the same with haggadol, "the great one," in [Gen
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021), which would lead to this
discrepancy, that in the verse before us Ham is called Noah's youngest
son, and in [Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021) Shem is called
Japhet's oldest brother, and thus implicite Ham is described as older
than Japhet. If we do not wish lightly to introduce a discrepancy into
the text of these two chapters, no other course is open than to follow
the lxx, Vulg. and others, and take "the little" here and "the great" in
[Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021) as used in a comparative
sense, Ham being represented here as Noah's younger son, and Shem in
[Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021) as Japhet's elder brother.
Consequently the order in which the three names stand is also an
indication of their relative ages. And this is not only the simplest and
readiest assumption, but is even confirmed by Gen 10, though the order
is inverted there, Japhet being mentioned first, then Ham, and Shem
last; and it is also in harmony with the chronological datum in [Gen
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010), as compared with [Gen
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032) (vid., [Gen
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010)).

To understand the words of Noah with reference to his sons ([Gen
9:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025)), we must bear in mind, on the
one hand, that as the moral nature of the patriarch was transmitted by
generation to his descendants, so the diversities of character in the
sons of Noah foreshadowed diversities in the moral inclinations of the
tribes of which they were the head; and on the other hand, that Noah,
through the Spirit and power of that God with whom he walked, discerned
in the moral nature of his sons, and the different tendencies which they
already displayed, the germinal commencement of the future course of
their posterity, and uttered words of blessing and of curse, which were
prophetic of the history of the tribes that descended from them. In the
sin of Ham "there lies the great stain of the whole Hamitic race, whose
chief characteristic is sexual sin" (Ziegler); and the curse which Noah
pronounced upon this sin still rests upon the race. It was not Ham who
was cursed, however, but his son Canaan. Ham had sinned against his
father, and he was punished in his son. But the reason why Canaan was
the only son named, is not to be found in the fact that Canaan was the
youngest son of Ham, and Ham the youngest son of Noah, as Hoffmann
supposes. The latter is not an established fact; and the purely external
circumstance, that Canaan had the misfortune to be the youngest son,
could not be a just reason for cursing him alone. The real reason must
either lie in the fact that Canaan was already walking in the steps of
his father's impiety and sin, or else be sought in the name Canaan, in
which Noah discerned, through the gift of prophecy, a significant omen;
a supposition decidedly favoured by the analogy of the blessing
pronounced upon Japhet, which is also founded upon the name. Canaan does
not signify lowland, nor was it transferred, as many maintain, from the
land to its inhabitants; it was first of all the name of the father of
the tribe, from whom it was transferred to his descendants, and
eventually to the land of which they took possession. The meaning of
Canaan is "the submissive one," from כּנע to stoop or submit, Hiphil, to
bend or subjugate ([Deu 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003); [Jdg
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#023), etc.). "Ham gave his son the
name from the obedience which he required, though he did not render it
himself. The son was to be the servant (for the name points to servile
obedience) of a father who was as tyrannical towards those beneath him,
as he was refractory towards those above. The father, when he gave him
the name, thought only of submission to his own commands. But the secret
providence of God, which rules in all such things, had a different
submission in view" (Hengstenberg, Christol. i. 28, transl.). "Servant
of servants (i.e., the lowest of slaves, vid., Ewald, 313) let him
become to his brethren." Although this curse was expressly pronounced
upon Canaan alone, the fact that Ham had no share in Noah's blessing,
either for himself or his other sons, was a sufficient proof that his
whole family was included by implication in the curse, even if it was to
fall chiefly upon Canaan. And history confirms the supposition. The
Canaanites were partly exterminated, and partly subjected to the lowest
form of slavery, by the Israelites, who belonged to the family of Shem;
and those who still remained were reduced by Solomon to the same
condition ([Kg1 9:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#020)). The
Phoenicians, along with the Carthaginians and the Egyptians, who all
belonged to the family of Canaan, were subjected by the Japhetic
Persians, Macedonians, and Romans; and the remainder of the Hamitic
tribes either shared the same fate, or still sigh, like the negroes, for
example, and other African tribes, beneath the yoke of the most crushing
slavery.

[Genesis 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 9:26</span></span>

In contrast with the curse, the blessings upon Shem and Japhet are
introduced with a fresh "and he said," whilst Canaan's servitude comes
in like a refrain and is mentioned in connection with both his brethren:
Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Shem, and let Canaan be servant to them."
Instead of wishing good to Shem, Noah praises the God of Shem, just as
Moses in [Deu 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#020), instead of
blessing Gad, blesses Him "that enlargeth Gad," and points out the
nature of the good which he is to receive, by using the name Jehovah.
This is done "propter excellentem benedictionem. Non enim loquitur de
corporali benedictione, sed de benedictione futura per semen promissum.
Eam tantam videt esse ut explicari verbis non possit, ideo se vertit ad
gratiarum actionem" (Luther). Because Jehovah is the God of Shem, Shem
will be the recipient and heir of all the blessings of salvation, which
God as Jehovah bestows upon mankind. למו = להם neither stands for the
singular לו (Ges. 103, 2), nor refers to Shem and Japhet. It serves to
show that the announcement does not refer to the person relation of
Canaan to Shem, but applies to their descendants.

[Genesis 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 9:27</span></span>

"Wide let God make it to Japhet, and let him dwell in the tents of
Shem." Starting from the meaning of the name, Noah sums up his blessing
in the word יפתּ (japht), from פּתה to be wide ([Pro
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#019)), in the Hiphil with ל, to
procure a wide space for any one, used either of extension over a wide
territory, or of removal to a free, unfettered position; analogous to ל
הרחיב, [Gen 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#022); [Psa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001), etc. Both must be retained here,
so that the promise to the family of Japhet embraced not only a wide
extension, but also prosperity on every hand. This blessing was desired
by Noah, not from Jehovah, the God of Shem, who bestows saving spiritual
good upon man, but from Elohim, God as Creator and Governor of the
world; for it had respect primarily to the blessings of the earth, not
to spiritual blessings; although Japhet would participate in these as
well, for he should come and dwell in the tents of Shem. The disputed
question, whether God or Japhet is to be regarded as the subject of the
verb "shall dwell," is already decided by the use of the word Elohim. If
it were God whom Noah described as dwelling in the tents of Shem, so
that the expression denoted the gracious presence of God in Israel, we
should expect to find the name Jehovah, since it was as Jehovah that God
took up His abode among Shem in Israel. It is much more natural to
regard the expression as applying to Japhet, (a) because the refrain,
"Canaan shall be his servant," requires that we should understand [Gen
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#027) as applying to Japhet, like [Gen
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#026) to Shem; (b) because the plural,
tents, is not applicable to the abode of Jehovah in Israel, inasmuch as
in the parallel passages "we read of God dwelling in His tent, on His
holy hill, in Zion, in the midst of the children of Israel, and also of
the faithful dwelling in the tabernacle or temple of God, but never of
God dwelling in the tents of Israel" (Hengstenberg); and (c) because we
should expect that act of affection, which the two sons so delicately
performed in concert, to have its corresponding blessing in the relation
established between the two (Delitzsch). Japhet's dwelling in the tents
of Shem is supposed by Bochart and others to refer to the fact, that
Japhet's descendants would one day take the land of the Shemites, and
subjugate the inhabitants; but even the fathers almost unanimously
understand the words in a spiritual sense, as denoting the participation
of the Japhetites in the saving blessings of the Shemites. There is
truth in both views. Dwelling presupposes possession; but the idea of
taking by force is precluded by the fact, that it would be altogether at
variance with the blessing pronounced upon Shem. If history shows that
the tents of Shem were conquered and taken by the Japhetites, the
dwelling predicted here still relates not to the forcible conquest, but
to the fact that the conquerors entered into the possessions of the
conquered; that along with them they were admitted to the blessings of
salvation; and that, yielding to the spiritual power of the vanquished,
they lived henceforth in their tents as brethren ([Psa
133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)). And if the dwelling of Japhet
in the tents of Shem presupposes the conquest of the land of Shem by
Japhet, it is a blessing not only to Japhet, but to Shem also, since,
whilst Japhet enters into the spiritual inheritance of Shem, he brings
to Shem all the good of this world (Isa 60). "The fulfilment," as
Delitzsch says, "is plain enough, for we are all Japhetites dwelling in
the tents of Shem; and the language of the New Testament is the language
of Javan entered into the tents of Shem." To this we may add, that by
the Gospel preached in this language, Israel, though subdued by the
imperial power of Rome, became the spiritual conqueror of the orbis
terrarum Romanus, and received it into his tents. Moreover it is true of
the blessing and curse of Noah, as of all prophetic utterances, that
they are fulfilled with regard to the nations and families in question
as a whole, but do not predict, like an irresistible fate, the
unalterable destiny of every individual; on the contrary, they leave
room for freedom of personal decision, and no more cut off the
individuals in the accursed race from the possibility of conversion, or
close the way of salvation against the penitent, than they secure the
individuals of the family blessed against the possibility of falling
from a state of grace, and actually losing the blessing. Hence, whilst a
Rahab and an Araunah were received into the fellowship of Jehovah, and
the Canaanitish woman was relieved by the Lord because of her faith, the
hardened Pharisees and scribes had woes pronounced upon them, and Israel
was rejected because of its unbelief.

In [Gen 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#028), [Gen
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#029), the history of Noah is brought
to a close, with the account of his age, and of his death.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 10](gen010)

</div>
