<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen009)  [Next](gen011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 10:0</span></span>

IV\. History of the Sons of Noah - Genesis 10-11:9

Pedigree of the Nations - Genesis 10

Of the sons of Noah, all that is handed down is the pedigree of the
nations, or the list of the tribes which sprang from them (Gen 10), and
the account of the confusion of tongues, together with the dispersion of
men over the face of the earth ([Gen
11:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#001)); two events that were closely
related to one another, and of the greatest importance to the history of
the human race and of the kingdom of God. The genealogy traces the
origin of the tribes which were scattered over the earth; the confusion
of tongues shows the cause of the division of the one human race into
many different tribes with peculiar languages.

The genealogy of the tribes is not an ethnographical myth, nor the
attempt of an ancient Hebrew to trace the connection of his own people
with the other nations of the earth by means of uncertain traditions and
subjective combinations, but a historical record of the genesis of the
nations, founded upon a tradition handed down from the fathers, which,
to judge from its contents, belongs to the time of Abraham (cf.
Hvernick's Introduction to Pentateuch, pp. 118ff. transl.), and was
inserted by Moses in the early history of the kingdom of God on account
of its universal importance in connection with sacred history. For it
not only indicates the place of the family which was chosen as the
recipient of divine revelation among the rest of the nations, but traces
the origin of the entire world, with the prophetical intention of
showing that the nations, although they were quickly suffered to walk in
their own ways ([Act 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016)), were not
intended to be for ever excluded from the counsels of eternal love.

In this respect the genealogies prepare the way for the promise of the
blessing, which was one day to spread from the chosen family to all the
families of the earth ([Gen 12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002)). -
The historical character of the genealogy is best attested by the
contents themselves, since no trace can be detected, either of any
pre-eminence given to the Shemites, or of an intention to fill up gaps
by conjecture or invention. It gives just as much as had been handed
down with regard to the origin of the different tribes. Hence the great
diversity in the lists of the descendants of the different sons of Noah.
Some are brought down only to the second, others to the third or fourth
generation, and some even further; and whilst in several instances the
founder of a tribe is named, in others we have only the tribes
themselves; and in some cases we are unable to determine whether the
names given denote the founder or the tribe. In many instances, too, on
account of the defects and the unreliable character of the accounts
handed down to us from different ancient sources with regard to the
origin of the tribes, there are names which cannot be identified with
absolute certainty.

(Note: Sam. Bochart has brought great learning to the explanation of the
table of nations in Phaleg, the first part of his geographia sacra, to
which Michaelis and Rosenmller made valuable additions-the former in his
spicil. geogr. Hebr. ext. 1769 and 1780, the latter in his Biblical
Antiquities. Knobel has made use of all the modern ethnographical
discoveries in his "Vlkertafel der Genesis" (1850), but many of his
combinations are very speculative. Kiepert, in his article ber d.
geograph. Stellung der nrdlichen Lnder in der phnikisch-hebrischen
Erdkunde (in the Monatsberichte d. Berliner Akad. 1859), denies entirely
the ethnographical character of the table of nations, and reduces it to
a mere attempt on the part of the Phoenicians to account for the
geographical position of the nations with which they were acquainted.)

[Genesis 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 10:1</span></span>

Descendants of Japhet. - In [Gen 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001)
the names of the three sons are introduced according to their relative
ages, to give completeness and finish to the Tholedoth; but in the
genealogy itself Japhet is mentioned first and Shem last, according to
the plan of the book of Genesis as already explained in the
introduction. In [Gen 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002) seven sons
of Japhet are given. The names, indeed, afterwards occur as those of
tribes; but here undoubtedly they are intended to denote the
tribe-fathers, and may without hesitation be so regarded. For even if in
later times many nations received their names from the lands of which
they took possession, this cannot be regarded as a universal rule, since
unquestionably the natural rule in the derivation of the names would be
for the tribe to be called after its ancestor, and for the countries to
receive their names from their earliest inhabitants. Gomer is most
probably the tribe of the Cimmerians, who dwelt, according to Herodotus,
on the Maeotis, in the Taurian Chersonesus, and from whom are descended
the Cumri or Cymry in Wales and Brittany, whose relation to the Germanic
Cimbri is still in obscurity. Magog is connected by Josephus with the
Scythians on the Sea of Asof and in the Caucasus; but Kiepert associates
the name with Macija or Maka, and applies it to Scythian nomad tribes
which forced themselves in between the Arian or Arianized Medes, Kurds,
and Armenians. Madai are the Medes, called Mada on the arrow-headed
inscriptions. Javan corresponds to the Greek Ἰάων, from whom the Ionians
(Ἰάονος) are derived, the parent tribe of the Greeks (in Sanskrit
Javana, old Persian Junâ). Tubal and Meshech are undoubtedly the
Tibareni and Moschi, the former of whom are placed by Herodotus upon the
east of the Thermodon, the latter between the sources of the Phasis and
Cyrus. Tiras: according to Josephus, the Thracians, whom Herodotus calls
the most numerous tribe next to the Indian. As they are here placed by
the side of Meshech, so we also find on the old Egyptian monuments
Mashuash and Tuirash, and upon the Assyrian Tubal and Misek (Rawlinson).

[Gen 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#003)

Descendants of Gomer. Ashkenaz: according to the old Jewish explanation,
the Germani; according to Knobel, the family of Asi, which is favoured
by the German legend of Mannus, and his three sons, Iscus (Ask,
Ἀσκάνιος), Ingus, and Hermino. Kiepert, however, and Bochart decide, on
geographical grounds, in favour of the Ascanians in Northern Phrygia.
Riphath: in Knobel's opinion the Celts, part of whom, according to
Plutarch, crossed the ὄρη Ῥίπαια, Montes Rhipaei, towards the Northern
Ocean to the furthest limits of Europe; but Josephus, whom Kiepert
follows, supposed Ῥιβάθης to be Paphlagonia. Both of these are very
uncertain. Togarmah is the name of the Armenians, who are still called
the house of Thorgom or Torkomatsi.

[Gen 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004)

Descendants of Javan. Elishah suggests Elis, and is said by Josephus to
denote the Aeolians, the oldest of the Thessalian tribes, whose culture
was Ionian in its origin; Kiepert, however, thinks of Sicily. Tarshish
(in the Old Testament the name of the colony of Tartessus in Spain) is
referred by Knobel to the Etruscans or Tyrsenians, a Pelasgic tribe of
Greek derivation; but Delitzsch objects, that the Etruscans were most
probably of Lydian descent, and, like the Lydians of Asia Minor, who
were related to the Assyrians, belonged to the Shemites. Others connect
the name with Tarsus in Cilicia. But the connection with the Spanish
Tartessus must be retained, although, so long as the origin of this
colony remains in obscurity, nothing further can be determined with
regard to the name. Kittim embraces not only the Citiaei, Citienses in
Cyprus, with the town Cition, but, according to Knobel and Delitzsch,
probably "the Carians, who settled in the lands at the eastern end of
the Mediterranean Sea; for which reason Ezekiel ([Gen
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#006)) speaks of the "isles of
Chittim." Dodanim (Dardani): according to Delitzsch, "the tribe related
to the Ionians and dwelling with them from the very first, which the
legend has associated with them in the two brothers Jasion and
Dardanos;" according to Knobel, "the whole of the Illyrian or north
Grecian tribe."

[Gen 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#005)

"From these have the islands of the nations divided themselves in their
lands;" i.e., from the Japhetites already named, the tribes on the
Mediterranean descended and separated from one another as they dwell in
their lands, "every one after his tongue, after their families, in their
nations." The islands in the Old Testament are the islands and
coastlands of the Mediterranean, on the European shore, from Asia Minor
to Spain.

[Genesis 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 10:6</span></span>

Descendants of Ham. - Cush: the Ethiopians of the ancients, who not only
dwelt in Africa, but were scattered over the whole of Southern Asia, and
originally, in all probability, settled in Arabia, where the tribes that
still remained, mingled with Shemites, and adopted a Shemitic language.
Mizraim is Egypt: the dual form was probably transferred from the land
to the people, referring, however, not to the double strip, i.e., the
two strips of land into which the country is divided by the Nile, but to
the two Egypts, Upper and Lower, two portions of the country which
differ considerably in their climate and general condition. The name is
obscure, and not traceable to any Semitic derivation; for the term מצור
in [Isa 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006), etc., is not to be
regarded as an etymological interpretation, but as a significant play
upon the word. The old Egyptian name is Kemi (Copt. Chmi, Kme), which,
Plutarch says, is derived from the dark ash-grey colour of the soil
covered by the slime of the Nile, but which it is much more correct to
trace to Ham, and to regard as indicative of the Hamitic descent of its
first inhabitants. Put denotes the Libyans in the wider sense of the
term (old Egypt. Phet; Copt. Phaiat), who were spread over Northern
Africa as far as Mauritania, where even in the time of Jerome a river
with the neighbouring district still bore the name of Phut; cf. Bochart,
Phal. iv. 33. On Canaan, see [Gen
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#025).

[Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007)

Descendants of Cush. Seba: the inhabitants of Mero; according to Knobel,
the northern Ethiopians, the ancient Blemmyer, and modern Bisharin.
Havilah: the Αὐαλῖται or Ἀβαλῖται of the ancients, the Macrobian
Ethiopians in modern Habesh. Sabtah: the Ethiopians inhabiting
Hadhramaut, whose chief city was called Sabatha or Sabota. Raamah:
Ῥεγμά, the inhabitants of a city and bay of that name in south-eastern
Arabia (Oman). Sabtecah: the Ethiopians of Caramania, dwelling to the
east of the Persian Gulf, where the ancients mention a seaport town and
a river Σαμυδάκη. The descendants of Raamah, Sheba and Dedan, are to be
sought in the neighbourhood of the Persian Gulf, "from which the Sabaean
and Dedanitic Cushites spread to the north-west, where they formed mixed
tribes with descendants of Joktan and Abraham." See notes on [Gen
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#028) and [Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003).

[Gen 10:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#008)

Besides the tribes already named, there sprang from Cush Nimrod, the
founder of the first imperial kingdom, the origin of which is introduced
as a memorable event into the genealogy of the tribes, just as on other
occasions memorable events are interwoven with the genealogical tables
(cf. [Ch1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#007), [Ch1
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#023); [Ch1
4:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#022), [Ch1
4:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#039)).

(Note: These analogies overthrow the assertion that the verses before us
have been interpolated by the Jehovist into the Elohistic document;
since the use of the name Jehovah is no proof of difference of
authorship, nor the use of ילד for הוליד, as the former also occurs in
[Gen 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013), [Gen
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015), [Gen
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#024), and [Gen
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#026).)

Nimrod "began to be a mighty one in the earth." גּבּר is used here, as
in [Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004), to denote a man who makes
himself renowned for bold and daring deeds. Nimrod was mighty in
hunting, and that in opposition to Jehovah (ἐναντίον κυρίον, lxx); not
before Jehovah in the sense of, according to the purpose and will of
Jehovah, still less, like לאלהים in [Jon
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003), or τῷ Θεῷ in [Act
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#020), in a simply superlative sense.
The last explanation is not allowed by the usage of the language, the
second is irreconcilable with the context. The name itself, Nimrod from
מרד, "we will revolt," points to some violent resistance to God. It is
so characteristic that it can only have been given by his
contemporaries, and thus have become a proper name.

(Note: This was seen even by Perizonius (Origg. Babyl. p. 183), who
says, "Crediderim hominem hunc utpote venatorem ferocem et sodalium
comitatu succinctum semper in ore habuisse et ingeminasse, ad reliquos
in rebellionem excitandos, illud nimrod, nimrod, h.e. rebellemus,
rebellemus, atque inde postea ab aliis, etiam ab ipso Mose, hoc vocabalo
tanquam proprio nomine designatium," and who supports his opinion by
other similar instances in history.)

In addition to this, Nimrod as a mighty hunter founded a powerful
kingdom; and the founding of this kingdom is shown by the verb ותּהי
with ו consec. to have been the consequence or result of his strength in
hunting, so that the hunting was most intimately connected with the
establishment of the kingdom. Hence, if the expression "a mighty hunter"
relates primarily to hunting in the literal sense, we must add to the
literal meaning the figurative signification of a "hunter of men"
("trapper of men by stratagem and force," Herder); Nimrod the hunter
became a tyrant, a powerful hunter of men. This course of life gave
occasion to the proverb, "like Nimrod, a mighty hunter against the
Lord," which immortalized not his skill in hunting beasts, but the
success of his hunting of men in the establishment of an imperial
kingdom by tyranny and power. But if this be the meaning of the proverb,
יהוה לפני "in the face of Jehovah" can only mean in defiance of Jehovah,
as Josephus and the Targums understand it. And the proverb must have
arisen when other daring and rebellious men followed in Nimrod's
footsteps, and must have originated with those who saw in such conduct
an act of rebellion against the God of salvation, in other words, with
the possessors of the divine promises of grace.

(Note: This view of Nimrod and his deeds is favoured by the Eastern
legend, which not only makes him the builder of the tower of Babel,
which was to reach to heaven, but has also placed him among the
constellations of heaven as a heaven-storming giant, who was chained by
God in consequence. Vid., Herzog's Real-Encycl. Art. Nimrod.)

[Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010)

"And the beginning of his kingdom was Babel," the well-known city of
Babylon on the Euphrates, which from the time of Nimrod downwards has
been the symbol of the power of the world in its hostility to God; -
"and Erech" (Ὀρέχ, lxx), one of the seats of the Cutheans (Samaritans),
[Ezr 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009), no doubt Orcho, situated,
according to Rawlinson, on the site of the present ruins of Warka,
thirty hours' journey to the south-east of Babel; - and Accad (Ἀρχάδ,
lxx), a place not yet determined, though, judging from its situation
between Erech and Calneh, it was not far from either, and Pressel is
probably right in identifying it with the ruins of Niffer, to the south
of Hillah; - "and Calneh:" this is found by early writers on the cite of
Ctesiphon, now a great heap of ruins, twenty hours north-east of Babel.
These four cities were in the land of Shinar, i.e., of the province of
Babylon, on the Lower Euphrates and Tigris.

[Gen 10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011)

From Shinar Nimrod went to Assyria אשּׁוּר is the accusative of
direction), the country on the east of the Tigris, and there built four
cities, or probably a large imperial city composed of the four cities,
or probably a large imperial city composed of the four cities named. As
three of these cities - Rehoboth-Ir, i.e., city markets (not
"street-city," as Bunsen interprets it), Chelach, and Resen - are not
met with again, whereas Nineveh was renowned in antiquity for its
remarkable size (vid., [Jon 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003)), the
words "this is the great city" must apply not to Resen, but to Nineveh.
This is grammatically admissible, if we regard the last three names as
subordinate to the first, taking as the sign of subordination (Ewald,
339a), and render the passage thus: "he built Nineveh, with Rehoboth-Ir,
Cheloch, and Resen between Nineveh and Chelach, this is the great city."
From this it follows that the four places formed a large composite city,
a large range of towns, to which the name of the (well-known) great city
of Nineveh was applied, in distinction from Nineveh in the more
restricted sense, with which Nimrod probably connected the other three
places so as to form one great capital, possibly also the chief fortress
of his kingdom on the Tigris. These four cities most likely correspond
to the ruins on the east of the Tigris, which Layard has so fully
explored, viz., Nebbi Ynus and Kouyunjik opposite to Mosul, Khorsabad
five hours to the north, and Nimrud eight hours to the south of Mosul.

(Note: This supposition of Rawlinson, Grote, M. v. Niebuhr, Knobel,
Delitzsch and others, has recently been adopted by Ewald also.)

[Gen 10:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013)

From Mizraim descended Ludim: not the Semitic Ludim ([Gen
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022)), but, according to Movers, the
old tribe of the Lewtah dwelling on the Syrtea, according to others, the
Moorish tribes collectively. Whether the name is connected with the Laud
flumen (Plin. v. 1) is uncertain; in any case Knobel is wrong in
thinking of Ludian Shemites, whether Hyksos, who forced their way to
Egypt, or Egyptianized Arabians. Anamim: inhabitants of the Delta,
according to Knobel. He associates the Enemetiei'm of the lxx with
Sanemhit, or Northern Egypt: "tsanemhit, i.e., pars, regio
septentrionis." Lehabim (= Lubim, [Nah
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#009)) are, according to Josephus, the
Δἰβνες or Δύβιες, not the great Libyan tribe (Phut, v. 6), which Nahum
distinguishes from them, but the Libyaegyptii of the ancients.
Naphtuchim: in Knobel's opinion, the Middle Egyptians, as the nation of
Pthah, the god of Memphis: but Bochart is more probably correct in
associating the name with Νέφθυς in Plut. de Is., the northern coast
line of Egypt. Pathrusim: inhabitants of Pathros, Παθούρης, Egypt.
Petrs, land of the south; i.e., Upper Egypt, the Thebais of the
ancients. Casluchim: according to general admission the Colchians, who
descended from the Egyptians (Herod. ii. 104), though the connection of
the name with Cassiotis is uncertain. "From thence (i.e., from
Casluchim, which is the name of both people and country) proceeded the
Philistines." Philistim, lxx Φυλιστιείμ or Ἀλλόφλοι, lit., emigrants or
immigrants from the Ethiopic fallâsa. This is not at variance with [Amo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007) and [Jer
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004), according to which the
Philistines came from Caphtor, so that there is no necessity to
transpose the relative clause after Philistim. The two statements may be
reconciled on the simple supposition that the Philistian nation was
primarily a Casluchian colony, which settled on the south-eastern coast
line of the Mediterranean between Gaza ([Gen
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019)) and Pelusium, but was
afterwards strengthened by immigrants from Caphtor, and extended its
territory by pressing out the Avim ([Deu
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023), cf. [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)). Caphtorim: according to the old
Jewish explanation, the Cappadocians; but according to Lakemacher's
opinion, which has been revived by Ewald, etc., the Cretans. This is not
decisively proved, however, either by the name Cherethites, given to the
Philistines in [Sa1 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014); [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005), and [Eze
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016), or by the expression "isle of
Caphtor" in [Jer 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004).

[Gen 10:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015)

From Canaan descended "Zidon his first-born, and Heth." Although Zidon
occurs in [Gen 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#019) and throughout
the Old Testament as the name of the oldest capital of the Phoenicians,
here it must be regarded as the name of a person, not only because of
the apposition "his first-born," and the verb ילד, "begat," but also
because the name of a city does not harmonize with the names of the
other descendants of Canaan, the analogy of which would lead us to
expect the nomen gentile "Sidonian" ([Jdg
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003), etc.); and lastly, because the
word Zidon, from צוּד to hunt, to catch, is not directly applicable to a
sea-port and commercial town, and there are serious objections upon
philological grounds to Justin's derivation, "quam a piscium ubertate
Sidona appellaverunt, nam piscem Phoenices Sidon vocant" (var. hist. 18,
3). Heth is also the name of a person, from which the term Hittite ([Gen
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#009); [Num
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#029)), equivalent to "sons of Heth"
([Gen 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#005)), is derived. "The
Jebusite:" inhabitants of Jebus, afterwards called Jerusalem. "The
Amorite:" not the inhabitants of the mountain or heights, for the
derivation from אמיר, "summit," is not established, but a branch of the
Canaanites, descended from Emor (Amor), which was spread far and wide
over the mountains of Judah and beyond the Jordan in the time of Moses,
so that in [Gen 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016); [Gen
48:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#022), all the Canaanites are
comprehended by the name. "The Girgashites," Γεργεσαῖος (lxx), are also
mentioned in [Gen 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#021); [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001), and [Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011); but their dwelling-place is
unknown, as the reading Γεργεσηνοί in [Mat
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028) is critically suspicious. "The
Hivites" dwelt in Sichem ([Gen 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#002)),
at Gibeon ([Jos 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#007)), and at the foot
of Hermon ([Jos 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003)); the meaning of
the word is uncertain. "The Arkites:" inhabitants of Ἀρκή, to the north
of Tripolis at the foot of Lebanon, the ruins of which still exist
(vid., Robinson). "The Sinite:" the inhabitants of Sin or Sinna, a place
in Lebanon not yet discovered. "The Arvadite," or Aradians, occupied
from the eighth century before Christ, the small rocky island of Arados
to the north of Tripolis. "The Zemarite:" the inhabitants of Simyra in
Eleutherus. "The Hamathite:" the inhabitants or rather founders of
Hamath on the most northerly border of Palestine ([Num
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021); [Num
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008)), afterwards called Epiphania, on
the river Orontes, the present Hamh, with 100,000 inhabitants. The words
in [Gen 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#018), "and afterward were the
families of the Canaanites spread abroad," mean that they all proceeded
from one local centre as branches of the same tribe, and spread
themselves over the country, the limits of which are given in two
directions, with evident reference to the fact that it was afterwards
promised to the seed of Abraham for its inheritance, viz., from north to
south, - "from Sidon, in the direction (lit., as thou comest) towards
Gerar (see [Gen 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)), unto Gaza," the
primitive Avvite city of the Philistines ([Deu
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023)), now called Guzzeh, at the S.W.
corner of Palestine, - and thence from west to east, in the direction
towards Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim (see [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)) to Lesha," i.e., Calirrhoe, a
place with sulphur baths, on the eastern side of the Dead Sea, in Wady
Serka Maein (Seetzen and Ritter).

[Genesis 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 10:21</span></span>

Descendants of Shem. - [Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021). For
the construction, vid., [Gen 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026).
Shem is called the father of all the sons of Eber, because two tribes
sprang from Eber through Peleg and Joktan, viz., the Abrahamides, and
also the Arabian tribe of the Joktanides ([Gen
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026).). - On the expression, "the
brother of Japhet הגּדול," see [Gen
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#024). The names of the five sons of
Shem occur elsewhere as the names of the tribes and countries; at the
same time, as there is no proof that in any single instance the name was
transferred from the country to its earliest inhabitants, no
well-grounded objection can be offered to the assumption, which the
analogy of the other descendants of Shem renders probable, that they
were originally the names of individuals. As the name of a people, Elam
denotes the Elymaeans, who stretched from the Persian Gulf to the
Caspian Sea, but who are first met with as Persians no longer speaking a
Semitic language. Asshur: the Assyrians who settled in the country of
Assyria, Ἀτουρία, to the east of the Tigris, but who afterwards spread
in the direction of Asia Minor. Arphaxad: the inhabitants of
Ἀῤῥαπαχῖχτις in northern Assyria. The explanation given of the name,
viz., "fortress of the Chaldeans" (Ewald), "highland of the Chaldeans"
(Knobel), "territory of the Chaldeans" (Dietrich), are very
questionable. Lud: the Lydians of Asia Minor, whose connection with the
Assyrians is confirmed by the names of the ancestors of their kings.
Aram: the ancestor of the Aramaeans of Syria and Mesopotamia.

[Genesis 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 10:23</span></span>

Descendants of Aram. Uz: a name which occurs among the Nahorides ([Gen
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021)) and Horites ([Gen
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#028)), and which is associated with
the Αἰσῖται of Ptolemy, in Arabia deserta towards Babylon; this is
favoured by the fact that Uz, the country of Job, is called by the lxx
χώρα Αὐσῖτις, although the notion that these Aesites were an Aramaean
tribe, afterwards mixed up with Nahorides and Horites, is mere
conjecture. Hul: Delitzsch associates this with Cheli (Cheri), the old
Egyptian name for the Syrians, and the Hylatae who dwelt near the
Emesenes (Plin. 5, 19). Gether he connects with the name give in the
Arabian legends to the ancestor of the tribes Themd and Ghadis. Mash:
for which we find Meshech in [Ch1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#017), a tribe mentioned in [Psa
120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005) along with Kedar, and since the
time of Bochart generally associated with the πορος Μάσιον above
Nisibis.

[Genesis 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 10:25</span></span>

Among the descendants of Arphaxad, Eber's eldest son received the name
of Peleg, because in his days the earth, i.e., the population of the
earth, was divided, in consequence of the building of the tower of Babel
([Gen 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#008)). His brother Joktan is
called Kachtan by the Arabians, and is regarded as the father of all the
primitive tribes of Arabia. The names of his sons are given in [Gen
10:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#026). There are thirteen of them,
some of which are still retained in places and districts of Arabia,
whilst others are not yet discovered, or are entirely extinct. Nothing
certain has been ascertained about Almodad, Jerah, Diklah, Obal,
Abimael, and Jobab. Of the rest, Sheleph is identical with Salif or
Sulaf (in Ptl. 6, 7, Σαλαπηνοί), an old Arabian tribe, also a district
of Yemen. Hazarmaveth (i.e., forecourt of death) is the Arabian
Hadhramaut in South-eastern Arabia on the Indian Ocean, whose name
Jauhari is derived from the unhealthiness of the climate. Hadoram: the
Ἀδραμῖται of Ptol. 6, 7, Atramitae of Plin. 6, 28, on the southern coast
of Arabia. Uzal: one of the most important towns of Yemen, south-west of
Mareb. Sheba: the Sabaeans, with the capital Saba or Mareb, Mariaba
regia (Plin.), whose connection with the Cushite ([Gen
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007)) and Abrahamite Sabaeans ([Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003)) is quite in obscurity. Ophir has
not yet been discovered in Arabia; it is probably to be sought on the
Persian Gulf, even if the Ophir of Solomon was not situated there.
Havilah appears to answer to Chaulaw of Edrisi, a district between Sanaa
and Mecca. But this district, which lies in the heart of Yemen, does not
fit the account in [Sa1 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#007), nor the
statement in [Gen 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018), that Havilah
formed the boundary of the territory of the Ishmaelites. These two
passages point rather to Χαυλοταῖοι, a place on the border of Arabia
Petraea towards Yemen, between the Nabataeans and Hagrites, which Strabo
describes as habitable.

[Genesis 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 10:30</span></span>

The settlements of these Joktanides lay "from Mesha towards Sephar the
mountain of the East," Mesha is still unknown: according to Gesenius, it
is Mesene on the Persian Gulf, and in Knobel's opinion, it is the valley
of Bisha or Beishe in the north of Yemen; but both are very improbable.
Sepher is supposed by Mesnel to be the ancient Himyaritish capital,
Shafr, on the Indian Ocean; and the mountain of the East, the mountain
of incense, which is situated still farther to the east. - The genealogy
of the Shemites closes with [Gen
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#031), and the entire genealogy of the
nations with [Gen 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032). According to
the Jewish Midrash, there are seventy tribes, with as many different
languages; but this number can only be arrived at by reckoning Nimrod
among the Hamites, and not only placing Peleg among the Shemites, but
taking his ancestors Salah and Eber to be names of separate tribes. By
this we obtain for Japhet 14, for Ham 31, and for Shem 25, - in all 70
names. The Rabbins, on the other hand, reckon 14 Japhetic, 30 Hamitic,
and 26 Semitic nations; whilst the fathers make 72 in all. But as these
calculations are perfectly arbitrary, and the number 70 is nowhere given
or hinted at, we can neither regard it as intended, nor discover in it
"the number of the divinely appointed varieties of the human race," or
"of the cosmical development," even if the seventy disciples ([Luk
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)) were meant to answer to the
seventy nations whom the Jews supposed to exist upon the earth.

[Genesis 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 10:32</span></span>

The words, "And by these were the nations of the earth divided in the
earth after the flood," prepare the way for the description of that
event which led to the division of the one race into many nations with
different languages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 11](gen011)

</div>
