<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen004)  [Next](gen006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 5:0</span></span>

II\. History of Adam - Genesis 5-6:8

Generations from Adam to Noah - Genesis 5

The origin of the human race and the general character of its
development having been thus described, all that remained of importance
to universal or sacred history, in connection with the progress of our
race in the primeval age, was to record the order of the families (Gen
5) and the ultimate result of the course which they pursued ([Gen
6:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#001)). - First of all, we have the
genealogical table of Adam with the names of the first ten patriarchs,
who were at the head of that seed of the woman by which the promise was
preserved, viz., the posterity of the first pair through Seth, from Adam
to the flood. We have also an account of the ages of these patriarchs
before and after the birth of those sons in whom the line was continued;
so that the genealogy, which indicates the line of development,
furnishes at the same time a chronology of the primeval age. In the
genealogy of the Cainites no ages are given, since this family, as being
accursed by God, had no future history. On the other hand, the family of
Sethites, which acknowledged God, began from the time of Enos to call
upon the name of the Lord, and was therefore preserved and sustained by
God, in order that under the training of mercy and judgment the human
race might eventually attain to the great purpose of its creation. The
genealogies of the primeval age, to quote the apt words of M.
Baumgarten, are "memorials, which bear testimony quite as much to the
faithfulness of God in fulfilling His promise, as to the faith and
patience of the fathers themselves." This testimony is first placed in
its true light by the numbers of the years. The historian gives not
merely the age of each patriarch at the time of the birth of the
first-born, by whom the line of succession was continued, but the number
of years that he lived after that, and then the entire length of his
life. Now if we add together the ages at the birth of the several
first-born sons, and the hundred years between the birth of Shem and the
flood, we find that the duration of the first period in the world's
history was 1656 years. We obtain a different result, however, from the
numbers given by the lxx and the Samaritan version, which differ in
almost every instance from the Hebrew text, both in Gen 5 and Gen 11
(from Shem to Terah), as will appear from the table on the following
page.

The principal deviations from the Hebrew in the case of the other two
texts are these: in Gen 5 the Samaritan places the birth of the
first-born of Jared, Methuselah, and Lamech 100 years earlier, whilst
the Septuagint places the birth of the first-born of all the other
fathers (except Noah) 100 years later than the Hebrew; in Gen 11 the
latter course is adopted in both texts in the case of all the fathers
except Shem and Terah. In consequence of this, the interval from Adam to
the flood is shortened in the Samaritan text by 349 years as compared
with the Hebrew, and in the Septuagint is lengthened by 586 (Cod. Alex.
606). The interval from the flood to Abram is lengthened in both texts;
in the Sam. by 650 years, in the Sept. by 880 (Cod. Alex. 780). In the
latter, Cainan is interpolated between Arphaxad and Salah, which adds
130 years, and the age of the first-born of Nahor is placed 150 years
later than in the Hebrew, whereas in the former the difference is only
50 years. With regard to the other differences, the reason for reducing
the lives of Jared, Methuselah, and Lamech in the Samaritan text after
the birth of their sons, was evidently to bring their deaths within the
time before the flood. The age of Methuselah, as given in the Cod. Alex.
of the lxx, is evidently to be accounted for on the same ground, since,
according to the numbers of the Vatican text, Methuselah must have lived
14 years after the flood. In the other divergences of these two texts
from the Hebrew, no definite purpose can be detected; at the same time
they are sufficient to show a twofold tendency, viz., to lengthen the
interval from the flood to Abram, and to reduce the ages of the fathers
at the birth of their first-born to greater uniformity, and to take care
that the age of Adam at the birth of Seth should not be exceeded by that
of any other of the patriarchs, especially in the time before the flood.
To effect this, the Sept. adds 100 years to the ages of all the fathers,
before and after the flood, whose sons were born before their 100th
years; the Sam., on the other hand, simply does this in the case of the
fathers who lived after the flood, whilst it deducts 100 years from the
ages of all the fathers before the flood who begot their first-born at a
later period of their life than Adam and Seth. The age of Noah alone is
left unaltered, because there were other data connected with the flood
which prevented any arbitrary alteration of the text. That the principal
divergences of both texts from the Hebrew are intentional changes, based
upon chronological theories or cycles, is sufficiently evident from
their internal character, viz., from the improbability of the statement,
that whereas the average duration of life after the flood was about half
the length that it was before, the time of life at which the fathers
begot their first-born after the flood was as late, and, according to
the Samaritan text, generally later than it had been before. No such
intention is discernible in the numbers of the Hebrew text; consequently
every attack upon the historical character of its numerical statements
has entirely failed, and no tenable argument can be adduced against
their correctness. The objection, that such longevity as that recorded
in our chapter is inconceivable according to the existing condition of
human nature, loses all its force if we consider "that all the memorials
of the old world contain evidence of gigantic power; that the climate,
the weather, and other natural conditions, were different from those
after the flood; that life was much more simple and uniform; and that
the after-effects of the condition of man in paradise would not be
immediately exhausted" (Delitzsch). This longevity, moreover,
necessarily contributed greatly to the increase of the human race; and
the circumstance that the children were not born till a comparatively
advanced period of life, - that is, until the corporeal and mental
development of the parent was perfectly complete, - necessarily favoured
the generation of a powerful race. From both these circumstances,
however, the development of the race was sure to be characterized by
peculiar energy in evil as well as in good; so that whilst in the godly
portion of the race, not only were the traditions of the fathers
transmitted faithfully and without adulteration from father to son, but
family characteristics, piety, discipline, and morals took deep root,
whilst in the ungodly portion time was given for sin to develop itself
with mighty power in its innumerable forms.

(Note: The numbers in brackets are the reading of the Cod. Alexandrinus
of the lxx. In the genealogical table, [Gen
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010) ff., the Samaritan text is the
only one which gives the whole duration of life.)

[Genesis 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 5:1</span></span>

The heading in [Gen 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001) runs thus:
"This is the book (sepher) of the generations (tholedoth) of Adam." On
tholedoth, see [Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004). Sepher is a
writing complete in itself, whether it consist of one sheet or several,
as for instance the "bill of divorcement" in [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001), [Deu
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#003). The addition of the clause, "in
the day that God created man," etc., is analogous to [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004); the creation being mentioned
again as the starting point, because all the development and history of
humanity was rooted there.

[Genesis 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 5:3</span></span>

As Adam was created in the image of God, so did he beget "in his own
likeness, after his image;" that is to say, he transmitted the image of
God in which he was created, not in the purity in which it came direct
from God, but in the form given to it by his own self-determination,
modified and corrupted by sin. The begetting of the son by whom the line
was perpetuated (no doubt in every case the first-born), is followed by
an account of the number of years that Adam and the other fathers lived
after that, by the statement that each one begat (other) sons and
daughters, by the number of years that he lived altogether, and lastly,
by the assertion ויּמת "and he died." This apparently superfluous
announcement is "intended to indicate by its constant recurrence that
death reigned from Adam downwards as an unchangeable law (vid., [Rom
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014)). But against this background of
universal death, the power of life was still more conspicuous. For the
man did not die till he had propagated life, so that in the midst of the
death of individuals the life of the race was preserved, and the hope of
the seed sustained, by which the author of death should be overcome." In
the case of one of the fathers indeed, viz., Enoch ([Gen
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#021).), life had not only a different
issue, but also a different form. Instead of the expression "and he
lived," which introduces in every other instance the length of life
after the birth of the first-born, we find in the case of Enoch this
statement, "he walked with God (Elohim);" and instead of the expression
"and he died," the announcement, "and he was not, for God (Elohim) took
him." The phrase "walked with God," which is only applied to Enoch and
Noah ([Gen 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009)), denotes the most
confidential intercourse, the closest communion with the personal God, a
walking as it were by the side of God, who still continued His visible
intercourse with men (vid., [Gen 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008)).
It must be distinguished from "walking before God" ([Gen
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001); [Gen
24:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#040), etc.), and "walking after God"
([Deu 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#004)), both which phrases are
used to indicate a pious, moral, blameless life under the law according
to the directions of the divine commands. The only other passage in
which this expression "walk with God" occurs is [Mal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006), where it denotes not the piety of
the godly Israelites generally, but the conduct of the priests, who
stood in a closer relation to Jehovah under the Old Testament than the
rest of the faithful, being permitted to enter the Holy Place, and hold
direct intercourse with Him there, which the rest of the people could
not do. The article in האלהים gives prominence to the personality of
Elohim, and shows that the expression cannot refer to intercourse with
the spiritual world.

In Enoch, the seventh from Adam through Seth, godliness attained its
highest point; whilst ungodliness culminated in Lamech, the seventh from
Adam through Cain, who made his sword his god. Enoch, therefore, like
Elijah, was taken away by God, and carried into the heavenly paradise,
so that he did not see (experience) death ([Heb
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#005)); i.e., he was taken up from this
temporal life and transfigured into life eternal, being exempted by God
from the law of death and of return to the dust, as those of the
faithful will be, who shall be alive at the coming of Christ to
judgment, and who in like manner shall not taste of death and
corruption, but be changed in a moment. There is no foundation for the
opinion, that Enoch did not participate at his translation in the
glorification which awaits the righteous at the resurrection. For,
according to [Co1 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#020), [Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023), it is not in glorification, but
in the resurrection, that Christ is the first-fruits. Now the latter
presupposes death. Whoever, therefore, through the grace of God is
exempted from death, cannot rise from the dead, but reaches ἀφθαρσία, or
the glorified state of perfection, through being "changed" or "clothed
upon" ([Co2 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)). This does not at all
affect the truth of the statement in [Rom
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#012), [Rom
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#014). For the same God who has
appointed death as the wages of sin, and given us, through Christ, the
victory over death, possesses the power to glorify into eternal life an
Enoch and an Elijah, and all who shall be alive at the coming of the
Lord without chaining their glorification to death and resurrection.
Enoch and Elijah were translated into eternal life with God without
passing through disease, death, and corruption, for the consolation of
believers, and to awaken the hope of a life after death. Enoch's
translation stands about half way between Adam and the flood, in the
987th year after the creation of Adam. Seth, Enos, Cainan, Mahalaleel,
and Jared were still alive. His son Methuselah and his grandson Lamech
were also living, the latter being 113 years old. Noah was not yet born,
and Adam was dead. His translation, in consequence of his walking with
God, was "an example of repentance to all generations," as the son of
Sirach says (Ecclus. 44:16); and the apocryphal legend in the book of
Enoch [Gen 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009) represents him as
prophesying of the coming of the Lord, to execute judgment upon the
ungodly ([Jde 1:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014)). In comparison
with the longevity of the other fathers, Enoch was taken away young,
before he had reached half the ordinary age, as a sign that whilst long
life, viewed as a time for repentance and grace, is indeed a blessing
from God, when the ills which have entered the world through sin are
considered, it is also a burden and trouble which God shortens for His
chosen. That the patriarchs of the old world felt the ills of this
earthly life in all their severity, was attested by Lamech ([Gen
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#028), [Gen
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#029)), when he gave his son, who was
born 69 years after Enoch's translation, the name of Noah, saying, "This
same shall comfort us concerning our work and the toil of our hands,
because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed." Noah, נוח from נוּח
to rest and הניח to bring rest, is explained by נחם to comfort, in the
sense of helpful and remedial consolation. Lamech not only felt the
burden of his work upon the ground which God had cursed, but looked
forward with a prophetic presentiment to the time when the existing
misery and corruption would terminate, and a change for the better, a
redemption from the curse, would come. This presentiment assumed the
form of hope when his son was born; he therefore gave expression to it
in his name. But his hope was not realized, at least not in the way that
he desired. A change did indeed take place in the lifetime of Noah. By
the judgment of the flood the corrupt race was exterminated, and in
Noah, who was preserved because of his blameless walk with God, the
restoration of the human race was secured; but the effects of the curse,
though mitigated, were not removed; whilst a covenant sign guaranteed
the preservation of the human race, and therewith, by implication, his
hope of the eventual removal of the curse ([Gen
9:8-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#008)).

The genealogical table breaks off with Noah; all that is mentioned with
reference to him being the birth of his three sons, when he was 500
years old ([Gen 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#032); see [Gen
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#010)), without any allusion to the
remaining years of his life-an indication of a later hand. "The mention
of three sons leads to the expectation, that whereas hitherto the line
has been perpetuated through one member alone, in the future each of the
three sons will form a new beginning (vid., [Gen
9:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#018); [Gen
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#001))." - M. Baumgarten.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 6](gen006)

</div>
