<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen039)  [Next](gen041) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

[Genesis 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 40:1</span></span>

The head cup-bearer and head baker had committed crimes against the king
of Egypt, and were imprisoned in "the prison of the house of the captain
of the trabantes, the prison where Joseph himself was confined;" the
state-prison, according to Eastern custom, forming part of the same
building as the dwelling-house of the chief of the executioners. From a
regard to the exalted position of these two prisoners, Potiphar ordered
Joseph to wait upon them, not to keep watch over them; for את פּקד does
not mean to appoint as guard, but to place by the side of a person.

[Genesis 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 40:5</span></span>

After some time ("days," [Gen 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#004), as
in [Gen 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#003)), and on the same night,
these two prisoners had each a peculiar dream, "each one according to
the interpretation of his dream;" i.e., each one had a dream
corresponding to the interpretation which specially applied to him. On
account of these dreams, which seemed to them to have some bearing upon
their fate, and, as the issue proved, were really true omens of it,
Joseph found them the next morning looking anxious, and asked them the
reason of the trouble which was depicted upon their countenances.

[Genesis 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 40:8</span></span>

On their replying that they had dreamed, and there was no one to
interpret the dream, Joseph reminded them first of all that
"interpretations are God's," come from God, are His gift; at the same
time he bade them tell him their dreams, from a consciousness, no doubt,
that he was endowed with this divine gift.

[Genesis 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 40:9</span></span>

The cup-bearer gave this account: "In my dream, behold there was a vine
before me, and on the vine three branches; and it was as though
blossoming, it shot forth its blossom (נצּהּ either from the hapax l. נץ
= נצּה, or from נצּה with the fem. termination resolved into the 3 pers.
suff.: Ewald, 257d), its clusters ripened into grapes. And Pharaoh's cup
was in my hand; and I took the grapes and pressed them into Pharaoh's
cup, and gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand." In this dream the office and
duty of the royal cup-bearer were represented in an unmistakeable
manner, though the particular details must not be so forced as to lead
to the conclusion, that the kings of ancient Egypt drank only the fresh
juice of the grape, and not fermented wine as well. The cultivation of
the vine, and the making and drinking of wine, among the Egyptians, are
established beyond question by ancient testimony and the earliest
monuments, notwithstanding the statement of Herodotus (2, 77) to the
contrary (see Hengstenberg, Egypt and the Books of Moses, pp. 13ff.).

[Genesis 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 40:12</span></span>

Joseph then gave this interpretation: The three branches were three
days, in which time Pharaoh would restore him to his post again ("lift
up his head," i.e., raise him from his degradation, send and fetch him
from prison, [Kg2 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027)). And he added
this request ([Gen 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#014)): "Only think
of me, as it goes well with thee, and show favour to me...for I was
stolen (i.e., carried away secretly and by force; I did not abscond
because of any crime) out of the land of the Hebrews (the land where the
Ibrim live); and here also I have done nothing (committed no crime) for
which they should put me into the hole." בּור: the cell, applied to a
prison as a miserable hole, because often dry cess-pools were used as
prisons.

[Genesis 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 40:16</span></span>

Encouraged by this favourable interpretation, the chief baker also told
his dream: "I too,...in my dream: behold, baskets of white bread upon my
head, and in the top basket all kinds of food for Pharaoh, pastry; and
the birds ate it out of the basket from my head." In this dream, the
carrying of the baskets upon the head is thoroughly Egyptian; for,
according to Herod. 2, 35, the men in Egypt carry burdens upon the head,
the women upon the shoulders. And, according to the monuments, the
variety of confectionary was very extensive (cf. Hengst. p. 27). In the
opening words, "I too," the baker points to the resemblance between his
dream and the cup-bearer's. The resemblance was not confined to the
sameness of the numbers-three baskets of white bread, and three branches
of the vine-but was also seen in the fact that his official duty at the
court was represented in the dream. But instead of Pharaoh taking the
bread from his hand, the birds of heaven ate it out of the basket upon
his head. And Joseph gave this interpretation: "The three baskets
signify three days: within that time Pharaoh will take away thy head
from thee ("lift up thy head," as in [Gen
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#013), but with מעליך "away from
thee," i.e., behead thee), and hang thee on the stake (thy body after
execution; vid., [Deu 21:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#022)), and
the birds will eat thy flesh from off thee." However simple and close
this interpretation of the two dreams may appear, the exact accordance
with the fulfilment was a miracle wrought by God, and showed that as the
dreams originated in the instigation of God, the interpretation was His
inspiration also.

[Genesis 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 40:20</span></span>

Joseph's interpretations were fulfilled three days afterwards, on the
king's birth-day. הלּדת יום: the day of being born; the inf. Hoph. is
construed as a passive with the accus. obj., as in [Gen
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018), etc. Pharaoh gave his servants a
feast, and lifted up the heads of both the prisoners, but in very
different ways. The cup-bearer was pardoned, and reinstated in his
office; the baker, on the other hand, was executed.

[Genesis 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 40:23</span></span>

But the former forgot Joseph in his prosperity, and did nothing to
procure his liberation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 41](gen041)

</div>
