<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen033)  [Next](gen035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)

[Genesis 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 34:1</span></span>

During their stay at Shechem, Dinah, Jacob's daughter by Leah, went out
one day to see, i.e., to make the acquaintance of the daughters of the
land; when Shechem the Hivite, the son of the prince, took her with him
and seduced her. Dinah was probably between 13 and 15 at the time, and
had attained perfect maturity; for this is often the case in the East at
the age of 12, and sometimes earlier. There is no ground for supposing
her to have been younger. Even if she was born after Joseph, and not
till the end of Jacob's 14 years' service with Laban, and therefore was
only five years old when they left Mesopotamia, eight or ten years may
have passed since then, as Jacob may easily have spent from eight to
eleven years in Succoth, where he had built a house, and Shechem, where
he had bought "a parcel of a field." But she cannot have been older;
for, according to [Gen 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#002), Joseph
was sold by his brethren when he was 17 years old, i.e., in the 11th
year after Jacob's return from Mesopotamia, as he was born in the 14th
year of Jacob's service with Laban

(Note: This view is generally supported by the earlier writers, such as
Demetrius, Petavius (Hengst. Diss.), etc.; only they reckon Dinah's age
at 16, placing her birth in the 14th year of Jacob's service.)

(cf. [Gen 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#024)). In the interim
between Dinah's seduction and the sale of Joseph there occurred nothing
but Jacob's journey from Shechem to Bethel and thence to Ephratah, in
the neighbourhood of which Benjamin was born and Rachel died, and his
arrival in Hebron (Gen 35). This may all have taken place within a
single year. Jacob was till at Hebron, when Joseph was sent to Shechem
and sold by his brethren ([Gen 37:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#014));
and Isaac's death did not happen for 12 years afterwards, although it is
mentioned in connection with the account of Jacob's arrival at Hebron
([Gen 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#027).).

[Genesis 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 34:3</span></span>

Shechem "loved the girl, and spoke to her heart;" i.e., he sought to
comfort her by the promise of a happy marriage, and asked his father to
obtain her for him as a wife.

[Genesis 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 34:5</span></span>

When Jacob heard of the seduction of his daughter, "he was silent,"
i.e., he remained quiet, without taking any active proceedings (ex. [Gen
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014); [Sa2
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#011)) until his sons came from the
field. When they heard of it, they were grieved and burned with wrath at
the disgrace. טמּא to defile = to dishonour, disgrace, because it was an
uncircumcised man who had seduced her. "Because he had wrought folly in
Israel, by lying with Jacob's daughter." "To work folly" was a standing
phrase for crimes against the honour and calling of Israel as the people
of God, especially for shameful sins of the flesh ([Deu
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#021); [Jdg
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#010); [Sa2
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#002), etc.); but it was also applied
to other great sins ([Jos 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#015)). As
Jacob had become Israel, the seduction of his daughter was a crime
against Israel, which is called folly, inasmuch as the relation of
Israel to God was thereby ignored ([Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001)). "And this ought not to be
done:" יעשׂה potentialis as in [Gen
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#009). - Hamor went to Jacob to ask for
his daughter ([Gen 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#006)); but Jacob's
sons reached home at the same time ([Gen
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#007)), so that Hamor spoke to them
(Jacob and his sons). To attain his object Hamor proposed a further
intermarriage, unrestricted movement on their part in the land, and that
they should dwell there, trade (ἐμπορεύεσθαι), and secure possessions
(נאחז settle down securely, as in [Gen
47:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#027)). Shechem also offered ([Gen
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#011), [Gen
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#012)) to give anything they might ask
in the form of dowry (מהר not purchase-money, but the usual gift made to
the bride, vid., [Gen 24:53](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#053)) and
presents (for the brothers and mother), if they would only give him the
damsel.

[Genesis 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 34:13</span></span>

Attractive as these offers of the Hivite prince and his son were, they
were declined by Jacob's sons, who had the chief voice in the question
of their sister's marriage (vid., [Gen
24:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050)). And they were quite right;
for, by accepting them, they would have violated the sacred call of
Israel and his seed, and sacrificed the promises of Jehovah to Mammon.
But they did it in a wrong way; for "they answered with deceit and acted
from behind" (וידבּרוּ בּמרמה: דּבּר) is to be rendered dolos struxit;
דּברים דּבּר would be the expression for "giving mere words," [Hos
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004); vid., Ges. thes.), "because he
had defiled Dinah their sister." They told him that they could not give
their sister to an uncircumcised man, because this would be a reproach
to them; and the only condition upon which they would consent (נאות
imperf. Niph. of אוּת) was, that the Shechemites should all be
circumcised; otherwise they would take their sister and go.

[Genesis 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 34:18</span></span>

The condition seemed reasonable to the two suitors, and by way of
setting a good example, "the young man did not delay to do this word,"
i.e., to submit to circumcision, "as he was honoured before all his
father's house." This is stated by anticipation in [Gen
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#019); but before submitting to the
operation, he went with his father to the gate, the place of public
assembly, to lay the matter before the citizens of the town. They knew
so well how to make the condition palatable, by a graphic description of
the wealth of Jacob and his family, and by expatiating upon the
advantages of being united with them, that the Shechemites consented to
the proposal. שׁלמים: integri, people whose bearing is unexceptionable.
"And the land, behold broad on both sides it is before them," i.e., it
offers space enough in every direction for them to wander about with
their flocks. And then the gain: "Their cattle, and their possessions,
and their beasts of burden...shall they not be ours?" מקנה is used here
for flocks and herds, בּהמה for beasts of burden, viz., camels and asses
(cf. [Num 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#026)). But notwithstanding
the advantages here pointed out, the readiness of all the citizens of
Shechem (vid., [Gen 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#010)) to consent
to be circumcised, could only be satisfactorily explained from the fact
that this religious rite was already customary in different nations
(according to Herod. 2, 104, among the Egyptians and Colchians), as an
act of religious or priestly consecration.

[Genesis 34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 34:25</span></span>

But on the third day, when the Shechemites were thoroughly prostrated by
the painful effects of the operation, Simeon and Levi (with their
servants of course) fell upon the town בּטח (i.e., while the people were
off their guard, as in [Eze 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#009)),
slew all the males, including Hamor and Shechem, with the edge of the
sword, i.e., without quarter ([Num
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#024); [Jos
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#028), etc.), and brought back their
sister. The sons of Jacob then plundered the town, and carried off all
the cattle in the town and in the fields, and all their possessions,
including the women and the children in their houses. By the sons of
Jacob ([Gen 34:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#027)) we are not to
understand the rest of his sons to the exclusion of Simeon, Levi, and
even Reuben, as Delitzsch supposes, but all his sons. For the
supposition, that Simeon and Levi were content with taking their
murderous revenge, and had no share in the plunder, is neither probable
in itself nor reconcilable with what Jacob said on his death-bed ([Gen
49:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005), observe שׁור עקּרוּ) about
this very crime; nor can it be inferred from ויּצאוּ in [Gen
34:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#026), for this relates merely to
their going away from the house of the two princes, not to their leaving
Shechem altogether. The abrupt way in which the plundering is linked on
to the slaughter of all the males, without any copulative Vav, gives to
the account the character of indignation at so revolting a crime; and
this is also shown in the verbosity of the description. The absence of
the copula is not to be accounted for by the hypothesis that [Gen
34:27-29](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#027) are interpolated; for an
interpolator might have supplied the missing link by a vav, just as well
as the lxx and other ancient translators.

[Genesis 34:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 34:30</span></span>

Jacob reproved the originators of this act most severely for their
wickedness: "Ye have brought me into trouble (conturbare), to make me
stink (an abomination) among the inhabitants of the land;...and yet I
(with my attendants) am a company that can be numbered (lit., people of
number, easily numbered, a small band, [Deu
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#027), cf. [Isa
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#019)); and if they gather together
against me, they will slay me," etc. If Jacob laid stress simply upon
the consequences which this crime was likely to bring upon himself and
his house, the reason was, that this was the view most adapted to make
an impression upon his sons. For his last words concerning Simeon and
Levi ([Gen 49:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)) are a sufficient
proof that the wickedness of their conduct was also an object of deep
abhorrence. And his fear was not groundless. Only God in His mercy
averted all the evil consequences from Jacob and his house ([Gen
35:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#005)). But his sons answered, "Are
they to treat our sister like a harlot?" עשׂה: as in [Lev
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015), etc. Their indignation was
justifiable enough; and their seeking revenge, as Absalom avenged the
violation of his sister on Amnon ([Sa2
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#022).), was in accordance with the
habits of nomadic tribes. In this way, for example, seduction is still
punished by death among the Arabs, and the punishment is generally
inflicted by the brothers (cf. Niebuhr, Arab. p. 39; Burckhardt, Syr. p.
361, and Beduinen, p. 89, 224-5). In addition to this, Jacob's sons
looked upon the matter not merely as a violation of their sister's
chastity, but as a crime against the peculiar vocation of their tribe.
But for all that, the deception they practised, the abuse of the
covenant sign of circumcision as a means of gratifying their revenge,
and the extension of that revenge to the whole town, together with the
plundering of the slain, were crimes deserving of the strongest
reprobation. The crafty character of Jacob degenerated into malicious
cunning in Simeon and Levi; and jealousy for the exalted vocation of
their family, into actual sin. This event "shows us in type all the
errors into which the belief in the pre-eminence of Israel was sure to
lead in the course of history, whenever that belief was rudely held by
men of carnal minds" (O. v. Gerlach).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 35](gen035)

</div>
