<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen020)  [Next](gen022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001)

[Genesis 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 21:1</span></span>

Birth of Isaac. - Jehovah did for Sarah what God had promised in [Gen
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#006) (cf. [Gen
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#014)): she conceived, and at the time
appointed bore a son to Abraham, when he was 100 years old. Abraham gave
it the name of Jizchak (or Isaac), and circumcised it on the eighth day.
The name for the promised son had been selected by God, in connection
with Abraham's laughing ([Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017)
and [Gen 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019)), to indicate the
nature of his birth and existence. For as his laughing sprang from the
contrast between the idea and the reality; so through a miracle of grace
the birth of Isaac gave effect to this contrast between the promise of
God and the pledge of its fulfilment on the one hand, and the incapacity
of Abraham for begetting children, and of Sarah for bearing them, on the
other; and through this name, Isaac was designated as the fruit of
omnipotent grace working against and above the forces of nature. Sarah
also, who had previously laughed with unbelief at the divine promise
([Gen 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#012)), found a reason in the
now accomplished birth of the promised son for laughing with joyous
amazement; so that she exclaimed, with evident allusion to his name, "A
laughing hath God prepared for me; every one who hears it will laugh to
me" (i.e., will rejoice with me, in amazement at the blessing of God
which has come upon me even in my old age), and gave a fitting
expression to the joy of her heart, in this inspired tristich ([Gen
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#007)): "Who would have said unto
Abraham: Sarah is giving suck; for I have born a son to his old age."
מלּל is the poetic word for דּבּר, and מי before the perfect has the
sense of - whoever has said, which we should express as a subjunctive;
cf. [Kg2 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#009); [Psa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003), etc.

[Genesis 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 21:8</span></span>

Expulsion of Ishmael. - The weaning of the child, which was celebrated
with a feast, furnished the outward occasion for this. Sarah saw Ishmael
mocking, making ridicule on the occasion. "Isaac, the object of holy
laughter, was made the butt of unholy wit or profane sport. He did not
laugh (צחק), but he made fun (מצחק). The little helpless Isaac a father
of nations! Unbelief, envy, pride of carnal superiority, were the causes
of his conduct. Because he did not understand the sentiment, 'Is
anything too wonderful for the Lord?' it seemed to him absurd to link so
great a thing to one so small" (Hengstenberg). Paul calls this the
persecution of him that was after the Spirit by him that was begotten
after the flesh ([Gal 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#029)), and
discerns in this a prediction of the persecution, which the Church of
those who are born after the spirit of faith endures from those who are
in bondage to the righteousness of the law.

[Gen 21:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#009)

Sarah therefore asked that the maid and her son might be sent away,
saying, the latter "shall not be heir with Isaac." The demand, which
apparently proceeded from maternal jealousy, displeased Abraham greatly
"because of his son," - partly because in Ishmael he loved his own flesh
and blood, and partly on account of the promise received for him ([Gen
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018) and [Gen
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020)). But God (Elohim, since there
is no appearance mentioned, but the divine will was made known to him
inwardly) commanded him to comply with Sarah's demand: "for in Isaac
shall seed (posterity) be called to thee." This expression cannot mean
"thy descendants will call themselves after Isaac," for in that case, at
all events, זרעך would be used; for "in (through) Isaac shall seed be
called into existence to thee," for קרא does not mean to call into
existence; but, "in the person of Isaac shall there be posterity to
thee, which shall pass as such," for נקרא includes existence and the
recognition of existence. Though the noun is not defined by any article,
the seed intended must be that to which all the promises of God
referred, and with which God would establish His covenant ([Gen
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#021), cf. [Rom
9:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007); [Heb
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#018)). To make the dismissal of
Ishmael easier to the paternal heart, God repeated to Abraham ([Gen
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#013)) the promise already given him
with regard to this son ([Gen 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020)).

[Gen 21:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#014)

The next morning Abraham sent Hagar away with Ishmael. The words, "he
took bread and a bottle of water and gave it to Hagar, putting it (שׂם
participle, not perfect) upon her shoulder, and the boy, and sent her
away," do not state the Abraham gave her Ishmael also to carry. For
ואת־היּלד does not depend upon שׂם and ויּתּן because of the copula ו,
but upon יקּח, the leading verb of the sentence, although it is
separated from it by the parenthesis "putting it upon her shoulder." It
does not follow from these words, therefore, that Ishmael is represented
as a little child. Nor is this implied in the statement which follows,
that Hagar, when wandering about in the desert, "cast the boy under one
of the shrubs," because the water in the bottle was gone. For ילד like
נער does not mean an infant, but a boy, and also a young man ([Gen
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#023)); - Ishmael must have been 15 or
16 years old, as he was 14 before Isaac was born (cf. [Gen
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#005), and [Gen
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#016)); - and השׁליך, "to throw,"
signifies that she suddenly left hold of the boy, when he fell exhausted
from thirst, just as in [Mat 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#030)
ῥίπτειν is used for laying hastily down. Though despairing of his life,
the mother took care that at least he should breathe out his life in the
shade, and she sat over against him weeping, "in the distance as
archers," i.e., according to a concise simile very common in Hebrew, as
far off as archers are accustomed to place the target. Her maternal love
could not bear to see him die, and yet she would not lose sight of him.

[Gen 21:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#017)

Then God heard the voice (the weeping and crying) of the boy, and the
angel of God called to Hagar from heaven, "What aileth thee, Hagar? Fear
not, for God hath heard the voice of the boy, where he is" (באשר for
אשׁר בּמקום, [Sa2 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#021)), i.e., in his
helpless condition: "arise, lift up the lad," etc. It was Elohim, not
Jehovah, who heard the voice of the boy, and appeared as the angel of
Elohim, not of Jehovah (as in [Gen
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)), because, when Ishmael and Hagar
had been dismissed from Abraham's house, they were removed from the
superintendence and care of the covenant God to the guidance and
providence of God the ruler of all nations. God then opened her eyes,
and she saw what she had not seen before, a well of water, from which
she filled the bottle and gave her son to drink.

[Gen 21:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#020)

Having been miraculously saved from perishing by the angel of God,
Ishmael grew up under the protection of God, settled in the wilderness
of Paran, and "became as he grew up an archer." Although preceded by
יגדּל, the רבה is not tautological; and there is no reason for
attributing to it the meaning of "archer," in which sense רבב alone
occurs in the one passage [Gen 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023).
The desert of Paran is the present large desert of et-Tih, which
stretches along the southern border of Canaan, from the western fringe
of the Arabah, towards the east to the desert of Shur (Jifar), on the
frontier of Egypt, and extends southwards to the promontories of the
mountains of Horeb (vid., [Num 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#012)).
On the northern edge of this desert was Beersheba (proleptically so
called in [Gen 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#014)), to which
Abraham had removed from Gerar; so that in all probability Hagar and
Ishmael were sent away from his abode there, and wandered about in the
surrounding desert, till Hagar was afraid that they should perish with
thirst. Lastly, in preparation for [Gen
25:12-18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#012), it is mentioned in [Gen
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#021) that Ishmael married a wife out
of Egypt.

[Genesis 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 21:22</span></span>

Abimelech's Treaty with Abraham. - Through the divine blessing which
visibly attended Abraham, the Philistine king Abimelech was induced to
secure for himself and his descendants the friendship of a man so
blessed; and for that purpose he went to Beersheba, with his captain
Phicol, to conclude a treaty with him. Abraham was perfectly ready to
agree to this; but first of all he complained to him about a well which
Abimelech's men had stolen, i.e., had unjustly appropriated to
themselves. Abimelech replied that this act of violence had never been
made known to him till that day, and as a matter of course commanded the
well to be returned. After the settlement of this dispute the treaty was
concluded, and Abraham presented the king with sheep and oxen, as a
material pledge that he would reciprocate the kindness shown, and live
in friendship with the king and his descendants. Out of this present he
selected seven lambs and set them by themselves; and when Abimelech
inquired what they were, he told him to take them from his hand, that
they might be to him (Abraham) for a witness that he had digged the
well. It was not to redeem the well, but to secure the well as his
property against any fresh claims on the part of the Philistines, that
the present was given; and by the acceptance of it, Abraham's right of
possession was practically and solemnly acknowledged.

[Genesis 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 21:31</span></span>

From this circumstance, the place where it occurred received the name
שׁבע בּאר, i.e., seven-well, "because there they sware both of them." It
does not follow from this note, that the writer interpreted the name
"oath-well," and took שׁבע in the sense of שׁבעה. The idea is rather the
following: the place received its name from the seven lambs, by which
Abraham secured to himself possession of the well, because the treaty
was sworn to on the basis of the agreement confirmed by the seven lambs.
There is no mention of sacrifice, however, in connection with the treaty
(see [Gen 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#033)). נשׁבּע to swear,
lit., to seven one's self, not because in the oath the divine number 3
is combined with the world-number 4, but because, from the sacredness of
the number 7, the real origin and ground of which are to be sought in
the number 7 of the work of creation, seven things were generally chosen
to give validity to an oath, as was the case, according to Herodotus (3,
8), with the Arabians among others. Beersheba was in the Wady es-Seba,
the broad channel of a winter-torrent, 12 hours' journey to the south of
Hebron on the road to Egypt and the Dead Sea, where there are still
stones to be found, the relics of an ancient town, and two deep wells
with excellent water, called Bir es Seba, i.e., seven-well (not
lion-well, as the Bedouins erroneously interpret it): cf. Robinson's
Pal. i. pp. 300ff.

[Genesis 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 21:33</span></span>

Here Abraham planted a tamarisk and called upon the name of the Lord
(vid., [Gen 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#026)), the everlasting
God. Jehovah is called the everlasting God, as the eternally true, with
respect to the eternal covenant, which He established with Abraham ([Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007)). The planting of this long-lived
tree, with its hard wood, and its long, narrow, thickly clustered,
evergreen leaves, was to be a type of the ever-enduring grace of the
faithful covenant God.

[Genesis 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 21:34</span></span>

Abraham sojourned a long time there in the Philistines' land. There
Isaac was probably born, and grew up to be a young man ([Gen
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006)), capable of carrying the wood
for a sacrifice; cf. [Gen 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#019). The
expression "in the land of the Philistines" appears to be at variance
with [Gen 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#032), where Abimelech and
Phicol are said to have returned to the land of the Philistines. But the
discrepancy is easily reconciled, on the supposition that at that time
the land of the Philistines had no fixed boundary, at all events,
towards the desert. Beersheba did not belong to Gerar, the kingdom of
Abimelech in the stricter sense; but the Philistines extended their
wanderings so far, and claimed the district as their own, as is evident
from the fact that Abimelech's people had taken the well from Abraham.
On the other hand, Abraham with his numerous flocks would not confine
himself to the Wady es Seba, but must have sought for pasture-ground in
the whole surrounding country; and as Abimelech had given him full
permission to dwell in his land ([Gen
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#015)), he would still, as heretofore,
frequently come as far as Gerar, so that his dwelling at Beersheba ([Gen
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#019)) might be correctly described as
sojourning (nomadizing) in the land of the Philistines.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 22](gen022)

</div>
