<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen019)  [Next](gen021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

[Genesis 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 20:1</span></span>

After the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, Abraham removed from the
grove of Mamre at Hebron to the south country, hardly from the same fear
as that which led Lot from Zoar, but probably to seek for better
pasture. Here he dwelt between Kadesh ([Gen
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007)) and Shur ([Gen
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007)), and remained for some time in
Gerar, a place the name of which has been preserved in the deep and
broad Wady Jurf el Gerr (i.e., torrent of Gerar) about eight miles
S.S.E. of Gaza, near to which Rowland discovered the ruins of an ancient
town bearing the name of Khirbet el Gerr. Here Abimelech, the Philistine
king of Gerar, like Pharaoh in Egypt, took Sarah, whom Abraham had again
announced to be his sister, into his harem, - not indeed because he was
charmed with the beauty of the woman of 90, which was either renovated,
or had not yet faded (Kurtz), but in all probability "to ally himself
with Abraham, the rich nomad prince" (Delitzsch). From this danger, into
which the untruthful statement of both her husband and herself had
brought her, she was once more rescued by the faithfulness of the
covenant God. In a dream by night God appeared to Abimelech, and
threatened him with death (מת הנּך en te moriturum) on account of the
woman, whom he had taken, because she was married to a husband.

[Genesis 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 20:4</span></span>

Abimelech, who had not yet come near her, because God had hindered him
by illness ([Gen 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006) and [Gen
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017)), excused himself on the ground
that he had done no wrong, since he had supposed Sarah to be Abraham's
sister, according to both her husband's statement and her own. This plea
was admitted by God, who told him that He had kept him from sinning
through touching Sarah, and commanded him to restore the woman
immediately to her husband, who was a prophet, that he might pray for
him and save his life, and threatened him with certain death to himself
and all belonging to him in case he should refuse. That Abimelech, when
taking the supposed sister of Abraham into his harem, should have
thought that he was acting "in innocence of heart and purity of hands,"
i.e., in perfect innocence, is to be fully accounted for, from his
undeveloped moral and religious standpoint, by considering the customs
of that day. But that God should have admitted that he had acted "in
innocence of heart," and yet should have proceeded at once to tell him
that he could only remain alive through the intercession of Abraham,
that is to say, through his obtaining forgiveness of a sin that was
deserving of death, is a proof that God treated him as capable of deeper
moral discernment and piety. The history itself indicates this in the
very characteristic variation in the names of God. First of all ([Gen
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003)), Elohim (without the article,
i.e., Deity generally) appears to him in a dream; but Abimelech
recognises the Lord, Adonai, i.e., God ([Gen
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004)); whereupon the historian
represents האלהים (Elohim with the article), the personal and true God,
as speaking to him. The address of God, too, also shows his
susceptibility of divine truth. Without further pointing out to him the
wrong which he had done in simplicity of heart, in taking the sister of
the stranger who had come into his land, for the purpose of increasing
his own harem, since he must have been conscious of this himself, God
described Abraham as a prophet, whose intercession alone could remove
his guilt, to show him the way of salvation. A prophet: lit., the
God-addressed or inspired, since the "inward speaking" (Ein-sprache) or
inspiration of God constitutes the essence of prophecy. Abraham was
προφήτης as the recipient of divine revelation, and was thereby placed
in so confidential a relation to God, that he could intercede for
sinners, and atone for sins of infirmity through his intercession.

[Genesis 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 20:8</span></span>

Abimelech carried out the divine instructions. The next morning he
collected his servants together and related what had occurred, at which
the men were greatly alarmed. He then sent for Abraham, and complained
most bitterly of his conduct, by which he had brought a great sin upon
him and his kingdom.

[Genesis 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 20:10</span></span>

"What sawest thou," i.e., what hadst thou in thine eye, with thine act
(thy false statement)? Abimelech did this publicly in the presence of
his servants, partly for his own justification in the sight of his
dependents, and partly to put Abraham to shame. The latter had but two
weak excuses: (1) that he supposed there was no fear of God at all in
the land, and trembled for his life because of his wife; and (2) that
when he left his father's house, he had arranged with his wife that in
every foreign place she was to call herself his sister, as she really
was his half-sister. On the subject of his emigration, he expressed
himself indefinitely and with reserve, accommodating himself to the
polytheistic standpoint of the Philistine king: "when God (or the gods,
Elohim) caused me to wander," i.e., led me to commence an unsettled life
in a foreign land; and saying nothing about Jehovah, and the object of
his wandering as revealed by Him.

[Genesis 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 20:14</span></span>

Abimelech then gave him back his wife with a liberal present of cattle
and slaves, and gave him leave to dwell wherever he pleased in his land.
To Sarah he said, "Behold, I have given a thousand shekele of silver to
thy brother; behold, it is to thee a covering of the eyes (i.e., an
expiatory gift) with regard to all that are with thee ("because in a
mistress the whole family is disgraced," Del.), and with all - so art
thou justified." The thousand shekels (about 131) were not a special
present made to Sarah, but indicate the value of the present made to
Abraham, the amount of which may be estimated by this standard, that at
a later date ([Exo 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032)) a slave was
reckoned at 30 shekels. By the "covering of the eyes" we are not to
understand a veil, which Sarah was to procure for 1000 shekels; but it
is a figurative expression for an atoning gift, and is to be explained
by the analogy of the phrase פּני פ כּפּר "to cover any one's face," so
that he may forget a wrong done (cf. [Gen
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#021); and [Job
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024), "he covereth the faces of the
judges," i.e., he bribes them). ונוכחת can only be the 2 pers. fem.
sing. perf. Niphal, although the Dagesh lene is wanting in the ת; for
the rules of syntax will hardly allow us to regard this form as a
participle, unless we imagine the extremely harsh ellipsis of נוכחת for
אתּ נוכחת. The literal meaning is "so thou art judged," i.e., justice
has been done thee.

[Genesis 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 20:17</span></span>

After this reparation, God healed Abimelech at Abraham's intercession;
also his wife and maids, so that they could bear again, for Jehovah had
closed up every womb in Abimelech's house on Sarah's account. אמהות,
maids whom the king kept as concubines, are to be distinguished from
שׁפחות female slaves ([Gen 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014)).
That there was a material difference between them, is proved by [Sa1
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#041). כּל־רחם עצר כּל does not mean,
as is frequently supposed, to prevent actual childbirth, but to prevent
conception, i.e., to produce barrenness ([Sa1
1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#005)). This is evident from the
expression "He hath restrained me from bearing" in [Gen
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#002) (cf. [Isa
66:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#009), and [Sa1
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#006)), and from the opposite phrase,
"open the womb," so as to facilitate conception ([Gen
29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031), and [Gen
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022)). The plague brought upon
Abimelech's house, therefore, consisted of some disease which rendered
the begetting of children (the coitus) impossible. This might have
occurred as soon as Sarah was taken into the royal harem, and therefore
need not presuppose any lengthened stay there. There is no necessity,
therefore, to restrict ויּלדוּ to the women and regard it as equivalent
to ותּלדנה, which would be grammatically inadmissible; for it may refer
to Abimelech also, since ילד signifies to beget as well as to bear. We
may adopt Knobel's explanation, therefore, though without approving of
the inference that [Gen 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018) was an
appendix of the Jehovist, and arose from a misunderstanding of the word
ויּלדוּ in [Gen 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017). A later
addition [Gen 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018) cannot be; for the
simple reason, that without the explanation give there, the previous
verse would be unintelligible, so that it cannot have been wanting in
any of the accounts. The name Jehovah, in contrast with Elohim and
Ha-Elohim in [Gen 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017), is obviously
significant. The cure of Abimelech and his wives belonged to the Deity
(Elohim). Abraham directed his intercession not to Elohim, an indefinite
and unknown God, but to האלהים; for the God, whose prophet he was, was
the personal and true God. It was He too who had brought the disease
upon Abimelech and his house, not as Elohim or Ha-Elohim, but as
Jehovah, the God of salvation; for His design therein was to prevent the
disturbance of frustration of His saving design, and the birth of the
promised son from Sarah.

But if the divine names Elohim and Ha-Elohim indicate the true relation
of God to Abimelech, and here also it was Jehovah who interposed for
Abraham and preserved the mother of the promised seed, our narrative
cannot be merely an Elohistic side-piece appended to the Jehovistic
account in [Gen 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#014)., and founded
upon a fictitious legend. The thoroughly distinctive character of this
event is a decisive proof of the fallacy of any such critical
conjecture. Apart from the one point of agreement-the taking of
Abraham's wife into the royal harem, because he said she was his sister
in the hope of thereby saving his own life (an event, the repetition of
which in the space of 24 years is by no means startling, when we
consider the customs of the age) - all the more minute details are
entirely different in the two cases. In king Abimelech we meet with a
totally different character from that of Pharaoh. We see in him a
heathen imbued with a moral consciousness of right, and open to receive
divine revelation, of which there is not the slightest trace in the king
of Egypt. And Abraham, in spite of his natural weakness, and the
consequent confusion which he manifested in the presence of the pious
heathen, was exalted by the compassionate grace of God to the position
of His own friend, so that even the heathen king, who seems to have been
in the right in this instance, was compelled to bend before him and to
seek the removal of the divine punishment, which had fallen upon him and
his house, through the medium of his intercession. In this way God
proved to the Philistine king, on the one hand, that He suffers no harm
to befall His prophets ([Psa 105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015)),
and to Abraham, on the other, that He can maintain His covenant and
secure the realization of His promise against all opposition from the
sinful desires of earthly potentates. It was in this respect that the
event possessed a typical significance in relation to the future
attitude of Israel towards surrounding nations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 21](gen021)

</div>
