<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen016)  [Next](gen018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001.md)

[Genesis 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 17:1</span></span>

The covenant had been made with Abram for at least fourteen years, and
yet Abram remained without any visible sign of its accomplishment, and
was merely pointed in faith to the inviolable character of the promise
of God. Jehovah now appeared to Him again, when he was ninety-nine years
old, twenty-four years after his migration, and thirteen after the birth
of Ishmael, to give effect to the covenant and prepare for its
execution. Having come down to Abram in a visible form ([Gen
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#022).md), He said to him, "I am El
Shaddai (almighty God): walk before Me and be blameless." At the
establishment of the covenant, God had manifested Himself to him as
Jehovah ([Gen 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007).md); here Jehovah
describes Himself as El Shaddai, God the Mighty One. שׁדּי: from שׁדד to
be strong, with the substantive termination ai, like חגּי the festal,
ישׁישׁי the old man, סיני the thorn-grown, etc. This name is not to be
regarded as identical with Elohim, that is to say, with God as Creator
and Preserver of the world, although in simple narrative Elohim is used
for El Shaddai, which is only employed in the more elevated and solemn
style of writing. It belonged to the sphere of salvation, forming one
element in the manifestation of Jehovah, and describing Jehovah, the
covenant God, as possessing the power to realize His promises, even when
the order of nature presented no prospect of their fulfilment, and the
powers of nature were insufficient to secure it. The name which Jehovah
thus gave to Himself was to be a pledge, that in spite of "his own body
now dead," and "the deadness of Sarah's womb" ([Rom
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#019).md), God could and would give him
the promised innumerable posterity. On the other hand, God required this
of Abram, "Walk before Me (cf. [Gen
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#022).md) and be blameless" ([Gen
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009).md). "Just as righteousness received
in faith was necessary for the establishment of the covenant, so a
blameless walk before God was required for the maintenance and
confirmation of the covenant." This introduction is followed by a more
definite account of the new revelation; first of the promise involved in
the new name of God ([Gen 17:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#002).md), and
then of the obligation imposed upon Abram ([Gen
17:9-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#009).md). "I will give My covenant,"
says the Almighty, "between Me and thee, and multiply thee exceedingly."
בּרית נתן signifies, not to make a covenant, but to give, to put, i.e.,
to realize, to set in operation the things promised in the covenant -
equivalent to setting up the covenant (cf. [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007.md) and [Gen
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012.md) with [Gen
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#009).md). This promise Abram appropriated
to himself by falling upon his face in worship, upon which God still
further expounded the nature of the covenant about to be executed.

[Genesis 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 17:4</span></span>

On the part of God אני placed at the beginning absolutely: so far as I
am concerned, for my part) it was to consist of this: (1) that God would
make Abram the father (אב instead of אני chosen with reference to the
name Abram) of a multitude of nations, the ancestor of nations and
kings; (2) that He would be God, show Himself to be God, in an eternal
covenant relation, to him and to his posterity, according to their
families, according to all their successive generations; and (3) that He
would give them the land in which he had wandered as a foreigner, viz.,
all Canaan, for an everlasting possession. As a pledge of this promise
God changed his name אברם, i.e., high father, into אברהם, i.e., father
of the multitude, from אב and רהם, Arab. ruhâm = multitude. In this name
God gave him a tangible pledge of the fulfilment of His covenant,
inasmuch as a name which God gives cannot be a mere empty sound, but
must be the expression of something real, or eventually acquire reality.

[Genesis 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 17:9</span></span>

On the part of Abraham (ואתּה thou, the antithesis to אני, as for me,
[Gen 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#004).md) God required that he and
his descendants in all generations should keep the covenant, and that as
a sign he should circumcise himself and every male in his house. המּול
Niph. of מוּל, and נמלתּם perf. Niph. for נמלּתם, from מלל = מוּל. As
the sign of the covenant, circumcision is called in [Gen
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#013.md), "the covenant in the flesh," so
far as the nature of the covenant was manifested in the flesh. It was to
be extended not only to the seed, the lineal descendants of Abraham, but
to all the males in his house, even to every foreign slave not belonging
to the seed of Abram, whether born in the house or acquired (i.e.,
bought) with money, and to the "son of eight days," i.e., the male child
eight days old; with the threat that the uncircumcised should be
exterminated from his people, because by neglecting circumcision he had
broken the covenant with God. The form of speech ההיא הנּפשׁ נכרתה, by
which many of the laws are enforced (cf. [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015.md), [Exo
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019.md); [Lev
7:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020.md), [Lev
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#025), etc..md), denotes not rejection
from the nation, or banishment, but death, whether by a direct judgment
from God, an untimely death at the hand of God, or by the punishment of
death inflicted by the congregation or the magistrates, and that whether
יוּמת מות is added, as in [Exo 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#014.md),
etc., or not. This is very evident from [Lev
17:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#009.md), where the extermination to be
effected by the authorities is distinguished from that to be executed by
God Himself (see my biblische Archologie ii. 153, 1). In this sense we
sometimes find, in the place of the earlier expression "from his
people," i.e., his nation, such expressions as "from among his people"
([Lev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004.md), [Lev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010.md); [Num
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#030).md), "from Israel" ([Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015.md); [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013).md), "from the congregation of
Israel" ([Exo 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#019).md); and instead of
"that soul," in [Lev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004.md), [Lev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#009.md) (cf. [Exo
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#033.md), [Exo
30:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#038).md), we find "that man."

[Genesis 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 17:15</span></span>

The appointment of the sign of the covenant was followed by this further
revelation as to the promised seed, that Abram would receive it through
his wife Sarai. In confirmation of this her exalted destiny, she was no
longer to be called Sarai (שׂרי, probably from שׂרר with the termination
ai, the princely), but שׂרה, the princess; for she was to become
nations, the mother of kings of nations. Abraham then fell upon his face
and laughed, saying in himself (i.e., thinking), "Shall a child be born
to him that is a hundred years old, or shall Sarah, that is ninety years
old, bear?" "The promise was so immensely great, that he sank in
adoration to the ground, and so immensely paradoxical, that he could not
help laughing" (Del.). "Not that he either ridiculed the promise of God,
or treated it as a fable, or rejected it altogether; but, as often
happens when things occur which are least expected, partly lifted up
with joy, partly carried out of himself with wonder, he burst out into
laughter" (Calvin). In this joyous amazement he said to God ([Gen
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#018).md), "O that Ishmael might live
before Thee!" To regard these words, with Calvin and others, as
intimating that he should be satisfied with the prosperity of Ishmael,
as though he durst not hope for anything higher, is hardly sufficient.
The prayer implies anxiety, lest Ishmael should have no part in the
blessings of the covenant. God answers, "Yes (אבל imo), Sarah thy wife
bears thee a son, and thou wilt call his name Isaac (according to the
Greek form Ἰσαάκ, for the Hebrew יצחק, i.e., laughter, with reference to
Abraham's laughing; [Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017.md), cf.
[Gen 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#006).md), and I will establish My
covenant with him," i.e., make him the recipient of the covenant grace.
And the prayer for Ishmael God would also grant: He would make him very
fruitful, so that he should beget twelve princes and become a great
nation. But the covenant, God repeated ([Gen
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#021).md), should be established with
Isaac, whom Sarah was to bear to him at that very time in the following
year. - Since Ishmael therefore was excluded from participating in the
covenant grace, which was ensured to Isaac alone; and yet Abraham was to
become a multitude of nations, and that through Sarah, who was to become
"nations" through the son she was to bear ([Gen
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#016).md); the "multitude of nations"
could not include either the Ishmaelites or the tribes descended from
the sons of Keturah ([Gen 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002)..md), but
the descendants of Isaac alone; and as one of Isaac's two sons received
no part of the covenant promise, the descendants of Jacob alone. But the
whole of the twelve sons of Jacob founded only the one nation of Israel,
with which Jehovah established the covenant made with Abraham (Ex 6 and
20-24), so that Abraham became through Israel the lineal father of one
nation only. From this it necessarily follows, that the posterity of
Abraham, which was to expand into a multitude of nations, extends beyond
this one lineal posterity, and embraces the spiritual posterity also,
i.e., all nations who are grafted ἐκ πίστεως Ἀβραάμ into the seed of
Abraham ([Rom 4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011.md), and [Rom
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#016.md), [Rom
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017).md). Moreover, the fact that the
seed of Abraham was not to be restricted to his lineal descendants, is
evident from the fact, that circumcision as the covenant sign was not
confined to them, but extended to all the inmates of his house, so that
these strangers were received into the fellowship of the covenant, and
reckoned as part of the promised seed. Now, if the whole land of Canaan
was promised to this posterity, which was to increase into a multitude
of nations ([Gen 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008).md), it is
perfectly evident, from what has just been said, that the sum and
substance of the promise was not exhausted by the gift of the land,
whose boundaries are described in [Gen
15:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018.md), as a possession to the
nation of Israel, but that the extension of the idea of the lineal
posterity, "Israel after the flesh," to the spiritual posterity, "Israel
after the spirit," requires the expansion of the idea and extent of the
earthly Canaan to the full extent of the spiritual Canaan, whose
boundaries reach as widely as the multitude of nations having Abraham as
father; and, therefore, that in reality Abraham received the promise
"that he should be the heir of the world" ([Rom
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#013).md).

(Note: What stands out clearly in this promise-viz., the fact that the
expressions "seed of Abraham" (people of Israel) and "land of Canaan"
are not exhausted in the physical Israel and earthly Canaan, but are to
be understood spiritually, Israel and Canaan acquiring the typical
significance of the people of God and land of the Lord - is still
further expanded by the prophets, and most distinctly expressed in the
New Testament by Christ and the apostles. This scriptural and spiritual
interpretation of the Old Testament is entirely overlooked by those who,
like Auberlen, restrict all the promises of God and the prophetic
proclamations of salvation to the physical Israel, and reduce the
application of them to the "Israel after the spirit," i.e., to believing
Christendom, to a mere accommodation.)

And what is true of the seed of Abraham and the land of Canaan must also
hold good of the covenant and the covenant sign. Eternal duration was
promised only to the covenant established by God with the seed of
Abraham, which was to grow into a multitude of nations, but not to the
covenant institution which God established in connection with the lineal
posterity of Abraham, the twelve tribes of Israel. Everything in this
institution which was of a local and limited character, and only
befitted the physical Israel and the earthly Canaan, existed only so
long as was necessary for the seed of Abraham to expand into a multitude
of nations. So again it was only in its essence that circumcision could
be a sign of the eternal covenant. Circumcision, whether it passed from
Abraham to other nations, or sprang up among other nations independently
of Abraham and his descendants (see my Archologie, 63, 1), was based
upon the religious view, that the sin and moral impurity which the fall
of Adam had introduced into the nature of man had concentrated itself in
the sexual organs, because it is in sexual life that it generally
manifests itself with peculiar force; and, consequently, that for the
sanctification of life, a purification or sanctification of the organ of
generation, by which life is propagated, is especially required. In this
way circumcision in the flesh became a symbol of the circumcision, i.e.,
the purification, of the heart ([Deu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016.md); [Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006.md), cf. [Lev
26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041.md); [Jer
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004.md); [Jer
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#025.md); [Eze
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#007).md), and a covenant sign to those
who received it, inasmuch as they were received into the fellowship of
the holy nation ([Exo 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006).md), and
required to sanctify their lives, in other words, to fulfil all that the
covenant demanded. It was to be performed on every boy on the eighth day
after its birth, not because the child, like its mother, remains so long
in a state of impurity, but because, as the analogous rule with regard
to the fitness of young animals for sacrifice would lead us to conclude,
this was regarded as the first day of independent existence ([Lev
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#027.md); [Exo
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029); see my Archologie, 63.md).

[Genesis 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 17:22</span></span>

When God had finished His address and ascended again, Abraham
immediately fulfilled the covenant duty enjoined upon him, by
circumcision himself on that very day, along with all the male members
of his house. Because Ishmael was 13 years old when he was circumcised,
the Arabs even now defer circumcision to a much later period than the
Jews, generally till between the ages of 5 and 13, and frequently even
till the 13th year.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 18](gen018.md)

</div>
