<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen028)  [Next](gen030) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)

[Genesis 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 29:1</span></span>

Arrival in Haran, and Reception by Laban. - Being strengthened in spirit
by the nocturnal vision, Jacob proceeded on his journey into "the land
of the sons of the East," by which we are to understand, not so much the
Arabian desert, that reaches to the Euphrates, as Mesopotamia, which
lies on the other side of that river. For there he saw the well in the
field ([Gen 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#002)), by which three
flocks were lying, waiting for the arrival of the other flocks of the
place, before they could be watered. The remark in [Gen
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#002), that the stone upon the well's
mouth was large (גּדלה without the article is a predicate), does not
mean that the united strength of all the shepherds was required to roll
it away, whereas Jacob rolled it away alone ([Gen
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#010)); but only that it was not in
the power of every shepherd, much less of a shepherdess like Rachel, to
roll it away. Hence in all probability the agreement that had been
formed among them, that they would water the flocks together. The scene
is so thoroughly in harmony with the customs of the East, both ancient
and modern, that the similarity to the one described in [Gen
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#011). is by no means strange (vid.,
Rob. Pal. i. 301, 304, ii. 351, 357, 371). Moreover the well was very
differently constructed from that at which Abraham's servant met with
Rebekah. There the water was drawn at once from the (open) well and
poured into troughs placed ready for the cattle, as is the case now at
most of the wells in the East; whereas here the well was closed up with
a stone, and there is no mention of pitchers and troughs. The well,
therefore, was probably a cistern dug in the ground, which was covered
up or closed with a large stone, and probably so constructed, that after
the stone had been rolled away the flocks could be driven to the edge to
drink.

(Note: Like the cistern Bir Beshat, described by Rosen., in the valley
of Hebron, or those which Robinson found in the desert of Judah (Pal.
ii. 165), hollowed out in the great mass of rock, and covered with a
large, thick, flat stone, in the middle of which a round hole had been
left, which formed the opening of the cistern, and in many cases was
closed up with a heavy stone, which it would take two or three men to
roll away.)

[Genesis 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 29:5</span></span>

Jacob asked the shepherds where they lived; from which it is probable
that the well was not situated, like that in [Gen
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#011), in the immediate neighbourhood
of the town of Haran; and when they said they were from Haran, he
inquired after Laban, the son, i.e., the descendant, of Nahor, and how
he was (לו השׁלום: is he well?; and received the reply, "Well; and
behold Rachel, his daughter, is just coming (בּאה particip.) with the
flock." When Jacob thereupon told the shepherds to water the flocks and
feed them again, for the day was still "great," - i.e., it wanted a long
while to the evening, and was not yet time to drive them in (to the
folds to rest for the night) - he certainly only wanted to get the
shepherds away from the well, that he might meet with his cousin alone.
But as Rachel came up in the meantime, he was so carried away by the
feelings of relationship, possibly by a certain love at first sight,
that he rolled the stone away from the well, watered her flock, and
after kissing her, introduced himself with tears of joyous emotion as
her cousin (אביה אחי, brother, i.e., relation of her father) and
Rebekah's son. What the other shepherds thought of all this, is passed
over as indifferent to the purpose of the narrative, and the friendly
reception of Jacob by Laban is related immediately afterwards. When
Jacob had told Laban "all these things," - i.e., hardly "the cause of
his journey, and the things which had happened to him in relation to the
birthright" (Rosenmller), but simply the things mentioned in [Gen
29:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#002) - Laban acknowledged him as
his relative: "Yes, thou art my bone and my flesh" (cf. [Gen
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023) and [Jdg
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#002)); and thereby eo ipso ensured him
an abode in his house.

[Genesis 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 29:15</span></span>

Jacob's Double Marriage. - After a full month ("a month of days," [Gen
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#004); [Num
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#020), etc.), during which time Laban
had discovered that he was a good and useful shepherd, he said to him,
"Shouldst thou, because thou art my relative, serve me for nothing? fix
me thy wages." Laban's selfishness comes out here under the appearance
of justice and kindness. To preclude all claim on the part of his
sister's son to gratitude or affection in return for his services, he
proposes to pay him like an ordinary servant. Jacob offered to serve him
seven years for Rachel, the younger of his two daughters, whom he loved
because of her beauty; i.e., just as many years as the week has days,
that he might bind himself to a complete and sufficient number of years
of service. For the elder daughter, Leah, had weak eyes, and
consequently was not so good-looking; since bright eyes, with fire in
them, are regarded as the height of beauty in Oriental women. Laban
agreed. He would rather give his daughter to him than to a stranger.

(Note: This is the case still with the Bedouins, the Druses, and other
Eastern tribes (Burckhardt, Voleny, Layard, and Lane).

Jacob's proposal may be explained, partly on the ground that he was not
then in a condition to give the customary dowry, or the usual presents
to relations, and partly also from the fact that his situation with
regard to Esau compelled him to remain some time with Laban. The assent
on the part of Laban cannot be accounted for from the custom of selling
daughters to husbands, for it cannot be shown that the purchase of wives
was a general custom at that time; but is to be explained solely on the
ground of Laban's selfishness and avarice, which came out still more
plainly afterwards. To Jacob, however, the seven years seemed but "a few
days, because he loved Rachel." This is to be understood, as C. a Lapide
observes, "not affective, but appretiative," i.e., in comparison with
the reward to be obtained for his service.

[Genesis 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 29:21</span></span>

But when Jacob asked for his reward at the expiration of this period,
and according to the usual custom a great marriage feast had been
prepared, instead of Rachel, Laban took his elder daughter Leah into the
bride-chamber, and Jacob went in unto her, without discovering in the
dark the deception that had been practised. Thus the overreacher of Esau
was overreached himself, and sin was punished by sin.

[Genesis 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 29:25</span></span>

But when Jacob complained to Laban the next morning of his deception, he
pleaded the custom of the country: כּן יעשׂה לא, "it is not accustomed
to be so in our place, to give the younger before the first-born." A
perfectly worthless excuse; for if this had really been the custom in
Haran as in ancient India and elsewhere, he ought to have told Jacob of
it before. But to satisfy Jacob, he promised him that in a week he would
give him the younger also, if he would serve him seven years longer for
her.

[Genesis 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 29:27</span></span>

"Fulfil her week;" i.e., let Leah's marriage-week pass over. The wedding
feast generally lasted a week (cf. [Jdg
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012); [Job
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#019)). After this week had passed, he
received Rachel also: two wives in eight days. To each of these Laban
gave one maid-servant to wait upon her; less, therefore, than Bethuel
gave to his daughter ([Gen 24:61](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#061)). -
This bigamy of Jacob must not be judged directly by the Mosaic law,
which prohibits marriage with two sisters at the same time ([Lev
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#018)), or set down as incest (Calvin,
etc.), since there was no positive law on the point in existence then.
At the same time, it is not to be justified on the ground, that the
blessing of God made it the means of the fulfilment of His promise,
viz., the multiplication of the seed of Abraham into a great nation.
Just as it had arisen from Laban's deception and Jacob's love, which
regarded outward beauty alone, and therefore from sinful infirmities, so
did it become in its results a true school of affliction to Jacob, in
which God showed to him, by many a humiliation, that such conduct as his
was quite unfitted to accomplish the divine counsels, and thus condemned
the ungodliness of such a marriage, and prepared the way for the
subsequent prohibition in the law.

[Genesis 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 29:31</span></span>

Leah's First Sons. - Jacob's sinful weakness showed itself even after
his marriage, in the fact that he loved Rachel more than Leah; and the
chastisement of God, in the fact that the hated wife was blessed with
children, whilst Rachel for a long time remained unfruitful. By this it
was made apparent once more, that the origin of Israel was to be a work
not of nature, but of grace. Leah had four sons in rapid succession, and
gave them names which indicated her state of mind: (1) Reuben, "see, a
son!" because she regarded his birth as a pledge that Jehovah had
graciously looked upon her misery, for now her husband would love her;
(2) Simeon, i.e., "hearing," for Jehovah had heard, i.e., observed that
she was hated; (3) Levi, i.e., attachment, for she hoped that this time,
at least, after she had born three sons, her husband would become
attached to her, i.e., show her some affection; (4) Judah (יהוּדה,
verbal, of the fut. hoph. of ידה), i.e., praise, not merely the praised
one, but the one for whom Jehovah is praised. After this fourth birth
there was a pause ([Gen 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031)), that
she might not be unduly lifted up by her good fortune, or attribute to
the fruitfulness of her own womb what the faithfulness of Jehovah, the
covenant God had bestowed upon her.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 30](gen030)

</div>
