<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen007)  [Next](gen009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

[Genesis 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 8:1</span></span>

With the words, "then God remembered Noah and all the animals...in the
ark," the narrative turns to the description of the gradual decrease of
the water until the ground was perfectly dry. The fall of the water is
described in the same pictorial style as its rapid rise. God's
"remembering" was a manifestation of Himself, an effective restraint of
the force of the raging element. He caused a wind to blow over the
earth, so that the waters sank, and shut up the fountains of the deep,
and the sluices of heaven, so that the rain from heaven was restrained.
"Then the waters turned (ישׁבוּ i.e., flowed off) from the earth,
flowing continuously (the inf. absol. ושׁוב הלוך expresses
continuation), and decreased at the end of 150 days." The decrease first
became perceptible when the ark rested upon the mountains of Ararat on
the 17th day of the seventh month; i.e.,, reckoning 30 days to a month,
exactly 150 days after the flood commenced. From that time forth it
continued without intermission, so that on the first day of the tenth
month, probably 73 days after the resting of the ark, the tops of the
mountains were seen, viz., the tops of the Armenian highlands, by which
the ark was surrounded. Ararat was the name of a province ([Kg2
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037)), which is mentioned along with
Minni (Armenia) as a kingdom in [Jer
51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027), probably the central province
of the country of Armenia, which Moses v. Chorene calls Arairad,
Araratia. The mountains of Ararat are, no doubt, the group of mountains
which rise from the plain of the Araxes in two lofty peaks, the greater
and lesser Ararat, the former 16,254 feet above the level of the sea,
the latter about 12,000. This landing-place of the ark is extremely
interesting in connection with the development of the human race as
renewed after the flood. Armenia, the source of the rivers of paradise,
has been called "a cool, airy, well-watered mountain-island in the midst
of the old continent;" but Mount Ararat especially is situated almost in
the middle, not only of the great desert route of Africa and Asia, but
also of the range of inland waters from Gibraltar to the Baikal Sea-in
the centre, too, of the longest line that can be drawn through the
settlements of the Caucasian race and the Indo-Germanic tribes; and, as
the central point of the longest land-line of the ancient world, from
the Cape of Good Hope to the Behring Straits, it was the most suitable
spot in the world, for the tribes and nations that sprang from the sons
of Noah to descend from its heights and spread into every land (vid., K.
v. Raumer, Palst. pp. 456ff.).

[Genesis 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 8:6</span></span>

Forty days after the appearance of the mountain tops, Noah opened the
window of the ark and let a raven fly out (lit., the raven, i.e., the
particular raven known from that circumstance), for the purpose of
ascertaining the drying up of the waters. The raven went out and
returned until the earth was dry, but without being taken back into the
ark, as the mountain tops and the carcases floating upon the water
afforded both resting-places and food. After that, Noah let a dove fly
out three times, at intervals of seven days. It is not distinctly stated
that he sent it out the first time seven days after the raven, but this
is implied in the statement that he stayed yet other seven days before
sending it out the second time, and the same again before sending it the
third time ([Gen 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#010) and [Gen
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#012)). The dove, when first sent out,
"found no rest for the sole of its foot;" for a dove will only settle
upon such places and objects as are dry and clean. It returned to the
ark and let Noah take it in again ([Gen
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#008), [Gen
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#009)). The second time it returned in
the evening, having remained out longer than before, and brought a fresh
(טרף freshly plucked) olive-leaf in its mouth. Noah perceived from this
that the water must be almost gone, had "abated from off the earth,"
though the ground might not be perfectly dry, as the olive-tree will put
out leaves even under water. The fresh olive-leaf was the first sign of
the resurrection of the earth to new life after the flood, and the dove
with the olive-leaf a herald of salvation. The third time it did not
return; a sign that the waters had completely receded from the earth.
The fact that Noah waited 40 days before sending the raven, and after
that always left an interval of seven days, is not to be accounted for
on the supposition that these numbers were already regarded as
significant. The 40 days correspond to the 40 days during which the rain
fell and the waters rose; and Noah might assume that they would require
the same time to recede as to rise. The seven days constituted the week
established at the creation, and God had already conformed to it in
arranging their entrance into the ark ([Gen
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#004), [Gen
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#010)). The selection which Noah made
of the birds may also be explained quite simply from the difference in
their nature, with which Noah must have been acquainted; that is to say,
from the fact that the raven in seeking its food settles upon every
carcase that it sees, whereas the dove will only settle upon what is dry
and clean.

[Genesis 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 8:13</span></span>

Noah waited some time, and then, on the first day of the first month, in
the 601st year of his life, removed the covering from the ark, that he
might obtain a freer prospect over the earth. He could see that the
surface of the earth was dry; but it was not till the 27th day of the
second month, 57 days, therefore, after the removal of the roof, that
the earth was completely dried up. Then God commanded him to leave the
ark with his family and all the animals; and so far as the latter were
concerned, He renewed the blessing of the creation ([Gen
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#017) cf. [Gen
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#022)). As the flood commenced on the
17th of the second month of the 600th year of Noah's life, and ended on
the 27th of the second month of the 601st year, it lasted a year and ten
days; but whether a solar year of 360 of 365 days, or a lunar year of
352, is doubtful. The former is the more probable, as the first five
months are said to have consisted of 150 days, which suits the solar
year better than the lunar. The question cannot be decided with
certainty, because we neither know the number of days between the 17th
of the seventh month and the 1st of the tenth month, nor the interval
between the sending out of the dove and the 1st day of the first month
of the 601st year.

[Genesis 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 8:20</span></span>

The first thing which Noah did, was to build an altar for burnt
sacrifice, to thank the Lord for gracious protection, and pray for His
mercy in time to come. This altar - מזבּח, lit., a place for the
offering of slain animals, from זבח, like θυσιαστήριον from θύειν - is
the first altar mentioned in history. The sons of Adam had built no
altar for their offerings, because God was still present on the earth in
paradise, so that they could turn their offerings and hearts towards
that abode. But with the flood God had swept paradise away, withdrawn
the place of His presence, and set up His throne in heaven, from which
He would henceforth reveal Himself to man (cf. [Gen
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005), [Gen
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#007)). In future, therefore, the hearts
of the pious had to be turned towards heaven, and their offerings and
prayers needed to ascend on high if they were to reach the throne of
God. To give this direction to their offerings, heights or elevated
places were erected, from which they ascended towards heaven in fire.
From this the offerings received the name of עלת from עולה, the
ascending, not so much because the sacrificial animals ascended or were
raised upon the altar, as because they rose from the altar to haven (cf.
[Jdg 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040); [Jer
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#015); [Amo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#010)). Noah took his offerings from
every clean beast and every clean fowl - from those animals, therefore,
which were destined for man's food; probably the seventh of every kind,
which he had taken into the ark. "And Jehovah smelled the smell of
satisfaction," i.e., He graciously accepted the feelings of the offerer
which rose to Him in the odour of the sacrificial flame. In the
sacrificial flame the essence of the animal was resolved into vapour; so
that when man presented a sacrifice in his own stead, his inmost being,
his spirit, and his heart ascended to God in the vapour, and the
sacrifice brought the feeling of his heart before God. This feeling of
gratitude for gracious protection, and of desire for further
communications of grace, was well-pleasing to God. He "said to His
heart' (to, or in Himself; i.e., He resolved), "I will not again curse
the ground any more for man's sake, because the image (i.e., the thought
and desire) of man's heart is evil from his youth up (i.e., from the
very time when he begins to act with consciousness)." This hardly seems
an appropriate reason. As Luther says: "Hic inconstantiae videtur Deus
accusari posse. Supra puniturus hominem causam consilii dicit, quia
figmentum cordis humani malum est. Hic promissurus homini gratiam, quod
posthac tali ira uti nolit, eandem causam allegat." Both Luther and
Calvin express the same thought, though without really solving the
apparent discrepancy. It was not because the thoughts and desires of the
human heart are evil that God would not smite any more every living
thing, that is to say, would not exterminate it judicially; but because
they are evil from his youth up, because evil is innate in man, and for
that reason he needs the forbearance of God; and also (and here lies the
principal motive for the divine resolution) because in the offering of
the righteous Noah, not only were thanks presented for past protection,
and entreaty for further care, but the desire of man was expressed, to
remain in fellowship with God, and to procure the divine favour. "All
the days of the earth;" i.e., so long as the earth shall continue, the
regular alternation of day and night and of the seasons of the year, so
indispensable to the continuance of the human race, would never be
interrupted again.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 9](gen009)

</div>
