<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos012)  [Next](hos014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)

[Hosea 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 13:1</span></span>

Because Israel would not desist from its idolatry, and entirely forgot
the goodness of its God, He would destroy its might and glory ([Hos
13:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001)). Because it did not
acknowledge the Lord as its help, its throne would be annihilated along
with its capital; but this judgment would become to all that were
penitent a regeneration to newness of life. [Hos
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001). "When Ephraim spake, there was
terror; he exalted himself in Israel; then he offended through Baal, and
died. [Hos 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002). And now they continue
to sin, and make themselves molten images out of their silver, idols
according to their understanding: manufacture of artists is it all: they
say of them, Sacrificers of men: let them kiss calves." In order to show
how deeply Israel had fallen through its apostasy, the prophet points to
the great distinction which the tribe of Ephraim formerly enjoyed among
the tribes of Israel. The two clauses of [Hos
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#001) cannot be so connected together
as that נשׂא should be taken as a continuation of the infinitive דּבּר.
The emphatic הוּא is irreconcilable with this. We must rather take רתת
(ἁπ. λεγ., in Aramaean = רטט, [Jer
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#024), terror, tremor) as the apodosis
to kedabbēr 'Ephraim (when Ephraim spake), like שׂאת in [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007) : "As Ephraim spake there was
terror," i.e., men listened with fear and trembling (cf. [Job
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#021)). נשׂא is used intransitively,
as in [Nah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#005); [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010). Ephraim, i.e., the tribe of
Ephraim, "exalted itself in Israel," - not "it was distinguished among
its brethren" (Hitzig), but "it raised itself to the government." The
prophet has in his mind the attempts made by Ephraim to get the rule
among the tribes, which led eventually to the secession of the ten
tribes from the royal family of David, and the establishment of the
kingdom of Israel by the side of that of Judah. When Ephraim had secured
this, the object of its earnest endeavours, it offended through Baal;
i.e., not only through the introduction of the worship of Baal in the
time of Ahab ([Kg1 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031).), but even
through the establishment of the worship of the calves under Jeroboam
([Kg1 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028)), through which Jehovah
was turned into a Baal. ויּמת, used of the state or kingdom, is
equivalent to "was given up to destruction" (cf. [Amo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002)). The dying commenced with the
introduction of the unlawful worship (cf. [Kg1
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#030)). From this sin Ephraim (the
people of the ten tribes) did not desist: they still continue to sin,
and make themselves molten images, etc., contrary to the express
prohibition in [Lev 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#004) (cf. [Exo
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)). These words are not merely to
be understood as signifying, that they added other idolatrous images in
Gilgal and Beersheba to the golden calves ([Amo
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014)); but they also involve their
obstinate adherence to the idolatrous worship introduced by Jeroboam
(compare [Kg2 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#016)). בּתבוּדם from
תּבוּנה, with the feminine termination dropped on account of the suffix
(according to Ewald, 257, d; although in the note Ewald regards this
formation as questionable, and doubts the correctness of the reading):
"according to their understanding," i.e., their proficiency in art.

The meaning of the second hemistich, which is very difficult, depends
chiefly upon the view we take of זבחי אדם, viz., whether we render these
words "they who sacrifice men," as the lxx, the fathers, and many of the
rabbins and Christian expositors have done; or "the sacrificers of
(among) men," as Kimchi, Bochart, Ewald, and others do, after the
analogy of אביוני אדם in [Isa 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#019).
Apart from this, however, zōbhechē 'âdâm cannot possibly be taken as an
independent sentence, such as "they sacrifice men," or "human
sacrificers are they," unless with the lxx we change the participle זבחי
arbitrarily into the perfect זבחוּ. As the words read, they must be
connected with what follows or with what precedes. But if we connect
them with what follows, we fail to obtain any suitable thought, whether
we render it "human sacrificers (those who sacrifice men) kiss calves,"
or "the sacrificers among men kiss calves." The former is open to the
objection that human sacrifices were not offered to the calves (i.e., to
Jehovah, as worshipped under the symbol of a calf), but only to Moloch,
and that the worshippers of Moloch did not kiss calves. The latter, "men
who offer sacrifice kiss calves," might indeed be understood in this
sense, that the prophet intended thereby to denounce the great folly,
that men should worship animals; but this does not suit the preceding
words הם אמרים, and it is impossible to see in what sense they could be
employed. There is no other course left, therefore, than to connect
Zōbhechē 'âdâm with what precedes, though not in the way proposed by
Ewald, viz., "even to these do sacrificers of men say." This rendering
is open to the following objections: (1) that הם after להם would have to
be taken as an emphatic repetition of the pronoun, and we cannot find
any satisfactory ground for this; and, (2) what is still more important,
the fact that 'âmâr would be used absolutely, in the sense of "they
speak in prayer," which, even apart from the "prayer," cannot be
sustained by any other analogous example. These difficulties vanish if
we take Zōbhechē 'âdâm as an explanatory apposition to hēm: "of them
(the ‛ătsabbı̄m) they say, viz., the sacrificers from among men (i.e.,
men who sacrifice), Let them worship calves." By the apposition zōbhechē
'âdâm, and the fact that the object ‛ăgâlı̄m is placed first, so that it
stands in immediate contrast to 'âdâm, the absurdity of men kissing
calves, i.e., worshipping them with kisses (see at [Kg1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018)), is painted as it were before
the eye.

[Hosea 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 13:3</span></span>

They prepare for themselves swift destruction in consequence. [Hos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003). "Therefore will they be like the
morning cloud, and like the dew that passes early away, as chaff blows
away from the threshing-floor, and as smoke out of the window." Lâkhēn,
therefore, viz., because they would not let their irrational idolatry
go, they would quickly perish. On the figures of the morning cloud and
dew, see at [Hos 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004). The figure of
the chaff occurs more frequently (vid., [Isa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013); [Isa
41:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015); [Psa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004); [Psa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#005), etc.). יס'ער is used relatively:
which is stormed away, i.e., blown away from the threshing-floor by a
violent wind. The threshing-floors were situated upon eminences (compare
my Bibl. Archol. ii. p. 114). "Smoke out of the window," i.e., smoke
from the fire under a saucepan in the room, which passed out of the
window-lattice, as the houses were without chimneys (see [Psa
68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003)).

[Hosea 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 13:4</span></span>

"And yet I am Jehovah thy God from the land of Egypt hither; and thou
knowest no God beside me, and there is no helper beside me. [Hos
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#005). I knew thee in the desert, in
the land of burning heats." As in [Hos
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#010), a contrast is drawn here again
between the idolatry of the people and the uninterrupted
self-attestation of Jehovah to the faithless nation. From Egypt hither
Israel has known no other God than Jehovah, i.e., has found no other God
to be a helper and Saviour. Even in the desert He knew Israel, i.e.,
adopted it in love. ידע, to know, when applied to God, is an attestation
of His love and care (compare [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002); [Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003), etc.). The ἁπ. λεγ. תּלאוּבת,
from לאב, Arab. lâb, med. Vav, to thirst, signifies burning heat, in
which men famish with thirst (for the fact, compare [Deu
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)).

[Hosea 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 13:6</span></span>

But prosperity made Israel proud, so that it forgot its God. [Hos
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#006). "As they had their pasture, they
became full; they became full, and their heart was lifted up: therefore
have they forgotten me." This reproof is taken almost word for word from
[Deu 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#011). (cf. [Deu
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#020); [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015).). כּמרעיתם, answering to their
pasture, i.e., because they had such good pasture in the land given them
by the Lord. The very thing of which Moses warned the people in [Deu
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#011) has come to pass. Therefore are
the threats of the law against the rebellious fulfilled upon them.

[Hosea 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 13:7</span></span>

"And I became like a lion to them; as a leopard by the wayside do I lie
in wait. [Hos 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008). I fall upon them
as a bear robbed of its young, and tear in pieces the enclosure of their
heart, and eat them there like a lioness: the beast of the field will
tear them in pieces." The figure of the pasture which made Israel full
([Hos 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#006)) is founded upon the
comparison of Israel to a flock (cf. [Hos
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016)). The chastisement of the people
is therefore represented as the tearing in pieces and devouring of the
fattened flock by wild beasts. God appears as a lion, panther, etc.,
which fall upon them (cf. [Hos 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014)).
ואהי does not stand for the future, but is the preterite, giving the
consequence of forgetting God. The punishment has already begun, and
will still continue; we have therefore from אשׁוּר onwards imperfects or
futures. אשׁוּר, from שׁוּר, to look round, hence to lie in wait, as in
[Jer 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#026). It is not to be changed
into 'Asshur, as it is by the lxx and Vulgate. סגור לבּם, the enclosure
of their heart, i.e., their breast. Shâm (there) points back to
‛al-derekh (by the way).

[Hosea 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 13:9</span></span>

[Hos 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009) commences a new strophe, in
which the prophet once more discloses to the people the reason for their
corruption ([Hos 13:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009)); and after
pointing to the saving omnipotence of the Lord ([Hos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014)), holds up before them utter
destruction as the just punishment for their guilt ([Hos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015) and [Hos
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)). [Hos
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009). "O Israel, it hurls thee into
destruction, that thou (art) against me, thy help. [Hos
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#010). Where is thy king? that he may
help thee in all thy cities: and (where) they judges? of whom thou
saidst, Give me king and princes! [Hos
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#011). I give thee kings in my anger,
and take them away in my wrath." שׁחתך does not combine together the
verbs in [Hos 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008), as Hitzig
supposes; nor does [Hos 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009) give the
reason for what precedes, but shichethkhâ is explained by [Hos
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#010), from which we may see that a
new train of thought commences with [Hos
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#009). Shichēth does not mean to act
corruptly here, as in [Deu 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#005); [Deu
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012), and [Exo
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007), but to bring into corruption, to
ruin, as in [Gen 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#017); [Gen
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#015); [Num
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#015), etc. The sentence כּי בי וגו
cannot be explained in any other way than by supplying the pronoun אתּה,
as a subject taken from the suffix to שׁחתך (Marck, and nearly all the
modern commentators). "This throws thee into distress, that thou hast
resisted me, who am thy help." בעזרך: as in [Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026), except that ב is used in the
sense of against, as in [Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012);
[Sa2 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#017), etc. This opposition did
not take place, however, when all Israel demanded a king of Samuel ([Sa1
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#005)). For although this desire is
represented there ([Hos 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007)) as the
rejection of Jehovah, Hosea is speaking here simply of the Israel of the
ten tribes. The latter rebelled against Jehovah, when they fell away
from the house of David, and made Jeroboam their king, and with contempt
of Jehovah put their trust in the might of their kings of their own
choosing ([Kg1 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#016).). But these
kings could not afford them any true help. The question, "Where" ('ehı̄
only occurs here and twice in [Hos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014), for אי or איה, possibly simply
from a dialectical variation - vid. Ewald, 104, c - and is strengthened
by אפוא, as in [Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015)), "Where is
thy king, that he may help thee?" does not presuppose that Israel had no
king at all at that time, and that the kingdom was in a state of
anarchy, but simply that it had no king who could save it, when the foe,
the Assyrian, attacked it in all its cities. Before shōpheteykhâ (thy
judges) we must repeat 'ĕhı̄ (where). The shōphetı̄m, as the use of the
word sârı̄m (princes) in its stead in the following clause clearly shows,
are not simple judges, but royal counsellors and ministers, who managed
the affairs of the kingdom along with the king, and superintended the
administration of justice. The saying, "Give me a king and princes,"
reminds us very forcibly of the demand of the people in the time of
Samuel; but they really refer simply to the desire of the ten tribes for
a king of their own, which manifested itself in their dissatisfaction
with the rule of the house of David, and their consequent secession, and
to their persistence in this secession amidst all the subsequent changes
of the government. We cannot therefore take the imperfects אתּן and אקּח
in [Hos 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#011) as pure preterites,
i.e., we cannot understand them as referring simply to the choice of
Jeroboam as king, and to his death. The imperfects denote an action that
is repeated again and again, for which we should use the present, and
refer to all the kings that the kingdom of the ten tribes had received
and was receiving still, and to their removal. God in His wrath gives
the sinful nation kings and takes them away, in order to punish the
nation through its kings. This applies not merely to the kings who
followed one another so rapidly through conspiracy and murder, although
through these the kingdom was gradually broken up and its dissolution
accelerated, but to the rulers of the ten tribes as a whole. God gave
the tribes who were discontented with the theocratical government of
David and Solomon a king of their own, that He might punish them for
their resistance to His government, which came to light in the rebellion
against Rehoboam. He suspended the division of the kingdom not only over
Solomon, as a punishment for his idolatry, but also over the rebellious
ten tribes, who, when they separated themselves from the royal house to
which the promise had been given of everlasting duration, were also
separated from the divinely appointed worship and altar, and given up
into the power of their kings, who hurled one another from the throne;
and God took away this government from them to chastise them for their
sins, by giving them into the power of the heathen, and by driving them
away from His face. It is to this last thought, that what follows is
attached. The removal of the king in wrath would occur, because the sin
of Ephraim was reserved for punishment.

[Hosea 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 13:12</span></span>

"The guilt of Ephraim is bound together: his sin is preserved. [Hos
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#013). The pains of a travailing woman
come upon him: he is an unwise son; that he does not place himself at
the time in the breaking forth of children." [Hos
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#012) is a special application of [Deu
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034) to the ten tribes. Tsârūr, bound
up in a bundle, like a thing which you wish to take great care of
(compare [Job 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#017); [Sa1
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#029)). The same thing is applied in
tsâphūn, hidden, carefully preserved, so as not to be lost ([Job
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#019)). "All their sins are preserved
for punishment" (Chald.). Therefore will pains overtake Ephraim like a
woman in labour. The pains of childbirth are not merely a figurative
representation of violent agony, but of the sufferings and calamities
connected with the refining judgments of God, by which new life was to
be born, and a complete transformation of all things effected (cf. [Mic
4:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009); [Isa
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008); [Isa
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#017); [Mat
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008)). He cannot be spared these
pains, for he is a foolish son (cf. [Deu
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006), [Deu
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#028).). But in what respect? This is
explained in the words כּי עת וגו, "for at the time," or as עת cannot
stand for לעת, more correctly "when it is time," he does not place
himself in, i.e., does not enter, the opening of the womb. Mishbar bânı̄m
is to be explained as in [Kg2 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#003) and
[Isa 37:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#003); and עמד, c. ב as in [Eze
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#030). If the child does not come to
the opening at the right time, the birth is retarded, and the life of
both mother and child endangered. The mother and child are one person
here. And this explains the transition from the pains of the mother to
the behaviour of the child at the time of birth. Ephraim is an unwise
son, inasmuch as even under the chastening judgment he still delays his
conversion, and will not let himself be new-born, like a child, that at
the time of the labour-pains will not enter the opening of the womb and
so come to the birth.

[Hosea 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 13:14</span></span>

But in order to preserve believers from despair, the Lord announces in
[Hos 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014) that He will nevertheless
redeem His people from the power of death. [Hos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014). "Out of the hand of hell will I
redeem them; from death will I set them free! Where are thy plagues, O
death? where thy destruction, O hell! Repentance is hidden from mine
eyes." The fact that this verse contains a promise, and not a threat,
would hardly have been overlooked by so many commentators, if they had
not been led, out of regard to [Hos
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#013), [Hos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015), to put force upon the words,
and either take the first clauses as interrogative, "Should I ...
redeem?" (Calvin and others), or as conditional, "I would redeem them,"
with "si resipiscerent" (supplied (Kimchi, Sal. b. Mel. Ros., etc.). But
apart from the fact that the words supplied are perfectly arbitrary,
with nothing at all to indicate them, both of these explanations are
precluded by the sentences which follow: for the questions, "Where are
thy plagues, O death?" etc., are obviously meant to affirm the conquest
or destruction of hell and death. And this argument retains its force
even if we take אהי as an optative from היה, without regard to [Hos
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#010), since the thought, "I should
like to be thy plague, O death," presupposes that deliverance from the
power of death is affirmed in what comes before. But, on account of the
style of address, we cannot take אהי even as an interrogative, in the
sense of "Should I be," etc. And what would be the object of this
gradation of thought, if the redemption from death were only
hypothetical, or were represented as altogether questionable? If we take
the words as they stand, therefore, it is evident that they affirm
something more than deliverance when life is in danger, or preservation
from death. To redeem or ransom from the hand (or power) of hell, i.e.,
of the under world, the realm of death, is equivalent to depriving hell
of its prey, not only by not suffering the living to die, but by
bringing back to life those who have fallen victims to hell, i.e., to
the region of the dead. The cessation or annihilation of death is
expressed still more forcibly in the triumphant words: "Where are thy
plagues (pestilences), O death? where thy destruction, O hell?" of which
Theodoret has aptly observed, παιανίζειν κατὰ θανάτου κελεύει. דּבריך is
an intensive plural of debher, plague, pestilence, and is to be
explained in accordance with [Psa
91:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006), where we also find the synonym
קטב in the form קטב, pestilence or destruction. The Apostle Paul has
therefore very properly quoted these words in [Co1
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055), in combination with the
declaration in [Isa 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008), "Death is
swallowed up in victory," to confirm the truth, that at the resurrection
of the last day, death will be annihilated, and that which is
corruptible changed into immortality. We must not restrict the substance
of this promise, however, to the ultimate issue of the redemption, in
which it will receive its complete fulfilment. The suffixes attached to
'ephdēm and 'eg'âlēm point to Israel of the ten tribes, like the verbal
suffixes in [Isa 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008). Consequently
the promised redemption from death must stand in intimate connection
with the threatened destruction of the kingdom of Israel. Moreover, the
idea of the resurrection of the dead was by no means so clearly
comprehended in Israel at that time, as that the prophet could point
believers to it as a ground of consolation when the kingdom was
destroyed. The only meaning that the promise had for the Israelites of
the prophet's day, was that the Lord possessed the power even to redeem
from death, and raise Israel from destruction into newness of life; just
as Ezekiel (ch. 37) depicts the restoration of Israel as the giving of
life to the dry bones that lay scattered about the field. The full and
deeper meaning of these words was but gradually unfolded to believers
under the Old Testament, and only attained complete and absolute
certainty for all believers through the actual resurrection of Christ.
But in order to anticipate all doubt as to this exceedingly great
promise, the Lord adds, "repentance is hidden from mine eyes," i.e., my
purpose of salvation will be irrevocably accomplished. The ̔απ. λεγ.
nōcham does not mean "resentment" (Ewald), but, as a derivative of
nicham, simply consolation or repentance. The former, which the
Septuagint adopts, does not suit the context, which the latter alone
does. The words are to be interpreted in accordance with [Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036) and [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), where the oath of God is still
further strengthened by the words ולא ינּחם, "and will not repent;" and
לא ינחם corresponds to אם אכזּב in [Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036) (Marck and Krabbe, Quaestion. de
Hos. vatic. spec. p. 47). Compare [Sa1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#029) and [Num
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019).

[Hosea 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hos 13:15</span></span>

"For he will bear fruit among brethren. East wind will come, a wind of
Jehovah, rising up from the desert; and his fountain will dry up, and
his spring become dried. He plunders the treasuries of all splendid
vessels." The connection between the first clause and the previous verse
has been correctly pointed out by Marck. "[Hos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015)," he says, "adduces a reason to
prove that the promised grace of redemption would certainly stand firm."
כּי cannot be either a particle of time or of condition here (when, or
if); for neither of them yields a suitable thought, since Ephraim
neither was at that time, nor could become, fruit-bearing among
brethren. Ewald's hypothetical view, "Should Ephraim be a fruitful
child," cannot be grammatically sustained, since kı̄ is only used in
cases where a circumstance is assumed to be real. For one that is merely
supposed to be possible, אם is required, as the interchange of אם and
כּי, in [Num 5:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#019), for example,
clearly shows. The meaning of יפריא is placed beyond all doubt by the
evident play upon the name Ephraim; and this also explains the writing
with א instead of ה fo d, as well as the idea of the sentence itself:
Ephraim will bear fruit among the brethren, i.e., the other tribes, as
its name, double-fruitfulness, affirms (see at [Gen
41:52](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#052)). This thought, through which
the redemption from death set before Israel is confirmed, is founded not
only upon the assumption that the name must become a truth, but chiefly
upon the blessing which the patriarch promised to the tribe of Ephraim
on the ground of its name, both in [Gen
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#004), [Gen
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#020), and [Gen
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022). Because Ephraim possessed such
a pledge of blessing in its very name, the Lord would not let it be
overwhelmed for ever in the tempest that was bursting upon it. The same
thing applies to the name Ephraim as to the name Israel, with which it
is used as synonymous; and what is true of all the promises of God is
true of this announcement also, viz., that they are only fulfilled in
the case of those who adhere to the conditions under which they were
given. Of Ephraim, those only will bear fruit which abides to
everlasting life, who walk as true champions for God in the footsteps of
faith and of their forefathers, wrestling for the blessing of the
promises. On the other hand, upon the Ephraim that has turned into
Canaan ([Hos 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008)) an east wind will
come, a tempest bursting from the desert (see at [Hos
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#002)), and that a stormy wind raised
by Jehovah, which will dry up his spring, i.e., destroy not only the
fruitful land with which God has blessed it ([Deu
33:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013)), but all the sources of its
power and stability. Like the promise in [Hos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014), the threatening of the
judgment, to which the kingdom of Israel is to succumb, is introduced
quite abruptly with the word יבוא. The figurative style of address then
passes in the last clause into a literal threat. הוּא, he, the hostile
conqueror, sent as a tempestuous wind by the Lord, viz., the Assyrian,
will plunder the treasure of all costly vessels, i.e., all the treasures
and valuables of the kingdom. On kelı̄ chemdâh compare [Nah
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010) and [Ch2
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#027). We understand by it chiefly the
treasures of the capital, to which a serious catastrophe is more
especially predicted in the next verse ([Hos
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)), which also belongs to this
strophe, on account of its rebellion against God.

[Hosea 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hos 13:16</span></span>

(Heb. Bibl. [Hos 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)). "Samaria will
atone, because it has rebelled against its God: they will fall by the
sword; their children will be dashed to pieces, and its women with child
ripped up." אשׁם, to atone, to bear the guilt, i.e., the punishment. It
is not equivalent to shâmēm in [Eze
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#006), although, as a matter of fact,
the expiation consisted in the conquest and devastation of Samaria by
Shalmanezer. The subject to yippelū (will fall) is the inhabitants of
Samaria. The suffix to הריּותיו (its women, etc.) refers to the nation.
The form הריּה is one derived from הרה, for הרה (Ewald, 189, c). The
construction with the masculine verb יבקּעוּ, in the place of the
feminine, is an anomaly, which may be explained from the fact that
feminine formations from the plur. imperf. are generally very rare (see
Ewald, 191, b). For the fact itself, compare [Hos
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014); [Kg2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#012); [Kg2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016); [Amo
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 14](hos014)

</div>
