<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos013)  [Next](joe000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

[Hosea 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 14:1</span></span>

After the prophet has set before the sinful nation in various ways its
own guilt, and the punishment that awaits it, viz., the destruction of
the kingdom, he concludes his addresses with a call to thorough
conversion to the Lord, and the promise that the Lord will bestow His
grace once more upon those who turn to Him, and will bless them
abundantly ([Hos 14:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001)). [Hos
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001). (Heb. Bib. v. 2). "Return, O
Israel, to Jehovah thy God; for thou hast stumbled through thy guilt.
[Hos 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#002). Take with you words, and
turn to Jehovah; say ye to Him, Forgive all guilt, and accept what is
good, that we may offer our lips as bullocks. [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003). Asshur will not help us: we will
not ride upon horses, nor say 'Our God' any more to the manufacture of
our own hands; for with Thee the orphan findeth compassion." There is no
salvation for fallen man without return to God. It is therefore with a
call to return to the Lord their God, that the prophet opens the
announcement of the salvation with which the Lord will bless His people,
whom He has brought to reflection by means of the judgment (cf. [Deu
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#030); [Deu
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001).). שׁוּב עד יי, to return, to be
converted to the Lord, denotes complete conversion; שׁוּב אל is,
strictly speaking, simply to turn towards God, to direct heart and mind
towards Him. By kâshaltâ sin is represented as a false step, which still
leaves it possible to return; so that in a call to conversion it is very
appropriately chosen. But if the conversion is to be of the right kind,
it must begin with a prayer for the forgiveness of sin, and attest
itself by the renunciation of earthly help and simple trust in the mercy
of God. Israel is to draw near to God in this state of mind. "Take with
you words," i.e., do not appear before the Lord empty ([Exo
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#015); [Exo
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#020)); but for this ye do not require
outward sacrifices, but simply words, sc. those of confession of your
guilt, as the Chaldee has correctly explained it. The correctness of
this explanation is evident from the confession of sin which follows,
with which they are to come before God. In כּל־תּשּׂא עון, the position
of col at the head of the sentence may be accounted for from the
emphasis that rests upon it, and the separation of ‛âvōn, from the fact
that col was beginning to acquire more of the force of an adjective,
like our all (thus [Sa2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#009); [Job
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#003) : cf. Ewald, 289, a; Ges. 114, 3,
Anm. 1). Qach tōbh means neither "accept goodness," i.e., let goodness
be shown thee (Hitzig), nor "take it as good," sc. that we pray
(Grotius, Ros.); but in the closest connection with what proceeds:
Accept the only good thing that we are able to bring, viz., the
sacrifices of our lips. Jerome has given the correct interpretation,
viz.: "For unless Thou hadst borne away our evil things, we could not
possibly have the good thing which we offer Thee;" according to that
which is written elsewhere ([Psa
37:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#027)), "Turn from evil, and do good."
שׂפתינוּ ... וּנשׁלּמה, literally, "we will repay (pay) as young oxen
our lips," i.e., present the prayers of our lips as thank-offerings. The
expression is to be explained from the fact that shillēm, to wipe off
what is owing, to pay, is a technical term, applied to the sacrifice
offered in fulfilment of a vow ([Deu
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#022); [Psa
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026); [Psa
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014), etc.), and that pârı̄m, young
oxen, were the best animals for thank-offerings ([Exo
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#005)). As such thank-offerings, i.e.,
in the place of the best animal sacrifices, they would offer their lips,
i.e., their prayers, to God (cf. [Psa
51:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017); [Psa
69:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#031)). In the Sept. rendering,
ἀποδώσομεν καρπὸν χείλεων, to which there is an allusion in [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015), פּרים has been confounded with
פּרי, as Jerome has already observed. but turning to God requires
renunciation of the world, of its power, and of all idolatry. Rebellious
Israel placed its reliance upon Assyria and Egypt ([Hos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013); [Hos
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#011); [Hos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#009)). It will do this no longer. The
riding upon horses refers partly to the military force of Egypt ([Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001)), and partly to their own ([Hos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007); [Isa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#007)). For the expression, "neither
will we say to the work of our hands," compare [Isa
42:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#017); [Isa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017). אשׁר בּך, not "Thou with whom,"
but "for with Thee" ('ăsher as in [Deu
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024)). The thought, "with Thee the
orphan findeth compassion," as God promises in His word ([Exo
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022); [Deu
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#018)), serves not only as a reason
for the resolution no longer to call the manufacture of their own hands
God, but generally for the whole of the penitential prayer, which they
are encouraged to offer by the compassionate nature of God. In response
to such a penitential prayer, the Lord will heal all His people's
wounds, and bestow upon them once more the fulness of the blessings of
His grace. The prophet announces this in [Isa
44:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#004) as the answer from the Lord.

[Hosea 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 14:4</span></span>

"I will heal their apostasy, will love them freely: for my wrath has
turned away from it. [Hos 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005). I will
be like dew for Israel: it shall blossom like the lily, and strike its
roots like Lebanon. [Hos 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#006). Its
shoots shall go forth, and its splendour shall become like the
olive-tree, and its smell like Lebanon. [Hos
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#007). They that dwell in its shadow
shall give life to corn again; and shall blossom like the vine: whose
glory is like the wine of Lebanon. [Hos
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008). Ephraim: What have I further
with the idols? I hear, and look upon him: I, like a bursting cypress,
in me is thy fruit found." The Lord promises first of all to heal their
apostasy, i.e., all the injuries which have been inflicted by their
apostasy from Him, and to love them with perfect spontaneity (nedâbhâh
an adverbial accusative, promta animi voluntate), since His anger, which
was kindled on account of its idolatry, had now turned away from it
(mimmennū, i.e., from Israel). The reading mimmennı̄ (from me), which the
Babylonian Codices have after the Masora, appears to have originated in
a misunderstanding of [Jer 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#035). This
love of the Lord will manifest itself in abundant blessing. Jehovah will
be to Israel a refreshing, enlivening dew (cf. [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)), through which it will blossom
splendidly, strike deep roots, and spread its shoots far and wide. "Like
the lily:" the fragrant white lily, which is very common in Palestine,
and grows without cultivation, and "which is unsurpassed in its
fecundity, often producing fifty bulbs from a single root" (Pliny h. n.
xxi. 5). "Strike roots like Lebanon," i.e., not merely the deeply rooted
forest of Lebanon, but the mountain itself, as one of the "foundations
of the earth" ([Mic 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#002)). The deeper
the roots, the more the branches spread and cover themselves with
splendid green foliage, like the evergreen and fruitful olive-tree ([Jer
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#016); Ps. 52:10). The smell is like
Lebanon, which is rendered fragrant by its cedars and spices ([Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011)). The meaning of the several
features in the picture has been well explained by Rosenmller thus: "The
rooting indicates stability: the spreading of the branches, propagation
and the multitude of inhabitants; the splendour of the olive, beauty and
glory, and that constant and lasting; the fragrance, hilarity and
loveliness." In [Hos 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#007) a somewhat
different turn is given to the figure. The comparison of the growth and
flourishing of Israel to the lily and to a tree, that strikes deep roots
and spreads its green branches far and wide, passes imperceptibly into
the idea that Israel is itself the tree beneath whose shade the members
of the nation flourish with freshness and vigour. ישׁוּבוּ is to be
connected adverbially with יהיּוּ. Those who sit beneath the shade of
Israel, the tree that is bursting into leaf, will revive corn, i.e.,
cause it to return to life, or produce it for nourishment, satiety, and
strengthening. Yea, they themselves will sprout like the vine, whose
remembrance is, i.e., which has a renown, like the wine of Lebanon,
which has been celebrated from time immemorial (cf. Plin. h. n. xiv. 7;
Oedmann, Verbm. Sammlung aus der Naturkunde, ii. p. 193; and Rosenmller,
Bibl. Althk. iv. 1, p. 217). The divine promise closes in [Hos
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009) with an appeal to Israel to
renounce idols altogether, and hold fast by the Lord alone as the source
of its life. Ephraim is a vocative, and is followed immediately by what
the Lord has to say to Ephraim, so that we may supply memento in
thought. מה־לּי עוד לע, what have I yet to do with idols? (for this
phrase, compare [Jer 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018)); that is to
say, not "I have now to contend with thee on account of the idols
(Schmieder), nor "do not place them by my side any more" (Ros.); but, "I
will have nothing more to do with idols," which also implies that
Ephraim is to have nothing more to do with them. To this there is
appended a notice of what God has done and will do for Israel, to which
greater prominence is given by the emphatic אני: I, I hearken (‛ânı̄thı̄ a
prophetic perfect), and look upon him. שׁוּר, to look about for a
person, to be anxious about him, or care for him, as in [Job
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015). The suffix refers to Ephraim.
In the last clause, God compares Himself to a cypress becoming green,
not only to denote the shelter which He will afford to the people, but
as the true tree of life, on which the nation finds its fruits - a fruit
which nourishes and invigorates the spiritual life of the nation. The
salvation which this promise sets before the people when they shall
return to the Lord, is indeed depicted, according to the circumstances
and peculiar views prevailing under the Old Testament, as earthly growth
and prosperity; but its real nature is such, that it will receive a
spiritual fulfilment in those Israelites alone who are brought to belief
in Jesus Christ.

[Hosea 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 14:9</span></span>

[Hos 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#009) (10) contains the epilogue
to the whole book. "Who is wise, that he may understand this?
understanding, that he may discern it? For the ways of Jehovah are
straight, and the righteous walk therein: but the rebellious stumble in
them." The pronoun אלּה and the suffix to ידעם refer to everything that
the prophet has laid before the people in his book for warning, for
reproof, for correction, for chastening in righteousness. He concludes
by summing up the whole substance of his teaching in the one general
sentence, which points back to [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004) : The ways of the Lord are
straight. "The ways of Jehovah" (darkhē Yehōvâh) are the ways taken by
God in the guidance and government of men; not only the ways which He
prescribes for them, but also His guidance of them. These ways lead some
to life and others to death, according to the different attitudes which
men assume towards God, as Moses announced to all the Israelites that
they would ([Deu 30:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)), and as the
Apostle Paul assured the church at Corinth that the gospel of Jesus also
would ([Co1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Introduction](joe000)

</div>
