<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos004)  [Next](hos006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001)

[Hosea 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 5:1</span></span>

With the words "Hear ye this," the reproof of the sins of Israel makes a
new start, and is specially addressed to the priests and the king's
house, i.e., the king and his court, to announce to the leaders of the
nation the punishment that will follow their apostasy from God and their
idolatry, by which they have plunged the people and the kingdom headlong
into destruction. [Hos 5:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001) form the
first strophe. [Hos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001). "Hear ye
this, ye priests; and give heed thereto, O house of Israel; and observe
it, O house of the king! for the judgment applies to you; for ye have
become a snare at Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor." By the word
"this," which points back to [Hos 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#004),
the prophecy that follows is attached to the preceding one. Beside the
priests and the king's house, i.e., the royal family, in which the
counsellors and adjutants surrounding the king are probably included,
the house of Israel, that is to say, the people of the ten tribes
regarded as a family, is summoned to hear, because what was about to be
announced applied to the people and kingdom as a whole. There is nothing
to warrant our understanding by the "house of Israel," the heads of the
nation or elders. Lâkjem hammishpât does not mean, It rests with you to
know or to defend the right; nor, "Ye ought to hear the reproof," as
Hitzig explains it, for mishpât in this connection signifies neither
"the maintenance of justice" nor "a reproof," but the judgment about to
be executed by God, τὸ κρίμα (lxx). The thought is this, The judgment
will fall upon you; and lâkhem refers chiefly to the priests and the
king's house, as the explanatory clause which follows clearly shows. It
is impossible to determine with certainty what king's house is intended.
Probably that of Zechariah or Menahem; possibly both, since Hosea
prophesied in both reigns, and merely gives the quintessence of his
prophetical addresses in his book. Going to Asshur refers rather to
Menahem than to Zechariah (comp. [Kg2
15:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019)). In the figures employed,
the bird-trap (pach) and the net spread for catching birds, it can only
be the rulers of the nation who are represented as a trap and net, and
the birds must denote the people generally who are enticed into the net
of destruction and caught (cf. [Hos
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#008)).

(Note: Jerome has given a very good explanation of the figure: "I have
appointed you as watchmen among the people, and set you in the highest
place of honour, that ye might govern the erring people; but ye have
become a trap, and are to be called sportsmen rather than watchmen.")

Mizpah, as a parallel to Tabor, can only be the lofty Mizpah of Gilead
([Jdg 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#017); [Jdg
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029)) or Ramah-Mizpah, which probably
stood upon the site of the modern es-Salt (see at [Deu
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043)); so that, whilst Tabor
represents the land on this side of the Jordan, Mizpah, which resembled
it in situation, is chosen to represent the land to the east of the
river.

(Note: As Tabor, for instance, rises up as a solitary conical hill (see
at [Jdg 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006)), so es-Salt is built
about the sides of a round steep hill, which rises up in a narrow rocky
valley, and upon the summit of which there stands a strong fortification
(see Seetzen in Burckhardt's Reisen in Syrien, p. 1061).)

Both places were probably noted as peculiarly adapted for bird-catching,
since Tabor is still thickly wooded. The supposition that they had been
used as places of sacrifice in connection with idolatrous worship,
cannot be inferred from the verse before us, nor is it rendered probable
by other passages.

[Hosea 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 5:2</span></span>

This accusation is still further vindicated in [Hos
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#002)., by a fuller exposure of the
moral corruption of the nation. [Hos
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#002). "And excesses they have spread
out deeply; but I am a chastisement to them all." The meaning of the
first half of the verse, which is very difficult, and has been very
differently interpreted by both ancient and modern expositors, has been
brought out best by Delitzsch (Com. on [Psa
101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)), who renders it, "they
understand from the very foundation how to spread out transgressions."
For the word שׂטים the meaning transgressions is well established by the
use of סטים in [Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003), where
Hengstenberg, Hupfeld, and Delitzsch all agree that this is the proper
rendering (see Ewald's philological defence of it at 146, e). In the
psalm referred to, however, the expression עשׂה סטים also shows that
shachătâh is the inf. piel, and sētı̄m the accusative of the object. And
it follows from this that shachătâh neither means to slaughter or
slaughter sacrifices, nor can be used for שׁחתה in the sense of acting
injuriously, but that it is to be interpreted according to the shâchūth
in [Kg1 10:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#016), in the sense of
stretching, stretching out; so that there is no necessity to take שׁחט
in the sense of שׁטח, as Delitzsch does, though the use of עלוה for עולה
in [Hos 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#009) may no doubt be adduced
in its support. שׂטים, from שׂטה (to turn aside, [Num
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#012), [Num
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#019)), are literally digressions or
excesses, answering to the hiznâh in [Hos
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#003), the leading sin of Israel. "They
have deepened to stretch out excesses," i.e., they have gone to great
lengths, or are deeply sunken in excesses, - a thought quite in harmony
with the context, to which the threat is appended. "I (Jehovah) am a
chastisement to them all, to the rulers as well as to the people;" i.e.,
I will punish them all (cf. [Hos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012)), because their idolatrous
conduct is well known to me. The way is thus prepared for the two
following verses.

[Hosea 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 5:3</span></span>

"I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me: for now, O Ephraim, thou
hast committed whoredom; Israel has defiled itself. [Hos
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#004). Their works do not allow to
return to their God, for the spirit of whoredom is in them, and they
know not Jehovah." By עתּה, the whoredom of Ephraim is designated as in
fact lying before them, and therefore undeniable; but not, as Hitzig
supposes, an act which has taken place once for all, viz., the choice of
a king, by which the severance of the kingdoms and the previous idolatry
had been sanctioned afresh. נטמא, defiled by whoredom, i.e., idolatry.
Their works do not allow them to return to their God, because the works
are merely an emanation of the character and state of the heart, and in
their hearts the demon of whoredom has its seat (cf. [Hos
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#012)), and the knowledge of the Lord
is wanting; that is to say, the demoniacal power of idolatry has taken
complete possession of the heart, and stifled the knowledge of the true
God. The rendering, "they do not direct their actions to this," is
incorrect, and cannot be sustained by an appeal to the use of נתן לב in
[Jdg 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001) and [Sa1
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#008)., or to [Jdg
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#028).

[Hosea 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 5:5</span></span>

"And the pride of Ephraim will testify against its face, and Israel and
Ephraim will stumble in their guilt; Judah has also stumbled with them."
As the meaning "to answer," to bear witness against a person, is well
established in the case of ענה ב (cf. [Num
35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030); [Deu
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#018), and [Isa
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009)), and ענה בפנים also occurs in
[Job 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008) in this sense, we must
retain the same meaning here, as Jerome and others have done. And there
is the more reason for this, because the explanation based upon the lxx,
καὶ ταπεινωθήσεται ἡ ὕβρις, "the haughtiness of Israel will be humbled,"
can hardly be reconciled with בפניו. "The pride of Israel," moreover, is
not the haughtiness of Israel, but that of which Israel is proud, or
rather the glory of Israel. We might understand by this the flourishing
condition of the kingdom, after [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008); but it would be only by its decay
that this would bear witness against the sin of Israel, so that "the
glory of Israel" would stand for "the decay of that glory," which would
be extremely improbable. We must therefore explain "the glory of Israel"
here and in [Hos 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#010) in accordance
with [Amo 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#007), i.e., we must
understand it as referring to Jehovah, who is Israel's eminence and
glory; in which case we obtain the following very appropriate thought:
They know not Jehovah, they do not concern themselves about Him;
therefore He Himself will bear witness by judgments, by the destruction
of their false glory (cf. [Hos
2:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#010)), against the face of Israel,
i.e., bear witness to their face. This thought occurs without ambiguity
in [Hos 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#010). Israel will stumble in
its sin, i.e., will fall and perish (as in [Hos
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#005)). Judah also falls with Israel,
because it has participated in Israel's sin ([Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015)).

[Hosea 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 5:6</span></span>

Israel, moreover, will not be able to avert the threatening judgment by
sacrifices. Jehovah will withdraw from the faithless generation, and
visit it with His judgments. This is the train of thought in the next
strophe ([Hos 5:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#006)). [Hos
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#006). "They will go with their sheep
and their oxen to seek Jehovah, and will not find Him: He has withdrawn
Himself from them. [Hos 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007). They
acted treacherously against Jehovah, for they have born strange
children: now will the new moon devour them with their fields." The
offering of sacrifices will be no help to them, because God has
withdrawn Himself from them, and does not hear their prayers; for God
has no pleasure in sacrifices which are offered in an impenitent state
of mind (cf. [Hos 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006); [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011).; [Jer
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#021).; [Psa
50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007), [Psa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#008).). The reason for this is given
in [Hos 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007). Bâgad, to act
faithlessly, which is frequently applied to the infidelity of a wife
towards her husband (e.g., [Jer 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020);
[Mal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014); cf. [Exo
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)), points to the conjugal relation
in which Israel stood to Jehovah. Hence the figure which follows.
"Strange children" are such as do not belong to the home ([Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005)), i.e., such as have not sprung
from the conjugal union. In actual fact, the expression is equivalent to
בּני זנוּנים in [Hos 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002); [Hos
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#004), though zâr does not expressly
mean "adulterous." Israel ought to have begotten children of God in the
maintenance of the covenant with the Lord; but in its apostasy from God
it had begotten an adulterous generation, children whom the Lord could
not acknowledge as His own. "The new moon will devour them," viz., those
who act so faithlessly. the meaning is not, "they will be destroyed on
the next new moon;" but the new moon, as the festal season, on which
sacrifices were offered ([Sa1 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#006),
[Sa1 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#029); [Isa
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013)), stands here for the
sacrifices themselves that were offered upon it. The meaning is this:
your sacrificial feast, your hypocritical worship, so far from bringing
you salvation, will rather prove your sin. חלקיהם are not sacrificial
portions, but the hereditary portions of Israel, the portions of land
that fell to the different families and households, and from the produce
of which they offered sacrifices to the Lord.

(Note: It is very evident from this verse, that the feasts and the
worship prescribed in the Mosaic law were observed in the kingdom of the
ten tribes, at the places of worship in Bethel and Dan.)

[Hosea 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 5:8</span></span>

The prophet sees in spirit the judgment already falling upon the
rebellious nation, and therefore addresses the following appeal to the
people. [Hos 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008). "Blow ye the horn at
Gibeah, the trumpet at Ramah! Raise the cry at Bethaven, Behind thee,
Benjamin!" The blowing of the shōphâr, a far-sounding horn, or of the
trumpet

(Note: "The sophar was a shepherd's horn, and was made of a carved horn;
the tuba (chătsōtserâh) was made of brass or silver, and sounded either
in the time of war or at festivals." - Jerome.)

(chătsōtserâh), was a signal by which the invasion of foes ([Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001); [Jer
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005); [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001)) and other calamities ([Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), cf. [Amo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#006)) were announced, to give the
inhabitants warning of the danger that threatened them. The words
therefore imply that foes had invaded the land. Gibeah (of Saul; see at
[Jos 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028)) and Ramah (of Samuel; see
at [Jos 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025)) were two elevated
places on the northern boundary of the tribe of Benjamin, which were
well adapted for signals, on account of their lofty situation. The
introduction of these particular towns, which did not belong to the
tribe of Israel, but to that of Judah, is intended to intimate that the
enemy has already conquered the kingdom of the ten tribes, and has
advanced to the border of that of Judah. הריע, to make a noise, is to be
understood here as relating to the alarm given by the war-signals
already mentioned, as in [Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), cf.
[Num 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#009). Bethaven is Bethel
(Beitin), as in [Hos 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015), the seat of
the idolatrous worship of the calves; and בּית is to be taken in the
sense of בּבית (according to Ges. 118, 1). The difficult words, "behind
thee, Benjamin," cannot indicate the situation or attitude of Benjamin,
in relation to Bethel or the kingdom of Israel, or show that "the
invasion is to be expected to start from Benjamin," as Simson supposes.
For the latter is no more appropriate in this train of thought than a
merely geographical or historical notice. The words are taken from the
ancient war-song of Deborah ([Jdg
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014)), but in a different sense from
that in which they are used there. There they mean that Benjamin marched
behind Ephraim, or joined it in attacking the foe; here, on the
contrary, they mean that the foe is coming behind Benjamin - that the
judgment announced has already broken out in the rear of Benjamin. There
is no necessity to supply "the enemy rises" behind thee, O Benjamin, as
Jerome proposes, or "the sword rages," as Hitzig suggests; but what
comes behind Benjamin is implied in the words, "Blow ye the horn," etc.
What these signals announce is coming after Benjamin; there is no
necessity, therefore, to supply anything more than "it is," or "it
comes." The prophet, for example, not only announces in [Hos
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008) that enemies will invade Israel,
but that the hosts by which God will punish His rebellious people have
already overflowed the kingdom of Israel, and are now standing upon the
border of Judah, to punish this kingdom also for its sins. This is
evident from [Hos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#009), [Hos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#010), which contain the practical
explanation of [Hos 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008).

[Hosea 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 5:9</span></span>

"Ephraim will become a desert in the day of punishment: over the tribes
of Israel have I proclaimed that which lasts. [Hos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#010). The princes of Judah have become
like boundary-movers; upon them I pour out my wrath like water." The
kingdom of Israel will entirely succumb to the punishment. It will
become a desert - will be laid waste not only for a time, but
permanently. The punishment with which it is threatened will be נאמנה.
This word is to be interpreted as in [Deu
28:59](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#059), where it is applied to lasting
plagues, with which God will chastise the obstinate apostasy of His
people. By the perfect הודעתּי, what is here proclaimed is represented
as a completed event, which will not be altered. Beshibhtē, not in or
among the tribes, but according to ענה ב, in [Deu
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#005), against or over the tribes
(Hitzig). Judah also will not escape the punishment of its sins. The
unusual expression massı̄gē gebhūl is formed after, and to be explained
from [Deu 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014), "Thou shalt not
remove thy neighbour's landmark;" or [Deu
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017), "Cursed be he that removeth his
neighbour's landmark." The princes of Judah have become
boundary-removers, not by hostile invasions of the kingdom of Israel
(Simson); for the boundary-line between Israel and Judah was not so
appointed by God, that a violation of it on the part of the princes of
Judah could be reckoned a grievous crime, but by removing the boundaries
of right which had been determined by God, viz., according to [Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015), by participating in the guilt of
Ephraim, i.e., by idolatry, and therefore by the fact that they had
removed the boundary between Jehovah and Baal, that is to say, between
the one true God and idols. "If he who removes his neighbour's boundary
is cursed, how much more he who removes the border of his God!"
(Hengstenberg). Upon such men the wrath of God would fall in its fullest
measure. כּמּים, like a stream of water, so plentifully. For the figure,
compare [Psa 69:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#025); [Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006); [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025). Severe judgments are thus
announced to Judah, viz., those of which the Assyrians under
Tiglath-pileser and Sennacherib were the instruments; but no ruin or
lasting devastation is predicted, as was the case with the kingdom of
Israel, which was destroyed by the Assyrians.

[Hosea 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 5:11</span></span>

From these judgments Israel and Judah will not be set free, until in
their distress they seek their God. This thought is expanded in the next
strophe ([Hos 5:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011)). [Hos
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011). "Ephraim is oppressed, broken in
pieces by the judgment; for it has wished, has gone according to
statute." By the participles ‛âshūq and râtsūts, the calamity is
represented as a lasting condition, which the prophet saw in the spirit
as having already begun. The two words are connected together even in
[Deu 28:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#033), to indicate the complete
subjection of Israel to the power and oppression of its foes, as a
punishment for falling away from the Lord. Retsuts mishpât does not mean
"of broken right," or "injured in its right" (Ewald and Hitzig), but
"broken in pieces by the judgment" (of God), with a genitivum
efficientis, like mukkēh Elōhı̄m in [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004). For it liked to walk according
to statute. For הלך אחרי compare [Jer
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005) and [Kg2
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#015). Tsav is a human statute; it
stands both here and in [Isa 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#010),
[Isa 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#013), the only other passages in
which it occurs, as an antithesis to the word or commandment of God. The
statute intended is the one which the kingdom of Israel upheld from
beginning to end, viz., the worship of the calves, that root of all the
sins, which brought about the dissolution and ruin of the kingdom.

[Hosea 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 5:12</span></span>

"And I am like the moth to Ephraim, and like the worm to the house of
Judah." The moth and worm are figures employed to represent destructive
powers; the moth destroying clothes ([Isa
50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009); [Isa
51:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#008); [Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012)), the worm injuring both wood
and flesh. They are both connected again in [Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028), as things which destroy slowly
but surely, to represent, as Calvin says, lenta Dei judicia. God becomes
a destructive power to the sinner through the thorn of conscience, and
the chastisements which are intended to effect his reformation, but
which lead inevitably to his ruin when he hardens himself against them.
The preaching of the law by the prophets sharpened the thorn in the
conscience of Israel and Judah. The chastisement consisted in the
infliction of the punishments threatened in the law, viz., in plagues
and invasions of their foes.

[Hosea 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 5:13</span></span>

The two kingdoms could not defend themselves against this chastisement
by the help of any earthly power. [Hos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013). "And Ephraim saw his sickness,
and Judah his abscess; and Ephraim went to Asshur, and sent to king
Jareb (striver): but he cannot cure you, nor drive the abscess away from
you." By the imperfects, with Vav rel., ויּלך, ויּרא, the attempts of
Ephraim and Judah to save themselves from destruction are represented as
the consequence of the coming of God to punish, referred to in [Hos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012). Inasmuch as this is to be seen,
so far as the historical fulfilment is concerned, not in the present,
but in the past and future, the attempts to obtain a cure for the
injuries also belong to the present (? past) and future. Mâzōr does not
mean a bandage or the cure of injuries (Ges., Dietr.), but is derived
from זוּר, to squeeze out (see Del. on [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006)), and signifies literally that
which is pressed out, i.e., a festering wound, an abscess. It has this
meaning not only here, but also in [Jer
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013), from which the meaning bandage
has been derived. On the figure employed, viz., the disease of the body
politic, see Delitzsch on [Isa 1:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005).
That this disease is not to be sought for specially in anarchy and civil
war (Hitzig), is evident from the simple fact, that Judah, which was
saved from these evils, is described as being just as sick as Ephraim.
The real disease of the two kingdoms was apostasy from the Lord, or
idolatry with its train of moral corruption, injustice, crimes, and
vices of every kind, which destroyed the vital energy and vital marrow
of the two kingdoms, and generated civil war and anarchy in the kingdom
of Israel. Ephraim sought for help from the Assyrians, viz., from king
Jareb, but without obtaining it. The name Jareb, i.e., warrior, which
occurs here and at [Hos 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#006), is an
epithet formed by the prophet himself, and applied to the king of
Assyria, not of Egypt, as Theodoret supposes. The omission of the
article from מלך may be explained from the fact that Jârēbh is, strictly
speaking, an appellative, as in למוּאל מלך in [Pro
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001). We must not supply Yehūdâh as
the subject to vayyishlach. The omission of any reference to Judah in
the second half of the verse, may be accounted for from the fact that
the prophecy had primarily and principally to do with Ephraim, and that
Judah was only cursorily mentioned. The ἅπ. λεγ. יגהה from גּהה, in
Syriac to by shy, to flee, is used with min in the tropical sense of
removing or driving away.

[Hosea 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 5:14</span></span>

No help is to be expected from Assyria, because the Lord will punish His
people. [Hos 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014). "For I am like a
lion to Ephraim, and like the young lion to the house of Judah: I, I
tear in pieces, and go; I carry away, and there is no deliverer. [Hos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015). "I go, return to my place, till
they repent and shall seek my face. In their affliction they will seek
me early." For the figure of the lion, which seizes its prey, and tears
it in pieces without deliverance, see [Hos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007) and [Isa
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#029). אשּׂא denotes the carrying away
of booty, as in [Sa1 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034). For the
fact itself, compare [Deu 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039). The
first clause of [Hos 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015) is still to
be interpreted from the figure of the lion. As the lion withdraws into
its cave, so will the Lord withdraw into His own place, viz., heaven,
and deprive the Israelites of His gracious, helpful presence, until they
repent, i.e., not only feel themselves guilty, but feel the guilt by
bearing the punishment. Suffering punishment awakens the need of mercy,
and impels them to seek the face of the Lord. The expression, "in the
distress to them," recals בּצּר לך in [Deu
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#030). Shichēr is to be taken as a
denom. of shachar, the morning dawn ([Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003)), in the sense of early, i.e.,
zealously, urgently, as the play upon the word כּשׁחר in [Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003) unmistakeably shows. For the fact
itself, compare [Hos 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#009) and [Deu
4:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 6](hos006)

</div>
