<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos002)  [Next](hos004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 3:0</span></span>

The Adulteress and Her Fresh Marriage - [Hos
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

"The significant pair are introduced again, but with a fresh
application." In a second symbolical marriage, the prophet sets forth
the faithful, but for that very reason chastising and reforming, love of
the Lord to rebellious and adulterous Israel. By the command of God he
takes a wife, who lives in continued adultery, notwithstanding his
faithful love, and places her in a position in which she is obliged to
renounce her lovers, that he may thus lead her to return. [Hos
3:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001) contain the symbolical action;
[Hos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004), [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005) the explanation, with an
announcement of the reformation which this proceeding is intended to
effect.

[Hosea 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 3:1</span></span>

"And Jehovah said to me, Go again, and love a woman beloved of her
companion, and committing adultery, as Jehovah loveth the children of
Israel, and they turn to other gods, and love raisin-cakes." The purely
symbolical character of this divine command is evident from the nature
of the command itself, but more especially from the peculiar epithet
applied to the wife. עוד is not to be connected with ויּאמר, in
opposition to the accents, but belongs to לך, and is placed first for
the sake of emphasis. Loving the woman, as the carrying out of the
divine command in [Hos 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002) clearly
shows, is in fact equivalent to taking a wife; and 'âhabh is chosen
instead of lâqach, simply for the purpose of indicating at the very
outset the nature of the union enjoined upon the prophet. The woman is
characterized as beloved of her companion (friend), and committing
adultery. רע denotes a friend or companion, with whom one cherishes
intercourse and fellowship, never a fellow-creature generally, but
simply the fellow-creature with whom one lives in the closest intimacy
([Exo 20:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#017); [Exo
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025), etc.). The רע (companion) of a
woman, who loves her, can only be her husband or paramour. The word is
undoubtedly used in [Jer 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001), [Jer
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#020), and [Sol
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016), with reference to a husband, but
never of a fornicator or adulterous paramour. And the second epithet
employed here, viz., "committing adultery," which forms an unmistakeable
antithesis to אהבת רע, requires that it should be understood in this
instance as signifying a husband; for a woman only becomes an adulteress
when she is unfaithful to her loving husband, and goes with other men,
but not when she gives up her beloved paramour to live with her husband
only. If the epithets referred to the love shown by a paramour, by which
the woman had annulled the marriage, this would necessarily have been
expressed by the perfect or pluperfect. By the participles אהבת and
מנאפת, the love of the companion and the adultery of the wife are
supposed to be continued and contemporaneous with the love which the
prophet is to manifest towards the woman. This overthrows the assertion
made by Kurtz, that we have before us a woman who was already married at
the time when the prophet was commanded to love her, as at variance with
the grammatical construction, and changing the participle into the
pluperfect. For, during the time that the prophet loved the wife he had
taken, the רע who displayed his love to her could only be her husband,
i.e., the prophet himself, towards whom she stood in the closest
intimacy, founded upon love, i.e., in the relation of marriage. The
correctness of this view, that the רע is the prophet as husband, is put
beyond all possibility of doubt by the explanation of the divine command
which follows. As Jehovah lovers the sons of Israel, although or whilst
they turn to other gods, i.e., break their marriage with Jehovah; so is
the prophet to love the woman who commits adultery, or will commit
adultery, notwithstanding his love, since the adultery could only take
place when the prophet had shown to the woman the love commanded, i.e.,
had connected himself with her by marriage. The peculiar epithet applied
to the woman can only be explained from the fact intended to be set
forth by the symbolical act itself, and, as we have already shown at p.
22, is irreconcilable with the assumption that the command of God refers
to a marriage to be really and outwardly consummated. The words כּאהבת
יי recal [Deu 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#008), and והם פּנים וגו
[Deu 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#018). The last clause, "and
loving grape-cakes," does not apply to the idols, who would be thereby
represented either as lovers of grape-cakes, or as those to whom
grape-cakes were offered (Hitzig), but is a continuation of פּנים,
indicating the reason why Israel turned to other gods. Grape or raisin
cakes (on 'ăshı̄shâh, see at [Sa2 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#019))
are delicacies, figuratively representing that idolatrous worship which
appeals to the senses, and gratifies the carnal impulses and desires.
Compare [Job 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012), where sin is
figuratively described as food which is sweet as new honey in the mouth,
but turns into the gall of asps in the belly. Loving grape-cakes is
equivalent to indulging in sensuality. Because Israel loves this, it
turns to other gods. "The solemn and strict religion of Jehovah is plain
but wholesome food; whereas idolatry is relaxing food, which is only
sought after by epicures and men of depraved tastes" (Hengstenberg).

[Hosea 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 3:2</span></span>

"And I acquired her for myself for fifteen pieces of silver, and a homer
of barley, and a lethech of barley." אכּרה, with dagesh lene or dirimens
(Ewald, 28, b), from kârâh, to dig, to procure by digging, then
generally to acquire (see at [Deu
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#006)), or obtain by trading ([Job
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#027); 40:30). Fifteen keseph are
fifteen shekels of silver; the word shekel being frequently omitted in
statements as to amount (compare Ges. 120, 4, Anm. 2). According to [Eze
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#011), the homer contained ten baths
or ephahs, and a lethech (ἡμίκορος, lxx) was a half homer. Consequently
the prophet gave fifteen shekels of silver and fifteen ephahs of barley;
and it is a very natural supposition, especially if we refer to [Kg2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#001); [Kg2
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#018), that at that time an ephah of
barley was worth a shekel, in which case the whole price would just
amount to the sum for which, according to [Exo
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#032), it was possible to purchase a
slave, and was paid half in money and half in barley. The reason for the
latter it is impossible to determine with certainty. The price
generally, for which the prophet obtained the wife, was probably
intended to indicate the servile condition out of which Jehovah
purchased Israel to be His people; and the circumstance that the prophet
gave no more for the wife than the amount at which a slave could be
obtained, according to Ecc. 21:32 and [Zac
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#012), and that this amount was not
even paid in money, but half of it in barley - a kind of food so
generally despised throughout antiquity (vile hordeum; see at [Num
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#015)) - was intended to depict still
more strikingly the deeply depressed condition of the woman. The price
paid, moreover, is not to be regarded as purchase money, for which the
wife was obtained from her parents; for it cannot be shown that the
custom of purchasing a bride from her parents had any existence among
the Israelites (see my Bibl. Archologie, ii. 109, 1). It was rather the
marriage present (mōhar), which a bridegroom gave, not to the parents,
but to the bride herself, as soon as her consent had been obtained. If,
therefore, the woman was satisfied with fifteen shekels and fifteen
ephahs of barley, she must have been in a state of very deep distress.

[Hosea 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 3:3</span></span>

"And I said to her, Many days wilt thou sit for me: and not act the
harlot, and not belong to a man; and thus will I also towards thee."
Instead of granting the full conjugal fellowship of a wife to the woman
whom he had acquired for himself, the prophet puts her into a state of
detention, in which she was debarred from intercourse with any man.
Sitting is equivalent to remaining quiet, and לי indicates that this is
for the husband's sake, and that he imposes it upon her out of affection
to her, to reform her and grain her up as a faithful wife. היה לאישׁ, to
be or become a man's, signifies conjugal or sexual connection with him.
Commentators differ in opinion as to whether the prophet himself is
included or not. In all probability he is not included, as his conduct
towards the woman is simply indicated in the last clause. The
distinction between זנה and היה לאישׁ, is that the former signifies
intercourse with different paramours, the latter conjugal intercourse;
here adulterous intercourse with a single man. The last words, "and I
also to thee" (towards thee), cannot have any other meaning, than that
the prophet would act in the same way towards the wife as the wife
towards every other man, i.e., would have no conjugal intercourse with
her. The other explanations that have been given of these words, in
which vegam is rendered "and yet," or "and then," are arbitrary. The
parallel is not drawn between the prophet and the wife, but between the
prophet and the other man; in other words, he does not promise that
during the period of the wife's detention he will not conclude a
marriage with any other woman, but declares that he will have no more
conjugal intercourse with her than any other man. This thought is
required by the explanation of the figure in [Hos
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004). For, according to the former
interpretation, the idea expressed would be this, that the Lord waited
with patience and long-suffering for the reformation of His former
nation, and would not plunge it into despair by adopting another nation
in its place. But there is no hint whatever at any such though as this
in [Hos 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004), [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005); and all that is expressed is,
that He will not only cut off all intercourse on the part of His people
with idols, but will also suspend, for a very long time, His own
relation to Israel.

[Hosea 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 3:4</span></span>

"For the sons of Israel will sit for many days without a king, and
without a prince, and without slain-offering, and without monument, and
without ephod and teraphim." The explanation of the figure is introduced
with כּי, because it contains the ground of the symbolical action. The
objects, which are to be taken away from the Israelites, form three
pairs, although only the last two are formally connected together by the
omission of אין before תּרפים, so as to form one pair, whilst the rest
are simply arranged one after another by the repetition of אין before
every one. As king and prince go together, so also do slain-offering and
memorial. King and prince are the upholders of civil government; whilst
slain-offering and memorial represent the nation's worship and religion.
מצּבה, monument, is connected with idolatrous worship. The "monuments"
were consecrated to Baal ([Exo 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#024)),
and the erection of them was for that reason prohibited even in the law
([Lev 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001); [Deu
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#022) : see at [Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023)); but they were widely spread in
the kingdom of Israel ([Kg2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#002); [Kg2
10:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#026); [Kg2
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#010)), and they were also erected in
Judah under idolatrous kings ([Kg1
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023); [Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004); [Kg2
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#014); [Ch2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#002); [Ch2
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001)). The ephod and teraphim did
indeed form part of the apparatus of worship, but they are also
specially mentioned as media employed in searching into the future. The
ephod, the shoulder-dress of the high priest, to which the Urim and
Thummim were attached, was the medium through which Jehovah communicated
His revelations to the people, and was used for the purpose of asking
the will of God ([Sa1 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009); [Sa1
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#007)); and for the same purpose it was
imitated in an idolatrous manner ([Jdg
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#005); [Jdg
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#005)). The teraphim were Penates,
which were worshipped as the givers of earthly prosperity, and also as
oracular deities who revealed future events (see my Bibl. Archol. 90).
The prophet mentions objects connected with both the worship of Jehovah
and that of idols, because they were both mixed together in Israel, and
for the purpose of showing to the people that the Lord would take away
both the Jehovah-worship and also the worship of idols, along with the
independent civil government. With the removal of the monarchy (see at
[Hos 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004)), or the dissolution of the
kingdom, not only was the Jehovah-worship abolished, but an end was also
put to the idolatry of the nation, since the people discovered the
worthlessness of the idols from the fact that, when the judgment burst
upon them, they could grant no deliverance; and notwithstanding the
circumstance that, when carried into exile, they were transported into
the midst of the idolaters, the distress and misery into which they were
then plunged filled them with abhorrence of idolatry (see at [Hos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007)).

This threat was fulfilled in the history of the ten tribes, when they
were carried away with the Assyrian captivity, in which they continue
for the most part to the present day without a monarchy, without
Jehovah-worship, and without a priesthood. For it is evident that by
Israel the ten tribes are intended, not only from the close connection
between this prophecy and [Hos 1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001),
where Israel is expressly distinguished from Judah ([Hos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007)), but also from the prospect held
out in [Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005), that the sons of
Israel will return to David their king, which clearly points to the
falling away of the ten tribes from the house of David. At the same
time, as the carrying away of Judah also is presupposed in [Hos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007), [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011), and therefore what is said of
Israel is transferred implicite to Judah, we must not restrict the
threat contained in this verse to the Israel of the ten tribes alone,
but must also understand it as referring to the Babylonian and Roman
exile of the Jews, just as in the time of king Asa ([Ch2
15:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#002)). The prophet Azariah predicted
this to the kingdom of Judah in a manner which furnishes an
unmistakeably support to Hosea's prophecy.

[Hosea 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 3:5</span></span>

"Afterward will the sons of Israel turn and seek Jehovah their God, and
David their king, and will go trembling to Jehovah and to His goodness
at the end of the days." This section, like the previous one, closes
with the announcement of the eventual conversation of Israel, which was
not indicated in the symbolical action which precedes it, but is added
to complete the interpretation of the symbol. Seeking Jehovah their God
is connected with seeking David their king. For just as the falling away
of the ten tribes from the royal house of David was merely the sequel
and effect of their inward apostasy from Jehovah, and was openly
declared in the setting up of the golden calves; the true return to the
Lord cannot take place without a return to David their king, since God
has promised the kingdom to David and his seed for ever ([Sa2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013), [Sa2
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016)), and therefore David is the only
true king of Israel (their king). This King David, however, is no other
than the Messiah. For although David received the promise of the
everlasting continuance of his government, not with reference to his own
person, but for his seed, i.e., his family; and on the ground of this
promise, the whole of the royal house of David is frequently embraced
under the expression "King David," so that we might imagine that David
is introduced here, not as an individual, but as signifying the Davidic
family; yet we must not understand it on this account as referring to
such historical representatives of the Davidic government as Zerubbabel,
and other earthly representatives of the house of David, since the
return of the Israelites to "their King David" was not to take place
till 'achârı̄th hayyâmı̄m (the end of the days). For "the end of the days"
does not denote the future generally, but always the closing future of
the kingdom of God, commencing with the coming of the Messiah (see at
[Gen 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001); [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002)). Pâchad 'el Yehovâh, to shake or
tremble to Jehovah, is a pregnant expression for "to turn to Jehovah
with trembling;" i.e., either trembling at the holiness of God, in the
consciousness of their own sinfulness and unworthiness, or else with
anguish and distress, in the consciousness of their utter helplessness.
It is used here in the latter sense, as the two parallels, [Hos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015). "in their affliction they will
seek me," and [Hos 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011), "they shall
tremble as a bird," etc., clearly show. This is also required by the
following expression, ואל־טוּבו, which is to be understood, according to
[Hos 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007), as denoting the goodness of
God manifested in His gifts. Affliction will drive them to seek the
Lord, ad His goodness which is inseparable from Himself (Hengstenberg).
Compare [Jer 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012), where "the
goodness of the Lord" is explained as corn, new wine, oil, lambs, and
oxen, these being the gifts that come from the goodness of the Lord
([Zac 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017); [Psa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#013); [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020)). He who has the Lord for his
God will want no good thing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 4](hos004)

</div>
