<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa026)  [Next](isa028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)

[Isaiah 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 27:1</span></span>

Upon whom the judgment of Jehovah particularly falls, is described in
figurative and enigmatical words in [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001) : "In that day will Jehovah visit
with His sword, with the hard, and the great, and the strong, leviathan
the fleet serpent, and leviathan the twisted serpent, and slay the
dragon in the sea." No doubt the three animals are emblems of three
imperial powers. The assertion that there are no more three animals than
there are three swords, is a mistake. If the preposition were repeated
in the case of the swords, as it is in the case of the animals, we
should have to understand the passage as referring to three swords as
well as three animals. But this is not the case. We have therefore to
inquire what the three world-powers are; and this question is quite a
justifiable one: for we have no reason to rest satisfied with the
opinion held by Drechsler, that the three emblems are symbols of ungodly
powers in general, of every kind and every sphere, unless the question
itself is absolutely unanswerable. Now the tannin (the stretched-out
aquatic animal) is the standing emblem of Egypt ([Isa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009); [Psa
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013); [Eze
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003); [Eze
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#002)). And as the Euphrates-land and
Asshur are mentioned in [Isa 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012),
[Isa 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013) in connection with Egypt,
it is immediately probable that the other two animals signify the
kingdom of the Tigris, i.e., Assyria, with its capital Nineveh which
stood on the Tigris, and the kingdom of the Euphrates, i.e., Chaldea,
with its capital Babylon which stood upon the Euphrates. Moreover, the
application of the same epithet Leviathan to both the kingdoms, with
simply a difference in the attributes, is suggestive of two kingdoms
that were related to each other. We must not be misled by the fact that
nâchâsh bâriach is a constellation in [Job
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#013); we have no bammarōm (on high)
here, as in [Isa 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#021), and therefore
are evidently still upon the surface of the globe. The epithet employed
was primarily suggested by the situation of the two cities. Nineveh was
on the Tigris, which was called Chiddekel,

(Note: In point of fact, not only does Arab. tyr signify both an arrow
and the Tigris, according to the Neo-Persian lexicons, but the old
explanation "Tigris, swift as a dart, since the Medes call the Tigris
toxeuma" (the shot or shot arrow; Eustath, on Dion Perieg. v. 984), is
confirmed by the Zendic tighri, which has been proved to be used in the
sense of arrow or shot (Yesht 8, 6, yatha tighris mainyavacâo), i.e.,
like a heavenly arrow.)

on account of the swiftness of its course and its terrible rapids; hence
Asshur is compared to a serpent moving along in a rapid, impetuous,
long, extended course (bâriach, as in [Isa
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#014), is equivalent to barriach, a
noun of the same form as עלּיז, and a different word from berriach, a
bolt, [Isa 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005)). Babylon, on the
other hand, is compared to a twisted serpent, i.e., to one twisting
about in serpentine curves, because it was situated on the very winding
Euphrates, the windings of which are especially labyrinthine in the
immediate vicinity of Babylon. The river did indeed flow straight away
at one time, but by artificial cuttings it was made so serpentine that
it passed the same place, viz., Arderikka, no less than three times; and
according to the declaration of Herodotus in his own time, when any one
sailed down the river, he had to pass it three times in three days
(Ritter, x. p. 8). The real meaning of the emblem, however, is no more
exhausted by this allusion to the geographical situation, than it was in
the case of "the desert of the sea" ([Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)). The attribute of winding is
also a symbol of the longer duration of one empire than of the other,
and of the more numerous complications into which Israel would be drawn
by it. The world-power on the Tigris fires with rapidity upon Israel, so
that the fate of Israel is very quickly decided. But the world-power on
the Euphrates advances by many windings, and encircles its prey in many
folds. And these windings are all the more numerous, because in the
prophet's view Babylon is the final form assumed by the empire of the
world, and therefore Israel remains encircled by this serpent until the
last days. The judgment upon Asshur, Babylon, and Egypt, is the judgment
upon the world-powers universally.

[Isaiah 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 27:2</span></span>

The prophecy here passes for the fourth time into the tone of a song.
The church recognises itself in the judgments upon the world, as
Jehovah's well-protected and beloved vineyard.

In that day a merry vineyard - sing it!

I, Jehovah, its keeper,

Every moment I water it.

That nothing may come near it,

I watch it night and day.

Wrath have I none;

O, had I thorns, thistles before me!

I would make up to them in battle,

Burn them all together.

Men would then have to grasp at my protection,

Make peace with me,

Make peace with me.

Instead of introducing the song with, "In that day shall this song be
sung," or some such introduction, the prophecy passes at once into the
song. It consists in a descending scale of strophes, consisting of one
of five lines ([Isa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002), [Isa
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003)), one of four lines ([Isa
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#004)), and one of three lines ([Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005)). The thema is placed at the
beginning, in the absolute case: cerem chemer. This may signify a
vineyard of fiery or good wine (compare cerem zaith in [Jdg
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#005)); but it is possible that the
reading should be cerem chemed, as in [Isa
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#012), as the lxx, Targum, and most
modern commentators assume. ענּה ל signifies, according to [Num
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#017); [Psa
147:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007) (cf., [Exo
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#018); [Psa
88:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001)), to strike up a song with
reference to anything - an onomatopoetic word (different from ענה, to
begin, literally to meet). Cerem (the vineyard) is a feminine here, like
בּאר, the well, in the song of the well in [Num
21:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#017), and just as Israel, of which
the vineyard here is a symbol ([Isa
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014); [Isa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001).), is sometimes regarded as
masculine, and at other times as feminine ([Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020)). Jehovah Himself is introduced
as speaking. He is the keeper of the vineyard, who waters it every
moment when there is any necessity (lirgâ‛im, like labbekârim in [Isa
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#002), every morning), and watches it
by night as well as by day, that nothing may visit it. על פּקד (to visit
upon) is used in other cases to signify the infliction of punishment;
here it denotes visitation by some kind of misfortune. Because it was
the church purified through afflictions, the feelings of Jehovah towards
it were pure love, without any admixture of the burning of anger
(chēmâh). This is reserved for all who dare to do injury to this
vineyard. Jehovah challenges these, and says, Who is there, then, that
gives me thorns, thistles! עיתּנני = לי יתּן, as in [Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001), cf., [Jos
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019).) The asyndeton, instead of
ושׁית שׁמיר, which is customary elsewhere, corresponds to the excitement
of the exalted defender. If He had thorns, thistles before Him, He would
break forth upon them in war, i.e., make war upon them (bâh, neuter,
upon such a mass of bush), and set it all on fire (הצית = הצּית). The
arrangement of the strophes requires that we should connect כּמּלחמה
with אפשׂעה (var. אפשׂעה), though this is at variance with the accents.
We may see very clearly, even by the choice of the expression
bammilchâmâh, that thorns and thistles are a figurative representation
of the enemies of the church ([Sa2
23:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#006)). And in this sense the song
concludes in [Isa 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005) : only by
yielding themselves to mercy will they find mercy. או with a voluntative
following, "unless," as in [Lev 26:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#041).
"Take hold of:" hechezik b', as in [Kg1
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050), of Adonijah, who lays hold of
the horns of the altar. "Make peace with:" ‛âsâh shâlōm l', as in [Jos
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#015). The song closes here. What the
church here utters, is the consciousness of the gracious protection of
its God, as confirmed in her by the most recent events.

[Isaiah 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 27:6</span></span>

The prophet now adds to the song of the vineyard, by way of explanation.
"In future will Jacob strike roots, Israel blossom and bud, and fill the
surface of the globe with fruits." We may see from הבּאים (acc. temp. as
in [Ecc 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#016), equivalent in meaning to
"Behold, the days come," [Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032),
etc.), that the true language of prophecy commences again here. For the
active וּמלאוּ, compare [Jer 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#004);
[Eze 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#017), etc. The prophet here says,
in a figure, just the same as the apostle in [Rom
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#012), viz., that Israel, when
restored once more to favour as a nation, will become "the riches of the
Gentiles."

[Isaiah 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 27:7</span></span>

The prophet does not return even now to his own actual times; but, with
the certainty that Israel will not be exalted until it has been deeply
humbled on account of its sins, he placed himself in the midst of this
state of punishment. And there, in the face of the glorious future which
awaited Israel, the fact shines out brightly before his eyes, that the
punishment which God inflicts upon Israel is a very different thing from
that inflicted upon the world. "Hath He smitten it like the smiting of
its smiter, or is it slain like the slaying of those slain by Him? Thou
punishedst it with measures, when thou didst thrust it away, sifting
with violent breath in the day of the east wind." "Its smiter" (maccēhū)
is the imperial power by which Israel had been attacked ([Isa
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#020)); and "those slain by Him"
(הרגיו) are the slain of the empire who had fallen under the strokes of
Jehovah. The former smote unmercifully, and its slain ones now lay
without hope ([Isa 26:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#014)). Jehovah
smites differently, and it is very different with the church, which has
succumbed in the persons of its righteous members. For the double play
upon words, see [Isa 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016); [Isa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#018); [Isa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016). When Jehovah put Israel away
(as if by means of a "bill of divorcement," [Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)), He strove against it ([Isa
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#025)), i.e., punished it, "in
measure," i.e., determining the measure very exactly, that it might not
exceed the enduring power of Israel, not endanger the existence of
Israel as a nation (cf., bemishpât in [Jer
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#024); [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011); [Jer
46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028)). On the other hand, Hitzig,
Ewald, and Knobel read בּסאסאה, from a word סאסא,

(Note: Bttcher refers to a Talmudic word, הסיא (to remove), but this is
to be pronounced הסּיא (= הסּיע), and is moreover, very uncertain.)

related to זעזע, or even טאטא, "when thou didst disturb (or drive
forth);" but the traditional text does not indicate any various reading
with ה mappic., and the ancient versions and expositors all take the
word as a reduplication of סאה, which stands here as the third of an
ephah to denote a moderately large measure. The clause hâgâh berūchō is
probably regarded as an elliptical relative clause, in which case the
transition to the third person can be best explained: "thou, who
siftedst with violent breath." Hâgâh, which only occurs again in [Pro
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#004), signifies to separate, e.g., the
dross from silver ([Isa 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)). Jehovah
sifted Israel (compare the figure of the threshing-floor in [Isa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010)), at the time when, by
suspending captivity over it, He blew as violently upon it as if the
east wind had raged (vid., [Job 2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001)
:19). But He only sifted, He did not destroy.

[Isaiah 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 27:9</span></span>

He was angry, but not without love; He punished, but only to be able to
pardon again. "Therefore will the guilt of Jacob be purged thus: and
this is all the fruit of the removal of his son: when He maketh all
altar-stones like chalk-stones that are broken in pieces, Astarte images
and sun-pillars do not rise up again." With the word "therefore" (lâcēn)
a conclusion is drawn from the expression "by measure." God punished
Israel "by measure;" His punishment is a way to salvation: therefore it
ceases as soon as its purpose is secured; and so would it cease now, if
Israel would thoroughly renounce its sin, and, above all, the sin of all
sins, namely idolatry. "Thus" (by this) refers to the בּשׂומו which
follows; "by this," namely the breaking to pieces of the altars and
images of the moon goddess; or possibly, to speak more correctly, the
goddess of the morning-star, and those of the sun-god as well (see [Isa
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#008)). By the fact that Israel put
away the fundamental cause of all mischief, viz., idolatry, the guilt
for which it had yet to make atonement would be covered, made good, or
wiped away (on cuppar, see at [Isa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#014)). The parenthesis (cf., [Isa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#011)) affirms that this very
consequence would be all the fruit (cŏl-peri) desired by Jehovah of the
removal of the sin of Israel, which the chastisement was intended to
effect.

[Isaiah 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 27:10</span></span>

The prophet said this from out of the midst of the state of punishment,
and was therefore able still further to confirm the fact, that the
punishment would cease with the sin, by the punishment which followed
the sin. "For the strong city is solitary, a dwelling given up and
forsaken like the steppe: there calves feed, and there they lie down,
and eat off its branches. When its branches become withered, they are
broken: women come, make fires with them; for it is not a people of
intelligence: therefore its Creator has no pity upon it, and its Former
does not pardon it." The nation without any intelligence ([Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)), of which Jehovah was the Creator
and Former ([Isa 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)), is Israel;
and therefore the fortress that has been destroyed is the city of
Jerusalem. The standpoint of the prophet must therefore be beyond the
destruction of Jerusalem, and in the midst of the captivity. If this
appears strange for Isaiah, nearly every separate word in these two vv.
rises up as a witness that it is Isaiah, and no other, who is speaking
here (compare, as more general proofs, [Isa
32:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013), and [Isa
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#017); and as more specific
exemplifications, [Isa 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#002), [Isa
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009); [Isa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#007), etc.). The suffix in "her
branches" refers to the city, whose ruins were overgrown with bushes.
Synonymous with סעפּים, branches (always written with dagesh in
distinction from סעפים, clefts, [Isa
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021)), is kâtzir, cuttings, equivalent
to shoots that can be easily cut off. It was a mistake on the part of
the early translators to take kâtzir in the sense of "harvest" (Vulg.,
Symm., Saad., though not the lxx or Luther). As kâtzir is a collective
term here, signifying the whole mass of branches, the predicate can be
written in the plural, tisshâbarnâh, which is not to be explained as a
singular form, as in [Isa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#003). אותהּ,
in the neuter sense, points back to this: women light it האיר, as in
[Mal 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010)), i.e., make with it a
lighting flame (אור) and a warming fire (אוּר, [Isa
54:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#016)). So desolate does Jerusalem
lie, that in the very spot which once swarmed with men a calf now
quietly eats the green foliage of the bushes that grow between the
ruins; and in the place whence hostile armies had formerly been
compelled to withdraw without accomplishing their purpose, women now
come and supply themselves with wood without the slightest opposition.

[Isaiah 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 27:12</span></span>

But when Israel repents, the mercy of Jehovah will change all this. "And
it will come to pass on that day, Jehovah will appoint a beating of corn
from the water-flood of the Euphrates to the brook of Egypt, and ye will
be gathered together one by one, O sons of Israel. And it will come to
pass in that day, a great trumpet will be blown, and the lost ones in
the land of Asshur come, and the outcasts in the land of Egypt, and cast
themselves down before Jehovah on the holy mountain in Jerusalem." I
regard every exposition of [Isa 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012)
which supposes it to refer to the return of the captives as altogether
false. The Euphrates and the brook of Egypt, i.e., the Wady el-Arish,
were the north-eastern and south-western boundaries of the land of
Israel, according to the original promise ([Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018); [Kg1
8:65](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#065)), and it is not stated that
Jehovah will beat on the outside of these boundaries, but within them.
Hence Gesenius is upon a more correct track, when he explains it as
meaning that "the kingdom will be peopled again in its greatest promised
extent, and that as rapidly and numerously as if men had fallen like
olives from the trees." No doubt the word châbat is applied to the
beating down of olives in [Deu 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#020);
but this figure is inapplicable here, as olives must already exist
before they can be knocked down, whereas the land of Israel is to be
thought of as desolate. What one expects is, that Jehovah will cause the
dead to live within the whole of the broad expanse of the promised land
(according to the promise in [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019), [Isa
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#021)). And the figure answers this
expectation most clearly and most gloriously. Châbat as the word
commonly applied to the knocking out of fruits with husks, which were
too tender and valuable to be threshed. Such fruits, as the prophet
himself affirms in [Isa 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#027), were
knocked out carefully with a stick, and would have been injured by the
violence of ordinary threshing. And the great field of dead that
stretched from the Euphrates to the Rhinokoloura,

(Note: Rhinokoloura (or Rhinokoroura): for the origin of this name of
the Wady el-Arish, see Strabo, xvi. 2, 31.)

resembled a floor covered over with such tender, costly fruit. There
true Israelites and apostate Israelites lay mixed together. But Jehovah
would separate them. He would institute a beating, so that the true
members of the church would come to the light of day, being separated
from the false like grains sifted from their husks. "Thy dead will
live;" it is to this that the prophet returns. And this view is
supported by the choice of the word shibboleth, which combines in itself
the meanings of "flood" ([Psa 69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003),
[Psa 69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016)) and "ear" (sc., of corn).
This word gives a fine dilogy (compare the dilogy in [Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018) and [Hab
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#007)). From the "ear" of the Euphrates
down to the Peninsula of Sinai, Jehovah would knock - a great heap of
ears, the grains of which were to be gathered together "one by one,"
i.e., singly (in the most careful manner possible; Greek, καθεῖς κατη ̓
ἓνα). To this risen church there would be added the still living
diaspora, gathered together by the signal of God (compare [Isa
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#003); [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)). Asshur and Egypt are named as
lands of banishment. They represent all the lands of exile, as in [Isa
19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#023) (compare [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)). The two names are
emblematical, and therefore not to be used as proofs that the prophecy
is within the range of Isaiah's horizon. Nor is there any necessity for
this. It is just as certain that the cycle of prophecy in chapters 24-27
belongs to Isaiah, and not to any other prophet, as it is that there are
not two men to be found in the world with faces exactly alike.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 28](isa028)

</div>
