<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa042)  [Next](isa044) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001)

[Isaiah 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 43:1</span></span>

The tone of the address is now suddenly changed. The sudden leap from
reproach to consolation was very significant. It gave them to
understand, that no meritorious work of their own would come in between
what Israel was and what it was to be, but that it was God's free grace
which came to meet it. "But now thus saith Jehovah thy Creator, O Jacob,
and thy Former, O Israel! Fear not, for I have redeemed thee; I have
called thee by name, thou art mine. When thou goest through the water, I
am with thee; and through rivers, they shall not drown thee: when thou
goest into fire, thou shalt not be burned; and the flame shall not set
thee on fire." The punishment has now lasted quite long enough; and, as
ועתּה affirms, the love which has hitherto retreated behind the wrath
returns to its own prerogatives again. He who created and formed Israel,
by giving Abraham the son of the promise, and caused the seventy of
Jacob's family to grow up into a nation in Egypt, He also will shelter
and preserve it. He bids it be of good cheer; for their early history is
a pledge of this. The perfects after כּי in [Isa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001) stand out against the promising
futures in [Isa 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002), as retrospective
glances: the expression "I have redeemed thee" pointing back to Israel's
redemption out of Egypt; "I have called thee by thy name" (lit. I have
called with thy name, i.e., called it out), to its call to be the
peculiar people of Jehovah, who therefore speaks of it in [Isa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012) as "My called." This help of the
God of Israel will also continue to arm it against the destructive power
of the most hostile elements, and rescue it from the midst of the
greatest dangers, from which there is apparently no escape (cf., [Psa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012); [Dan
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#017), [Dan
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#027); and Ges. 103, 2).

[Isaiah 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 43:3</span></span>

Just as in [Isa 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001), kı̄ (for), with
all that follows, assigns the reason for the encouraging "Fear not;" so
here a second kı̄ introduces the reason for the promise which ensures
them against the dangers arising from either water or fire. "For I
Jehovah am thy God; (I) the Holy One of Israel, thy Saviour: I give up
Egypt as a ransom for thee, Ethiopia and Seba in thy stead. Because thou
art dear in my eyes, highly esteemed, and I loved thee; I give up men in
thy stead, and peoples for thy life." Both "Jehovah" and "the Holy One
of Israel" are in apposition to "I" ('ănı̄), the force of which is
continued in the second clause. The preterite nâthattı̄ (I have given),
as the words "I will give" in [Isa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#004) clearly show, states a fact which
as yet is only completed so far as the purpose is concerned. "A ransom:"
kōpher (λύτρον) is literally the covering - the person making the
payment. סבא is the land of Mero, which is enclosed between the White
and Blue Nile, the present Dr Sennr, district of Sennr (Sen-rti, i.e.,
island of Sen), or the ancient Meriotic priestly state settled about
this enclosed land, probably included in the Mudrya (Egypt) of the
Achaemenidian arrowheaded inscriptions; though it is uncertain whether
the Kusiya (Heb. Kūshı̄m) mentioned there are the predatory tribe of
archers called Κοσσαῖοι (Strabo, xi. 13, 6), whose name has been
preserved in the present Chuzistan, the eastern Ethiopians of the Greeks
(as Lassen and Rawlinson suppose), or the African Ethiopians of the
Bible, as Oppert imagines. The fact that Egypt was only conquered by
Cambyses, and not by Cyrus, who merely planned it (Herod. i. 153), and
to whom it is only attributed by a legend (Xen. Cyr. viii. 6, 20,
λἐγεται καταστρἐψσασθαι Αἰγυπτον), does no violence to the truth of the
promise. It is quite enough that Egypt and the neighbouring kingdoms
were subjugated by the new imperial power of Persia, and that through
that empire the Jewish people recovered their long-lost liberty. The
free love of God was the reason for His treating Israel according to the
principle laid down in [Pro 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#008); [Pro
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#018). מאשׁר does not signify ex quo
tempore here, but is equivalent to אשׁר מפּני in [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018); [Jer
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023); for if it indicated the
terminus a quo, it would be followed by a more distinct statement of the
fact of their election. The personal pronoun "and I" (va'ănı̄) is
introduced in consequence of the change of persons. In the place of
ונתתּי (perf. cons.), ואתּן commended itself, as the former had already
been used in a somewhat different function. All that composed the chosen
nation are here designated as "man" (âdâm), because there was nothing in
them but what was derived from Adam. תּחת has here a strictly
substitutionary meaning throughout.

[Isaiah 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 43:5</span></span>

The encouraging "Fear not" is here resumed, for the purpose of assigning
a still further reason. "Fear not; for I am with thee: I bring thy seed
from the east, and from the west will I gather them; I will say to the
north, Give up; and to the south, Keep not back: bring my sons from far,
and my daughters from the end of the earth; everything that is called by
my name, and I have created for my glory, that I have formed, yea
finished!" The fact that Jehovah is with Israel will show itself in
this, that He effects its complete restoration from all quarters of the
heaven (compare the lands of the diaspora in all directions already
mentioned by Isaiah in [Isa 11:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)).
Jehovah's command is issued to north and south to give up their
unrighteous possession, not to keep it back, and to restore His sons and
daughters (compare the similar change in the gender in [Isa
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#012)), which evidently implies the
help and escort of the exiles on the part of the heathen ([Isa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#002)). The four quarters and four
winds are of the feminine gender. In [Isa
43:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#007) the object is more precisely
defined from the standpoint of sacred history. The three synonyms bring
out the might, the freeness, and the riches of grace, with which Jehovah
called Israel into existence, to glorify Himself in it, and that He
might be glorified by it. They form a climax, for בּרא signifies to
produce as a new thing; יצר, to shape what has been produced; and עשׂה,
to make it perfect or complete, hence creavi, formavi, perfeci.

[Isaiah 43:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 43:8</span></span>

We come now to the third turn in the second half of this prophecy. It is
linked on to the commencement of the first turn ("Hear, ye deaf, and
look, ye blind, that ye may see"), the summons being now addressed to
some one to bring forth the Israel, which has eyes and ears without
seeing or hearing; whilst, on the other hand, the nations are all to
come together, and this time not for the purpose of convincing them, but
of convincing Israel. "Bring out a blind people, and it has eyes; and
deaf people, and yet furnished with ears! All ye heathen, gather
yourselves together, and let peoples assemble! Who among you can
proclaim such a thing? And let them cause former things to be heard,
appoint their witnesses, and be justified. Let these hear, and say,
True! Ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and my servant whom I have
chosen; that ye may know and believe me, and see that it is I: before me
was no God formed, and there will be none after me." "Bring out" does
not refer here to bringing out of captivity, as in [Eze
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034), [Eze
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#041); [Eze
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#013), since the names by which Israel
is called are hardly applicable to this, but rather to bringing to the
place appointed for judicial proceedings. The verb is in the imperative.
The heathen are also to gather together en masse; נקבּצוּ is also an
imperative here, as in [Joe 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#011) =
הקּבצוּ (cf., נלווּ, [Jer 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#005); Ewald,
226, c). In [Isa 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#009) we have the
commencement of the evidence adduced by Jehovah in support of His own
divine right: Who among the gods of the nations can proclaim this? i.e.,
anything like my present announcement of the restoration of Israel? To
prove that they can, let them cause "former things" to be heard, i.e.,
any former events which they had foretold, and which had really taken
place; and let them appoint witnesses of such earlier prophecies, and so
prove themselves to be gods, that is to say, by the fact that these
witnesses have publicly heard their declaration and confirm the truth
thereof. The subject to וגו וישׁמעוּ (they may hear, etc.) is the
witnesses, not as now informing themselves for the first time, but as
making a public declaration. The explanation, "that men may hear,"
changes the subject without any necessity. But whereas the gods are dumb
and lifeless, and therefore cannot call any witnesses for themselves,
and not one of all the assembled multitude can come forward as their
legitimate witness, or as one able to vindicate them, Jehovah can call
His people as witnesses, since they have had proofs in abundance that He
possesses infallible knowledge of the future. It is generally assumed
that "and my servant" introduces a second subject: "Ye, and (especially)
my servant whom I have chosen." In this case, "my servant" would denote
that portion of the nation which was so, not merely like the mass of the
people according to its divine calling, but also by its own fidelity to
that calling; that is to say, the kernel of the nation, which was in the
midst of the mass, but had not the manners of the mass. At the same
time, the sentence which follows is much more favourable to the unity of
the subject; and why should not "my servant" be a second predicate? The
expression "ye" points to the people, who were capable of seeing and
hearing, and yet both blind and deaf, and who had been brought out to
the forum, according to [Isa 43:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#008). Ye,
says Jehovah, are my witnesses, and ye are my servant whom I have
chosen; I can appeal to what I have enabled you to experience and to
perceive, and to the relation in which I have in mercy caused you to
stand to myself, that ye may thereby be brought to consider the great
difference that there is between what ye have in your God and that which
the heathen (here present with you) have in their idols. "I am He,"
i.e., God exclusively, and God for ever. His being has no beginning and
no end; so that any being apart from His, which could have gone before
or could follow after, so as to be regarded as divine (in other words,
the deity of the artificial and temporal images which are called gods by
the heathen), is a contradiction in itself.

[Isaiah 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 43:11</span></span>

The address now closes by holding up once more the object and warrant of
faith. "I am Jehovah; and beside me there is no Savour. I have
proclaimed and brought salvation, and given to perceive, and there was
no other god among you: and ye are my witnesses, saith Jehovah, and I am
God. Even from the day onwards I am so; and there is no deliverer out of
my hand: I act, and who can turn it back?" The proper name "Jehovah" is
used here ([Isa 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013)) as a name
indicating essence: "I and no other am the absolutely existing and
living One," i.e., He who proves His existence by His acts, and indeed
by His saving acts. מושׁיע and Jehovah are kindred epithets here; just
as in the New Testament the name Jehovah sets, as it were, but only to
rise again in the name Jesus, in which it is historically fulfilled.
Jehovah's previous self-manifestation in history furnished a pledge of
the coming redemption. The two synonyms הגּדתּי and השׁמעתּ have
הושׁעתּי in the midst. He proclaimed salvation, brought salvation, and
in the new afflictions was still ever preaching salvation, without there
having been any zâr, i.e., any strange or other god in Israel ([Deu
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#016); see above, [Isa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010)), who proved his existence in
any such way, or, in fact, gave any sign of existence at all. This they
must themselves confess; and therefore (Vav in sense equivalent to ergo,
as in [Isa 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018), [Isa
40:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#025)) He, and He alone, is El, the
absolutely mighty One, i.e., God. And from this time forth He is so,
i.e., He, and He only, displays divine nature and divine life. There is
no reason for taking מיּום in the sense of יום מהיות, "from the period
when the day, i.e., time, existed" (as the lxx, Jerome, Stier, etc.,
render it). Both the gam (also) and the future 'eph‛al (I will work)
require the meaning supported by [Eze
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze048.htm#035), "from the day onwards," i.e.,
from this time forth (syn. לפני־יום, [Isa
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#007)). The concluding words give them
to understand, that the predicted salvation is coming in the way of
judgment. Jehovah will go forward with His work; and if He who is the
same yesterday and today sets this before Him, who can turn it back, so
that it shall remain unaccomplished? The prophecy dies away, like the
massâ' Bâbhel with its epilogue in [Isa
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#027). In the first half (Isaiah
42:1-17) Jehovah introduced His servant, the medium of salvation, and
proclaimed the approaching work of salvation, at which all the world had
reason to rejoice. The second half (Isaiah 42:18-43:13) began with
reproaching, and sought to bring Israel through this predicted salvation
to reflect upon itself, and also upon its God, the One God, to whom
there was no equal.

[Isaiah 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 43:14</span></span>

In close connection with the foregoing prophecy, the present one
commences with the dissolution of the Chaldean empire. "Thus saith
Jehovah, your Redeemer, the Holy One of Israel, For your sake I have
sent to Babel, and will hurl them all down as fugitives, and the
Chaldeans into the ships of their rejoicing. I, Jehovah, am your Holy
One; (I) Israel's Creator, your King." Hitzig reads באניות, and adopts
the rendering, "and drowned the shouting of the Chaldeans in groaning."
Ewald also corrects [Isa 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#014) thus:
"And plunge their guitars into groanings, and the rejoicing of the
Chaldeans into sighs." We cannot see any good taste in this un-Hebraic
bombast. Nor is there any more reason for altering ברייחם (lxx
φεύγοντας) into ברייחם (Jerome, vectes), as Umbreit proposes: "and make
all their bolts

(Note: This would require כּל־בּריחיה.)

fall down, and the Chaldeans, who rejoice in ships" (bāŏniyōth). None of
these alterations effect any improvement. For your sakes, says Jehovah,
i.e., for the purpose of releasing you, I have sent to Babylon (sc., the
agents of my judgments, [Isa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003)),
and will throw them all down (viz., the πάμιμκτος ὄχλος of this market
of the world; see [Isa 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#014); [Isa
47:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#015)) as fugitives (bârı̄chı̄m with a
fixed kametz, equivalent to barrı̄chı̄m), i.e., into a hurried flight; and
the Chaldeans, who have been settled there from a hoary antiquity, even
they shall be driven into the ships of their rejoicing (bŏŏniyōth, as in
[Pro 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#014)), i.e., the ships which
were previously the object of their jubilant pride and their jubilant
rejoicing. והורדתּי stands in the perf. consec., as indicating the
object of all the means already set in motion. The ships of pleasure are
not air-balloons, as Hitzig affirms. Herodotus (i. 194) describes the
freight ships discharging in Babylon; and we know from other sources
that the Chaldeans not only navigated the Euphrates, but the Persian
Gulf as well, and employed vessels built by Phoenicians for warlike
purposes also.

(Note: See G. Rawlinson, Monarchies, i. 128, ii. 448.)

הוריד itself might indeed signify "to hurl to the ground" ([Psa
56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008); [Psa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#012)); but the allusion to ships
shows that בּ הוריד are to be connected (cf., [Isa
63:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#014)), and that a general driving
down both by land and water to the southern coast is intended. By thus
sweeping away both foreigners and natives out of Babylon into the sea,
Jehovah proves what He is in Himself, according to [Isa
43:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#015), and also in His relation to
Israel; we must supply a repetition of אני here ([Isa
43:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#015)), as in [Isa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003). The congregation which addresses
Him as the Holy One, the people who suffer Him to reign over them as
their King, cannot remain permanently despised and enslaved.

[Isaiah 43:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 43:16</span></span>

There now follows a second field of the picture of redemption; and the
expression "for your sake" is expounded in [Isa
43:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#016) : "Thus saith Jehovah, who
giveth a road through the sea, and a path through tumultuous waters; who
bringeth out chariot and horse, army and hero; they lie down together,
they never rise: they have flickered away, extinguished like a wick.
Remember not things of olden time, nor meditate upon those of earlier
times! Behold, I work out a new thing: will ye not live to see it? Yea,
I make a road through the desert, and streams through solitudes. The
beast of the field will praise me, wild dogs and ostriches: for I give
water in the desert, streams in solitude, to give drink to my people, my
chosen. The people that I formed for myself, they shall show forth my
praise." What Jehovah really says commences in [Isa
43:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#018). Then in between He is described
as Redeemer out of Egypt; for the redemption out of Egypt was a type and
pledge of the deliverance to be looked for out of Babylon. The
participles must not be rendered qui dedit, eduxit; but from the mighty
act of Jehovah in olden time general attributes are deduced: He who
makes a road in the sea, as He once showed. The sea with the tumultuous
waters is the Red Sea ([Neh 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#011));
‛izzūz, which rhymes with vâsūs, is a concrete, as in [Psa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008), the army with the heroes at its
head. The expression "bringeth out," etc., is not followed by "and
suddenly destroys them," but we are transported at once into the very
midst of the scenes of destruction. ישׁכּבוּ shows them to us entering
upon the sleep of death, in which they lie without hope ([Isa
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#014)). The close (kappishtâh khâbhū)
is iambic, as in [Jdg 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#027). The
admonition in [Isa 43:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#018) does not
commend utter forgetfulness and disregard (see [Isa
66:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#009)); but that henceforth they are to
look forwards rather than backward. The new thing which Jehovah is in
the process of working out eclipses the old, and deserves a more
undivided and prolonged attention. Of this new thing it is affirmed,
"even now it sprouts up;" whereas in [Isa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#009), even in the domain of the
future, a distinction was drawn between "the former things" and "new
things," and it could be affirmed of the latter that they were not yet
sprouting up. In the passage before us the entire work of God in the new
time is called chădâshâh (new), and is placed in contrast with the
ri'shōnōth, or occurrences of the olden time; so that as the first part
of this new thing had already taken place ([Isa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#009)), and there was only the last
part still to come, it might very well be affirmed of the latter, that
it was even now sprouting up (not already, which עתה may indeed also
mean, but as in [Isa 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#007)). In
connection with this, תדעוּה הלוא (a verbal form with the suffix, as in
[Jer 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017), with kametz in the
syllable before the tone, as in [Isa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009); [Isa
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#011), in pause) does not mean, "Will
ye then not regard it," as Ewald, Umbreit, and others render it; but,
"shall ye not, i.e., assuredly ye will, experience it." The substance of
the chădâshâh (the new thing) is unfolded in [Isa
43:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#019). It enfolds a rich fulness of
wonders: אף affirming that, among other things, Jehovah will do this one
very especially. He transforms the pathless, waterless desert, that His
chosen one, the people of God, may be able to go through in safety, and
without fainting. And the benefits of this miracle of divine grace reach
the animal world as well, so that their joyful cries are an unconscious
praise of Jehovah. (On the names of the animals, see Khler on [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003).) In this we can recognise the
prophet, who, as we have several times observed since chapter 11
(compare especially [Isa 30:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#023);
[Isa 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007)), has not only a
sympathizing heart for the woes of the human race, but also an open ear
for the sighs of all creation. He knows that when the sufferings of the
people of God shall be brought to an end, the sufferings of creation
will also terminate; for humanity is the heart of the universe, and the
people of God (understanding by this the people of God according to the
Spirit) are the heart of humanity. In v. 21 the promise is brought to a
general close: the people that (zū personal and relative, as in [Isa
42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024))

(Note: The pointing connects עם־זוּ with makkeph, so that the rendering
would be, "The people there I have formed for myself;" but according to
our view, עם should be accented with yethib, and zū with munach. In just
the same way, zū is connected with the previous noun as a demonstrative,
by means of makkeph, in [Exo 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#013),
[Exo 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016); [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016); [Psa
62:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012); [Psa
142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004); [Psa
143:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#008), and by means of a subsidiary
accent in [Psa 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002); [Psa
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008). The idea which underlies [Isa
42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024) appears to be, "This is the
retribution that we have met with from him."' But in none of these can
we be bound by the punctuation.)

I have formed for myself will have richly to relate how I glorified
myself in them.

[Isaiah 43:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 43:22</span></span>

It would be the praise of God, however, and not the merits of their own
works, that they would have to relate; for there was nothing at all that
could give them any claim to reward. There were not even acts of
ceremonial worship, but only the guilt of grievous sins. "And thou hast
not called upon me, O Jacob, that thou shouldst have wearied thyself for
me, O Israel! Thou hast not brought me sheep of thy burnt-offerings, and
thou hast not honoured me with thy slain-offerings. I have not burdened
thee with meat-offerings, and have not troubled thee about incense. Thou
hast bought me no spice-cane for silver, nor hast thou refreshed me with
fat of thy slain-offerings. No; thou hast wearied me with thy sins,
troubled me with thine iniquities." We cannot agree with Stier, that
these words refer to the whole of the previous worship of Israel, which
is treated here as having no existence, because of its heartlessness and
false-holiness. And we must also not forget, that all these prophecies
rested on either the historical or the ideal soil of the captivity. The
charge commences with the worship of prayer (with calling upon Jehovah,
as in [Psa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004); [Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007)), to which the people were
restricted when in exile, since the law did not allow them to offer
sacrifice outside the holy land. The personal pronoun אתי, in the place
of the suffix, is written first of all for the sake of emphasis, as if
the meaning were, "Israel could exert itself to call upon other gods,
but not upon Jehovah." The following kı̄ is equivalent to ut ([Hos
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006)), or ‛ad-kı̄ in [Sa2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#010), adeo ut laborasses me colendo
(so as to have wearied thyself in worshipping me). They are also charged
with having offered no sacrifices, inasmuch as in a foreign land this
duty necessarily lapsed of itself, together with the self-denial that it
involved. The spelling הביאת (as in [Num
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#031)) appears to have been intended
for the pronunciation הביאת (compare the pronunciation in [Kg2
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#025), which comes between the two).
The ‛ōlōth (burnt-offerings) stand first, as the expression of
adoration, and are connected with sēh, which points to the daily morning
and evening sacrifice (the tâmı̄d). Then follow the zebâchı̄m
(slain-offerings), the expression of the establishment of fellowship
with Jehovah (וּזבחיך is equivalent to וּבזביחך, like חמה = בּחמה, [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025)). The "fat" (chēlebh) in [Isa
43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024) refers to the portions of fat
that were placed upon the altar in connection with this kind of
sacrifice. After the zebâchı̄m comes the michâh, the expression of desire
for the blessing of Jehovah, a portion of which, the so-called
remembrance portion ('azkârâh), was placed upon the altar along with the
whole of the incense. And lastly, the qâneh (spice-cane), i.e., some one
of the Amoma,

(Note: The qâneh is generally supposed to be the Calamus; but the
calamus forms no stalk, to say nothing of a cane or hollow stalk. It
must be some kind of aromatic plant, with a stalk like a cane, either
the Cardamum, Ingber, or Curcuma; at any rate, it belonged to the
species Amomum. The aroma of this was communicated to the anointing oil,
the latter being infused, and the resinous parts of the former being
thereby dissolved.)

points to the holy anointing oil ([Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023)), or if it refer to spices
generally, to the sacred incense, though qâneh is not mentioned as one
of the ingredients in [Exo 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034). The
nation, which Jehovah was now redeeming out of pure unmingled grace, had
not been burdened with costly tasks of this description (see [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020)); on the contrary, it was Jehovah
only who was burdened and troubled. He denies that there was any
"causing to serve" (העביד, lit., to make a person a servant, to impose
servile labour upon him) endured by Israel, but affirms this rather of
Himself. The sins of Israel pressed upon Him, as a burden does upon a
servant. His love took upon itself the burden of Israel's guilt, which
derived its gravitating force from His won holy righteous wrath; but it
was a severe task to bear this heavy burden, and expunge it - a
thoroughly divine task, the significance of which was first brought out
in its own true light by the cross on Golgotha. When God creates, He
expresses His fiat, and what He wills comes to pass. But He does not
blot out sin without balancing His love with His justice; and this
equalization is not effected without conflict and victory.

[Isaiah 43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 43:25</span></span>

Nevertheless, the sustaining power of divine love is greater than the
gravitating force of divine wrath. "I, I alone, blot out thy
transgressions for my own sake, and do not remember thy sins." Jehovah
Himself here announces the sola gratia and sola fides. We have adopted
the rendering "I alone," because the threefold repetition of the
subject, "I, I, He is blotting out thy transgressions," is intended to
affirm that this blotting out of sin is so far from being in any way
merited by Israel, that it is a sovereign act of His absolute freedom;
and the expression "for my own sake," that it has its foundation only in
God, namely, in His absolute free grace, that movement of His love by
which wrath is subdued. For the debt stands written in God's own book.
Justice has entered it, and love alone blots it out (mâchâh, ἐξαλείφει,
as in [Isa 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022); [Psa
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003), [Psa
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#011); [Psa
109:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#014)); but, as we know from the
actual fulfilment, not without paying with blood, and giving the
quittance with blood.

[Isaiah 43:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 43:26</span></span>

Jehovah now calls upon Israel, if this be not the case, to remind Him of
any merit upon which it can rely. "Call to my remembrance; we will
strive with one another: tell now, that thou mayst appear just."
Justification is an actus forensis (see [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)). Justice accuses, and grace
acquits. Or has Israel any actual merits, so that Justice would be
obliged to pronounce it just? The object to hazkı̄rēnı̄ and sappēr, which
never have the closed sense of pleading, as Bttcher supposes, is the
supposed meritorious works of Israel.

[Isaiah 43:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 43:27</span></span>

But Israel has no such works; on the contrary, its history has been a
string of sins from the very first. "Thy first forefather sinned, and
thy mediators have fallen away from me." By the first forefather,
Hitzig, Umbreit, and Knobel understand Adam; but Adam was the forefather
of the human race, not of Israel; and the debt of Adam was the debt of
mankind, and not of Israel. The reference is to Abraham, as the first of
the three from whom the origin and election of Israel were dated;
Abraham, whom Israel from the very first had called with pride "our
father" ([Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)). Even the history
of Abraham was stained with sin, and did not shine in the light of
meritorious works, but in that of grace, and of faith laying hold of
grace. The melı̄tsı̄m, interpreters, and mediators generally ([Ch2
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031); [Job
33:23](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#023)), are the prophets and priests,
who stood between Jehovah and Israel, and were the medium of intercourse
between the two, both in word and deed. They also had for the most part
become unfaithful to God, by resorting to ungodly soothsaying and false
worship. Hence the sin of Israel was as old as its very earliest origin;
and apostasy had spread even among those who ought to have been the best
and most godly, because of the office they sustained.

[Isaiah 43:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 43:28</span></span>

Consequently the all-holy One was obliged to do what had taken place.
"Then I profaned holy princes, and gave up Jacob to the curse, and
Israel to blasphemies." ואחלל might be an imperfect, like ואכל, "I ate,"
in [Isa 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#019), and ואבּיט, "I looked,"
in [Isa 63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005); but ואתּנה by the side
of it shows that the pointing sprang out of the future interpretation
contained in the Targum; so that as the latter is to be rejected, we
must substitute ואחלל, ואתּנה (Ges. 49, 2). The "holy princes" (sârē
qōdesh) are the hierarchs, as in [Ch1
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#005), the supreme spiritual rulers as
distinguished from the temporal rulers. The profanation referred to was
the fact that they were ruthlessly hurried off into a strange land,
where their official labours were necessarily suspended. This was the
fate of the leaders of the worship; and the whole nation, which bore the
honourable names of Jacob and Israel, was give up to the ban (chērem)
and the blasphemies (giddūphı̄m) of the nations of the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 44](isa044)

</div>
