<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa009)  [Next](isa011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001)

[Isaiah 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 10:1</span></span>

Strophe 4. "Woe unto them that decree unrighteous decrees, and to the
writers who prepare trouble to force away the needy from demanding
justice, and to rob the suffering of my people of their rightful claims,
that widows may become their prey, and they plunder orphans! And what
will ye do in the day of visitation, and in the storm that cometh from
afar? To whom will ye flee for help? and where will ye deposit your
glory? There is nothing left but to bow down under prisoners, and they
fall under the slain. With all this His anger is not turned away, but
His hand is stretched out still." This last strophe is directed against
the unjust authorities and judges. The woe pronounced upon them is, as
we have already frequently seen, Isaiah's Ceterum censeo. Châkak is
their decisive decree (not, however, in a denominative sense, but in the
primary sense of hewing in, recording in official documents, [Isa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008); [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023)); and Cittēb (piel only
occurring here, and a perfect, according to Gesenius, 126, 3) their
official signing and writing. Their decrees are Chikekē 'aven (an open
plural, as in [Jdg 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#015), for Chukkē,
after the analogy of גללי, עממי, with an absolute Chăkâkim underlying
it: Ewald, 186-7), inasmuch as their contents were worthlessness, i.e.,
the direct opposite of morality; and what they wrote out was ‛âmâl,
trouble, i.e., an unjust oppression of the people (compare πόνος and
πονηρός).

(Note: The current accentuation, ומכתבים mercha, עמל tiphchah, is wrong.
The true accentuation would be the former with tiphchah (and metheg),
the latter with mercha; for ‛âmâl cittēbu is an attributive (an
elliptical relative) clause. According to its etymon, ‛âmâl seems to
stand by the side of μῶλος, moles, molestus (see Pott in Kuhn's
Zeitschrift, ix. 202); but within the Semitic itself it stands by the
side of אמל, to fade, marcescere, which coincides with the Sanscrit root
mlâ and its cognates (see Leo Meyer, Vergleichende Grammatik, i. 353),
so that ‛âmâl is, strictly speaking, to wear out or tire out (vulg. to
worry).)

Poor persons who wanted to commence legal proceedings were not even
allowed to do so, and possessions to which widows and orphans had a
well-founded claim were a welcome booty to them (for the diversion into
the finite verb, see [Isa 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024); [Isa
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#011); [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005); [Isa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)). For all this they could not
escape the judgment of God. This is announced to them in [Isa
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003), in the form of three distinct
questions (commencing with ūmâh, quid igitur). The noun pekuddah in the
first question always signifies simply a visitation of punishment;
sho'âh is a confused, dull, desolate rumbling, hence confusion (turba),
desolation: here it is described as "coming from afar," because a
distant nation (Asshur) was the instrument of God's wrath. Second
question: "Upon whom will ye throw yourselves in your search for help
then" (nūs ‛al, a constr. praegnans, only met with here)? Third
question: "Where, i.e., in whose hand, will ye deposit your wealth in
money and possessions" (câbōd, what is weighty in value and imposing in
appearance); ‛âzab with b'yad ([Gen
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#006)), or with Lamed ([Job
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#014)), to leave anything with a
person as property in trust. No one would relieve them of their wealth,
and hold it as a deposit; it was irrecoverably lost. To this negative
answer there is appended the following bilti, which, when used as a
preposition after a previous negation, signifies praeter; when used as a
conjunction, nisi (bilti 'im, [Jdg
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#014)); and where it governs the whole
sentence, as in this case, nisi quod (cf., [Num
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#006); [Dan
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#018)). In the present instance, where
the previous negation is to be supplied in thought, it has the force of
nil reliquum est nisi quod (there is nothing left but). The singular
verb (câra‛) is used contemptuously, embracing all the high persons as
one condensed mass; and tachath does not mean aeque ac or loco (like, or
in the place of), as Ewald (217, k) maintains, but is used in the
primary and local sense of infra (below). Some crouch down to find room
at the feet of the prisoners, who are crowded closely together in the
prison; or if we suppose the prophet to have a scene of transportation
in his mind, they sink down under the feet of the other prisoners, in
their inability to bear such hardships, whilst the rest fall in war; and
as the slaughter is of long duration, not only become corpses
themselves, but are covered with corpses of the slain (cf., [Isa
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019)). And even with this the wrath
of God is not satisfied. The prophet, however, does not follow out the
terrible gradation any further. Moreover, the captivity, to which this
fourth strophe points, actually formed the conclusion of a distinct
period.

[Isaiah 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 10:5</span></span>

The law of contrast prevails in prophecy, as it does also in the history
of salvation. When distress is at its height, it is suddenly brought to
an end, and changed into relief; and when prophecy has become as black
with darkness as in the previous section, it suddenly becomes as bright
and cloudless as in that which is opening now. The hoi (woe) pronounced
upon Israel becomes a hoi upon Asshur. Proud Asshur, with its confidence
in its own strength, after having served for a time as the goad of
Jehovah's wrath, now falls a victim to that wrath itself. Its attack
upon Jerusalem leads to its own overthrow; and on the ruins of the
kingdom of the world there rises up the kingdom of the great and
righteous Son of David, who rules in peace over His redeemed people, and
the nations that rejoice in Him: - the counterpart of the redemption
from Egypt, and one as rich in materials for songs of praise as the
passage through the Red Sea. The Messianic prophecy, which turns its
darker side towards unbelief in chapter 7, and whose promising aspect
burst like a great light through the darkness in Isaiah 8:5-9:6, is
standing now upon its third and highest stage. In chapter 7 it is like a
star in the night; in Isaiah 8:5-9:6, like the morning dawn; and now the
sky is perfectly cloudless, and it appears like the noonday sun. The
prophet has now penetrated to the light fringe of [Isa
6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001). The name Shear-yashub, having
emptied itself of all the curse that it contained, is now transformed
into a pure promise. And it becomes perfectly clear what the name
Immanuel and the name given to Immanuel, El gibbor (mighty God),
declared. The remnant of Israel turns to God the mighty One; and God the
mighty is henceforth with His people in the Sprout of Jesse, who has the
seven Spirits of God dwelling within Himself. So far as the date of
composition is concerned, the majority of the more recent commentators
agree in assigning it to the time of Hezekiah, because [Isa
10:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009) presupposes the destruction of
Samaria by Shalmanassar, which took place in the sixth year of Hezekiah.
But it was only from the prophet's point of view that this event was
already past; it had not actually taken place. The prophet had already
predicted that Samaria, and with Samaria the kingdom of Israel, would
succumb to the Assyrians, and had even fixed the years ([Isa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008) and [Isa
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#004), [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007)). Why, then, should he not be able
to presuppose it here as an event already past? The stamp on this
section does not tally at all with that of Isaiah's prophecy in the
times of Hezekiah; whereas, on the other hand, it forms so integral a
link in the prophetic cycle in chapters 7-12, and is interwoven in so
many ways with that which precedes, and of which it forms both the
continuation and crown, that we have no hesitation in assigning it, with
Vitringa, Caspari, and Drechsler, to the first three years of the reign
of Ahaz, though without deciding whether it preceded or followed the
destruction of the two allies by Tiglath-pileser. It is by no means
impossible that it may have preceded it.

The prophet commences with hoi (woe!), which is always used as an
expression of wrathful indignation to introduce the proclamation of
judgment upon the person named; although, as in the present instance,
this may not always follow immediately (cf., [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004), [Isa
1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)), but may be preceded by the
announcement of the sin by which the judgment had been provoked. In the
first place, Asshur is more particularly indicated as the chosen
instrument of divine judgment upon all Israel. "Woe to Asshur, the rod
of mine anger, and it is a staff in their hand, mine indignation.
Against a wicked nation will I send them, and against the people of my
wrath give them a charge, to spoil spoil, and to prey prey, to make it
trodden down like street-mire." "Mine indignation:" za‛mi is either a
permutation of the predicative הוּא, which is placed emphatically in the
foreground (compare the אתּה־הּוּא in [Jer
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022), which is also written with
makkeph), as we have translated it, though without taking הוּא as a
copula (= est), as Ewald does; or else בידם הוּא is written elliptically
for בידם הוּא אשׁר, "the staff which they hold is mine indignation"
(Ges., Rosenmller, and others), in which case, however, we should rather
expect הוא זעמי בידם ומטה. It is quite inadmissible, however, to take
za‛mi as a separate genitive to matteh, and to point the latter with
zere, as Knobel has done; a thing altogether unparalleled in the Hebrew
language.

(Note: In the Arabic, such a separation does occur as a poetical licence
(see De Sacy, Gramm. t. ii. 270).)

The futures in [Isa 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006) are to be
taken literally; for what Asshur did to Israel in the sixty year of
Hezekiah's reign, and to Judah in his fourteenth year, was still in the
future at the time when Isaiah prophesied. Instead of וּלשׂימו the keri
has וּלשׂוּמו, the form in which the infinitive is written in other
passages when connected with suffixes (see, on the other hand, [Sa2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#007)). "Trodden down:" mirmas with
short a is the older form, which was retained along with the other form
with the a lengthened by the tone (Ewald 160, c).

[Isaiah 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 10:7</span></span>

Asshur was to be an instrument of divine wrath upon all Israel; but it
would exalt itself, and make itself the end instead of the means. [Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007) "Nevertheless he meaneth not so,
neither doth his heart think so; for it is in his heart to destroy and
cut off nations not a few." Asshur did not think so (lo'-cēn), i.e., not
as he ought to think, seeing that his power over Israel was determined
by Jehovah Himself. For what filled his heart was the endeavour,
peculiar to the imperial power, to destroy not a few nations, i.e., as
many nations as possible, for the purpose of extending his own
dominions, and with the determination to tolerate no other independent
nation, and the desire to deal with Judah as with all the rest. For
Jehovah was nothing more in his esteem than one of the idols of the
nations. [Isa 10:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#008) "For he saith,
Are not my generals all kings? Is not Calno as Carchemish, or Hamath as
Arpad, or Samaria as Damascus? As my hand hath reached the kingdoms of
the idols, and their graven images were more than those of Jerusalem and
Samaria; shall I not, as I have done unto Samaria and her idols, do
likewise to Jerusalem and her idols?" The king of Asshur bore the title
of the great king ([Isa 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#004)), and
indeed, as we may infer from [Eze
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007), that of the king of kings. The
generals in his army he could call kings,

(Note: The question is expressed in Hebrew phraseology, since sar in
Assyrian was a superior title to that of melek, as we may see from
inscriptions and proper names.)

because the satraps

(Note: Satrapes is the old Persian (arrow-headed) khshatra (Sanscr.
xatra) pâvan, i.e., keeper of government. Pâvan (nom. pâvâ), which
occurs in the Zendik as an independent word pavan (nom. pavao) in the
sense of sentry or watchman, is probably the original of the Hebrew
pechâh (see Spiegel, in Kohler on [Mal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008)).)

who led their several contingents were equal to kings in the extent and
splendour of their government, and some of them were really conquered
kings (cf., [Kg2 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#028)). He proudly
asks whether every one of the cities named has not been as incapable as
the rest, of offering a successful resistance to him. Carchemish is the
later Circesium (Cercusium), at the junction of the Chaboras with the
Euphrates (see above); Calno, the later Ctesiphon, on the left bank of
the Tigris; Arpad (according to Mershid, i. p. 47, in the pashalic of
Chaleb, i.e., Aleppo) and Hamath (i.e., Epiphania) were Syrian cities,
the latter on the river Orontes, still a large and wealthy place. The
king of Asshur had also already conquered Samaria, at the time when the
prophet introduced him as uttering these words. Jerusalem, therefore,
would be unable to resist him. As he had obtained possession of
idolatrous kingdoms (ל מעא, to reach, as in [Psa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#009) : hâ-'elil with the article
indicating the genus), which had more idols than Jerusalem or than
Samaria; so would he also overcome Jerusalem, which had just as few and
just as powerless idols as Samaria had. Observe there that [Isa
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#011) is the apodosis to [Isa
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010), and that the comparative clause
of [Isa 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010) is repeated in [Isa
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#011), for the purpose of instituting
a comparison, more especially with Samaria and Jerusalem. The king of
Asshur calls the gods of the nations by the simple name of idols, though
the prophet does not therefore make him speak from his own Israelitish
standpoint. On the contrary, the great sin of the king of Asshur
consisted in the manner in which he spoke. For since he recognised no
other gods than his own Assyrian national deities, he placed Jehovah
among the idols of the nations, and, what ought particularly to be
observed, with the other idols, whose worship had been introduced into
Samaria and Jerusalem. But in this very fact there was so far
consolation for the worshippers of Jehovah, that such blasphemy of the
one living God would not remain unavenged; whilst for the worshipers of
idols it contained a painful lesson, since their gods really deserved
nothing better than that contempt should be heaped upon them. The
prophet has now described the sin of Asshur. It was ambitious
self-exaltation above Jehovah, amounting even to blasphemy. And yet he
was only the staff of Jehovah, who could make use of him as He would.

[Isaiah 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 10:12</span></span>

And when He had made use of him as He would, He would throw him away.
"And it will come to pass, when the Lord shall have brought to an end
all His work upon Mount Zion and upon Jerusalem, I will come to punish
over the fruit of the pride of heart of the king of Asshur, and over the
haughty look of his eyes." The "fruit" (peri) of the heart's pride of
Asshur is his vainglorious blasphemy of Jehovah, in which his whole
nature is comprehended, as the inward nature of the tree is in the fruit
which hangs above in the midst of the branches; tiph'ereth, as in [Zac
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#007), the self-glorification which
expresses itself in the lofty look of the eyes. Several constructives
are here intentionally grouped together (Ges. 114, 1), to express the
great swelling of Asshur even to bursting. But Jehovah, before whom
humility is the soul of all virtue, would visit this pride with
punishment, when He should have completely cut off His work, i.e., when
He should have thoroughly completed (bizza', absolvere) His punitive
work upon Jerusalem (ma‛aseh, as in [Isa
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021)). The prep. Beth is used in the
same sense as in [Jer 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#023), agere cum
aliquo. It is evident that ma‛aseh is not used to indicate the work of
punishment and grace together, so that yebazza‛ could be taken as a
literal future (as Schrring and Ewald suppose), but that it denotes the
work of punishment especially; and consequently yebazza‛ is to be taken
as a futurum exactum (cf., [Isa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004)),
as we may clearly see from the choice of this word in [Lam
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#017) (cf., [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009)).

[Isaiah 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 10:13</span></span>

When Jehovah had punished to such an extent that He could not go any
further without destroying Israel - a result which would be opposed to
His mercy and truth - His punishing would turn against the instrument of
punishment, which would fall under the curse of all ungodly selfishness.
"For he hath said, By the strength of my hand I have done it, and by my
own wisdom; for I am prudent: and I removed the bounds of the nations,
and I plundered their stores, and threw down rulers

(Note: Thronende, lit., those who sat (on thrones).)

like a bull. And my hand extracted the wealth of the nations like a
nest: and as men sweep up forsaken eggs, have I swept the whole earth;
there was none that moved the wing, and opened the mouth, and chirped."
The futures may be taken most safely as regulated by the preterites, and
used, like German imperfects, to express that which occurs not once
merely, but several times. The second of these preterites, שׁושׂיתי, is
the only example of a poel of verbs ל ה; possibly a mixed form from שׁסס
(poel of שסס) and שהסה (piel of שסה). The object to this, viz.,
‛athidoth (chethib) or ‛athudoth (keri), is sometimes used in the sense
of τὰ μέλλοντα ; sometimes, as in this instance, in the sense of τὰ
ὑπάρχοντα . According to the keri, the passage is to be rendered, "And
I, a mighty one, threw down kings" (those sitting on thrones), cabbir
being taken in the same sense as in [Job
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#017), [Job
34:24](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#024); [Job
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#005). But the chethib câ'abbı̄r is to
be preferred as more significant, and not to be rendered "as a hero" (to
which the Caph similitudinis is so little suitable, that it would be
necessary to take it, as in [Isa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006),
as Caph veritatis), but "as a bull," 'abbı̄r as in [Psa
68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031); [Psa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013); [Psa
50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013). A bull, as the excavations
show, was an emblem of royalty among the Assyrians. In [Isa
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014), the more stringent Vav conv. is
introduced before the third pers. fem. The Kingdoms of the nations are
compared here to birds' nests, which the Assyrian took for himself
('âsaph, as in [Hab 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)); and their
possessions to single eggs. The mother bird was away, so that there was
not even a sign of resistance; and in the nest itself not one of the
young birds moved a wing to defend itself, or opened its beak to scare
the intruder away. Seb. Schmid has interpreted to correctly, "nulla alam
movet ad defendendum aut os aperit ad terrendum." Thus proudly did
Asshur look back upon its course of victory, and thus contemptuously did
it look down upon the conquered kingdoms.

[Isaiah 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 10:15</span></span>

This self-exaltation was a foolish sin. "Dare the axe boast itself
against him that heweth therewith, or the saw magnify itself against him
that useth it? As if a staff were to swing those that lift it up, as if
a stick should lift up not-wood!" "Not-wood" is to be taken as one word,
as in [Isa 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008). A stick is wood, and
nothing more; in itself it is an absolutely motionless thing. A man is
"not-wood," an incomparably higher, living being. As there must be
"not-wood" to lay hold of wood, so, wherever a man performs
extraordinary deeds, there is always a superhuman cause behind, viz.,
God Himself, who bears the same relation to the man as the man to the
wood. The boasting of the Assyrian was like the bragging of an
instrument, such as an axe, a saw, or a stick, against the person using
it. The verb hēnı̄ph is applied both to saw and stick, indicating the
oscillating movements of a measured and more or less obvious character.
The plural, "those that lift it up," points to the fact that by Him who
lifts up the stock, Jehovah, the cause of all causes, and power of all
powers, is intended.

[Isaiah 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 10:16</span></span>

There follows in the next v. the punishment provoked by such
self-deification (cf., [Hab 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011)).
"Therefore will the Lord, the Lord of hosts, send consumption against
his fat men; and under Asshur's glory there burns a brand like a
firebrand." Three epithets are here employed to designate God according
to His unlimited, all-controlling omnipotence: viz., hâ'âdōn, which is
always used by Isaiah in connection with judicial and penal
manifestations of power; and adonâi zebâoth, a combination never met
with again, similar to the one used in the Elohistic Psalms, Elohim
zebaoth (compare, on the other hand, [Isa
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#015); [Isa
10:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023)). Even here a large number of
codices and editions (Norzi's, for example) have the reading Jehovah
Zebaoth, which is customary in other cases.

(Note: This passage is not included in the 134 vaddâ'ı̄n (i.e., "real")
adonai, or passages in which adonai is written, and not merely to be
read, that are enumerated by the Masora (see Br's Psalterium, p. 133).)

Râzōn ([Isa 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#004)) is one of the
diseases mentioned in the catalogue of curses in [Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016) and [Deu
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022). Galloping consumption comes
like a destroying angel upon the great masses of flesh seen in the
well-fed Assyrian magnates: mishmannim is used in a personal sense, as
in [Psa 78:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#031). And under the glory of
Asshur, i.e., its richly equipped army (câbōd as in [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007)), He who makes His angels flames
of fire places fire so as to cause it to pass away in flames. In
accordance with Isaiah's masterly art of painting in tones, the whole
passage is so expressed, that we can hear the crackling, and
spluttering, and hissing of the fire, as it seizes upon everything
within its reach. This fire, whatever it may be so far as its natural
and phenomenal character is concerned, is in its true essence the wrath
of Jehovah.

[Isaiah 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 10:17</span></span>

"And the light of Israel becomes a fire, and His Holy One a flame; and
it sets on fire and devours its thistles and thorns on one day." God is
fire ([Deu 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003)), and light ([Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005)); and in His own self-life the
former is resolved into the latter. Kâdōsh (holy) is here parallel to
'ōr (light); for the fact that God is holy, and the fact that He is pure
light, are essentially one and the same thing, whether kâdash meant
originally to be pure or to be separate. The nature of all creatures,
and of the whole cosmos, is a mixture of light and darkness. The nature
of God alone is absolute light. But light is love. In this holy light of
love He has given Himself up to Israel, and taken Israel to Himself. But
He has also within Him a basis of fire, which sin excites against
itself, and which was about to burst forth as a flaming fire of wrath
against Asshur, on account of its sins against Him and His people.
Before this fire of wrath, this destructive might of His penal
righteousness, the splendid forces of Asshur were nothing but a mass of
thistles and a bed of thorns (written here in the reverse order peculiar
to Isaiah, shâmı̄r vâshaith), equally inflammable, and equally deserving
to be burned. To all appearance, it was a forest and a park, but is was
irrecoverably lost.

[Isaiah 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 10:18</span></span>

"And the glory of his forest and his garden-ground will He destroy, even
to soul and flesh, so that it is as when a sick man dieth. And the
remnant of the trees of his forest can be numbered, and a boy could
write them." The army of Asshur, composed as it was of many and various
nations, was a forest (ya‛ar); and, boasting as it did of the beauty of
both men and armour, a garden ground (carmel), a human forest and park.
Hence the idea of "utterly" is expressed in the proverbial "even to soul
and flesh," which furnishes the occasion for a leap to the figure of the
wasting away of a נסס (hap. leg. the consumptive man, from nâsas,
related to nūsh, 'ânash, Syr. n‛sı̄so, n‛shisho, a sick man, based upon
the radical notion of melting away, cf., mâsas, or of reeling to and
fro, cf., mūt, nūt, Arab. nâsa, nâta). Only a single vital spark would
still glimmer in the gigantic and splendid colossus, and with this its
life would threaten to become entirely extinct. Or, what is the same
thing, only a few trees of the forest, such as could be easily numbered
(mispâr as in [Deu 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006), cf., [Isa
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017)), would still remain, yea, so
few, that a boy would be able to count and enter them. And this really
came to pass. Only a small remnant of the army that marched against
Jerusalem ever escaped. With this small remnant of an all-destroying
power the prophet now contrasts the remnant of Israel, which is the seed
of a new power that is about to arise.

[Isaiah 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 10:20</span></span>

"And it will come to pass in that day, the remnant of Israel, and that
which has escaped of the house of Jacob, will not continue to stay
itself upon its chastiser, and will stay itself upon Jehovah, the Holy
One of Israel, in truth." Behind the judgment upon Asshur there lies the
restoration of Israel. "The chastiser" was the Assyrian. While relying
upon this, Israel received strokes, because Jehovah made Israel's staff
into its rod. But henceforth it would sanctify the Holy One of Israel,
putting its trust in Him and not in man, and that purely and truly
(be'emeth, "in truth"), not with fickleness and hypocrisy. Then would be
fulfilled the promise contained in the name Shear-yashub, after the
fulfilment of the threat that it contained.

[Isaiah 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 10:21</span></span>

"The remnant will turn, the remnant of Jacob, to God the mighty." El
gibbor is God as historically manifested in the heir of David ([Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)). Whilst Hosea ([Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)) places side by side Jehovah and
the second David, Isaiah sees them as one. In New Testament phraseology,
it would be "to God in Christ."

[Isaiah 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 10:22</span></span>

To Him the remnant of Israel would turn, but only the remnant. "For if
thy people were even as the sea-sand, the remnant thereof will turn:
destruction is firmly determined, flowing away righteousness. For the
Lord, Jehovah of hosts, completes the finishing stroke and that which is
firmly determined, within the whole land." As the words are not preceded
by any negative clause, ci 'im are not combined in the sense of sed or
nisi; but they belong to two sentences, and signify nam si (for if). If
the number of the Israelites were the highest that had been promised,
only the remnant among them, or of them (bō partitive, like the French
en), would turn, or, as the nearer definition ad Deum is wanting here,
come back to their right position. With regard to the great mass,
destruction was irrevocably determined (râchatz, τέμνειν, then to
resolve upon anything, ἀποτόμως, [Kg1
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#040)); and this destruction
"overflowed with righteousness," or rather "flowed on (shōtēph, as in
[Isa 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#018)) righteousness," i.e.,
brought forth righteousness as it flowed onwards, so that it was like a
swell of the penal righteousness of God (shâtaph, with the accusative,
according to Ges. 138, Anm. 2). That cillâyōn is not used here in the
sense of completion any more than in [Deu
28:65](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065), is evident from [Isa
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#023), where câlâh (fem. of câleh,
that which vanishes, then the act of vanishing, the end) is used
interchangeably with it, and necherâtzâh indicates judgment as a thing
irrevocably decided (as in [Isa 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#022),
and borrowed from these passages in [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027); [Dan
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036)). Such a judgment of
extermination the almighty Judge had determined to carry fully out
(‛ōseh in the sense of a fut. instans) within all the land (b'kereb,
within, not b'thok, in the midst of), that is to say, one that would
embrace the whole land and all the people, and would destroy, if not
every individual without exception, at any rate the great mass, except a
very few.

[Isaiah 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 10:24</span></span>

In these esoteric addresses, whoever, it is not the prophet's intention
to threaten and terrify, but to comfort and encourage. He therefore
turns to that portion of the nation which needs and is susceptible of
consolation, and draws this conclusion from the element of consolation
contained in what has been already predicted, that they may be consoled.
- "Therefore thus saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts, My people that
dwellest in Zion, be not afraid of Asshur, if it shall smite thee with
the rod, and lift its stick against thee, in the manner of Egypt."
"Therefore:" lacēn never occurs in Hebrew in the sense of attamen
(Gesenius and Hitzig), and this is not the meaning here, but propterea.
The elevating appeal is founded upon what has just before been
threatened in such terrible words, but at the same time contains an
element of promise in the midst of the peremptory judgment. The very
words in which the people are addressed, "My people that dwelleth on
Zion," are indirectly encouraging. Zion was the site of the gracious
presence of God, and of that sovereignty which had been declared
imperishable. Those who dwelt there, and were the people of God (the
servants of God), not only according to their calling, but also
according to their internal character, were also heirs of the promise;
and therefore, even if the Egyptian bondage should be renewed in the
Assyrian, they might be assured of this to their consolation, that the
redemption of Egypt would also be renewed. "In the manner of Egypt:"
b'derek Mitzraim, lit., in the way, i.e., the Egyptians' mode of acting;
derek denotes the course of active procedure, and also, as in [Isa
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#026) and [Amo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#010), the course of passive endurance.

[Isaiah 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 10:25</span></span>

A still further reason is given for the elevating words, with a
resumption of the grounds of consolation upon which they were founded.
"For yet a very little the indignation is past, and my wrath turns to
destroy them: and Jehovah of hosts moves the whip over it, as He smote
Midian at the rock of Oreb; and His staff stretches out over the sea,
and He lifts it up in the manner of Egypt." The expression "a very
little" (as in [Isa 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014); [Isa
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#017)) does not date from the actual
present, when the Assyrian oppressions had not yet begun, but from the
ideal present, when they were threatening Israel with destruction. The
indignation of Jehovah would then suddenly come to an end (câlâh za‛am,
borrowed in [Dan 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#036), and to be
interpreted in accordance with [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020)); and the wrath of Jehovah would
be, or go, ‛al-tabilthâm. Luzzatto recommends the following emendation
of the text, יתּם על־תּבל ואפּי, "and my wrath against the world will
cease," tēbēl being used, as in [Isa
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#017), with reference to the
oikoumenon as enslaved by the imperial power. But the received text
gives a better train of thought, if we connect it with [Isa
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#026). We must not be led astray,
however, by the preposition ‛al, and take the words as meaning, My wrath
(burneth) over the destruction inflicted by Asshur upon the people of
God, or the destruction endured by the latter. It is to the destruction
of the Assyrians that the wrath of Jehovah is now directed; ‛al being
used, as it frequently is, to indicate the object upon which the eye is
fixed, or to which the intention points ([Psa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008); [Psa
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#042)). With this explanation [Isa
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#025) leads on to [Isa
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#026). The destruction of Asshur is
predicted there in two figures drawn from occurrences in the olden time.
The almighty Judge would swing the whip over Asshur (‛orer, agitare, as
in [Sa2 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#018)), and smite it, as
Midian was once smitten. The rock of Oreb is the place where the
Ephraimites slew the Midianitish king 'Oreb ([Jdg
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#025)). His staff would then be over
the sea, i.e., would be stretched out, like the wonder-working staff of
Moses, over the sea of affliction, into which the Assyrians had driven
Israel (yâm, the sea, an emblem borrowed from the type; see Kohler on
[Zac 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011), cf., [Psa
66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006)); and He would lift it up,
commanding the waves of the sea, so that they would swallow Asshur. "In
the manner of Egypt:" b'derek Mitzraim (according to Luzzatto in both
instances, "on the way to Egypt," which restricts the Assyrian bondage
in a most unhistorical manner to the time of the Egyptian campaign)
signifies in [Isa 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024), as the
Egyptians lifted it up; but here, as it was lifted up above the
Egyptians. The expression is intentionally conformed to that in [Isa
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024) : because Asshur had lifted up
the rod over Israel in the Egyptian manner, Jehovah would lift it up
over Asshur in the Egyptian manner also.

[Isaiah 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 10:27</span></span>

The yoke of the imperial power would then burst asunder. "And it will
come to pass in that day, its burden will remove from thy shoulder, and
its yoke from thy neck; and the yoke will be destroyed from the pressure
of the fat." We have here two figures: in the first (cessabit onus ejus
a cervice tua) Israel is represented as a beast of burden; in the second
(et jugum ejus a collo tuo), as a beast of draught. And this second
figure is divided again into two fields. For yâsūr merely affirms that
the yoke, like the burden, will be taken away from Israel; but chubbal,
that the yoke itself will snap, from the pressure of his fat strong neck
against it. Knobel, who alters the text, objects to this on the ground
that the yoke was a cross piece of wood, and not a collar. And no doubt
the simple yoke is a cross piece of wood, which is fastened to the
forehead of the ox (generally of two oxen yoked together: jumenta =
jugmenta, like jugum, from jungere); but the derivation of the name
itself, ‛ol, from ‛âlal, points to the connection of the cross piece of
wood with a collar, and here the yoke is expressly described as lying
round the neck (and not merely fastened against the forehead). There is
no necessity, therefore, to read chebel (chablo), as Knobel proposes;
chubbal (Arabic chubbila) indicates her a corrumpi consequent upon a
disrumpi. (On p'nē, vid., [Job 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005);
and for the application of the term mippenē to energy manifesting itself
in its effects, compare [Psa 68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003) as
an example.) Moreover, as Kimchi has observed, in most instances the
yoke creates a wound in the fat flesh of the ox by pressure and
friction; but here the very opposite occurs, and the fatness of the ox
leads to the destruction of the yoke (compare the figure of grafting
employed in [Rom 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#017), to which Paul
gives a turn altogether contrary to nature). Salvation, as the double
turn in the second figure affirms, comes no less from within ([Isa
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#027)) than from without ([Isa
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#027)). It is no less a consequence of
the world-conquering grace at work in Isaiah, than a miracle wrought for
Israel upon their foes.

The prophet now proceeds to describe how the Assyrian army advances
steadily towards Jerusalem, spreading terror on every hand, and how,
when planted there like a towering forest, it falls to the ground before
the irresistible might of Jehovah. Eichhorn and Hitzig pronounce this
prophecy a vaticinium post eventum, because of its far too special
character; but Knobel regards it as a prophecy, because no Assyrian king
ever did take the course described; in other words, as a mere piece of
imagination, as Ewald maintains. Now, no doubt the Assyrian army, when
it marched against Jerusalem, came from the southwest, namely, from the
road to Egypt, and not directly from the north. Sennacherib had
conquered Lachish; he then encamped before Libnah, and it was thence
that he advanced towards Jerusalem. But the prophet had no intention of
giving a fragment out of the history of the war: all that he meant to do
was to give a lively representation of the future fact, that after
devastating the land of Judah, the Assyrian would attack Jerusalem.
There is no necessity whatever to contend, as Drechsler does, against
calling the description an ideal one. There is all the difference in the
world between idea and imagination. Idea is the essential root of the
real, and the reality is its historical form. This form, its essential
manifestation, may be either this or that, so far as individual features
are concerned, without any violation of its essential character. What
the prophet here predicts has, when properly interpreted, been all
literally fulfilled. The Assyrian did come from the north with the
storm-steps of a conqueror, and the cities named were really exposed to
the dangers and terrors of war. And this was what the prophet depicted,
looking as he did from a divine eminence, and drawing from the heart of
the divine counsels, and then painting the future with colours which
were but the broken lights of those counsels as they existed in his own
mind.

[Isaiah 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 10:28</span></span>

Aesthetically considered, the description is one of the most magnificent
that human poetry has ever produced. "He comes upon Ayyath, passes
through Migron; in Michmash he leaves his baggage. They go through the
pass: let Geba be our quarters for the night! Ramah trembles; Gibeah of
Saul flees. Scream aloud, O daughter of Gallim! Only listen, O Laysha!
Poor Anathoth! Madmenah hurries away; the inhabitants of Gebim rescue.
He still halts in Nob today; swings his hand over the mountain of the
daughter of Zion, the hill of Jerusalem. Behold, the Lord, Jehovah of
hosts, lops down the branches with terrific force; and those of towering
growth are hewn down, and the lofty are humbled. And He fells the
thickets of the forest with iron; and Lebanon, it falls by a Majestic
One." When the Assyrian came upon Ayyath (= Ayyah, [Ch1
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#028) (?), [Neh
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#031), generally hâ-‛ai, or 'Ai),
about thirty miles to the north-east of Jerusalem, he trod for the first
time upon Benjaminitish territory, which was under the sway of Judaea.
The name of this 'Ai, which signifies "stone-heap," tallies, as Knobel
observes, with the name of the Tell el-hagar, which is situated about
three-quarters of an hour to the south-east of Beitn, i.e., Bethel. But
there are tombs, reservoirs, and ruins to be seen about an hour to the
south-east of Beitin; and these Robinson associates with Ai. From Ai,
however, the army will not proceed towards Jerusalem by the ordinary
route, viz., the great north road (or "Nablus road"); but, in order to
surprise Jerusalem, it takes a different route, in which it will have to
cross three deep and difficult valleys. From Ai they pass to Migron, the
name of which has apparently been preserved in the ruins of Burg Magrun,
situated about eight minutes' walk from Beitn.

(Note: I also find the name written Magrum (read Magrun), which is
probably taken from a more correct hearsay than the Machrn of Robinson
(ii. 127).)

Michmash is still to be found in the form of a deserted village with
ruins, under the name of Muchms, on the eastern side of the valley of
Migron. Here they deposit their baggage (hiphkid, [Jer
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#020)), so far as they are able to
dispense with it - either to leave it lying there, or to have it
conveyed after them by an easier route. For they proceed thence through
the pass of Michmash, a deep and precipitous ravine about forty-eight
minutes in breadth, the present Wady Suweinit. "The pass" (ma‛bârâh) is
the defile of Michmash, with two prominent rocky cliffs, where Jonathan
had his adventure with the garrison of the Philistines. One of these
cliffs was called Seneh ([Sa1 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#004)), a
name which suggests es-Suweinit. Through this defile they pass,
encouraging one another, as they proceed along the difficult march, by
the prospect of passing the night in Geba, which is close at hand. It is
still disputed whether this Geba is the same place as the following
Gibeah of Saul or not. There is at the present time a village called
Geba' below Muchms, situated upon an eminence. The almost universal
opinion now is, that this is not Gibeah of Saul, but that the latter is
to be seen in the prominent Tell (Tuleil) el-Fl, which is situated
farther south. This is possibly correct.

(Note: This is supported by Robinson in his Later Biblical Researches in
Palestine (1857), by Valentiner (pastor at Jerusalem), and by Keil in
the Commentary on Joshua, Judges, etc. ([Jos
18:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021)), where all the more recent
writings on this topographical question are given.)

For there can be no doubt that this mountain, the name of which
signifies "Bean-hill," would be a very strong position, and one very
suitable for Gibeah of Saul; and the supposition that there were two
places in Benjamin named Geba, Gibeah, or Gibeath, is favoured at any
rate by [Jos 18:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021), where Geba and
Gibeath are distinguished from one another. And this mountain, which is
situated to the south of er-Rm - that is to say, between the ancient
Ramah and Anathoth - tallies very well with the route of the Assyrian as
here described; whilst it is very improbable that Isaiah has designated
the very same place first of all Geba, and then (for what reason no one
can tell) Gibeah of Saul. We therefore adopt the view, that the Assyrian
army took up its quarters for the night at Geba, which still bears this
name, spreading terror in all directions, both east and west, and still
more towards the south. Starting in the morning from the deep valley
between Michmash and Geba, they pass on one side of Rama (the present
er-Rm), situated half an hour to the west of Geba, which trembles as it
sees them go by; and the inhabitants of Gibeath of Saul, upon the
"Bean-hill," a height that commands the whole of the surrounding
country, take to flight when they pass by. Every halting-place on their
route brings them nearer to Jerusalem. The prophet goes in spirit
through it all. It is so objectively real to him, that it produces the
utmost anxiety and pain. The cities and villages of the district are
lost.

He appeals to the daughter, i.e., the population, of Gallim, to raise a
far-sounding yell of lamentation with their voice (Ges. 138, 1, Anm. 3),
and calls out in deep sympathy to Laysha, which was close by (on the two
places, both of which have vanished now, see [Sa1
25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044) and [Jdg
18:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#029)), "only listen," the enemy is
coming nearer and nearer; and then for Anathoth (‛Anâtâ, still to be
seen about an hour and a quarter to the north of Jerusalem) he utters
this lamentation (taking the name as an omen of its fate): O poor
Anathoth! There is no necessity for any alteration of the text; ‛anniyâh
is an appeal, or rather an exclamation, as in [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011); and ‛anâthoth follows,
according to the same verbal order as in [Isa
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012), unless indeed we take it at
once as an adjective written before the noun - an arrangement of the
words which may possibly have been admissible in such interjectional
sentences. The catastrophe so much to be dreaded by Jerusalem draws
nearer and nearer. Madmenah (dung-hill, see Comm. on Job, at [Job
9:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#011)) flees in anxious haste: the
inhabitants of Gebim (water-pits) carry off their possessions (הּעיז,
from עוּז, to flee, related to chush, hence to carry off in flight, to
bring in haste to a place of security, [Exo
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#019), cf., [Jer
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006); [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001); synonymous with hēnı̄s, [Exo
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#020); [Jdg
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011); different from ‛âzaz, to be
firm, strong, defiant, from which mâ‛oz, a fortress, is derived - in
distinction from the Arabic ma‛âdh, a place of refuge: comp. [Isa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002), to flee to Pharaoh's shelter).
There are no traces left of either place. The passage is generally
understood as implying that the army rested another day in Nob. But this
would be altogether at variance with the design - to take Jerusalem by
surprise by the suddenness of the destructive blow. We therefore render
it, "Even to-day he will halt in Nob" (in eo est ut subsistat, Ges. 132,
Anm. 1) - namely, to gather up fresh strength there in front of the city
which was doomed to destruction, and to arrange the plan of attack. The
supposition that Nob was the village of el-'Isawiye, which is still
inhabited, and lies to the south-west of Ant, fifty-five minutes to the
north of Jerusalem, is at variance with the situation, as correctly
described by Jerome, when he says: "Stans in oppidulo Nob et procul
urbem conspiciens Jerusalem." A far more appropriate situation is to be
found in the hill which rises to the north of Jerusalem, and which is
called Sadr, from its breast-like projection or roundness - a name which
is related in meaning to nob, nâb, to rise. From this eminence the way
leads down into the valley of Kidron; and as you descend, the city
spreads out before you at a very little distance off. It may have been
here, in the prophet's view, that the Assyrians halted.

(Note: This is the opinion of Valentiner, who also regards the march of
the Assyrians as an "execution-march" in two columns, one of which took
the road through the difficult ground to the east, whilst the other
inflicted punishment upon the places that stood near the road. The text
does not require this, however, but describes a march, which spread
alarm both right and left as it went along.)

It was not long, however (as the yenōphēph which follows ἀσυνδέτως
implies), before his hand was drawn out to strike ([Isa
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015); [Isa
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016)), and swing over the mountain of
the daughter of Zion ([Isa 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)), over
the city of the holy hill. But what would Jehovah do, who was the only
One who could save His threatened dwelling-place in the face of such an
army? As far as [Isa 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#032), the
prophet's address moved on at a hurried, stormy pace; it then halted,
and seemed, as it were, panting with anxiety; it now breaks forth in a
dactylic movement, like a long rolling thunder. The hostile army stands
in front of Jerusalem, like a broad dense forest. But it is soon
manifest that Jerusalem has a God who cannot be defied with impunity,
and who will not leave His city in the lurch at the decisive moment,
like the gods of Carchemish and Calno. Jehovah is the Lord, the God of
both spiritual and starry hosts. He smites down the branches of this
forest of an army: sē‛ēph is a so-called piel privativum, to lop (lit.
to take the branches in hand; cf., sikkēl, [Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)); and pu'rah = pe'urah (in Ezekiel
pō'rah) is used like the Latin frons, to include both branches and
foliage - in other words, the leafy branches as the ornament of the
tree, or the branches as adorned with leaves. The instrument He employs
is ma‛arâtzâh, his terrifying and crushing power (compare the verb in
[Isa 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#019), [Isa
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#021)). And even the lofty trunks of
the forest thus cleared of branches and leaves do not remain; they lie
hewn down, and the lofty ones must fall. It is just the same with the
trunks, i.e., the leaders, as with the branches and the foliage, i.e.,
with the great crowded masses. The whole of the forest thicket (as in
[Isa 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#017)) he hews down (nikkaph,
third pers. piel, though it may also be niphal); and Lebanon, i.e., the
army of Asshur which is now standing opposite to Mount Zion, like
Lebanon with its forest of cedars, falls down through a Majestic One
('addı̄r), i.e., through Jehovah ([Isa
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#021), cf., [Psa
76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005); [Psa
93:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#004)). In the account of the
fulfilment ([Isa 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)) it is the
angel of the Lord (mal'ach Jehovah), who is represented as destroying
the hundred and eighty-five thousand in the Assyrian camp in a single
night. The angel of Jehovah is not a messenger of God sent from afar,
but the chosen organ of the ever-present divine power.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 11](isa011)

</div>
