<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa010)  [Next](isa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

[Isaiah 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 11:1</span></span>

This is the fate of the imperial power of the world. When the axe is
laid to it, it falls without hope. But in Israel spring is returning.
"And there cometh forth a twig out of the stump of Jesse, and a shoot
from its roots bringeth forth fruit." The world-power resembles the
cedar-forest of Lebanon; the house of David, on the other hand, because
of its apostasy, is like the stump of a felled tree (geza‛, truncus,
from gâza‛, truncare), like a root without stem, branches, or crown. The
world-kingdom, at the height of its power, presents the most striking
contrast to Israel and the house of David in the uttermost depth
announced in [Isa 6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001) fin.,
mutilated and reduced to the lowliness of its Bethlehemitish origin. But
whereas the Lebanon of the imperial power is thrown down, to remain
prostrate; the house of David renews its youth. And whilst the former
has no sooner reached the summit of its glory, than it is suddenly cast
down; the latter, having been reduced to the utmost danger of
destruction, is suddenly exalted. What Pliny says of certain trees,
"inarescunt rursusque adolescunt, senescunt quidem, sed e radicibus
repullulant," is fulfilled in the tree of Davidic royalty, that has its
roots in Jesse (for the figure itself, see F. V. Lasaulx, Philosophie
der Geschichte, pp. 117-119). Out of the stumps of Jesse, i.e., out of
the remnant of the chosen royal family which has sunk down to the
insignificance of the house from which it sprang, there comes forth a
twig (choter), which promises to supply the place of the trunk and
crown; and down below, in the roots covered with earth, and only rising
a little above it, there shows itself a nētzer, i.e., a fresh green
shoot (from nâtzēr, to shine or blossom). In the historical account of
the fulfilment, even the ring of the words of the prophecy is noticed:
the nētzer, at first so humble and insignificant, was a poor despised
Nazarene ([Mat 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023)). But the
expression yiphreh shows at once that it will not stop at this lowliness
of origin. The shoot will bring forth fruit (pârâh, different in
meaning, and possibly

(Note: We say possibly, for the Indo-Germanic root bhar, to bear
(Sanscr. bharâmi = φέρω, fero, cf., ferax, fertilis), which Gesenius
takes as determining the radical meaning of pârach, cannot be traced
with any certainty in the Semitic. Nevertheless peri and perach bear the
same relation to one another, in the ordinary usage of the language, as
fruit and blossom: the former is so called, as that which has broken
through (cf., pĕtĕr); the latter, as that which has broken up, or
budded.)

also in root, from pârach, to blossom and bud). In the humble beginning
there lies a power which will carry it up to a great height by a steady
and certain process ([Eze 17:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022)).
The twig which is shooting up on the ground will become a tree, and this
tree will have a crown laden with fruit. Consequently the state of
humiliation will be followed by one of exaltation and perfection.

[Isaiah 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 11:2</span></span>

Jehovah acknowledges Him, and consecrates and equips Him for His great
work with the seven spirits."And the Spirit of Jehovah descends upon
Him, spirit of wisdom and understanding, spirit of counsel and might,
spirit of knowledge and fear of Jehovah." "The Spirit of Jehovah" (ruach
Yehovah) is the Divine Spirit, as the communicative vehicle of the whole
creative fulness of divine powers. Then follow the six spirits,
comprehended by the ruach Yehovah in three pairs, of which the first
relates to the intellectual life, the second to the practical life, and
the third to the direct relation to God. For chocmâh (wisdom) is the
power of discerning the nature of things through the appearance, and
bı̄nâh (understanding) the power of discerning the differences of things
in their appearance; the former is σοφία, the latter διάκρισις or
σύνεσις. "Counsel" (etzâh) is the gift of forming right conclusions, and
"might" (gebūrâh) the ability to carry them out with energy. "The
knowledge of Jehovah" (da‛ath Yehovah) is knowledge founded upon the
fellowship of love; and "the fear of Jehovah" (yir'ath Yehovâh), fear
absorbed in reverence. There are seven spirits, which are enumerated in
order from the highest downwards; since the spirit of the fear of
Jehovah is the basis of the whole ([Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007); [Job
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#028); [Psa
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010)), and the Spirit of Jehovah is
the heart of all. It corresponds to the shaft of the seven-lighted
candlestick, and the three pair of arms that proceeded from it. In these
seven forms the Holy Spirit descended upon the second David for a
permanent possession, as is affirmed in the perf. consec. ונהה (with the
tone upon the ultimate, on account of the following guttural, to prevent
its being pronounced unintelligibly;

(Note: This moving forward of the tone to the last syllable is also
found before Ayin in [Gen 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#010), and
very commonly with kūmâh, and verbs of a similar kind; also before
Elohim and Jehovah, to be read Adonai, and before the half-guttural
resh, [Psa 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001); [Psa
119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154), but nowhere on any other
ground than the orthophonic rather than euphonic one mentioned above;
compare also וסרה in [Isa 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013), with
וסרוּ (with ה following) in [Exo 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#007).)

nuach like καταβαίνειν καὶ μένειν, [Joh
1:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032)). The seven torches before the
throne of God ([Rev 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005), cf., [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)) burn and give light in His soul.
The seven spirits are His seven eyes ([Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)).

[Isaiah 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 11:3</span></span>

And His regal conduct is regulated by this His thoroughly spiritual
nature."And fear of Jehovah is fragrance to Him; and He judges not
according to outward sight, neither does He pass sentence according to
outward hearing." We must not render it: His smelling is the smelling of
the fear of God, i.e., the penetration of it with a keen judicial
insight (as Hengstenberg and Umbreit understand it); for hērı̄ach with
the preposition Beth has not merely the signification to smell (as when
followed by an accusative, [Job
39:25](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#025)), but to smell with satisfaction
(like בּ ראה, to see with satisfaction), [Exo
30:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#038); [Lev
26:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#031); [Amo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#021). The fear of God is that which He
smells with satisfaction; it is rēach nı̄choach to Him. Meier's
objection, that fear of God is not a thing that can be smelt, and
therefore that hērı̄ach must signify to breathe, is a trivial one. Just
as the outward man has five senses for the material world, the inner man
has also a sensorium for the spiritual world, which discerns different
things in different ways. Thus the second David scents the fear of God,
and only the fear of God, as a pleasant fragrance; for the fear of God
is a sacrifice of adoration continually ascending to God. His favour or
displeasure does not depend upon brilliant or repulsive external
qualities; He does not judge according to outward appearances, but
according to the relation of the heart to His God.

[Isaiah 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 11:4</span></span>

This is the standard according to which He will judge when saving, and
judge when punishing. "And judges the poor with righteousness, and
passes sentence with equity for the humble in the land; and smites the
earth with the rod of His mouth, and with the breath of His lips He
slays the wicked. And righteousness is the girdle of His loins, and
faithfulness the girdle of His hips." The main feature in [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004) is to be seen in the objective
ideas. He will do justice to the dallim, the weak and helpless, by
adopting an incorruptibly righteous course towards their oppressors, and
decide with straightforwardness for the humble or meek of the land:
‛ânâv, like ‛ânı̄, from ‛ânâh, to bend, the latter denoting a person
bowed down by misfortune, the former a person inwardly bowed down, i.e.,
from all self-conceit (hōcı̄ach l', as in [Job
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#021)). The poor and humble, or meek,
are the peculiar objects of His royal care; just as it was really to
them that the first beatitudes of the Sermon on the Mount applied. But
"the earth" and "the wicked" (the latter is not to be understood
collectively, but, as in several passages in the Old Testament, viz.,
[Psa 68:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#022); [Psa
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006); [Hab
3:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013), as pointing forward
prophetically to an eschatological person, in whom hostility towards
Jehovah and His Anointed culminates most satanically) will experience
the full force of His penal righteousness. The very word of His mouth is
a rod which shatters in pieces ([Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009); [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016)); and the breath of His lips is
sufficient to destroy, without standing in need of any further means
([Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008)). As the girdle upon the
hips (mothnaim, lxx την̀ ὀσφύν), and in front upon the loins (chălâzaim,
lxx τὰς πλευράς), fastens the clothes together, so all the qualities and
active powers of His person have for their band tzedâkâh, which follows
the inviolable norm of the divine will, and hâ'emūnâh, which holds
immovably to the course divinely appointed, according to promise ([Isa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001)). Special prominence is given by
the article to 'emūnâh; He is the faithful and true witness ([Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005); [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014)). Consequently with Him there
commences a new epoch, in which the Son of David and His righteousness
acquire a world-subduing force, and find their home in a humanity that
has sprung, like Himself, out of deep humiliation.

[Isaiah 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 11:6</span></span>

The fruit of righteousness is peace, which now reigns in humanity under
the rule of the Prince of Peace, and even in the animal world, with
nothing whatever to disturb it. "And the wolf dwells with the lamb, and
the leopard lies down with the kid; and calf and lion and stalled ox
together: a little boy drives them. And cow and bear go to the pasture;
their young ones lie down together: and the lion eats shopped straw like
the ox. And the suckling plays by the hole of the adder, and the weaned
child stretches its hand to the pupil of the basilisk-viper. They will
not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain: for the land is filled
with knowledge of Jehovah, like the waters covering the sea." The
fathers, and such commentators as Luther, Calvin, and Vitringa, have
taken all these figures from the animal world as symbolical. Modern
rationalists, on the other hand, understand them literally, but regard
the whole as a beautiful dream and wish. It is a prophecy, however, the
realization of which is to be expected on this side of the boundary
between time and eternity, and, as Paul has shown in Rom 8, is an
integral link in the predestined course of the history of salvation
(Hengstenberg, Umbreit, Hofmann, Drechsler). There now reign among
irrational creatures, from the greatest to the least, - even among such
as are invisible, - fierce conflicts and bloodthirstiness of the most
savage kind. But when the Son of David enters upon the full possession
of His royal inheritance, the peace of paradise will be renewed, and all
that is true in the popular legends of the golden age be realized and
confirmed. This is what the prophet depicts in such lovely colours. The
wolf and lamb, those two hereditary foes, will be perfectly reconciled
then. The leopard will let the teazing kid lie down beside it. The lion,
between the calf and stalled ox, neither seizes upon its weaker
neighbour, nor longs for the fatter one. Cow and bear graze together,
whilst their young ones lie side beside in the pasture. The lion no
longer thirsts for blood, but contents itself, like the ox, with chopped
straw. The suckling pursues its sport (pilpel of שׁעע, mulcere) by the
adder's hole, and the child just weaned stretches out its hand boldly
and fearlessly to me'ūrath tziph‛ōni. It is evident from [Jer
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017) that tziph‛ōni is the name of a
species of snake. According to Aquila and the Vulgate, it is basiliskos,
serpens regulus, possibly from tzaph, to pipe or hiss (Ges., Frst); for
Isidorus, in his Origg. xii. 4, says, Sibilus idem est qui et regulus;
sibilo enim occidit, antequam mordeat vel exurat. For the hapax leg.
hâdâh, the meaning dirigere, tendere, is established by the Arabic; but
there is all the more uncertainty about the meaning of the hap. leg.
מאורה. According to the parallel חר, it seems to signify the hollow
(Syr., Vulg., lxx, κοίτη): whether from אּוּר = עוּר, from which comes
מערה; or from אור, the light-hole (like מאור, which occurs in the
Mishna, Ohaloth xiii. 1) or opening where a cavern opens to the light of
day. It is probable, however, that me'ūrâh refers to something that
exerts an attractive influence upon the child, either the "blending of
colours" (Saad. renders tziph‛oni, errakas', the motley snake), or
better still, the "pupil of the eye" (Targum), taking the word as a
feminine of mâ'ōr, the light of the eye (b. Erubin 55b - the power of
vision). The look of a snake, more especially of the basilisk (not
merely the basilisk-lizard, but also the basilisk-viper), was supposed
to have a paralyzing and bewitching influence; but now the snake will
lose this pernicious power ([Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)), and the basilisk become so
tame and harmless, as to let children handle its sparkling eyes as if
they were jewels. All this, as we should say with Luthardt and Hofmann
(Schriftbeweis, ii. 2, 567), is only colouring which the hand of the
prophet employs, for the purpose of painting the peace of that glorified
state which surpasses all possibility of description; and it is
unquestionably necessary to take the thought of the promise in a
spiritual sense, without adhering literally to the medium employed in
expressing it. But, on the other hand, we must guard against treating
the description itself as merely a drapery thrown around the actual
object; whereas it is rather the refraction of the object in the mind of
the prophet himself, and therefore a manifestation of the true nature of
that which he actually saw.

But are the animals to be taken as the subject in [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009) also? The subject that most
naturally suggests itself is undoubtedly the animals, of which a few
that are alarming and destructive to men have been mentioned just
before. And the fact that they really are thought of as the subject, is
confirmed by [Isa 65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025), where [Isa
11:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006) is repeated in a compendious
form. The idea that ירעוּ requires men as the subject, is refuted by the
common רעה חיּה (compare the parallel promise in [Eze
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#025), which rests upon [Hos
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#020)). That the term yashchithu can be
applied to animals, is evident from [Jer
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030), and may be assumed as a matter
of course. But if the animals are the subject, har kodshi (my holy
mountain) is not Zion-Moriah, upon which wild beasts never made their
home in historical times; but, as the generalizing col (all) clearly
shows, the whole of the holy mountain-land of Israel: har kodshi has
just this meaning in [Isa 57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013) (cf.,
[Psa 78:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#054); [Exo
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#017)). The fact that peace prevails
in the animal world, and also peace between man and beast, is then
attributed to the universal prevalence of the knowledge of God, in
consequence of which that destructive hostility between the animal world
and man, by which estrangement and apostasy from God were so often
punished ([Kg2 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#025); [Eze
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#015), etc.: see also [Isa
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#024)), have entirely come to an end.
The meaning of "the earth" is also determined by that of "all my holy
mountain." The land of Israel, the dominion of the Son of David in the
more restricted sense, will be from this time forward the paradisaical
centre, as it were, of the whole earth - a prelude of its future state
of perfect and universal glorification ([Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003), "all the earth"). It has now
become full of "the knowledge of Jehovah," i.e., of that experimental
knowledge which consists in the fellowship of love (דעה, like לדה, is a
secondary form of דעת, the more common infinitive or verbal noun from
ידע: Ges. 133, 1), like the waters which cover the sea, i.e., bottom of
the sea (compare [Hab 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#014), where
lâda‛ath is a virtual accusative, full of that which is to be known).
"Cover:" cissâh l' (like sâcac l', [Psa
91:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#004)), signifies to afford a covering
to another; the Lamed is frequently introduced with a participle (in
Arabic regularly) as a sign of the object (Ewald, 292, e), and the
omission of the article in the case of mecassim is a natural consequence
of the inverted order of the words.

[Isaiah 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 11:10</span></span>

The prophet has now described, in [Isa
11:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001), the righteous conduct of the
Son of David, and in [Isa 11:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006) the
peace which prevails under His government, and extends even to the
animal world, and which is consequent upon the living knowledge of God
that has now become universal, that is to say, of the spiritual
transformation of the people subject to His sway, - an allusion full of
enigmas, but one which is more clearly expounded in the following verse,
both in its direct contents and also in all that it presupposes. "And it
will come to pass in that day: the root-sprout of Jesse, which stands as
a banner of the peoples, for it will nations ask, and its place of rest
is glory." The first question which is disposed of here, has reference
to the apparent restriction thus far of all the blessings of this
peaceful rule to Israel and the land of Israel. This restriction, as we
now learn, is not for its own sake, but is simply the means of an
unlimited extension of this fulness of blessing. The proud tree of the
Davidic sovereignty is hewn down, and nothing is left except the root.
The new David is shoresh Yishai (the root-sprout of Jesse), and
therefore in a certain sense the root itself, because the latter would
long ago have perished if it had not borne within itself from the very
commencement Him who was now about to issue from it. But when He who had
been concealed in the root of Jesse as its sap and strength should have
become the rejuvenated root of Jesse itself (cf., [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016)), He would be exalted from this
lowly beginning l'nēs ‛ammin, into a banner summoning the nations to
assemble, and uniting them around itself. Thus visible to all the world,
He would attract the attention of the heathen to Himself, and they would
turn to Him with zeal, and His menuchâh, i.e., the place where He had
settled down to live and reign (for the word in this local sense,
compare [Num 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033) and [Psa
132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008), [Psa
132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)), would be glory, i.e., the
dwelling-place and palace of a king whose light shines over all, who has
all beneath His rule, and who gathers all nations around Himself. The
Vulgate renders it "et sepulcrum ejus gloriosum" (a leading passage for
encouraging pilgrimages), but the passion is here entirely swallowed up
by the splendour of the figure of royalty; and menuchah is no more the
place of rest in the grave than nēs is the cross, although undoubtedly
the cross has become the banner in the actual fulfilment, which divides
the parousia of Christ into a first and second coming.

[Isaiah 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 11:11</span></span>

A second question also concerns Israel. The nation out of which and for
which this king will primarily arise, will before that time be scattered
far away from its native land, in accordance with the revelation in [Isa
6:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001). How, then, will it be possible
for Him to reign in the midst of it? "And it will come to pass in that
day, the Lord will stretch out His hand again a second time to redeem
the remnant of His people that shall be left, out of Asshur, and out of
Egypt, and out of Pathros, and out of Ethiopia, and out of 'Elam, and
out of Shinar, and out of Hamath, and out of the islands of the sea. And
he raises a banner for the nations, and fetches home the outcasts of
Israel; and the dispersed of Judah will He assemble from the four
borders of the earth." Asshur and Egypt stand here in front, and side by
side, as the two great powers of the time of Isaiah (cf., [Isa
7:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)). As appendices to Egypt, we
have (1.) Pathros, hierogl. to-rēs, and with the article petorēs, the
southland, i.e., Upper Egypt, so that Mizraim in the stricter sense is
Lower Egypt (see, on the other hand, [Jer
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015)); and (2.) Cush, the land which
lies still farther south than Upper Egypt on both sides of the Arabian
Gulf; and as appendices to Asshur, (1.) 'Elam, i.e., Elymais, in
southern Media, to the east of the Tigris; and (2.) Shinar, the plain to
the south of the junction of the Euphrates and Tigris. Then follow the
Syrian Hamath at the northern foot of the Lebanon; and lastly, "the
islands of the sea," i.e., the islands and coast-land of the
Mediterranean, together with the whole of the insular continent of
Europe. There was no such diaspora of Israel at the time when the
prophet uttered this prediction, nor indeed even after the dissolution
of the northern kingdom; so that the specification is not historical,
but prophetic. The redemption which the prophet here foretells is a
second, to be followed by no third; consequently the banishment out of
which Israel is redeemed is the ultimate form of that which is
threatened in [Isa 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#012) (cf., [Deu
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001).). It is the second redemption,
the counterpart of the Egyptian. He will then stretch out His hand again
(yōsiph, supply lishloach); and as He once delivered Israel out of
Egypt, so will He now redeem it - purchase it back (kânâh, opp. mâcar)
out of all the countries named. The min attached to the names of the
countries is to be construed with liknōth. Observe how, in the prophet's
view, the conversion of the heathen becomes the means of the redemption
of Israel. The course which the history of salvation has taken since the
first coming of Christ, and which is will continue to take to the end,
as described by Paul in the Epistle to the Romans, is distinctly
indicated by the prophet. At the word of Jehovah the heathen will set
His people free, and even escort them ([Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022); [Isa
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)); and thus He will gather again
('âsaph, with reference to the one gathering point; kibbētz, with
reference to the dispersion of those who are to be gathered together)
from the utmost ends of the four quarters of the globe, "the outcasts of
the kingdom of Israel, and the dispersed of the kingdom of Judah"
(nidchē Yisrâe ūnephutzōth Yehūdâh: nidchē = niddechē, with the dagesh
dropped before the following guttural),

(Note: The same occurs in ויסעוּ, וישׂאוּ, ויקנאוּ, מלאוּ, שׁלחוּ,
תּקחוּ. In every case the dagesh has fallen out because of the following
guttural (Luzzatto, Gramm. 180).)

both men and women.

[Isaiah 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 11:13</span></span>

But this calls to mind the present rent in the unity of the nation; and
the third question very naturally arises, whether this rent will
continue. The answer to this is given in [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013) : "And the jealousy of Ephraim
is removed, and the adversaries of Judah are cut off; Ephraim will not
show jealousy towards Judah, and Judah will not oppose Ephraim." As the
suffix and genitive after tzōrēr are objective in every other instance
(e.g., [Amo 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#012)), tzorerē Yehudâh
must mean, not those members of Judah who are hostile to Ephraim, as
Ewald, Knobel, and others suppose, but those members of Ephraim who are
hostile to Judah, as Umbreit and Schegg expound it. In [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013) the prophet has chiefly in his
mind the old feeling of enmity cherished by the northern tribes, more
especially those of Joseph, towards the tribe of Judah, which issued
eventually in the division of the kingdom. It is only in [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013) that he predicts the termination
of the hostility of Judah towards Ephraim. The people, when thus brought
home again, would form one fraternally united nation, whilst all who
broke the peace of this unity would be exposed to the immediate judgment
of God (yiccârēthu, will be cut off).

[Isaiah 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 11:14</span></span>

A fourth question has reference to the relation between this Israel of
the future and the surrounding nations, such as the warlike Philistines,
the predatory nomad tribes of the East, the unbrotherly Edomites, the
boasting Moabites, and the cruel Ammonites. Will they not disturb and
weaken the new Israel, as they did the old? "And they fly upon the
shoulder of the Philistines seawards; unitedly they plunder the sons of
the East: they seize upon Edom and Moab, and the sons of Ammon are
subject to them." Câthēph (shoulder) was the peculiar name of the
coast-land of Philistia which sloped off towards the sea ([Jos
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#011)); but here it is used with an
implied allusion to this, to signify the shoulder of the Philistian
nation (becâthēph = becĕthĕph; for the cause see at [Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002)), upon which Israel plunges down
like an eagle from the height of its mountain-land. The "object of the
stretching out of their hand" is equivalent to the object of their
grasp. And whenever any one of the surrounding nations mentioned should
attack Israel, the whole people would make common cause, and act
together. How does this warlike prospect square, however, with the
previous promise of paradisaical peace, and the end of all warfare which
this promise presupposes (cf., [Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004))? This is a contradiction, the
solution of which is to be found in the fact that we have only figures
here, and figures drawn from the existing relations and warlike
engagements of the nation, in which the prophet pictures that supremacy
of the future united Israel over surrounding nations, which is to be
maintained by spiritual weapons.

[Isaiah 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 11:15</span></span>

He dwells still longer upon the miracles in which the antitypical
redemption will resemble the typical one. "And Jehovah pronounces the
ban upon the sea-tongue of Egypt, and swings His hand over the Euphrates
in the glow of His breath, and smites it into seven brooks, and makes it
so that men go through in shoes. And there will be a road for the
remnant of His people that shall be left, out of Asshur, as it was for
Israel in the day of its departure out of the land of Egypt." The two
countries of the diaspora mentioned first are Asshur and Egypt. And
Jehovah makes a way by His miraculous power for those who are returning
out of both and across both. The sea-tongue of Egypt, which runs between
Egypt and Arabia, i.e., the Red Sea (sinus Heroopolitanus, according to
another figure), He smites with the ban (hecherim, corresponding in
meaning to the pouring out of the vial of wrath in [Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012) -a stronger term than gâ‛ar,
e.g., [Psa 106:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#009)); and the consequence
of this is, that it affords a dry passage to those who are coming back
(though without there being any necessity to read hecherı̄b, or to follow
Meier and Knobel, who combine hecherı̄m with chârūm, [Lev
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#018), in the precarious sense of
splitting). And in order that the dividing of Jordan may have its
antitype also, Jehovah swings His hand over the Euphrates, to smite,
breathing upon it at the same time with burning breath, so that it is
split up into seven shallow brooks, through which men can walk in
sandals. בּעים stands, according to the law of sound, for בּעים; and the
ἁπ λεγ עים (with a fixed kametz), from עום = חום, חמם, to glow,
signifies a glowing heat - a meaning which is also so thoroughly
supported by the two Arabic verbs med. Ye ‛lm and glm (inf. ‛aim, gaim,
internal heat, burning thirst, also violent anger), that there is no
need whatever for the conjecture of Luzzatto and Gesenius, בעתסם. The
early translators (e.g., lxx πνεύματι βιαίῳ, Syr. beuchdono, with a
display of might) merely give conjectural renderings of the word, which
had become obsolete before their time; Saadia, however, renders it with
etymological correctness suchūn, from sachana, to be hot, or set on
fire. Thus, by changing the Euphrates in the (parching) heat of His
breath into seven shallow wadys, Jehovah makes a free course for His
people who come out of Asshur, etc. This was the idea which presented
itself to the prophet in just this shape, though it by no means followed
that it must necessarily embody itself in history in this particular
form.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 12](isa012)

</div>
