<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa036)  [Next](isa038) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#001)

[Isaiah 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 37:1</span></span>

The king and the deputation apply to Isaiah. "And it came to pass, when
king Hizkiyahu had heard, he rent his clothes, and wrapped himself in
mourning linen, and went into the house of Jehovah. And sent Eliakim the
house-minister, and Shebna (K. omits את) the chancellor, and the eldest
of the priests, wrapped in mourning linen, to Isaiah son of Amoz, the
prophet (K. has what is inadmissible: the prophet son of Amoz). And they
said to him, Thus saith Hizkiyahu, A day of affliction, and punishment,
and blasphemy is this day; for children are come to the matrix, and
there is no strength to bring them forth. Perhaps Jehovah thy God will
hear the words (K. all the words) of Rabshakeh, with which the king of
Asshur his lord has sent him to revile the living God; and Jehovah thy
God will punish for the words which He hath heard, and thou wilt make
intercession for the remnant that still exists." The distinguished
embassy is a proof of the distinction of the prophet himself (Knobel).
The character of the deputation accorded with its object, which was to
obtain a consolatory word for the king and people. In the form of the
instructions we recognise again the flowing style of Isaiah. תּוכחה, as
a synonym of מוּסר, נקם, is used as in [Hos
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#009); נאצה (from the kal נאץ) according
to [Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004); [Isa
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024); [Isa
52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005), like נאצה (from the piel נאץ),
[Neh 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#018), [Neh
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026) (reviling, i.e., reviling of God,
or blasphemy). The figure of there not being sufficient strength to
bring forth the child, is the same as in [Isa
66:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#009). משׁבּר (from שׁבר, syn. פּרץ,
[Gen 38:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#029)) does not signify the
actual birth (Luzzatto, punto di dover nascere), nor the
delivering-stool (Targum), like mashbēr shel-chayyâh, the
delivering-stool of the midwife (Kelim xxiii. 4); but as the subject is
the children, and not the mother, the matrix or mouth of the womb, as in
[Hos 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#013), "He (Ephraim) is an unwise
child; when it is time does he not stop in the children's passage"
(mashbēr bânı̄m), i.e., the point which a child must pass, not only with
its head, but also with its shoulders and its whole body, for which the
force of the pains is often not sufficient? The existing condition of
the state resembled such unpromising birth-pains, which threatened both
the mother and the fruit of the womb with death, because the matrix
would not open to give birth to the child. לדה like דּעה in [Isa
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009). The timid inquiry, which hardly
dared to hope, commences with 'ūlai. The following future is continued
in perfects, the force of which is determined by it: "and He (namely
Jehovah, the Targum and Syriac) will punish for the words," or, as we
point it, "there will punish for the words which He hath heard, Jehovah
thy God (hōkhı̄ach, referring to a judicial decision, as in a general
sense in [Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004) and [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)); and thou wilt lift up prayer"
(i.e., begin to offer it, [Isa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#004)).
"He will hear," namely as judge and deliverer; "He hath heard," namely
as the omnipresent One. The expression, "to revile the living God"
(lechârēph 'Elōhı̄m chai), sounds like a comparison of Rabshakeh to
Goliath ([Sa1 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026), [Sa1
17:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#036)). The "existing remnant" was
Jerusalem, which was not yet in the enemy's hand (compare [Isa
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008)). The deliverance of the remnant
is a key-note of Isaiah's prophecies. But the prophecy would not be
fulfilled, until the grace which fulfilled it had been met by repentance
and faith. Hence Hezekiah's weak faith sues for the intercession of the
prophet, whose personal relation to God is here set forth as a closer
one than that of the king and priests.

[Isaiah 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 37:5</span></span>

Isaiah's reply. "And the servants of king Hizkiyahu came to Isaiah. And
Isaiah said to them (אליהם, K. להם), Speak thus to your lord, Thus saith
Jehovah, Be not afraid of the words which thou hast heard, with which
the servants of the king of Asshur have blasphemed me! Behold, I will
bring a spirit upon him, and he will hear a hearsay, and return to his
land; and I cut him down with the sword in his own land." Luzzatto,
without any necessity, takes ויּאמרוּ in [Isa
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#003) in the modal sense of what they
were to do (e dovevano dirgli): they were to say this to him, but he
anticipated them at once with the instructions given here. The fact, so
far as the style is concerned, is rather this, that [Isa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#005), while pointing back, gives the
ground for [Isa 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#006) : "and when they
had come to him (saying this), he said to them." נערי we render
"servants" (Knappen)

(Note: Knappe is the same word as "Knave;" but we have no word in use
now which is an exact equivalent, and knave has entirely lost its
original sense of servant. - Tr.)

after [Est 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#002); [Est
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#003), [Est
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#005); it is a more contemptuous
expression than עבדי. The rūăch mentioned here as sent by God is a
superior force of a spiritual kind, which influences both thought and
conduct, as in such other connections as [Isa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014); [Isa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#006); [Isa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#010) (Psychol. p. 295, Anm.).

The external occasion which determined the return of Sennacherib, as
described in [Isa 37:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036), was the
fearful mortality that had taken place in his army. The shemū‛âh
(rumour, hearsay), however, was not the tidings of this catastrophe,
but, as the continuation of the account in [Isa
37:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#008), [Isa
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#009), clearly shows, the report of the
advance of Tirhakah, which compelled Sennacherib to leave Palestine in
consequence of this catastrophe. The prediction of his death is
sufficiently special to be regarded by modern commentators, who will
admit nothing but the most misty figures as prophecies, as a vaticinium
post eventum. At the same time, the prediction of the event which would
drive the Assyrian out of the land is intentionally couched in these
general terms. The faith of the king, and of the inquirers generally,
still needed to be tested and exercised. The time had not yet come for
him to be rewarded by a clearer and fuller announcement of the judgment.

[Isaiah 37:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 37:8</span></span>

Rabshakeh, who is mentioned alone in both texts as the leading person
engaged, returns to Sennacherib, who is induced to make a second attempt
to obtain possession of Jerusalem, as a position of great strength and
decisive importance. "Rabshakeh thereupon returned, and found the king
of Asshur warring against Libnah: for he had heard that he had withdrawn
from Lachish. And he heard say concerning Tirhakah king of Ethiopia, (K.
Behold), he has come out to make war with thee; and heard, and sent (K.
and repeated, and sent) messengers to Hizkiyahu, saying." Tirhakah was
cursorily referred to in [Isa 18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001).
The twenty-fifth dynasty of Manetho contained three Ethiopian rulers:
Sabakon, Sebichōs (סוא = סוא), although, so far as we know, the Egyptian
names begin with Sh), and Tarakos (Tarkos), Egypt. Taharka, or Heb. with
the tone upon the penultimate, Tirhâqâh. The only one mentioned by
Herodotus is Sabakon, to whom he attributes a reign of fifty years (ii.
139), i.e., as much as the whole three amount to, when taken in a round
sum. If Sebichos is the biblical So', to whom the lists attribute from
twelve to fourteen years, it is perfectly conceivable that Tirhakah may
have been reigning in the fourteenth year of Hezekiah. But if this took
place, as Manetho affirms, 366 years before the conquest of Egypt by
Alexander, i.e., from 696 onwards (and the Apis-stele, No. 2037, as
deciphered by Vic. de Roug, Revue archol. 1863, confirms it), it would
be more easily reconcilable with the Assyrian chronology, which
represents Sennacherib as reigning from 702-680 (Oppert and Rawlinson),
than with the current biblical chronology, according to which Hezekiah's
fourteenth year is certainly not much later than the year 714.

(Note: On the still prevailing uncertainty with regard to the
synchronism, see Keil on Kings; and Duncker, Geschichte des Alterthums.
pp. 713-4.)

It is worthy of remark also, that Tirhakah is not described as Pharaoh
here, but as the king of Ethiopia (melekh Kūsh; see at [Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)). Libnah, according to the Onom.
a place in regione Eleutheropolitana, is probably the same as Tell
es-Safieh ("hill of the pure" = of the white), to the north-west of Bet
Gibrin, called Alba Specula (Blanche Garde) in ten middle ages. The
expression ויּשׁמע ("and he heard"), which occurs twice in the text,
points back to what is past, and also prepares the way for what follows:
"having heard this, he sent," etc. At the same time it appears to have
been altered from ויּשׁב.

[Isaiah 37:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 37:10</span></span>

The message. "Thus shall ye say to Hizkiyahu king of Judah, saying, Let
not thy God in whom thou trustest deceive thee, saying, Jerusalem will
not be given into the hand of the king of Asshur. Behold, thou hast
surely heard what (K. that which) the kings of Asshur have done to all
lands, to lay the ban upon them; and thou, thou shouldst be delivered?!
Have the gods of the nations, which my fathers destroyed, delivered
them: Gozan, and Haran, and Rezeph, and the Benē-‛Eden, which are in
Tellasar? Where is (K. where is he) the king of Hamath, and the king of
Arpad, and the king of 'Ir-Sepharvaim, Hena', and 'Ivah?"Although ארץ is
feminine, אותם (K. אתם), like להחרימם, points back to the lands (in
accordance with the want of any thoroughly developed distinction of the
genders in Hebrew); likewise אשׁר quas pessumdederunt. There is
historical importance in the fact, that here Sennacherib attributes to
his fathers (Sargon and the previous kings of the Derketade dynasty
which he had overthrown) what Rabshakeh on the occasion of the first
mission had imputed to Sennacherib himself. On Gozan, see p. 33. It is
no doubt identical with the Zuzan of the Arabian geographers, which is
described as a district of outer Armenia, situated on the Chabur, e.g.,
in the Merasid. ("The Chabur is the Chabur of el-Hasaniye, a district of
Mosul, to the east of the Tigris; it comes down from the mountains of
the land of Zuzan, flows through a broad and thickly populated country
in the north of Mosul, which is called outer Armenia, and empties itself
into the Tigris." Ptolemy, on the other hand ([Isa
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#018), [Isa
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#014)), is acquainted with a
Mesopotamian Gauzanitis; and, looking upon northern Mesopotamia as the
border land of Armenia, he says, κατέχει δὲ τῆς ξηώρας τὰ μὲν πρὸς τῆ
Αρμενία ἡ Ανθεμουσία (not far from Edessa) ὑφ ἥν ἡ Χαλκῖτις ὑπὸ δὲ
ταύτην ἡ Γαυζανῖτις, possibly the district of Gulzan, in which Nisibin,
the ancient Nisibis, still stands.

(Note: See Oppert, Expdition, i. 60.)

For Hrn (Syr. Horon; Joseph. Charran of Mesopotamia), the present Harrn,
not far from Charmelik, see Genesis, p. 327. The Harran in the Guta of
Damascus (on the southern arm of the Harus), which Beke has recently
identified with it, is not connected with it in any way. Retseph is the
Rhesapha of Ptol. v. 18, 6, below Thapsacus, the present Rusafa in the
Euphrates-valley of ez-Zor, between the Euphrates and Tadmur (Palmyra;
see Robinson, Pal.). Telassar, with which the Targum (ii. iii.) and Syr.
confound the Ellasar of [Gen 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001),
i.e., Artemita (Artamita), is not the Thelseae of the Itin. Antonini and
of the Notitia dignitatum - in which case the Benē-‛Eden might be the
tribe of Bt Genn (Bettegene) on the southern slope of Lebanon (i.e., the
'Eden of Coelesyria, [Amo 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005); the
Paradeisos of Ptol. v. 15, 20; Paradisus, Plin. v. 19) - but the Thelser
of the Tab. Peuting., on the eastern side of the Tigris; and Benē-‛Eden
is the tribe of the 'Eden mentioned by Ezekiel ([Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023)) after Haran and Ctesiphon.
Consequently the enumeration of the warlike deeds describes a curve,
which passes in a north-westerly direction through Hamath and Arpad, and
then returns in Sepharvaim to the border of southern Mesopotamia and
Babylonia. 'Ir-Sepharvaim is like 'Ir-Nchs, 'Ir-shemesh, etc. The
legends connect the name with the sacred books. The form of the name is
inexplicable; but the name itself probably signifies the double shore
(after the Aramaean), as the city, which was the southernmost of the
leading places of Mesopotamia, was situated on the Euphrates. The words
ועוּה הנע, if not take as proper names, would signify, "he has taken
away, and overthrown;" but in that case we should expect ועוּוּ הניעוּ
or ועוּיתי הניעתי. They are really the names of cities which it is no
longer possible to trace. Hena' is hardly the well-known Avatho on the
Euphrates, as Gesenius, V. Niebuhr, and others suppose; and 'Ivah, the
seat of the Avvı̄m ([Kg2 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031)), agrees
still less, so far as the sound of the word is concerned, with "the
province of Hebeh (? Hebeb: Ritter, Erdk. xi. 707), situated between
Anah and the Chabur on the Euphrates," with which V. Niebuhr combines
it.

(Note: For other combinations of equal value, see Oppert, Expdition, i.
220.)

[Isaiah 37:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 37:14</span></span>

This intimidating message, which declared the God of Israel to be
utterly powerless, was conveyed by the messengers of Sennacherib in the
form of a latter. "And Hizkiyahu took the letter out of the hand of the
messengers, and read it (K. read them), and went up to the house of
Jehovah; and Hizkiyahu spread it before Jehovah." Sephârı̄m (the sheets)
is equivalent to the letter (not a letter in duplo), like literae (cf.,
grammata). ויּקראהוּ (changed by K. into m- ') is construed according to
the singular idea. Thenius regards this spreading out of the letter as a
naivetי; and Gesenius even goes so far as to speak of the praying
machines of the Buddhists. But it was simply prayer without words - an
act of prayer, which afterwards passed into vocal prayer. "And Hizkiyahu
prayed to (K. before) Jehovah, saying (K. and said), Jehovah of hosts
(K. omits tsebhâ'ōth), God of Israel, enthroned upon the cherubim, Thou,
yea Thou alone, art God of all the kingdoms of the earth; Thou, Thou
hast made the heavens and the earth. Incline Thine ear, Jehovah, and
hear וּשׁמע, various reading in both texts וּשׁמע)! Open Thine eyes (K.
with Yod of the plural), Jehovah, and see; and hear the (K. all the)
words of Sennacherib, which he hath sent (K. with which he hath sent
him, i.e., Rabshakeh) to despise the living God! Truly, O Jehovah, the
kings of Asshur have laid waste all lands, and their land (K. the
nations and their land), and have put (venâthōn, K. venâthenū) their
gods into the fire: for they were not gods, only the work of men's
hands, wood and stone; therefore they have destroyed them. And now,
Jehovah our God, help us (K. adds pray) out of his hand, and all the
kingdoms of the earth may know that Thou Jehovah (K. Jehovah Elohim) art
it alone." On כּרבים (no doubt the same word as γρυπές, though not
fabulous beings like these, but a symbolical representation of heavenly
beings), see my Genesis, p. 626; and on yōshēbh hakkerubhı̄m (enthroned
on the cherubim), see at [Psa 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)
and [Psa 80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002). הוּא in אתּה־הוּא is an
emphatic repetition, that is to say a strengthening, of the subject,
like [Isa 43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); [Isa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012); [Sa2
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#028); [Jer
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012); [Psa
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#005); [Neh
9:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006); [Ezr
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#011) : tu ille (not tu es ille, Ges.
121, 2) = tu, nullus alius. Such passages as [Isa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004), where הוּא is the predicate, do
not belong here. עין is not a singular (like עיני in [Psa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008), where the lxx have עיני), but a
defective plural, as we should expect after pâqach. On the other hand,
the reading shelâchō ("hath sent him"), which cannot refer to debhârı̄m
(the words), but only to the person bringing the written message, is to
be rejected. Moreover, Knobel cannot help giving up his preference for
the reading venâthōn (compare [Gen
41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043); Ges. 131, 4a); just as, on the
other hand, we cannot help regarding the reading ואת־ארצם את־כּל־הארצות
as a mistake, when compared with the reading of the book of Kings.
Abravanel explains the passage thus: "The Assyrians have devastated the
lands, and their own land" (cf., [Isa
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020)), of which we may find examples
in the list of victories given above; compare also Beth-arbel in [Hos
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#014), if this is Irbil on the Tigris,
from which Alexander's second battle in Persia, which was really fought
at Gaugamela, derived its name. But how does this tally with the fact
that they threw the gods of these lands - that is to say, of their own
land also (for אלהיהם could not possibly refer to הארצות, to the
exclusion of ארצם) - into the fire? If we read haggōyı̄m (the nations),
we get rid both of the reference to their own land, which is certainly
purposeless here, and also of the otherwise inevitable conclusion that
they burned the gods of their own country. The reading הארצות appears to
have arisen from the fact, that after the verb החריב the lands appeared
to follow more naturally as the object, than the tribes themselves
(compare, however, [Isa 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#012)). The
train of thought is the following: The Assyrians have certainly
destroyed nations and their gods, because these gods were nothing but
the works of men: do Thou then help us, O Jehovah, that the world may
see that Thou alone art it, viz., God ('Elōhı̄m, as K. adds, although,
according to the accents, Jehovah Elohim are connected together, as in
the books of Samuel and Chronicles, and very frequently in the mouth of
David: see Symbolae in Psalmos, pp. 15, 16).

[Isaiah 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 37:21</span></span>

The prophet's reply. "And Isaiah the son of Amoz sent to Hizkiyahu,
saying, Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel, That which thou hast
prayed to me concerning Sennacherib the king of Asshur (K. adds, I have
heard): this is the utterance which Jehovah utters concerning him." He
sent, i.e., sent a message, viz., by one of his disciples (limmūdı̄m,
[Isa 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#016)). According to the text of
Isaiah, אשׁר would commence the protasis to הדּבר זה (as for that which
- this is the utterance); or, as the Vav of the apodosis is wanting, it
might introduce relative clauses to what precedes ("I, to whom:" Ges.
123, 1, Anm. 1). But both of these are very doubtful. We cannot dispense
with שׁמעתּי (I have heard), which is given by both the lxx and Syr. in
the text of Isaiah, as well as that of Kings.

The prophecy of Isaiah which follows here, is in all respects one of the
most magnificent that we meet with. It proceeds with strophe-like
strides on the cothurnus of the Deborah style: "The virgin daughter of
Zion despiseth thee, laugheth thee to scorn; the daughter of Jerusalem
shaketh her head after thee. Whom hast thou reviled and blasphemed, and
over whom hast thou spoken loftily, that thou hast lifted up thine eyes
on high? Against the Holy One of Israel." The predicate is written at
the head, in [Isa 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022), in the
masculine, i.e., without any precise definition; since בּזה is a verb ל
ה, and neither the participle nor the third pers. fem. of בּוּז. Zion is
called a virgin, with reference to the shame with which it was
threatened though without success ([Isa
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#012)); bethūlath bath are subordinate
appositions, instead of co-ordinate. With a contented and heightened
self-consciousness, she shakes her head behind him as he retreats with
shame, saying by her attitude, as she moves her head backwards and
forwards, that it must come to this, and could not be otherwise ([Jer
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016); [Lam
2:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015)). The question in [Isa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023) reaches as far as עיניך,
although, according to the accents, [Isa
37:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#023) is an affirmative clause: "and
thou turnest thine eyes on high against the Holy One of Israel" (Hitzig,
Ewald, Drechsler, and Keil). The question is put for the purpose of
saying to Asshur, that He at whom they scoff is the God of Israel, whose
pure holiness breaks out into a consuming fire against all by whom it is
dishonoured. The fut. cons. ותּשּׂה is essentially the same as in [Isa
51:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012), and מרום is the same as in
[Isa 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026).

[Isaiah 37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 37:24</span></span>

Second turn, "By thy servants (K. thy messengers) hast thou reviled the
Lord, in that thou sayest, With the multitude (K. chethib ברכב) of my
chariots have I climbed the height of the mountains, the inner side of
Lebanon; and I shall fell the lofty growth of its cedars, the choice
(mibhchar, K. mibhchōr) of its cypresses: and I shall penetrate (K. and
will penetrate) to the height (K. the halting-place) of its uttermost
border, the grove of its orchard." The other text appears, for the most
part, the preferable one here. Whether mal'ăkhekhâ (thy messengers,
according to [Isa 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014)) or ‛ăbhâdekhâ
(thy servants, viz., Rabshakeh, Tartan, and Rabsaris) is to be
preferred, may be left undecided; also whether רכבי ברכב is an error or
a superlative expression, "with chariots of my chariots," i.e., my
countless chariots; also, thirdly, whether Isaiah wrote mibhchōr. He
uses mistōr in [Isa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006) for a special
reason; but such obscure forms befit in other instances the book of
Kings, with its colouring of northern Palestine; and we also meet with
mibhchōr in [Kg2 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019), in the strongly
Aramaic first series of histories of Elisha. On the other hand, קצּה
מלון is certainly the original reading, in contrast with קצו מרום. It is
important, as bearing upon the interpretation of the passage, that both
texts have ואכרת, not ואכרת, and that the other text confirms this
pointing, inasmuch as it has ואבואה instead of ואובא. The Lebanon here,
if not purely emblematical (as in [Jer
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006) = the royal city Jerusalem; [Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003) = Judah-Jerusalem), has at any
rate a synecdochical meaning (cf., [Isa
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#008)), signifying the land of Lebanon,
i.e., the land of Israel, into which he had forced a way, and all the
fortresses and great men of which he would destroy. He would not rest
till Jerusalem, the most renowned height of the land of Lebanon, was
lying at his feet. Thenius is quite right in regarding the
"resting-place of the utmost border" and "the pleasure-garden wood" as
containing allusions to the holy city and its royal citadel (compare the
allegory in chapter 5).

[Isaiah 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 37:25</span></span>

Third turn, "I, I have digged and drunk (K. foreign) waters, and will
make dry with the sole of my feet all the Nile-arms (יארי, K. יאורי) of
Matsor." If we take עליתי in [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024) as a perfect of certainty, [Isa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#025) would refer to the overcoming of
the difficulties connected with the barren sandy steppe on the way to
Egypt (viz., et-Tih); but the perfects stand out against the following
futures, as statements of what was actually past. Thus, in places where
there were no waters at all, and it might have been supposed that his
army would inevitably perish, there he had dug them (qūr, from which
mâqōr is derived, fodere; not scaturire, as Luzzatto supposes), and had
drunk up these waters, which had been called up, as if by magic, upon
foreign soil; and in places where there were waters, as in Egypt (mâtsōr
is used in Isaiah and Micah for mitsrayim, with a play upon the
appellative meaning of the word: an enclosing fence, a fortifying
girdle: see [Psa 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#022)), the Nile-arms
and canals of which appeared to bar all farther progress, it was an easy
thing for him to set at nought all these opposing hindrances. The Nile,
with its many arms, was nothing but a puddle to him, which he trampled
out with his feet.

[Isaiah 37:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 37:26</span></span>

And yet what he was able to do was not the result of his own power, but
of the counsel of God, which he subserved. Fourth turn, "Hast thou not
heart? I have done it long ago, from (K. lemin, since) the days of
ancient time have I formed it, and now brought it to pass (הבאתיה, K.
הביאתיה): that thou shouldst lay waste fortified cities into desolate
stone heaps; and their inhabitants, powerless, were terrified, and were
put to shame (ובשׁוּ, K. ויּבשׁוּ): became herb of the field and green
of the turf, herb of the house-tops, and a corn-field (וּשׁדמה, K. and
blighted corn) before the blades." L'mērâcōq (from afar) is not to be
connected with the preceding words, but according to the parallel with
those which follow. The historical reality, in this instance the
Assyrian judgment upon the nations, had had from all eternity an ideal
reality in God (see at [Isa 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)).
The words are addressed to the Assyrian; and as his instrumentality
formed the essential part of the divine purpose, וּתהי does not mean
"there should," but "thou shouldest," e!mellej e)chremw=sai (cf., [Isa
44:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014), and [Hab
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017)). K. has להשׁות instead of
להשׁאות (though not as chethib, in which case it would have to be
pointed להשׁות), a singularly syncopated hiphil (for לשׁאות). The point
of comparison in the four figures is the facility with which they can be
crushed. The nations in the presence of the Assyrian became, as it were,
weak, delicate grasses, with roots only rooted in the surface, or like a
cornfield with the stalk not yet formed (shedēmâh, [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008)), which could easily be rooted
up, and did not need to be cut down with the sickle. This idea is
expressed still more strikingly in Kings, "like corn blighted
(shedēphâh, compare shiddâpōn, corn-blight) before the shooting up of
the stalk;" the Assyrian being regarded as a parching east wind, which
destroys the seed before the stalk is formed.

[Isaiah 37:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 37:28</span></span>

Asshur is Jehovah's chosen instrument while thus casting down the
nations, which are "short-handed against him," i.e., incapable of
resisting him. But Jehovah afterwards places this lion under firm
restraint; and before it has reached the goal set before it, He leads it
back into its own land, as if with a ring through its nostril. Fifth
turn, "And thy sitting down, and thy going out, and thy entering in, I
know; and thy heating thyself against me. On account of thy heating
thyself against me, and because thy self-confidence has risen up into
mine ears, I put my ring into thy nose, and my muzzle into thy lips, and
lead thee back by the way by which thou hast come." Sitting down and
rising up ([Psa 139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002)), going out and
coming in ([Psa 121:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#008)), denote every
kind of human activity. All the thoughts and actions, the purposes and
undertakings of Sennacherib, more especially with regard to the people
of Jehovah, were under divine control. יען is followed by the
infinitive, which is then continued in the finite verb, just as in [Isa
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#012). שׁאננך (another reading,
שׁאננך) is used as a substantive, and denotes the Assyrians' complacent
and scornful self-confidence ([Psa
123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004)), and has nothing to do with
שׁאון (Targum, Abulw., Rashi, Kimchi, Rosenmller, Luzzatto). The figure
of the leading away with a nose-ring (chachı̄ with a latent dagesh, חא to
prick, hence chōach, Arab. chōch, chōcha, a narrow slit, literally means
a cut or aperture) is repeated in [Eze
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#004). Like a wild beast that had been
subdued by force, the Assyrian would have to return home, without having
achieved his purpose with Judah (or with Egypt).

[Isaiah 37:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">isa 37:30</span></span>

The prophet now turns to Hezekiah. "And let this be a sign to thee, Men
eat this year what is self-sown; and in the second year what springs
from the roots (shâc, K. sâchı̄sh); and in the third year they sow and
reap and plant vineyards, and eat (chethib אכול) their fruit." According
to Thenius, hasshânâh (this year) signifies the first year after
Sennacherib's invasions, hasshânâh hasshēnı̄th (the second year) the
current year in which the words were uttered by Hezekiah, hasshânâh
hasshelı̄shith (the third year) the year that was coming in which the
land would be cleared of the enemy. But understood in this way, the
whole would have been no sign, but simply a prophecy that the condition
of things during the two years was to come to an end in the third. It
would only be a "sign" if the second year was also still in the future.
By hasshânâh, therefore, we are to understand what the expression itself
requires (cf., [Isa 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001); [Isa
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#010)), namely the current year, in
which the people had been hindered from cultivating their fields by the
Assyrian who was then in the land, and therefore had been thrown back
upon the sâphı̄ach, i.e., the after growth (αὐτόματα, lxx, the
self-sown), or crop which had sprung up from the fallen grains of the
previous harvest (from sâphach, adjicere, see at [Hab
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#015); or, according to others,
effundere). It was autumn at the time when Isaiah gave this sign ([Isa
33:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#009)), and the current civil year was
reckoned from one autumnal equinox to the other, as, for example, in
[Exo 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016), where the feast of
tabernacles or harvest festival is said to fall at the close of the
year; so that if the fourteenth year of Hezekiah was the year 714, the
current year would extend from Tishri 714 to Tishri 713. But if in the
next year also, 713-712, there was no sowing and reaping, but the people
were to eat shâchis, i.e., that which grew of itself (αὐτοφυές, Aq.,
Theod.), and that very sparingly, not from the grains shed at the
previous harvest, but from the roots of the wheat, we need not assume
that this year, 713-712, happened to be a sabbatical year, in which the
law required all agricultural pursuits to be suspended.

(Note: There certainly is no necessity for a sabbatical year followed by
a year of jubilee, to enable us to explain the "sign," as Hofmann
supposes.)

It is very improbable in itself that the prophet should have included a
circumstance connected with the calendar in his "sign;" and, moreover,
according to the existing chronological data, the year 715 had been a
sabbatical year (see Hitzig). It is rather presupposed, either that the
land would be too thoroughly devastated and desolate for the fields to
be cultivated and sown (Keil); or, as we can hardly imagine such an
impossibility as this, if we picture to ourselves the existing situation
and the kind of agriculture common in Palestine, that the Assyrian would
carry out his expedition to Egypt in this particular year (713-12), and
returning through Judah, would again prevent the sowing of the corn
(Hitzig, Knobel). But in the third year, that is to say the year 712-11,
freedom and peace would prevail again, and there would be nothing more
to hinder the cultivation of the fields or vineyards. If this should be
the course of events during the three years, it would be a sign to king
Hezekiah that the fate of the Assyrian would be no other than that
predicated. The year 712-11 would be the peremptory limit appointed him,
and the year of deliverance.

[Isaiah 37:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">isa 37:31</span></span>

Seventh turn, "And that which is escaped of the house of Judah, that
which remains will again take root downward, and bear fruit upward. For
from Jerusalem will a remnant go forth, and a fugitive from Mount Zion;
the zeal of Jehovah of hosts (K. chethib omits tsebhâ'ōth) will carry
this out." The agricultural prospect of the third year shapes itself
there into a figurative representation of the fate of Judah. Isaiah's
watchword, "a remnant shall return," is now fulfilled; Jerusalem has
been spared, and becomes the source of national rejuvenation. You year
the echo of [Isa 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024); [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), and also of [Isa
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006). The word tsebhâ'ōth is wanting
in Kings, here as well as in [Isa
37:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#017); in fact, this divine name is,
as a rule, very rare in the book of Kings, where it only occurs in the
first series of accounts of Elijah ([Kg1
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#015); [Kg1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010), [Kg1
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#014); cf., [Kg2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#014)).

[Isaiah 37:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">isa 37:33</span></span>

The prophecy concerning the protection of Jerusalem becomes more
definite in the last turn than it ever has been before. "Therefore thus
saith Jehovah concerning the king of Asshur, He will not enter into this
city, nor shoot off an arrow there; nor do they assault it with a
shield, nor cast up earthworks against it. By the way by which he came
(K. will come) will he return; and he will not enter into this city,
saith Jehovah. And I shield this city (על, K. אל), to help it, for mine
own sake, and for the sake of David my servant." According to Hitzig,
this conclusion belongs to the later reporter, on account of its
"suspiciously definite character." Knobel, on the other hand, sees no
reason for disputing the authorship of Isaiah, inasmuch as in all
probability the pestilence had already set in ([Isa
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#024)), and threatened to cripple the
Assyrian army very considerably, so that the prophet began to hope that
Sennacherib might now be unable to stand against the powerful Ethiopian
king. To us, however, the words "Thus saith Jehovah" are something more
than a flower of speech; and we hear the language of a man exalted above
the standard of the natural man, and one how has been taken, as Amos
says ([Amo 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#007)), by God, the moulder
of history into "His secret." Here also we see the prophecy at its
height, towards which it has been ascending from [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013) and [Isa
10:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033) onwards, through the midst of
obstacles accumulated by the moral condition of the nation, but with the
same goal invariably in view. The Assyrian will not storm Jerusalem;
there will not even be preparations for a siege. The verb qiddēm is
construed with a double accusative, as in [Psa
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004) : sōlelâh refers to the
earthworks thrown up for besieging purposes, as in [Jer
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#024). The reading יבא instead of בּא
has arisen in consequence of the eye having wandered to the following
יבא. The promise in [Isa 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#035) sounds
like [Isa 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#005). The reading אל for על
is incorrect. One motive assigned ("for my servant David's sake") is the
same as in [Kg1 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#004), etc.; and the
other ("for mine own sake") the same as in [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025); [Isa
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#011) (compare, however, [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003) also). On the one hand, it is in
accordance with the honour and faithfulness of Jehovah, that Jerusalem
is delivered; and, on the other hand, it is the worth of David, or, what
is the same thing, the love of Jehovah turned towards him, of which
Jerusalem reaps the advantage.

[Isaiah 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">isa 37:36</span></span>

To this culminating prophecy there is now appended an account of the
catastrophe itself. "Then (K. And it came to pass that night, that) the
angel of Jehovah went forth and smote (vayyakkeh, K. vayyakh) in the
camp of Asshur a hundred and eighty-five thousand; and when men rose up
in the morning, behold, they were all lifeless corpses. Then Sennacherib
king of Asshur decamped, and went forth and returned, and settled down
in Nineveh. And it cam to pass, as he was worshipping in the temple of
Misroch, his god, Adrammelech and Sharezer his sons (L. chethib omits
'his sons') smote him with the sword; and when they escaped to the land
of Ararat, Esarhaddon ascended the throne in his stead." The first pair
of histories closes here with a short account of the result of the
Assyrian drama, in which Isaiah's prophecies were most gloriously
fulfilled: not only the prophecies immediately preceding, but all the
prophecies of the Assyrian era since the time of Ahaz, which pointed to
the destruction of the Assyrian forces (e.g., [Isa
10:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033)), and to the flight and death
of the king of Assyrian ([Isa 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009);
[Isa 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033)). If we look still further
forward to the second pair of histories (chapters 38-39), we see from
[Isa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#006) that it is only by
anticipation that the account of these closing events is finished here;
for the third history carries us back to the period before the final
catastrophe. We may account in some measure for the haste and brevity of
this closing historical fragment, from the prophet's evident wish to
finish up the history of the Assyrian complications, and the prophecy
bearing upon it. But if we look back, there is a gap between [Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036) and the event narrated here.
For, according to [Isa 37:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030), there
was to be an entire year of trouble between the prophecy and the
fulfilment, during which the cultivation of the land would be suspended.
What took place during that year? There can be no doubt that Sennacherib
was engaged with Egypt; for (1.) when he made his second attempt to get
Jerusalem into his power, he had received intelligence of the advance of
Tirhakah, and therefore had withdrawn the centre of his army from
Lachish, and encamped before Libnah ([Isa
37:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#008)); (2.) according to Josephus
(Ant. x. 1, 4), there was a passage of Berosus, which has been lost, in
which he stated that Sennacherib "made an expedition against all Asia
and Egypt;" (3.) Herodotus relates (ii. 141) that, after Anysis the
blind, who lost his throne for fifty years in consequence of an invasion
of Egypt by the Ethiopians under Sabakoa, but who recovered it again,
Sethon the priest of Hephaestus ascended the throne. The priestly caste
was so oppressed by him, that when Sanacharibos, the king of the
Arabians and Assyrians, led a great army against Egypt, they refused to
perform their priestly functions. but the priest-king went into the
temple to pray, and his God promised to help him. He experienced the
fulfilment of this prophecy before Pelusium, where the invasion was to
take place, and where he awaited the foe with such as continued true to
him. "Immediately after the arrival of Sanacharibos, an army of
field-mice swarmed throughout the camp of the foe, and devoured their
quivers, bows, and shield-straps, so that when morning came on they had
to flee without arms, and lost many men in consequence. This is the
origin of the stone of Sethon in the temple of Hephaestus (at Memphis),
which is standing there still, with a mouse in one hand, and with this
inscription: Whosoever looks at me, let him fear the gods!" This Σέθως
(possibly the Zet whose name occurs in the lists at the close of the
twenty-third dynasty, and therefore in the wrong place) is to be
regarded as one of the Saitic princes of the twenty-sixth dynasty, who
seem to have ruled in Lower Egypt contemporaneously with the Ethiopians

(Note: A seal of Pharaoh Sabakon has been found among the ruins of the
palace of Kuyunjik. The colossal image of Tarakos is found among the
bas-reliefs of Mediet-Habu. He is holding firmly a number of Asiatic
prisoners by the hair of their head, and threatening them with a club.
There are several other stately monuments in imitation of the Egyptian
style in the ruins of Nepata, the northern capital of the Meriotic
state, which belong to him (Lepsius, Denkmler, p. 10 of the programme).)

(as, in fact, is stated in a passage of the Armenian Eusebius, Aethiopas
et Saitas regnasse aiunt eodem tempore), until they succeeded at length
in ridding themselves of the hateful supremacy. Herodotus evidently
depended in this instance upon the hearsay of Lower Egypt, which
transferred the central point of the Assyrian history to their own
native princely house. The question, whether the disarming of the
Assyrian army in front of Pelusium merely rested upon a legendary
interpretation of the mouse in Sethon's hand,

(Note: This Sethos monument has not yet been discovered (Brugsch,
Reiseberichte, p. 79). The temple of Phta was on the south side of
Memphis; the site is marked by the ruins at Mitrahenni.)

which may possibly have been originally intended as a symbol of
destruction; or whether it was really founded upon an actual occurrence
which was exaggerated in the legend,

(Note: The inhabitants of Troas worshipped mice, "because they gnawed
the strings of the enemies' bows" (see Wesseling on Il. i. 39).)

may be left undecided.

But it is a real insult to Isaiah, when Thenius and G. Rawlinson place
the scene of [Isa 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036) at Pelusium,
and thus give the preference to Herodotus. Has not Isaiah up to this
point constantly prophesied that the power of Asshur was to be broken in
the holy mountain land of Jehovah ([Isa
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#025)), that the Lebanon forest of the
Assyrian army would break to pieces before Jerusalem ([Isa
10:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#032)), and that there the Assyrian
camp would become the booty of the inhabitants of the city, and that
without a conflict? And is not the catastrophe that would befal Assyria
described in [Isa 18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001) as an act of
Jehovah, which would determine the Ethiopians to do homage to God who
was enthroned upon Zion? We need neither cite [Ch2
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#021) nor [Psa
76:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001) (lxx ὠδὴ πρὸς τὸν Ἀσσύριον),
according to which the weapons of Asshur break to pieces upon Jerusalem;
Isaiah's prophecies are quite sufficient to prove, that to force this
Pelusiac disaster

(Note: G. Rawlinson, Monarchies, ii. 445.)

into [Isa 37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036) is a most thoughtless
concession to Herodotus. The final catastrophe occurred before
Jerusalem, and the account in Herodotus gives us no certain information
even as to the issue of the Egyptian campaign, which took place in the
intervening year. Such a gap as the one which occurs before [Isa
37:36](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#036) is not without analogy in the
historical writings of the Bible; see, for example, [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001), where an abrupt leap is made
over the thirty-seven years of the wanderings in the desert. The
abruptness is not affected by the addition of the clause in the book of
Kings, "It came to pass that night." For, in the face of the "sign"
mentioned in [Isa 37:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030), this cannot
mean "in that very night" (viz., the night following the answer given by
Isaiah); but (unless it is a careless interpolation) it must refer to
[Isa 37:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#033), [Isa
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#034), and mean illa nocte, viz., the
night in which the Assyrian had encamped before Jerusalem. The account
before us reads just like that of the slaying of the first-born in Egypt
([Exo 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012); [Exo
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004)). The plague of Egypt is marked
as a pestilence by the use of the word nâgaph in connection with hikkâh
in [Exo 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023), [Exo
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013) (compare [Amo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#010), where it seems to be alluded to
under the name דּבר); and in the case before us also we cannot think of
anything else than a divine judgment of this kind, which even to the
present day defies all attempts at an aetiological solution, and which
is described in 2 Sam as effected through the medium of angels, just as
it is here. Moreover, the concise brevity of the narrative leaves it
quite open to assume, as Hensler and others do, that the ravages of the
pestilence in the Assyrian army, which carried off thousands in the
night ([Psa 91:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#006)), even to the number
of 185,000, may have continued for a considerable time.

(Note: The pestilence in Mailand in 1629 carried off, according to
Tadino, 160,000 men; that in Vienna, in 1679, 122,849; that in Moscow,
at the end of the last century, according to Martens, 670,000; but this
was during the whole time that the ravages of the pestilence lasted.)

The main thing is the fact that the prophecy in [Isa
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008) was actually fulfilled. According
to Josephus (Ant. x. 1, 5), when Sennacherib returned from his
unsuccessful Egyptian expedition, he found the detachment of his army,
which he had left behind in Palestine, in front of Jerusalem, where a
pestilential disease sent by God was making great havoc among the
soldiers, and that on the very first night of the siege. The three
verses, "he broke up, and went away, and returned home," depict the
hurried character of the retreat, like "abiit excessit evasit erupit"
(Cic. ii. Catil. init.). The form of the sentence in [Isa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038) places Sennacherib's act of
worship and the murderous act of his sons side by side, as though they
had occurred simultaneously. The connection would be somewhat different
if the reading had been ויּכּהוּ (cf., Ewald, 341, a).

Nisroch apparently signifies the eagle-like, or hawk-like (from nisr,
nesher), possibly like "Arioch from 'ărı̄. (The lxx transcribe it
νασαραχ, A. ασαραχ, א ασαρακ (K. ἐσθραχ, where B. has μεσεραχ), and
explorers of the monuments imagined at one time that they had discovered
this god as Asarak;

(Note: Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, xii. 2, pp. 426-7.)

but they have more recently retracted this, although there really is a
hawk-headed figure among the images of the Assyrian deities or genii.

(Note: Rawlinson, Monarchies, ii. 265.)

The name has nothing to do with that of the supreme Assyrian deity,
Asur, Asshur. A better derivation of Nisroch would be from סרך, שׂרך,
שׂרג; and this is confirmed by Oppert, who has discovered among the
inscriptions in the harem of Khorsabad a prayer of Sargon to Nisroch,
who appears there, like the Hymen of Greece, as the patron of marriage,
and therefore as a "uniter."

(Note: Expdition Scientifique en Mesopotamie, t. ii. p. 339.)

The name 'Adrammelekh (a god in [Kg2
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031)) signifies, as we now known,
gloriosus ('addı̄r) est rex;" and Sharetser (for which we should expect
to find Saretser), dominator tuebitur. The Armenian form of the latter
name (in Moses Chroen. i. 23), San-asar (by the side of Adramel, who is
also called Arcamozan), probably yields the original sense of "Lunus
(the moon-god Sin) tuebitur." Polyhistorus (in Euseb. chron. arm. p.
19), on the authority of Berosus, mentions only the former, Ardumuzan,
as the murderer, and gives eighteen years as the length of Sennacherib's
reign. The murder did not take place immediately after his return, as
Josephus says (Ant. x. 1, 5; cf., Tobit i. 21-25, Vulg.); and the
expression used by Isaiah, he "dwelt (settled down) in Nineveh,"
suggests the idea of a considerable interval. This interval embraced the
suppression of the rebellion in Babylon, where Sennacherib made his son
Asordan king, and the campaign in Cilicia (both from Polyhistorus),

(Note: Vid., Richter, Berosi quae supersunt (1825), p. 62; Mller,
Fragmenta Hist. Gr. ii. 504.)

and also, according to the monuments, wars both by sea and land with
Susiana, which supported the Babylonian thirst for independence. The
Asordan of Polyhistorus is Esar-haddon (also written without the
makkeph, Esarhaddon), which is generally supposed to be the Assyrian
form of אשׁור־ח־ידן, Assur fratrem dedit. It is so difficult to make the
chronology tally here, that Oppert, on [Isa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001), proposes to alter the fourteenth
year into the twenty-ninth, and Rawlinson would alter it into the
twenty-seventh.

(Note: Sargonides, p. 10, and Monarchies, ii. 434.)

They both of them assign to king Sargon a reign of seventeen (eighteen)
years, and to Sennacherib (in opposition to Polyhistorus) a reign of
twenty-three (twenty-four) years; and they both agree in giving 680 as
the year of Sennacherib's death. This brings us down below the first
decade of Manasseh's reign, and would require a different author from
Isaiah for [Isa 37:37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#037), [Isa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038). But the accounts given by
Polyhistorus, Abydenus, and the astronomical canon, however we may
reconcile them among themselves, do not extend the reign of Sennacherib
beyond 693.

(Note: See Duncker, Gesch. des Alterthums. i. pp. 708-9.)

It is true that even then Isaiah would have been at least about ninety
years old. But the tradition which represents him as dying a martyr's
death in the reign of Manasseh, does really assign him a most unusual
old age. Nevertheless, [Isa 37:37](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#037),
[Isa 37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038) may possibly have been
added by a later hand. The two parricides fled to the "land of Ararat,"
i.e., to Central Armenia. The Armenian history describes them as the
founders of the tribes of the Sassunians and Arzerunians. From the
princely house of the latter, among whom the name of Sennacherib was a
very common one, sprang Leo the Armenian, whom Genesios describes as of
Assyrio-Armenian blood. If this were the case, there would be no less
than ten Byzantine emperors who were descendants of Sennacherib, and
consequently it would not be till a very late period that the prophecy
of Nahum was fulfilled.

(Note: Duncker, on the contrary (p. 709), speaks of the parricides as
falling very shortly afterwards by their brother's hand, and overlooks
the Armenian tradition (cf., Rawlinson, Monarchies, ii. 465), which
transfers the flight of the two, who were to have been sacrificed, as is
reported by their own father, to the year of the world 4494, i.e., b.c.
705 (see the historical survey of Prince Hubbof in the Miscellaneous
Translations, vol. ii. 1834). The Armenian historian Thomas (at the end
of the ninth century) expressly states that he himself had sprung from
the Arzerunians, and therefore from Sennacherib; and for this reason his
historical work is chiefly devoted to Assyrian affairs (see Aucher on
Euseb. chron. i. p. xv.).)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 38](isa038)

</div>
