<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa018)  [Next](isa020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 19:0</span></span>

The Oracle Concerning Egypt - Isaiah 19

[Isa 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)

The three prophecies in [Isa 18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001),
19 and [Isa 20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001) really form a
trilogy. The first ([Isa 18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)),
which, like chapter 1, the introduction to the whole, is without any
special heading, treats in language of the sublimest pathos of Ethiopia.
The second (chapter 19) treats in a calmer and more descriptive tone of
Egypt. The third ([Isa 20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001)) treats
of both Egypt and Ethiopia in the style of historic prose. The kingdom
to which all three prophecies refer is one and the same, viz., the
Egypto-Ethiopian kingdom; but whilst [Isa
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001) refers to the ruling nation,
chapter 19 treats of the conquered one, and [Isa
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001) embraces both together. The
reason why such particular attention is given to Egypt in the prophecy,
is that no nation on earth was so mixed up with the history of the
kingdom of God, from the patriarchal times downwards, as Egypt was. And
because Israel, as the law plainly enjoined upon it, was never to forget
that it had been sheltered for a long time in Egypt, and there had grown
into a great nation, and had received many benefits; whenever prophecy
has to speak concerning Egypt, it is quite as earnest in its promises as
it is in its threats. And thus the massa of Isaiah falls into two
distinct halves, viz., a threatening one ([Isa
19:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)), and a promising one ([Isa
19:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)); whilst between the judgment
and the salvation (in [Isa 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016) and
[Isa 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#017)) there stands the alarm,
forming as it were a connecting bridge between the two. And just in
proportion as the coil of punishments is unfolded on the one hand by the
prophet, the promise is also unfolded in just as many stages on the
other; and moving on in ever new grooves, rises at length to such a
height, that it breaks not only through the limits of contemporaneous
history, but even through those of the Old Testament itself, and speaks
in the spiritual language of the world-embracing love of the New
Testament.

[Isaiah 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 19:1</span></span>

The oracle opens with a short introduction, condensing the whole of the
substance of the first half into a few weighty words - an art in which
Isaiah peculiarly excelled. In this the name of Egypt, the land without
an equal, occurs no less than three times. "Behold, Jehovah rideth upon
a light cloud, and cometh to Egypt; and the idols of Egypt shake before
Him, and the heart of Egypt melteth within it." Jehovah rides upon
clouds when He is about to reveal Himself in His judicial majesty ([Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)); and in this instance He rides
upon a light cloud, because it will take place rapidly. The word kal
signifies both light and swift, because what is light moves swiftly; and
even a light cloud, which is light because it is thin, is comparatively
עב, i.e., literally dense, opaque, or obscure. The idols of Egypt shake
נוּע, as in [Isa 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#004); [Isa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002)), because Jehovah comes over them
to judgment (cf., [Exo 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012); [Jer
46:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#025); [Eze
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#013)): they must shake, for they are
to be thrown down; and their shaking for fear is a shaking to their fall
נוּע, as in [Isa 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#020); [Isa
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#009)). The Vav apodosis in ונעוּ
together the cause and effect, as in [Isa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007). - In what judgments the judgment
will be fulfilled, is now declared by the majestic Judge Himself.

[Isaiah 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 19:2</span></span>

"And I spur Egypt against Egypt: and they go to war, every one with his
brother, and every one with his neighbour; city against city, kingdom
against kingdom. And the spirit of Egypt is emptied out within it: and I
swallow up its ready counsel; and they go to the idols to inquire, and
to the mutterers, and to the oracle-spirits, and to the soothsayers. And
I shut up Egypt in the hand of a hard rule; and a fierce king will reign
over them, saith the Lord, Jehovah of hosts." Civil war will rage in
Egypt (on sicsēc, see at [Isa 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010)).
The people once so shrewd are now at their wits' end; their spirit is
quite poured out נבקה, with the reduplication removed, for נבקּה,
according to Ges. 68, Anm. 11 - as, for example, in [Gen
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007); [Eze
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#007)), so that there is nothing left
of either intelligence or resolution. Then (and this is also part of the
judgment) they turn for help, in counsel and action, where no help is to
be found, viz., to their "nothings" of gods, and the manifold demoniacal
arts, of which Egypt could boast of being the primary seat. On the names
of the practisers of the black art, see [Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019); 'ittim, the mutterers, is from
'âtat, to squeak (used of a camel-saddle, especially when new), or to
rumble (used of an empty stomach): see Lane's Lexicon. But all this is
of no avail: Jehovah gives them up (סכּר, syn. הסגּיר, συγκλείειν to be
ruled over by a hard-hearted and cruel king. The prophecy does not
relate to a foreign conqueror, so as to lead us to think of Sargon
(Knobel) or Cambyses (Luzzatto), but to a native despot. In comparing
the prophecy with the fulfilment, we must bear in mind that [Isa
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#002) relates to the national
revolution which broke out in Sais, and resulted in the overthrow of the
Ethiopian rule, and to the federal dodekarchy to which the rising of the
nation led. "Kingdom against kingdom:" this exactly suits those twelve
small kingdoms into which Egypt was split up after the overthrow of the
Ethiopian dynasty in the year 695, until Psammetichus, the dodekarch of
Sais, succeeded in the year 670 in comprehending these twelve states
once more under a single monarchy. This very Psammetichus (and the royal
house of Psammetichus generally) is the hard ruler, the reckless despot.
He succeeded in gaining the battle at Momemphis, by which he established
himself in the monarchy, through having first of all strengthened
himself with mercenary troops from Ionia, Caria, and Greece. From his
time downwards, the true Egyptian character was destroyed by the
admixture of foreign elements;

(Note: See Leo, Universalgesch. i. 152, and what Brugsch says in his
Histoire d'Egypte, i. 250, with regard to the brusques changements that
Egypt endured under Psammetichus.)

and this occasioned the emigration of a large portion of the military
caste to Meroe. The Egyptian nation very soon came to feel how
oppressive this new dynasty was, when Necho (616-597), the son and
successor of Psammetichus, renewed the project of Ramses-Miamun, to
construct a Suez canal, and tore away 120,000 of the natives of the land
from their homes, sending them to wear out their lives in forced labour
of the most wearisome kind. A revolt on the part of the native troops,
who had been sent against the rising Cyrene, and driven back into the
desert, led to the overthrow of Hophra, the grandson of Necho (570), and
put an end to the hateful government of the family of Psammetichus.

[Isaiah 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 19:5</span></span>

The prophet then proceeds to foretell another misfortune which was
coming upon Egypt: the Nile dries up, and with this the fertility of the
land disappears. "And the waters will dry up from the sea, and the river
is parched and dried. And the arms of the river spread a stench; the
channels of Matzor become shallow and parched: reed and rush shrivel up.
The meadows by the Nile, on the border of the Nile, and every corn-field
of the Nile, dries up, is scattered, and disappears. And the fishermen
groan, and all who throw draw-nets into the Nile lament, and they that
spread out the net upon the face of the waters languish away. And the
workers of fine combed flax are confounded, and the weavers of cotton
fabrics. And the pillars of the land are ground to powder; all that work
for wages are troubled in mind." In [Isa
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#005) the Nile is called yâm (a sea),
just as Homer calls it Oceanus, which, as Diodorus observes, was the
name given by the natives to the river (Egypt. oham). The White Nile is
called bahr el-abyad (the White Sea), the Blue Nile bahr el-azrak, and
the combined waters bahr eṅNil, or, in the language of the Besharn, as
here in Isaiah, yām. And in the account of the creation, in Gen 1,
yammim is the collective name for great seas and rivers. But the Nile
itself is more like an inland sea than a river, from the point at which
the great bodies of water brought down by the Blue Nile and the White
Nile, which rises a few weeks later, flow together; partly on account of
its great breadth, and partly also because of its remaining stagnant
throughout the dry season. It is not till the tropical rains commence
that the swelling river begins to flow more rapidly, and the yâm becomes
a nâhâr. But when, as is here threatened, the Nile sea and Nile river in
Upper Egypt sink together and dry up (nisshethu, niphal either of
shâthath = nâshattu, to set, to grow shallow; or more probably from
nâshath, to dry up, since [Isa 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#017)
and [Jer 51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030) warrant the assumption
that there was such a verb), the mouths (or arms) of the Nile (nehâr),
which flow through the Delta, and the many canals (ye'orim), by which
the benefits of the overflow are conveyed to the Nile valley, are turned
into stinking puddles (האזניחוּ, a hiphil, half substantive half verbal,
unparalleled elsewhere,

(Note: It is not unparalleled as a hiph. denom. (compare הצהיר, oil,
יצהר, to press, [Job 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#011), Talm.
התליע, to become worm-eaten, and many others of a similar kind); and as
a mixed form (possibly a mixture of two readings, as Gesenius and
Bttcher suppose, though it is not necessarily so), the language admitted
of much that was strange, more especially in the vulgar tongue, which
found its way here and there into written composition.)

signifying to spread a stench; possibly it may have been used in the
place of הזניח, from אזנח or אזנח, stinking, to which a different
application was given in ordinary use). In all probability it is not
without intention that Isaiah uses the expression Mâtzor, inasmuch as he
distinguishes Mâzort from Pathros ([Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011)), i.e., Lower from Upper Egypt
(Egyp. sa-het, the low land, and sa-res, the higher land), the two
together being Mitzrayim. And ye'orim (by the side of nehâroth) we are
warranted in regarding as the name given of the Nile canals. The canal
system in Egypt and the system of irrigation are older than the invasion
of the Hyksos (vid., Lepsius, in Herzog's Cyclopaedia). On the other
hand, ye'ōr in [Isa 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#007) (where it is
written three times plene, as it is also in [Isa
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#008)) is the Egyptian name of the Nile
generally (yaro).

(Note: From the fact that aur in old Egyptian means the Nile, we may
explain the Φρουορῶ ἤτοι Νεῖλος, with which the Laterculus of
Eratosthenes closes.)

It is repeated emphatically three times, like Mitzrayim in [Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001). Parallel to mizra‛, but yet
different from it, is ערות, from ערה, to be naked or bare, which
signifies, like many derivatives of the synonymous word in Arabic,
either open spaces, or as here, grassy tracts by the water-side, i.e.,
meadows. Even the meadows, which lie close to the water-side (pi = ora,
as in [Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002), not ostium), and all
the fields, become so parched, that they blow away like ashes.

Then the three leading sources from which Egypt derived its maintenance
all fail: - viz. the fishing; the linen manufacture, which supplied
dresses for the priests and bandages for mummies; and the cotton
manufacture, by which all who were not priests were supplied with
clothes. The Egyptian fishery was very important. In the Berlin Museum
there is an Egyptian micmoreth with lead attached. The mode of working
the flax by means of serikâh, pectinatio (compare סרוק, wool-combs,
Kelim, 12, 2), is shown on the monuments. In the Berlin Museum there are
also Egyptian combs of this description with which the flax was carded.
The productions of the Egyptian looms were celebrated in antiquity:
chōrây, lit., white cloth (singularet. with the old termination ay), is
the general name for cotton fabrics, or the different kinds of byssus
that were woven there (compare the βυσσίνων ὀθονίων of the Rosetta
inscription). All the castes, from the highest to the lowest, are not
thrown into agonies of despair. The shâthōth (an epithet that was
probably suggested by the thought of shethi, a warp, Syr. 'ashti, to
weave, through the natural association of ideas), i.e., the "pillars" of
the land (with a suffix relating to Mitzrayim, see at [Isa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#008), and construed as a masculine as
at [Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003)), were the highest
castes, who were the direct supporters of the state edifice; and שׂכר
עשׂי cannot mean the citizens engaged in trade, i.e., the middle
classes, but such of the people as hired themselves to the employers of
labour, and therefore lived upon wages and not upon their own property
(שׂכר is used here as in [Pro 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#018),
and not as equivalent to סכר, the dammers-up of the water for the
purpose of catching the fish, like סכרין, Kelim, 23, 5).

[Isaiah 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 19:11</span></span>

The prophet now dwells upon the punishment which falls upon the pillars
of the land, and describes it in [Isa
19:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011) : "The princes of Zoan become
mere fools, the wise counsellors of Pharaoh; readiness in counsel is
stupefied. How can ye say to Pharaoh, I am a son of wise men, a son of
kings of the olden time? Where are they then, thy wise men? Let them
announce to thee, and know what Jehovah of hosts hath determined
concerning Egypt. The princes of Zoan have become fools, the princes of
Memphis are deceived; and they have led Egypt astray who are the
corner-stone of its castes." The two constructives יעצי חכמי do not
stand in a subordinate relation, but in a co-ordinate one (see at [Psa
78:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#009) and [Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017); compare also [Kg2
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013), Keri), viz., "the wise men,
counsellors of Pharaoh,"

(Note: Pharaoh does not mean "the king" (equivalent to the Coptic
π-ουρο), but according to Brugsch, "great house" (Upper Egyptian perâa,
Lower Egyptian pher-âo; vid., aus dem Orient, i. 36). Lauth refers in
confirmation of this to Horapollo, i. 62, ὄφις καὶ οἶκος μέγας ἐν μέσω
αὐτοῦ σημαίνει βασιλέα, and explains this Coptic name for a king from
that of the Οὐραῖος (βασιλίσκος) upon the head of the king, which was a
specifically regal sign.)

so that the second noun is the explanatory permutative of the first.
Zoan is the Tanis of primeval times ([Num
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022)), which was situated on one of
the arms through which the Nile flows into the sea (viz., the ostium
Taniticum), and was the home from which two dynasties sprang. Noph (per
aphaer. = Menoph, contracted into Moph in [Hos
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006)) is Memphis, probably the seat of
the Pharaohs in the time of Joseph, and raised by Psammetichus into the
metropolis of the whole kingdom. The village of Mitrahenni still stands
upon its ruins, with the Serapeum to the north-west.

(Note: What the lexicons say with reference to Zoan and Noph needs
rectifying. Zoan (old Egyptian Zane, with the hieroglyphic of striding
legs, Copt. 'Gane) points back to the radical idea of pelli or fugere;
and according to the latest researches, to which the Turin papyrus No.
112 has led, it is the same as Αὔαρις (Ἄβαρις), which is said to mean
the house of flight (Ha-uare), and was the seat of government under the
Hykshōs. But Memphis is not equivalent to Ma-m-ptah, as Champollion
assumed (although this city is unquestionably sometimes called
Ha-ka-ptah, house of the essential being of Ptah); it is rather
equivalent to Men-nefer (with the hieroglyphic of the pyramids), place
of the good (see Brugsch, Histoire d'Egypte, i. 17). In the later
language it is called pa-nuf or ma-nuf, which has the same meaning
(Copt. nufi, good). Hence Moph is the contraction of the name commencing
with ma, and Noph the abbreviation of the name commencing with ma or pa
by the rejection of the local prefix; for we cannot for a moment think
of Nup, which is the second district of Upper Egypt (Brugsch, Geogr. i.
66). Noph is undoubtedly Memphis.)

Consequently princes of Zoan and Memphis are princes of the chief cities
of the land, and of the supposed primeval pedigree; probably
priest-princes, since the wisdom of the Egyptian priest was of
world-wide renown (Herod. ii. 77, 260), and the oldest kings of Egypt
sprang from the priestly caste. Even in the time of Hezekiah, when the
military caste had long become the ruling one, the priests once more
succeeded in raising one of their own number, namely Sethos, to the
throne of Sais. These magnates of Egypt, with their wisdom, would be
turned into fools by the history of Egypt of the immediate future; and
(this is the meaning of the sarcastic "how can ye say") they would no
longer trust themselves to boast of their hereditary priestly wisdom, or
their royal descent, when giving counsel to Pharaoh. They were the
corner-stone of the shebâtim, i.e., of the castes of Egypt (not of the
districts or provinces, νομοί); but instead of supporting and defending
their people, it is now very evident that they only led them astray.
התעוּ, as the Masora on [Isa 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015)
observes, has no Vav cop.

[Isaiah 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 19:14</span></span>

In [Isa 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014) and [Isa
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015) this state of confusion is more
minutely described: "Jehovah hath poured a spirit of giddiness into the
heart of Egypt, so that they have led Egypt astray in all its doing, as
a drunken man wandereth about in his vomit. And there does not occur of
Egypt any work, which worked, of head and tail, palm-branch and rush."
The spirit which God pours out (as it also said elsewhere) is not only a
spirit of salvation, but also a spirit of judgment. The judicial, penal
result which He produces is here called עועים, which is formed from עועו
(root עו, to curve), and is either contracted from עועוים, or points
back to a supposed singular עועה (vid., Ewald, 158, b). The suffix in
b'kribâh points to Egypt. The divine spirit of judgment makes use of the
imaginary wisdom of the priestly caste, and thereby plunges the people,
as it were, into the giddiness of intoxication. The prophet employs the
hiphil התעה to denote the carefully considered actions of the leaders of
the nation, and the niphal נתעה to denote the constrained actions of a
drunken man, who has lost all self-control. The nation has been so
perverted by false counsels and hopes, that it lies there like a drunken
man in his own vomit, and gropes and rolls about, without being able to
find any way of escape. "No work that worked," i.e., that averted
trouble (עשׂה is as emphatic as in [Dan
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024)), was successfully carried out by
any one, either by the leaders of the nation or by the common people and
their flatterers, either by the upper classes or by the mob.

[Isaiah 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 19:16</span></span>

The result of all these plagues, which were coming upon Egypt, would be
fear of Jehovah and of the people of Jehovah. "In that day will the
Egyptians become like women, and tremble and be alarmed at the swinging
of the hand of Jehovah of hosts, which He sets in motion against it. And
the land of Judah becomes a shuddering for Egypt; as often as they
mention this against Egypt, it is alarmed, because of the decree of
Jehovah of hosts, that He suspendeth over it." The swinging (tenuphâh)
of the hand ([Isa 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#032)) points back
to the foregoing judgments, which have fallen upon Egypt blow after
blow. These humiliations make the Egyptians as soft and timid as women
(tert. compar., not as in [Isa 13:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#007);
[Isa 21:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003)). And the sacred soil of
Judah ('adâmâh, as in [Isa 14:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001);
[Isa 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013)), which Egypt has so often
made the scene of war, throws them into giddiness, into agitation at the
sight of terrors, whenever it is mentioned (אשׁר כּל, cf., [Sa1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#013), lit., "whoever," equivalent to
"as often as any one," Ewald, 337, 3, f; חגּא is written according to
the Aramaean form, with Aleph for He, like זרא) in [Num
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#020), קרחא in Ezek. 37:31, compare
כּלּא, [Eze 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#005), and similar in form
to חפה in [Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005)).

The author of the plagues is well known to them, their faith in the
idols is shaken, and the desire arises in their heart to avert fresh
plagues by presents to Jehovah.

[Isaiah 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 19:18</span></span>

At first there is only slavish fear; but there is the beginning of a
turn to something better. "In that day there will be five cities in the
land of Egypt speaking the language of Canaan, and swearing to Jehovah
of hosts: 'Ir ha-Heres will one be called." Five cities are very few for
Egypt, which was completely covered with cities; but this is simply a
fragmentary commencement of Egypt's future and complete conversion. The
description given of them, as beginning to speak the language of Canaan,
i.e., the sacred language of the worship of Jehovah (comp. [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)), and to give themselves up to
Jehovah with vows made on oath, is simply a periphrastic announcement of
the conversion of the five cities. ל נשׁבּע (different from בּ נשׁבּע,
[Isa 65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016), as [Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023) clearly shows) signifies to
swear to a person, to promise him fidelity, to give one's self up to
him. One of these five will be called ‛Ir ha-Heres. As this is evidently
intended for a proper name, lâ'echât does not mean unicuique, as in [Jdg
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#018) and [Eze
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#006), but uni. It is a customary thing
with Isaiah to express the nature of anything under the form of some
future name (vid., [Isa 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003); [Isa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005); [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006); [Isa
62:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#004)). The name in this instance,
therefore, must have a distinctive and promising meaning.

But what does ‛Ir ha-Heres mean? The Septuagint has changed it into
πόλις ἀσεδέκ, equivalent to ‛Ir hazzedek (city of righteousness),
possibly in honour of the temple in the Heliopolitan nomos, which was
founded under Ptolemaeus Philometor about 160 b.c., during the Syrian
reign of terror, by Onias IV, son of the high priest Onias III, who
emigrated to Egypt.

(Note: See Frankel on this Egyptian auxiliary temple, in his
Monatschrift fr Geschichte und Wissenschaft des Judenthums, 1852, p.
273ff.; Herzfeld, Geschichte des Volkes Israel, iii. 460ff., 557ff.; and
Grtz, Geschichte der Juden, iii. 36ff.)

Maurer in his Lexicon imagines that he has found the true meaning, when
he renders it "city of rescue;" but the progressive advance from the
meaning "to pull off' to that of "setting free" cannot be established in
the case of the verb hâras; in fact, hâras does not mean to pull off or
pull out, but to pull down. Heres cannot have any other meaning in
Hebrew than that of "destruction." But as this appears unsuitable, it is
more natural to read ‛Ir ha-cheres (which is found in some codices,
though in opposition to the Masora).

(Note: But no Greek codex has the reading πόλις ἀχερές (see
Holmes-Parsons' V. T. Graecum c. var. lect. t. iv. on this passage), as
the Complutensian has emended it after the Vulgate (see the Vocabluarium
Hebr. 37a, belonging to the Complutensian).)

This is now generally rendered "city of protection" (Rosenmller, Ewald,
Knobel, and Meier), as being equivalent to an Arabic word signifying
divinitus protecta. But such an appeal to the Arabic is contrary to all
Hebrew usage, and is always a very precarious loophole. ‛Ir ha-cheres
would mean "city of the sun" (cheres as in [Job
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007) and [Jdg
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#018)), as the Talmud in the leading
passage concerning the Onias temple (in b. Menahoth 110a) thinks that
even the received reading may be understood in accordance with [Job
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007), and says "it is a description of
the sun." "Sun-city" was really the name of one of the most celebrated
of the old Egyptian cities, viz., Heliopolis, the city of the sun-god
Ra, which was situated to the north-east of Memphis, and is called On in
other passages of the Old Testament. Ezekiel ([Eze
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#017)) alters this into Aven, for the
purpose of branding the idolatry of the city.

(Note: Heliopolis answers to the sacred name Pe-ra, house of the sun-god
(like Pe-Ramesses, house of Ramses), which was a name borne by the city
that was at other times called On (old Egyptian anu). Cyrill, however,
explains even the latter thus, Ὤν δέ ἐστι κατ ̓ αὐτοὺς ὁ ἤλιος ("On,
according to their interpretation, is the sun"), which is so far true
according to Lauth, that Ain, Oin, Oni, signifies the eye as an emblem
of the sun; and from this, the tenth month, which marks the return of
the sun to the equinoctial point, derives its name of Pa-oni, Pa-one,
Pa-uni. It may possibly be with reference to this that Heliopolis is
called Ain es-sems in Arabic (see Arnold, Chrestom. Arab. p. 56 s.).
Edrisi (iii. 3) speaks of this Ain es-sems as "the country-seat of
Pharaoh, which may God curse;" just as Bin el-Faraun is a common
expression of contempt, which the Arabs apply to the Coptic fellahs.)

But this alteration of the well-attested text is a mistake; and the true
explanation is, that Ir-hahares is simply used with a play upon the name
Ir-hacheres. This is the explanation given by the Targum: "Heliopolis,
whose future fate will be destruction." But even if the name is intended
to have a distinctive and promising meaning, it is impossible to adopt
the explanation given by Luzzatto, "a city restored from the ruins;" for
the name points to destruction, not to restoration. Moreover, Heliopolis
never has been restored since the time of its destruction, which Strabo
dates as far back as the Persian invasion. There is nothing left
standing now out of all its monuments but one granite obelisk: they are
all either destroyed, or carried away, like the so-called "Cleopatra's
Needle," or sunk in the soil of the Nile (Parthey on Plutarch, de Iside,
p. 162). This destruction cannot be the one intended. But hâras is the
word commonly used to signify the throwing down of heathen altars ([Jdg
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#025); [Kg1
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#030); [Kg1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010), [Kg1
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#014)); and the meaning of the
prophecy may be, that the city which had hitherto been ‛Ir-ha-cheres,
the chief city of the sun-worship, would become the city of the
destruction of idolatry, as Jeremiah prophesies in [Isa
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013), "Jehovah will break in pieces
the obelisks of the sun-temple in the land of Egypt." Hence Herzfeld's
interpretation: "City of demolished Idols". It is true that in this case
ha-heres merely announces the breaking up of the old, and does not say
what new thing will rise upon the ruins of the old; but the context
leaves no doubt as to this new thing, and the one-sided character of the
description is to be accounted for from the intentional play upon the
actual name of that one city out of the five to which the prophet gives
especial prominence. With this interpretation - for which indeed we
cannot pretend to find any special confirmation in the actual fulfilment
in the history of the church, and, so to speak, the history of missions
- the train of thought in the prophet's mind which led to the following
groove of promises is a very obvious one.

[Isaiah 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 19:19</span></span>

The allusion to the sun-city, which had become the city of destruction,
led to the mazzeboth or obelisks (see [Jer
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#013)), which were standing there on
the spot where Ra was worshipped. "In that day there stands an altar
consecrated to Jehovah in the midst of the land of Egypt, and an obelisk
near the border of the land consecrated to Jehovah. And a sign and a
witness for Jehovah of hosts is this in the land of Egypt: when they cry
to Jehovah for oppressors, He will send them a helper and champion, and
deliver them." This is the passage of Isaiah (not v. 18) to which Onias
IV appealed, when he sought permission of Ptolemaeus Philometor to build
a temple of Jehovah in Egypt. He built such a temple in the nomos of
Heliopolis, 180 stadia (22 1/2 miles) to the north-east of Memphis
(Josephus, Bell. vii. 10, 3), and on the foundation and soil of the
ὀχύρωμα in Leontopolis, which was dedicated to Bubastis (Ant. xiii. 3,
1, 2).

(Note: We are acquainted with two cities called Leontopolis, viz., the
capital of the nomos called by its name, which was situated between the
Busiritic and the Tanitic nomoi; and a second between Herōōn-poils and
Magdōlon (see Brugsch, Geogr. i. 262). The Leontopolis of Josephus,
however, must have been another, or third. It may possibly have derived
its name, as Lauth conjectures, from the fact that the goddess Bast
(from which comes Boubastos, House of Bast) was called Pacht when
regarded in her destructive character (Todtenbuch, 164, 12). The meaning
of the name is "lioness," and, as her many statues show, she was
represented with a lion's head. At the same time, the boundaries of the
districts fluctuated, and the Heliopolitan Leontopolis of Josephus may
have originally belonged to the Bubastic district.)

This temple, which was altogether unlike the temple of Jerusalem in its
outward appearance, being built in the form of a castle, and which stood
for more than two hundred years (from 160 b.c. to a.d. 71, when it was
closed by command of Vespasian), was splendidly furnished and much
frequented; but the recognition of it was strongly contested both in
Palestine and Egypt. It was really situated "in the midst of the land of
Egypt." But it is out of the question to seek in this temple for the
fulfilment of the prophecy of Isaiah, from the simple fact that it was
by Jews and for Jews that it was erected. And where, in that case, would
the obelisk be, which, as Isaiah prophesies, was to stand on the border
of Egypt, i.e., on the side towards the desert and Canaan? The altar was
to be "a sign" ('oth) that there were worshippers of Jehovah in Egypt;
and the obelisk a "witness" (‛ēd) that Jehovah had proved Himself, to
Egypt's salvation, to be the God of the gods of Egypt. And now, if they
who erected this place of worship and this monument cried to Jehovah, He
would show Himself ready to help them; and they would no longer cry in
vain, as they had formerly done to their own idols ([Isa
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#003)). Consequently it is the
approaching conversion of the native Egyptians that is here spoken of.
The fact that from the Grecian epoch Judaism became a power in Egypt, is
certainly not unconnected with this. But we should be able to trace this
connection more closely, if we had any information as to the extent to
which Judaism had then spread among the natives, which we do know to
have been by no means small. The therapeutae described by Philo, which
were spread through all the nomoi of Egypt, were of a mixed
Egypto-Jewish character (vid., Philo, Opp. ii. p. 474, ed. Mangey). It
was a victory on the part of the religion of Jehovah, that Egypt was
covered with Jewish synagogues and coenobia even in the age before
Christ. And Alexandra was the place where the law of Jehovah was
translated into Greek, and thus made accessible to the heathen world,
and where the religion of Jehovah created for itself those forms of
language and thought, under which it was to become, as Christianity, the
religion of the world. And after the introduction of Christianity into
the world, there were more than one mazzebah (obelisk) that were met
with on the way from Palestine to Egypt, even by the end of the first
century, and more than one mizbeach (altar) found in the heart of Egypt
itself. The importance of Alexandria and of the monasticism and
anachoretism of the peninsula of Sinai and also of Egypt, in connection
with the history of the spread of Christianity, is very well known.

[Isaiah 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 19:21</span></span>

When Egypt became the prey of Islam in the year 640, there was already
to be seen, at all events in the form of a magnificent prelude, the
fulfilment of what the prophet foretells in [Isa
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#021), [Isa
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#022) : "And Jehovah makes Himself
known to the Egyptians, and the Egyptians know Jehovah in that day; and
they serve with slain-offerings and meat-offerings, and vow vows to
Jehovah, and pay them. And Jehovah smites Egypt, smiting and healing;
and if they return to Jehovah, He suffers Himself to be entreated, and
heals them." From that small commencement of five cities, and a solitary
altar, and one solitary obelisk, it has now come to this: Jehovah
extends the knowledge of Himself to the whole of Egypt ענודע, reflective
se cognoscendum dare, or neuter innotescere), and throughout all Egypt
there arises the knowledge of God, which soon shows itself in acts of
worship. This worship is represented by the prophet, just as we should
expect according to the Old Testament view, as consisting in the
offering of bleeding and bloodless, or legal and free-will offerings:
ועבדוּ, viz., את־יהוה, so that עבד is construed with a double
accusative, as in [Exo 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#026), cf.,
[Gen 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#029); or it may possibly be used
directly in the sense of sacrificing, as in the Phoenician, and like
עשׂה in the Thorah; and even if we took it in this sense, it would yield
no evidence against Isaiah's authorship (compare [Isa
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021); [Isa
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017)). Egypt, though converted, is
still sinful; but Jehovah smites it, "smiting and healing" (nâgoph
verâpho', compare [Kg1 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#037)), so that
in the act of smiting the intention of healing prevails; and healing
follows the smiting, since the chastisement of Jehovah leads it to
repentance. Thus Egypt is now under the same plan of salvation as Israel
(e.g., [Lev 26:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#044); [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036)).

[Isaiah 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 19:23</span></span>

Asshur, as we already know from [Isa
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001), is equally humbled; so that
now the two great powers, which have hitherto only met as enemies, meet
in the worship of Jehovah, which unites them together. "In that day a
road will run from Egypt to Asshur, and Asshur comes into Egypt, and
Egypt to Asshur; and Egypt worships (Jehovah) with Asshur." את is not a
sign of the accusative, for there can be no longer any idea of the
subjection of Egypt to Asshur: on the contrary, it is a preposition
indicating fellowship; and עבדוּ is used in the sense of worship, as in
[Isa 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#021). Friendly intercourse is
established between Egypt and Assyria by the fact that both nations are
now converted to Jehovah. The road of communication runs through Canaan.

[Isaiah 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 19:24</span></span>

Thus is the way prepared for the highest point of all, which the prophet
foretells in [Isa 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#024), [Isa
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025) : "In that day will Israel be
the third part to Egypt and Asshur, a blessing in the midst of the
earth, since Jehovah of hosts blesseth them thus: Blessed be thou, my
people Egypt; and thou Asshur, the work of my hands; and thou Israel,
mine inheritance." Israel is added to the covenant between Egypt and
Asshur, so that it becomes a tripartite covenant in which Israel forms
the "third part" (sheilshiyyâh, tertia pars, like ‛ası̄ryyâh, decima
pars, in [Isa 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013)). Israel has now
reached the great end of its calling - to be a blessing in "the midst of
the earth" (b'kereb hâ'âretz, in the whole circuit of the earth), all
nations being here represented by Egypt and Assyria. Hitherto it had
been only to the disadvantage of Israel to be situated between Egypt and
Assyria. The history of the Ephraimitish kingdom, as well as that of
Judah, clearly proves this. If Israel relied upon Egypt, it deceived
itself, and was deceived; and if it relied on Assyria, it only became
the slave of Assyria, and had Egypt for a foe. Thus Israel was in a most
painful vise between the two great powers of the earth, the western and
the eastern powers. But how will all this be altered now! Egypt and
Assyria become one in Jehovah, and Israel the third in the covenant.
Israel is lo longer the only nation of God, the creation of God, the
heir of God; but all this applies to Egypt and Assyria now, as well as
to Israel. To give full expression to this, Israel's three titles of
honour are mixed together, and each of the three nations receives one of
the choice names - nachali, "my inheritance," being reserved for Israel,
as pointing back to its earliest history. This essential equalization of
the heathen nations and Israel is no degradation to the latter. For
although from this time forward there is to be no essential difference
between the nations in their relation to God, it is still the God of
Israel who obtains this universal recognition, and the nation of Israel
that has become, according to the promise, the medium of blessing to the
world.

Thus has the second half of the prophecy ascended step by step from
salvation to salvation, as the first descended step by step from
judgment to judgment. The culminating point in [Isa
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#025) answers to the lowest point in
[Isa 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015). Every step in the
ascending half is indicated by the expression "in that day." Six times
do we find this sign-post to the future within the limits of [Isa
19:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016). This expression is almost as
characteristic of Isaiah as the corresponding expression, "Behold, the
days come" (hinneh yâm bâ'im), is of Jeremiah (compare, for example,
[Isa 7:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)). And it is more
particularly in the promising or Messianic portions of the prophecy that
it is so favourite an introduction ([Isa
11:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010); [Isa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001); compare Zech). Nevertheless, the
genuineness of [Isa 19:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#016) has
recently been called in question, more especially by Hitzig. Sometimes
this passage has not been found fanatical enough to have emanated from
Isaiah, i.e., too free from hatred towards the heathen; whereas, on the
other hand, Knobel adduces evidence that the prophet was no fanatic at
all. Sometimes it is too fanatical; in reply to which we observe, that
there never was a prophet of God in the world who did not appear to a
"sound human understanding" to be beside himself, since, even assuming
that this human understanding be sound, it is only within the four sides
of its own peculiar province that it is so. Again, in [Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018), [Isa
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#019), a prophecy has been discovered
which is too special to be Isaiah's, in opposition to which Knobel
proves that it is not so special as is supposed. But it is quite special
enough; and this can never astonish any one who can discern in the
prophecy a revelation of the future communicated by God, whereas in
itself it neither proves nor disproves the authorship of Isaiah. So far
as the other arguments adduced against the genuineness are concerned,
they have been answered exhaustively by Caspari, in a paper which he
contributed on the subject to the Lutherische Zeitschrift, 1841, 3.
Hvernick, in his Introduction, has not been able to do anything better
than appropriate the arguments adduced by Caspari. And we will not
repeat for a third time what has been said twice already. The two halves
of the prophecy are like the two wings of a bird. And it is only through
its second half that the prophecy becomes the significant centre of the
Ethiopic and Egyptian trilogy. For chapter 19 predicts the saving effect
that will be produced upon Egypt by the destruction of Assyria. And [Isa
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#023). announces what will become of
Assyria. Assyria will also pass through judgment to salvation. This
eschatological conclusion to chapter 19, in which Egypt and Assyria are
raised above themselves into representatives of the two halves of the
heathen world, is the golden clasp which connects chapters 19 and [Isa
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001). We now turn to this third
portion of the trilogy, which bears the same relation to chapter 19 as
[Isa 16:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#013) to Isaiah 15-16:12.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 20](isa020)

</div>
