<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa035)  [Next](isa037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 36:0</span></span>

Fulfilments of Prophecy; Prophecies Belonging to the Fourteenth Year of
Hezekiah's Reign; and the Times Immediately Following - Isaiah 36-39
part vii

To the first six books of Isaiah's prophecies there is now appended a
seventh. The six form three syzygies. In the "Book of Hardening,"
chapters 1-6 (apart from chapter 1, which belonged to the times of
Uzziah and Jotham), we saw Israel's day of grace brought to an end. In
the "Book of Immanuel," chapters 7-12 (from the time of Ahaz), we saw
the judgment of hardening and destruction in its first stage of
accomplishment; but Immanuel was pledge that, even if the great mass
should perish, neither the whole of Israel nor the house of David would
be destroyed. The separate judgments through which the way was to be
prepared for the kingdom of Immanuel, are announced in the "Book
concerning the Nations," chapters 13-23 (from the time of Ahaz and
Hezekiah); and the general judgment in which they would issue, and after
which a new Israel would triumph, is foretold in the "Book of the great
Catastrophe," chapters 24-27 (after the fifteenth year of Hezekiah).
These two syzygies form the first great orbit of the collection. A
second opens with the "Book of Woes, or of the Precious Corner-stone,"
chapters 28-33 (ch. 28-32, from the first years of Hezekiah, and chapter
33 from the fourteenth year), by the side of which is placed the "Book
of the Judgment upon Edom, and of the Restoration of Israel," chapters
34-35 (after Hezekiah's fifteenth year). The former shows how Ephraim
succumbs to the power of Asshur, and Judah's trust in Egypt is put to
shame; the latter, how the world, with its hostility to the church,
eventually succumbs to the vengeance of Jehovah, whereas the church
itself is redeemed and glorified. Then follows, in chapters 36-39, a
"Book of Histories," which returns from the ideal distances of chapters
34-35 to the historical realities of chapters 33, and begins by stating
that "at the conduit of the upper pool in the highway of the fuller's
field," where Ahaz had formerly preferred the help of Asshur to that of
Jehovah, there stood an embassy from the king of Asshur with a
detachment of his army ([Isa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002)),
scornfully demanding the surrender of Jerusalem.

Just as we have found throughout a well-considered succession and
dovetailing of the several parts, so here we can see reciprocal
bearings, which are both designed and expressive; and it is priori a
probable thing that Isaiah, who wrote the historical introduction to the
Judaeo-Assyrian drama in the second book, is the author of the
concluding act of the same drama, which is here the subject of Book 7.
The fact that the murder of Sennacherib is related in [Isa
37:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#037), in accordance with the
prophecy in [Isa 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#007), does not render
this impossible, since, according to credible tradition, Isaiah outlived
Hezekiah. The assertion made by Hitzig and others - that the speciality
of the prophecy, and the miraculous character of the events recorded in
chapters 36-39, preclude the possibility of Isaiah's authorship,
inasmuch as, "according to a well-known critical rule," such special
prophecies as these are always vaticinia ex eventu, and accounts of
miracles are always more recent than their historical germ - rests upon
a foregone conclusion which was completed before any investigation took
place, and which we have good ground for rejecting, although we are well
acquainted with the valuable service that has been rendered by this
philosopher's stone. The statement that accounts of miracles as such are
never contemporaneous with the events themselves, is altogether at
variance with experience; and if the advance from the general to the
particular were to be blotted out of Isaiah's prophecy in relation to
Asshur, this would be not only unhistorical, but unpsychological also.

The question whether Isaiah is the author of chapters 36-39 or not, is
bound up with the question whether the original place of these histories
is in the book of Isaiah or the book of Kings, where the whole passage
is repeated with the exception of Hezekiah's psalm of thanksgiving (2
Kings 18:13-20:19). We shall find that the text of the book of Kings is
in several places the purer and more authentic of the two (though not so
much so as a biassed prejudice would assume), from which it apparently
follows that this section is not in its original position in the book of
Isaiah, but has been taken from some other place and inserted there. But
this conclusion is a deceptive one. In the relation in which Jer 52 and
2 Kings 24:18-25:30 stand to one another, we have a proof that the text
of a passage may be more faithfully preserved in a secondary place than
in its original one. For in this particular instance it is equally
certain that the section relating to king Zedekiah and the Chaldean
catastrophe was written by the author of the book of Kings, whose style
was formed on that of Deuteronomy, and also, that in the book of
Jeremiah it is an appendix taken by an unknown hand from the book of the
Kings. But it is also an acknowledged fact, that the text of Jer is
incomparably the purer of the two, and also that there are many other
instances in which the passage in the book of Kings is corrupt - that is
to say, in the form in which it lies before us now - whereas the
Alexandrian translator had it in his possession in a partially better
form. Consequently, the fact that Isaiah 36-39 is in some respects less
pure than 2 Kings 18:13-20:19, cannot be any argument in itself against
the originality of this section in the book of Isaiah.

It is indeed altogether inconceivable, that the author of the book of
Kings should have written it; for, on the one hand, the liberality of
the prophetic addresses communicated point to a written source; and, on
the other hand, it is wanting in that Deuteronomic stamp, by which the
hand of this author is so easily recognised. Nor can it have been copied
by him out of the annals of Hezekiah (dibhrē hayyâmı̄m), as is commonly
supposed, since it is written in prophetic and not in annalistic style.
Whoever has once made himself acquainted with these two different kinds
of historical composition, the fundamentally different characteristics
of which we have pointed out in the Introduction, can never by any
possibility confound them again. And this passage is written in a style
so peculiarly prophetical, that, like the magnificent historical
accounts of Elijah, for example, which commence so abruptly in [Kg2
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001), it must have been taken from
some special and prophetical source, which had nothing to do with other
prophetico-historical portions of the book of Kings. And the following
facts are sufficient to raise the probability, that this source was no
other than the book of Isaiah itself, into an absolute certainty. In the
first place, the author of the book of Kings had the book of Isaiah
amongst the different sources, of which his apparatus was composed; this
is evident from [Kg2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005), a passage
which was written with [Isa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001) in
view. And secondly, we have express, though indirect, testimony to the
effect that this section, which treats of the most important epoch in
Hezekiah's reign, is in its original place in the book of Isaiah. The
author of the book of Chronicles says, in [Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032) : "Now the rest of the acts of
Hezekiah, and the gracious occurrences of his life, behold, they are
written in the vision (châzōn) of Isaiah the son of Amoz, and in the
book of the kings of Judah and Israel." This notice clearly proves that
a certain historical account of Hezekiah had either been taken out of
the collection of Isaiah's prophecies, which is headed châzōn (vision),
and inserted in the "book of the kings of Judah and Israel," or else had
been so inserted along with the whole collection. The book of the Kings
was the principal source employed by the chronicler, which he calls "the
midrash of the book of the Kings" in [Ch2
24:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#027). Into this Midrash, or else into
the still earlier work upon which it was a commentary, the section in
question was copied from the book of Isaiah; and it follows from this,
that the writer of the history of the kings made use of our book of
Isaiah for one portion of the history of Hezekiah's reign, and made
extracts from it. The chronicler himself did not care to repeat the
whole section, which he knew to be already contained in the canonical
book of Kings (to say nothing of the book of Isaiah). At the same time,
his own historical account of Hezekiah in [Ch2
27:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#001) clearly shows that he was
acquainted with it, and also that the historical materials, which the
annals supplied to him through the medium of the Midrash, were totally
different both in substance and form from those contained in the section
in question. These two testimonies are further strengthened by the fact,
that Isaiah is well known to us as a historian through another passage
in the Chronicles, namely, as the author of a complete history of
Uzziah's reign; also by the fact, that the prophetico-historical style
of chapters 36-39, with their fine, noble, pictorial prose, which is
comparable to the grandest historical composition to be met with in
Hebrew, is worthy of Isaiah, and bears every mark of Isaiah's pen;
thirdly, by the fact, that there are other instances in which Isaiah has
interwoven historical accounts with his prophecies (chapters 7-8 and
[Isa 20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001)), and that in so doing he
sometimes speaks of himself in the first person ([Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001); [Isa
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001)), and sometimes in the third
([Isa 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003)., and [Isa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001)), just as in chapters 36-39; and
fourthly, by the fact that, as we have already observed, [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003) and [Isa
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002) bear the clearest marks of having
had one and the same author; and, as we shall also show, the order in
which the four accounts in chapters 36-39 are arranged, corresponds to
the general plan of the whole collection of prophecies - chapters 36 and
37 looking back to the prophecies of the Assyrian era, and chapters 38
and [Isa 39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001) looking forwards to
those of the Babylonian era, which is the prophet's ideal present from
chapter 40 onwards.

[Isaiah 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 36:1</span></span>

Marcus V. Niebuhr, in his History of Asshur and Babel (p. 164), says,
"Why should not Hezekiah have revolted from Asshur as soon as he
ascended the throne? He had a motive for doing this, which other kings
had not - namely, that as he held his kingdom in fief from his God,
obedience to a temporal monarch was in his case sin." But this
assumption, which is founded upon the same idea as that in which the
question was put to Jesus concerning the tribute money, is not at all in
accordance with Isaiah's view, as we may see from chapters 28-32; and
Hezekiah's revolt cannot have occurred even in the sixth year of his
reign. For Shalmanassar, or rather Sargon, made war upon Egypt and
Ethiopia after the destruction of Samaria ([Isa
20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001); cf., Oppert, Les Inscriptions
des Sargonides, pp. 22, 27), without attempting anything against
Hezekiah. It was not till the time of Sargon, who overthrew the reigning
house of Assyria, that the actual preparations for the revolt were
commenced, by the formation of an alliance between the kingdom of Judah
on the one hand, and Egypt, and probably Philistia, on the other, the
object of which was the rupture of the Assyrian yoke.

(Note: The name Amgarron upon the earthenware prism of Sennacherib does
not mean Migron (Oppert), but Ekron (Rawlinson).)

The campaign of Sennacherib the son of Sargon, into which we are
transported in the following history, was the third of his expeditions,
the one to which Sennacherib himself refers in the inscription upon the
prism: "dans ma ̄e campagne je marchai vers la Syrie." The position
which we find Sennacherib taking up between Philistia and Jerusalem, to
the south-west of the latter, is a very characteristic one in relation
to both the occasion and the ultimate object of the campaign.

(Note: We shall show the variations in the text of [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)., as far as we possibly can, in
our translation. K. signifies the book of Kings. But the task of
pronouncing an infallible sentence upon them all we shall leave to those
who know everything.)

[Isa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001) "And it came to pass in the
(K. and in the) fourteenth year of king Hizkyahu, Sancherb king of
Asshur came up against all the fortified cities of Judah, and took them.
(K. adds: Then Hizkiyah king of Judah sent to the king of Asshur to
Lachish, saying, I have sinned, withdraw from me again; what thou
imposest upon me I will raise. And the king of Asshur imposed upon
Hizkiyah king of Judah three hundred talents of silver, and thirty
talents of gold. And Hizkiyah gave up all the silver that was in the
house of Jehovah, and in the treasures of the king's house. At the same
time Hizkiyah mutilated the doors of the temple of Jehovah, and the
pillars which Hizkiyah king of Judah had plated with gold, and gave it
to the king of Asshur)." This long addition, which is distinguished at
once by the introduction of חזיקה in the place of חזקיהו, is probably
only an annalistic interpolation, though one of great importance in
relation to [Isa 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#007). What follows in
Isaiah does not dovetail well into this addition, and therefore does not
presuppose its existence. [Isa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002)
"Then the king of Asshur sent Rabshakeh (K.: Tartan, and Rabsaris, and
Rabshakeh) from Lachish towards Jerusalem to king Hizkiyahu with a great
army, and he advanced (K.: to king H. with a great army to Jerusalem;
and they went up and came to Jerusalem, and went up, and came and
advanced) to the conduit of the upper pool by the road of the fuller's
field." Whereas in K. the repeated ויבאו ויעלו (and went up and came)
forms a "dittography," the names Tartan and Rab-saris have apparently
dropped out of the text of Isaiah, as [Isa
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#006), [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024) presuppose a plurality of
messengers. The three names are not names of persons, but official
titles, viz., the commander-in-chief (Tartan, which really occurs in an
Assyrian list of offices; see Rawlinson, Monarchies, ii. 412), the chief
cup-bearer (רבשׁקה with tzere = רבשׁקא)). The situation of Lachish is
marked by the present ruins of Umm Lakis, to the south-west of
Bet-Gibrin ((Eleutheropolis) in the Shephelah. The messengers come from
the south-west with the ultima ratio of a strong detachment (חיל a
connecting form, from חיל, like גדולה גּיא, [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004); Ewald, 287, a); they therefore
halt on the western side of Jerusalem (on the locality, see at [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003); [Isa
22:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#008); compare Keil on Kings).

[Isaiah 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 36:3</span></span>

Hezekiah's confidential ministers go there also. [Isa
36:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#003) (K. "And they called to the
king), and there went out to him (K. to them) Eliakim son of Hilkiyahu,
the house-minister, and Shebna the chancellor, and Joah son of Asaph,
the recorder." On the office of the house-minister, or major-domo, which
was now filled by Eliakim instead of Shebna (שׁבנא, K. twice שׁבנה), see
[Isa 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#015).; and on that of sōphēr and
mazkı̄r. Rabshakeh's message follows in [Isa
36:4-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#004) : "And Rabshakeh said to them,
Say now to Hizkiyahu, Thus saith the great king, the king of Asshur,
What sort of confidence is this that thou hast got? I say (K. thou
sayest, i.e., thou talkest), vain talk is counsel and strength for war:
now, then, in whom dost thou trust, that thou hast rebelled against me?
(K. Now) Behold, thou trustest (K. לּך) in this broken reed-staff there,
in Egypt, on which one leans, and it runs into his hand and pierces it;
so does Pharaoh king of Egypt to all who trust in him. But if thou
sayest to me (K. ye say), We trust in Jehovah our God; is it not He
whose high places and altars Hizkiyahu has removed, and has said to
Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before the altar (K. ads, in
Jerusalem)? And now take a wager with my lord (K. with) the king of
Asshur; I will deliver thee two thousand horses, if thou art able for
thy part to give horsemen upon them. And how couldst thou repel the
advance of a single satrap among the least of the servants of my lord?!
Thou puttest thy trust then in Egypt for chariots and riders! And
(omitted in K.) now have I come up without Jehovah against this land to
destroy it (K. against this place, to destroy it)? Jehovah said to me,
Go up to (K. against) this land, and destroy it." The chronicler has a
portion of this address of Rabshakeh in [Ch2
32:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#010). And just as the prophetic
words in the book of Kings have a Deuteronomic sound, and those in the
Chronicles the ring of a chronicle, so do Rabshakeh's words, and those
which follow, sound like the words of Isaiah himself. "The great king"
is the standing royal title appended to the names of Sargon and
Sennacherib upon the Assyrian monuments (compare [Isa
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#008)). Hezekiah is not thought worthy
of the title of king, ether here or afterwards. The reading אמרתּ in
[Isa 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#005) (thou speakest vain talk) is
not the preferable one, because in that case we should expect דּבּרתּ,
or rather (according to the usual style) אך דּבּרתּ. The meaning is,
that he must look upon Hezekiah's resolution, and his strength (וּגבוּרה
עצה connected as in [Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)) for
going to war, as mere boasting ("lip-words," as in [Pro
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#023)), and must therefore assume that
there was something in the background of which he was well aware. And
this must be Egypt, which would not only be of no real help to its ally,
but would rather do him harm by leaving him in the lurch. The figure of
a reed-staff has been borrowed by Ezekiel in [Isa
29:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#006). It was a very appropriate one
for Egypt, with its abundance of reeds and rushes ([Isa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006)), and it has Isaiah's peculiar
ring (for the expression itself, compare [Isa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#003); and for the fact itself, [Isa
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#005), and other passages). רצוּץ does
not mean fragile (Luzz. quella fragil canna), but broken, namely, in
consequence of the loss of the throne by the native royal family, from
whom it had been wrested by the Ethiopians ([Isa
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)), and the defeats sustained at
the hands of Sargon ([Isa 20:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001)). The
construction cui quis innitur et intrat is paratactic for cui si quis.
In [Isa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#007) the reading תאמרוּן
commends itself, from the fact that the sentence is not continued with
הסירת; but as Hezekiah is addressed throughout, and it is to him that
the reply is to be made, the original reading was probably תאמר. The
fact that Hezekiah had restricted the worship of Jehovah to Jerusalem,
by removing the other places of worship ([Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004)), is brought against him in a
thoroughly heathen, and yet at the same time (considering the
inclination to worship other gods which still existed in the nation) a
very crafty manner. In [Isa 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#008), [Isa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#009), he throws in his teeth, with
most imposing scorn, his own weakness as compared with Asshur, which was
chiefly dreaded on account of its strength in cavalry and war-chariots.
נא התערב does not refer to the performance and counter-performance which
follow, in the sense of "connect thyself" (Luzz. associati), but is used
in a similar sense to the Omeric μιγῆναι, though with the idea of vying
with one another, not of engaging in war (the synonym in the Talmud is
himrâh, to bet, e.g., b. Sabbath 31a): a bet and a pledge are kindred
notions (Heb. ערבון, cf., Lat. vadari). On pechâh (for pachâh), which
also occurs as an Assyrian title in [Eze
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006), [Eze
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023). אחד פּחת, two constructives,
the first of which is to be explained according to Ewald, 286, a
(compare above, [Isa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002), כבד חיל),
form the logical regens of the following servorum dominin mei minimorum;
and hēshı̄bh penē does not mean here to refuse a petitioner, but to repel
an antagonist ([Isa 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#006)). The fut.
consec. ותּבטח deduces a consequence: Hezekiah could not do anything by
himself, and therefore he trusted in Egypt, from which he expected
chariots and horsemen. In [Isa 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#010),
the prophetic idea, that Asshur was the instrument employed by Jehovah
([Isa 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005), etc.), is put into the
mouth of the Assyrian himself. This is very conceivable, but the
colouring of Isaiah is undeniable.

[Isaiah 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 36:11</span></span>

The concluding words, in which the Assyrian boasts of having Jehovah on
his side, affect the messengers of Hezekiah in the keenest manner,
especially because of the people present. "Then said Eliakim (K. the son
of Hilkiyahu), and Shebna, and Joah, to Rabshakeh, Pray, speak to thy
servants in Aramaean, for we understand it; and do not speak to (K.
with) us in Jewish, in the ears of the people that are on the wall."
They spoke Yehūdı̄th, i.e., the colloquial language of the kingdom of
Judah. The kingdom of Israel was no longer in existence, and the
language of the Israelitish nation, as a whole, might therefore already
be called Judaean (Jewish), as in [Neh
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#024), more especially as there may
have been a far greater dialectical difference between the popular
speech of the northern and southern kingdoms, than we can gather from
the biblical books that were written in the one or the other. Aramaean
('arâmı̄th), however, appears to have been even then, as it was at a
later period ([Ezr 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007)), the language
of intercourse between the empire of Eastern Asia and the people to the
west of the Tigris (compare Alex. Polyhistor in Euseb. chron. arm. i.
43, where Sennacherib is said to have erected a monument with a Chaldean
inscription); and consequently educated Judaeans not only understood it,
but were able to speak it, more especially those who were in the service
of the state. Assyrian, on the contrary, was unintelligible to Judaeans
([Isa 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#011); [Isa
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#019)), although this applied
comparatively less to the true Assyrian dialect, which was Semitic, and
can be interpreted for the most part from the Hebrew (see Oppert's
"Outlines of an Assyrian Grammar" in the Journal Asiatique, 1859), than
to the motley language of the Assyrian army, which was a compound of
Arian and Turanian elements. The name Sennacherib (Sanchērı̄bh =
סן־אסהי־ירב, lxx Sennachēreim, i.e., "Sin, the moon-god, had multiplied
the brethren") is Semitic; on the other hand, the name Tartan, which
cannot be interpreted either from the Semitic or the Arian, is an
example of the element referred to, which was so utterly strange to a
Judaean ear.

[Isaiah 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 36:12</span></span>

The harsh reply is given in [Isa
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#012). "Then Rabshakeh said (K. to
them), Has my lord sent me to (K. העל) the men who sit upon the wall, to
eat their dung, and to drink their urine together with you?" - namely,
because their rulers were exposing them to a siege which would involve
the most dreadful state of famine.

[Isaiah 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 36:13</span></span>

After Rabshakeh had refused the request of Hezekiah's representatives in
this contemptuous manner, he turned in defiance of them to the people
themselves. "Then Rabshakeh went near, and cried with a loud voice in
the Jewish language (K. and spake), and said, Hear the words (K. the
word) of the great king, the king of Asshur. Thus saith the king, Let
not Hizkiyahu practise deception upon you (יסה, K. יסהיא)); for he
cannot deliver you (K. out of his hand). And let not Hizkiyahu feed you
with hope in Jehovah, saying, Jehovah will deliver, yea, deliver us: (K.
and) this city will not be delivered into the hand of the king of
Asshur. Hearken not to Hizkiyahu: for thus saith the king (hammelekh, K.
melekh) of Asshur, Enter into a connection of mutual good wishes with
me, and come out to me: and enjoy every one his vine, and every one his
fig-tree, and drink every one the water of his cistern; till I come and
take you away into a land like your land, a land of corn and wine, a
land of bread-corn and vineyards (K. a land full of fine olive-trees and
honey, and live and do not die, and hearken not to Hizkiyahu); that
Hizkiyahu to not befool you (K. for he befools you), saying, Jehovah
will deliver us! Have the gods of the nations delivered (K. really
delivered) every one his land out of the hand of the king of Asshur?
Where are the gods of Hamath and Arpad? where the gods of Sepharvayim
(K. adds, Hena‛ and ‛Ivah)? and how much less (וכי, K. כּי) have they
delivered that Samaria out of my hand? Who were they among all the gods
of these (K. of the) lands, who delivered their land out of my hand? how
much less will Jehovah deliver Jerusalem out of my hand!? The chronicler
also has this continuation of Rabshakeh's address in part ([Ch2
32:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#013)), but he has fused into one
the Assyrian self-praise uttered by Rabshakeh on his first and second
mission. The encouragement of the people, by referring to the help of
Jehovah ([Ch2 32:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#006)), is placed by
him before this first account is given by Isaiah, and forms a conclusion
to the preparations for the contest with Asshur as there described.
Rabshakeh now draws nearer to the wall, and harangues the people. השּׁיא
is construed here with a dative (to excite treacherous hopes); whereas
in [Ch2 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#015) it is written with an
accusative. The reading מיּדו is altered from מיּדי in [Isa
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#020), which is inserted still more
frequently by the chronicler. The reading את־העיר with תנּתן is
incorrect; it would require ינּתן (Ges. 143, 1a). To make a berâkhâh
with a person was equivalent to entering into a relation of blessing,
i.e., into a state of mind in which each wished all prosperity to the
other. This was probably a common phrase, though we only meet with it
here. יצא, when applied to the besieged, is equivalent to surrendering
(e.g., [Sa1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#003)). If they did that,
they should remain in quiet possession and enjoyment, until the Assyrian
fetched them away (after the Egyptian campaign was over), and
transported them to a land which he describes to them in the most
enticing terms, in order to soften down the inevitable transportation.
It is a question whether the expansion of this picture in the book of
Kings is original or not; since ועוּה הנע in [Isa
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#019) appears to be also tacked on
here from [Isa 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#013) (see at this
passage). On Hamath and Arpad (to the north of Haleb in northern Syria,
and a different place from Arvad = Arad), see [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009). Sepharvayim (a dual form, the
house of the Sepharvı̄m, [Kg2 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031)) is
the Sipphara of Ptol. v. 18, 7, the southernmost city of Mesopotamia, on
the left bank of the Euphrates; Pliny's Hipparenum on the Narraga, i.e.,
the canal, nehar malkâ, the key to the irrigating or inundating works of
Babylon, which were completed afterwards by Nebuchadnezzar (Plin. h. n.
vi. 30); probably the same place as the sun-city, Sippara, in which
Xisuthros concealed the sacred books before the great flood (see K.
Mller's Fragmenta Historicorum Gr. ii. 501-2). פּן in [Isa
36:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018) has a warning meaning (as if it
followed לכם השּׁמרו ); and both וכי and כּי in [Isa
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#019), [Isa
36:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#020), introduce an exclamatory clause
when following a negative interrogatory sentence: and that they should
have saved," or "that Jehovah should save," equivalent to "how much less
have they saved, or will He save" (Ewald, 354, c; comp. אף־כּי, [Ch2
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#015)). Rabshakeh's words in [Isa
36:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#018) are the same as those in [Isa
10:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#008). The manner in which he defies
the gods of the heathen, of Samaria, and last of all of Jerusalem,
corresponds to the prophecy there. It is the prophet himself who acts as
historian here, and describes the fulfilment of the prophecy, though
without therefore doing violence to his character as a prophet.

[Isaiah 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 36:21</span></span>

The effect of Rabshakeh's words. "But they held their peace (K. and
they, the people, held their peace), and answered him not a word; for it
was the king's commandment, saying, Ye shall not answer him. Then came
Eliakim son of Hilkiyahu (K. Hilkiyah), the house-minister, and Shebna
the chancellor, and Joah son of Asaph, the recorder, to Hizkiyahu, with
torn clothes, and told him the words of Rabshakeh." It is only a
superficial observation that could commend the reading in Kings, "They,
the people, held their peace," which Hitzig and Knobel prefer, but which
Luzzatto very properly rejects. As the Assyrians wished to speak to the
king himself ([Kg2 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#018)), who sent
the three to them as his representatives, the command to hear, and to
make no reply, can only have applied to them (and they had already made
the matter worse by the one remark which they had made concerning the
language); and the reading ויּחרישׁוּ in the text of Isaiah is the
correct one. The three were silent, because the king had imposed the
duty of silence upon them; and regarding themselves as dismissed,
inasmuch as Rabshakeh had turned away from them to the people, they
hastened to the king, rending their clothes, in despair and grief and
the disgrace they had experienced.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 37](isa037)

</div>
