<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa008)  [Next](isa010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)

[Isaiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 9:1</span></span>

After the prophet has thus depicted the people as without morning dawn,
he gives the reason for the assumption that a restoration of light is to
be expected, although not for the existing generation. "For it does not
remain dark where there is now distress: in the first time He brought
into disgrace the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, and in the
last He brings to honour the road by the sea, the other side of Jordan,
the circle of the Gentiles." כּי is neither to be taken as equivalent to
the untranslatable ὃτι recitativum (Knobel), nor is there any necessity
to translate it "but" or "nevertheless," and supply the clause, "it will
not remain so." The reason assigned for the fact that the unbelieving
people of Judah had fallen into a night without morning, is, that there
was a morning coming, whose light, however, would not rise upon the land
of Judah first, but upon other parts of the land. Mū‛âp and mūzâk are
hophal nouns: a state of darkness and distress. The meaning is, There is
not, i.e., there will not remain, a state of darkness over the land
(lâh, like bâh in [Isa 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021), refers to
'eretz), which is now in a state of distress; but those very districts
which God has hitherto caused to suffer deep humiliation He will bring
to honour by and by (hēkal = hēkēl, according to Ges. 67, Anm. 3, opp.
hicbı̄d, as in [Isa 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#009)). The height
of the glorification would correspond to the depth of the disgrace. We
cannot adopt Knobel's rendering, "as at a former time," etc., taking עת
as an accusative of time and כּ as equivalent to כּאשׁר, for כּ is never
used conjunctionally in this way (see Psalter, i. 301, and ii. 514); and
in the examples adduced by Knobel (viz., [Isa
61:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#011) and [Job
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#002)), the verbal clauses after Caph
are elliptical relative clauses. The rendering adopted by Rosenmller and
others (sicut tempus prius vilem reddidit, etc., "as a former time
brought it into contempt") is equally wrong. And Ewald, again, is not
correct in taking the Vav in v'hâ-acharōn as the Vav of sequence used in
the place of the Cēn of comparison. הראשׁון כּעת and האחרון are both
definitions of time. The prophet intentionally indicates the time of
disgrace with כּ, because this would extend over a lengthened period, in
which the same fate would occur again and again. The time of
glorification, on the other hand, is indicated by the accus. temporis,
because it would occur but once, and then continue in perpetuity and
without change. It is certainly possible that the prophet may have
regarded hâ-acharōn as the subject; but this would destroy the harmony
of the antithesis. By the land or territory of Naphtali ('artzâh, poet.
for 'eretz, as in [Job 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#013); [Job
37:12](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#012), with a toneless ah) we are to
understand the upper Galilee of later times, and by the land of Zebulun
lower Galilee. In the antithetical parallel clause, what is meant by the
two lands is distinctly specified: (1.) "the road by the sea," derek
hayyâm, the tract of land on the western shore of the sea of Chinnereth;
(2.) "the other side of Jordan," ‛ēber hayyardēn, the country to the
east of the Jordan; (3.) "the circle of the Gentiles," gelı̄l haggōyim,
the northernmost border-land of Palestine, only a portion of the
so-called Galilaea of after times. Ever since the times of the judges,
all these lands had been exposed, on account of the countries that
joined them, to corruption from Gentile influence and subjugation by
heathen foes. The northern tribes on this side, as well as those on the
other side, suffered the most in the almost incessant war between Israel
and the Syrians, and afterwards between Israel and the Assyrians; and
the transportation of their inhabitants, which continued under Pul,
Tiglath-pileser, and Shalmanassar, amounted at last to utter
depopulation (Caspari, Beitr. 116-118). But these countries would be the
very first that would be remembered when that morning dawn of glory
should break. Matthew informs us ([Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013).) in what way this was fulfilled
at the commencement of the Christian times. On the ground of this
prophecy of Isaiah, and not of a "somewhat mistaken exposition of it,"
as Renan maintains in his Vie de Jsus (Chapter 13), the Messianic hopes
of the Jewish nation were really directed towards Galilee.

(Note: The Zohar was not the first to teach that the Messiah would
appear in Galilee, and that redemption would break forth from Tiberias;
but this is found in the Talmud and Midrash (see Litteratur-blatt des
Orients, 1843, Col. 776).)

It is true that, according to Jerome, in loc., the Nazarenes supposed
[Isa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) to refer to the light of the
gospel spread by the preaching of Paul in terminos gentium et viam
universi maris. But "the sea" (hayyâm) cannot possibly be understood as
referring to the Mediterranean, as Meier and Hofmann suppose, for "the
way of the sea" (derek hayyâm) would in that case have been inhabited by
the Philistines and Phoenicians; whereas the prophet's intention was
evidently to mention such Israelitish provinces as had suffered the
greatest affliction and degradation.

[Isaiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 9:2</span></span>

The range of vision is first widened in [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002).: "The people that walk about in
darkness see a great light; they who dwell in the land of the shadow of
death, upon them a light shines." The range of vision is here extended;
not to the Gentiles, however, but to all Israel. Salvation would not
break forth till it had become utterly dark along the horizon of Israel,
according to the description in [Isa
5:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#030), i.e., till the land of Jehovah
had become a land of the shadow of death on account of the apostasy of
its inhabitants from Jehovah (zalmâveth is modified, after the manner of
a composite noun, from zalmūth, according to the form kadrūth, and is
derived from צלם, Aeth. salema, Arab. zalima, to be dark).

(Note: The shadow or shade, zēl, Arab. zill (radically related to tall =
טל, dew), derived its name ab obtegendo, and according to the idea
attached to it as the opposite of heat or of light, was used as a figure
of a beneficent shelter ([Isa 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#003)),
or of what was dark and horrible (cf., Targ. tallâni, a night-demon).
The verb zâlam, in the sense of the Arabic zalima, bears the same
relation to zâlal as bâham to bâhâh (Gen. p. 93), ‛âram, to be naked, to
‛ârâh (Jeshurun, p. 159). The noun zelem, however, is either formed from
this zâlam, or else directly from zēl, with the substantive termination
em.)

The apostate mass of the nation is to be regarded as already swept away;
for if death has cast its shadow over the land, it must be utterly
desolate. In this state of things the remnant left in the land beholds a
great light, which breaks through the sky that has been hitherto covered
with blackness. The people, who turned their eyes upwards to no purpose,
because they did so with cursing ([Isa
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021)), are now no more. It is the
remnant of Israel which sees this light of spiritual and material
redemption arise above its head. In what this light would consist the
prophet states afterwards, when describing first the blessings and then
the star of the new time.

[Isaiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 9:3</span></span>

In [Isa 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003) he says, in words of
thanksgiving and praise: "Thou multipliest the nation, preparest it
great joy; they rejoice before Thee like the joy in harvest, as men
rejoice when they share the spoil." "The nation" (haggoi) is undoubtedly
Israel, reduced to a small remnant. That God would make this again into
a numerous people, was a leading feature in the pictures drawn of the
time of glory ([Isa 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#015); [Isa
66:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008); [Zac
14:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010)), which would be in this
respect the counterpart of that of Solomon ([Kg1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020)). If our explanation is the
correct one so far, the only way to give an intelligible meaning to the
chethib לא, taking it in a negative sense, is to render it, as
Hengstenberg, Hitzig, and others have done, "Thou multipliest the nation
to which Thou hadst formerly not given great joy," which must signify,
per litoten, "the nation which Thou hadst plunged into deep sorrow." But
it is unnatural to take any one of the prophetic preterites, commencing
with hicbı̄d in [Isa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001), in any other
than a future sense. We must therefore give the preference to the Keri
לו, and render it, "Thou makest of the nation a great multitude, and
preparest it great joy." The pronoun loo is written first, as in [Lev
7:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#007); [Job
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#004) (keri), probably with the
emphasis assumed by Drechsler: "to it, in which there was not the
smallest indication of such an issue as this." The verbs "multiplied"
(higdaltâ) and "increased" (hirbithâ) are intentionally written
together, to put the intensity of the joy on a level with the
extensiveness of the multitude. This joy would be a holy joy, as the
expression "before Thee" implies: the expression itself recals the
sacrificial meals in the courts of the temple ([Deu
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#007); [Deu
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#026)). It would be a joy over
blessings received, as the figure of the harvest indicates; and joy over
evil averted, as the figure of dividing the spoil presupposes: for the
division of booty is the business of conquerors. This second figure is
not merely a figure: the people that are so joyous are really victorious
and triumphant.

(Note: On the passages in which לא chethib is לו keri, see at [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003) and [Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015).)

[Isaiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 9:4</span></span>

"For the yoke of its burden and the stick of its neck, the stick of its
oppressor, Thou hast broken to splinters, as in the day of Midian." The
suffixes refer to the people (hâēâm). Instead of soblō, from sōbel, we
have intentionally the more musical form סבּלו (with dagesh dirimens and
chateph kametz under the influence of the previous u instead of the
simple sheva). The rhythm of the v. of anapaestic. "Its burden"
(subbolo) and "its oppressor" (nogēs bō) both recall to mind the
Egyptian bondage ([Exo 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011); [Exo
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#006)). The future deliverance, which
the prophet here celebrates, would be the counterpart of the Egyptian.
But as the whole of the great nation of Israel was then redeemed,
whereas only a small remnant would participate in the final redemption,
he compares it to the day of Midian, when Gideon broke the seven years'
dominion of Midian, not with a great army, but with a handful of
resolute warriors, strong in the Lord (Judg 7). The question suggests
itself here, Who is the hero, Gideon's antitype, through whom all this
is to occur? The prophet does not say; but building up one clause upon
another with כּי, he gives first of all the reason for the cessation of
the oppressive dominion of the imperial power - namely, the destruction
of all the military stores of the enemy.

[Isaiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 9:5</span></span>

"For every boot of those who tramp with boots in the tumult of battle,
and cloak rolled in blood, shall be for burning, a food of fire." That
which is the food of fire becomes at the same time a sĕrēphâh, inasmuch
as the devouring fire reduces it to ashes, and destroys its previous
existence. This closing statement requires for סאון the concrete sense
of a combustible thing; and this precludes such meanings as business
(Handel und Wandel), noise, or din (= שׁאון, Jerome, Syriac, Rashi, and
others). On the other hand, the meaning "military equipment," adopted by
Knobel and others - a meaning derived from a comparison of the
derivatives of the Aramaean zūn, ăzan, and the Arabic zâna, fut. yezı̄n
(to dress or equip) - would be quite admissible; at the same time, the
interchange of Samech and Zain in this word cannot be dialectically
established. Jos. Kimchi has very properly referred to the Targum sēn,
mesân (Syr. also sâūn with an essentially long a), which signifies shoe
(see Bynaeus, de calceo Hebraeorum) - a word which is more Aramaean than
Hebrew, and the use of which in the present connection might be
explained on the ground that the prophet had in his mind the
annihilation of the Assyrian forces. We should no doubt expect sâ'ūn
(sandaloumenos) instead of sō'ēn; but the denom. verb sâ'ăn might be
applied to a soldier's coming up in military boots, and so signify
Caligatum venire, although the primary meaning is certainly Calceare se
(e.g., [Eph 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#015), Syr.). Accordingly
we should render it, "every boot of him who comes booted (des
Einherstiefelnden) into the tumult of battle," taking the word ra‛ash,
not as Drechsler does, in the sense of the noise made by a warrior
coming up proudly in his war-boots, nor with Luzzatto in the sense of
the war-boot itself, for which the word is too strong, but as referring
to the noise or tumult of battle (as in [Jer
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#022)), in the midst of which the man
comes up equipped or shod for military service. The prophet names the
boot and garment with an obvious purpose. The destruction of the hostile
weapons follows as a matter of course, if even the military shoes, worn
by the soldiers in the enemies' ranks, and the military cloaks that were
lying in dâmim, i.e., in blood violently shed upon the battle-field,
were all given up to the fire.

[Isaiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 9:6</span></span>

Upon the two sentences with ci the prophet now builds a third. The
reason for the triumph is the deliverance effected; and the reason for
the deliverance, the destruction of the foe; and the reason for all the
joy, all the freedom, all the peace, is the new great King. - "For unto
us a child is born, unto us a son is given; and the government rests
upon His shoulder: and they call His name, Wonder, Counsellor, mighty
God, Eternal-Father, Prince of Peace." The same person whom the prophet
foretold in chapter 7 as the son of the virgin who would come to
maturity in troublous times, he here sees as born, and as having already
taken possession of the government. There he appeared as a sign, here as
a gift of grace. The prophet does not expressly say that he is a son of
David in this instance any more than in chapter 7 (for the remark that
has been recently made, that yeled is used here for "infant-prince," is
absurd); but this followed as a matter of course, from the fact that he
was to bear the government, with all its official rights ([Isa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#022)) and godlike majesty ([Psa
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#006)), upon his shoulder; for the
inviolable promise of eternal sovereignty, of which the new-born infant
was to be the glorious fulfilment, had been bound up with the seed of
David in the course of Israel's history ever since the declaration in 2
Sam 7. In chapter 7 it is the mother who names the child; here it is the
people, or indeed any one who rejoices in him: ויּקרא, "one calls, they
call, he is called," as Luther has correctly rendered it, though under
the mistaken idea that the Jews had altered the original ויּקּרא into
ויּקרא, for the purpose of eliminating the Messianic sense of the
passage. But the active verb itself has really been twisted by Jewish
commentators in this way; so that Rashi, Kimchi, Malbim, and others
follow the Targum, and explain the passage as meaning, "the God, who is
called and is Wonder,' Counsellor, the mighty God, the eternal Father,
calls his name the Prince of Peace;" but this rendering evidently tears
asunder things that are closely connected. And Luzzatto has justly
observed, that you do not expect to find attributes of God here, but
such as would be characteristic of the child. He therefore renders the
passage, "God the mighty, the eternal Father, the Prince of Peace,
resolves upon wonderful things," and persuades himself that this long
clause is meant for the proper name of the child, just as in other cases
declaratory clauses are made into proper names, e.g., the names of the
prophet's two sons. But even granting that such a sesquipedalian name
were possible, in what an unskilful manner would the name be formed,
since the long-winded clause, which would necessarily have to be uttered
in one breath, would resolve itself again into separate clauses, which
are not only names themselves, but, contrary to all expectation, names
of God! The motive which prompted Luzzatto to adopt this original
interpretation is worthy of notice. He had formerly endeavoured, like
other commentators, to explain the passage by taking the words from
"Wonderful" to "Prince of Peace" as the name of the child; and in doing
this he rendered יועץ פלא "one counselling wonderful things," thus
inverting the object, and regarded "mighty God" as well as "eternal
Father" as hyperbolical expressions, like the words applied to the King
in [Psa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007). But now he cannot help
regarding it as absolutely impossible for a human child to be called el
gibbor, like God Himself in [Isa
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021). So far as the relation between
his novel attempt at exposition and the accentuation is concerned, it
certainly does violence to this, though not to such an extent as the
other specimen of exegetical leger-demain, which makes the clause from
פלא to אבי־עד the subject to ויקרא. Nevertheless, in the face of the
existing accentuation, we must admit that the latter is, comparatively
speaking, the better of the two; for if שמו ויקרא were intended to be
the introduction to the list of names which follows, שׁמו would not be
pointed with geresh, but with zakeph. The accentuators seem also to have
shrunk from taking el gibbor as the name of a man. They insert
intermediate points, as though "eternal Father, Prince of Peace," were
the name of the child, and all that precedes, from "Wonder" onwards, the
name of God, who would call him by these two honourable names. But, at
the very outset, it is improbable that there should be two names instead
of one or more; and it is impossible to conceive for what precise reason
such a periphrastic description of God should be employed in connection
with the naming of this child, as is not only altogether different from
Isaiah's usual custom, but altogether unparalleled in itself, especially
without the definite article. The names of God should at least have been
defined thus, הגּבּור פּלא היּועץ, so as to distinguish them from the
two names of the child.

Even assuming, therefore, that the accentuation is meant to convey this
sense, "And the wonderful Counsellor, the mighty God, calls his name
Eternal-Father, Prince of Peace," as appears to be the case; we must
necessarily reject it, as resting upon a misunderstanding and
misinterpretation.

(Note: The telisha in פלא is the smallest of all disjunctive accents;
the geresh in שׁמו separates rather more strongly than this; the pashta
in יועץ separates somewhat more than the other two, but less than the
zakeph in גבור; and this zakeph is the greatest divider in the sentence.
The whole sentence, therefore, distributes itself in the following
manner: אבי־עד גבור אל יועץ פלא שׁמו ויקרא שׂר־שלום . All the words from
ויקרא onwards are subordinate to the zakeph attached to גבור, which is,
to all appearance, intended to have the force of an introductory colon:
as, for example, in [Sa2 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#005) (in the
case of לאמר in the clause לאמר ואת־אתי ואת־אבישי יואב). In smaller
subdivisions, again, פלא (telisha) is connected with יועץ (pashta), and
both together with גבור אל (munach zakeph). If only sar shalom (Prince
of Peace) were intended as the name of the child, it would necessarily
be accentuated in the following manner: שמו ויקרא kadma geresh, יועץ פלא
teilsha gershayim, גבור אל mercha tebir, עד אבי tifchah, שׂר־שׁלום
silluk; and the principal disjunctive would stand at עד instead of גבור.
But if the name of the child were intended to form a declaratory clause,
commencing with יועץ פלא, "determines wonderful things," as Luzzatto
assumes, we should expect to find a stronger disjunctive than telisha at
פלא, the watchword of the whole; and above all, we should expect a
zakeph at שׁמו, and not at גבור. This also applies to our (the ordinary)
explanation. It does not correspond to the accentuation. The
introductory words שׁמו ויקרא ought to have a stronger distinctive
accent, in order that all which follows might stand as the name which
they introduce. Francke (see Psalter, ii. 521) perceived this, and in
his Abyssus mysteriorum Esa (ix. 6) he lays great stress upon the fact,
that God who gives the name has Himself a threefold name.)

We regard the whole, from פלא onwards - as the connection, the
expression, and the syntax require - as a dependent accusative predicate
to שמו ויקרא (they call his name), which stands at the head (compare
קרא, they call, it is called, in [Gen
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#009); [Gen
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#014); [Jos
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#026), and above [Isa
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#004), ישׂא, they will carry: Ges. 137,
3). If it be urged, as an objection to the Messianic interpretation of
[Isa 7:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), that the Christ who
appeared was not named Immanuel, but Jesus, this objection is
sufficiently met by the fact that He did not receive as a proper name
any one of the five names by which, according to this second prophecy,
He was to be called. Moreover, this objection would apply quite as
strongly to the notion, which has been a very favourite one with Jewish
commentators (e.g., Rashi, A. E. Kimchi, Abravanel, Malbim, Luzzatto,
and others), and even with certain Christian commentators (such as
Grotius, Gesenius, etc.), that the prophecy refers to Hezekiah - a
notion which is a disgrace to those who thereby lead both themselves and
others astray. For even if the hopes held out in the prophecy were
attached for a long time to Hezekiah, the mistake was but too quickly
discovered; whereas the commentators in question perpetuate the mistake,
by forcing it upon the prophecy itself, although the prophet, even after
the deception had been outlived, not only did not suppress the prophecy,
but handed it down to succeeding ages as awaiting a future and
infallible fulfilment. For the words in their strict meaning point to
the Messiah, whom men may for a time, with pardonable error, have hoped
to find in Hezekiah, but whom, with unpardonable error, men refused to
acknowledge, even when He actually appeared in Jesus. The name Jesus is
the combination of all the Old Testament titles used to designate the
Coming One according to His nature and His works. The names contained in
[Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014) and [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006) are not thereby suppressed; but
they have continued, from the time of Mary downwards, in the mouths of
all believers. There is not one of these names under which worship and
homage have not been paid to Him. But we never find them crowded
together anywhere else, as we do here in Isaiah; and in this respect
also our prophet proves himself the greatest of the Old Testament
evangelists.

The first name is פּלא, or perhaps more correctly פּלא, which is not to
be taken in connection with the next word, יועץ, though this
construction might seem to commend itself in accordance with עצה הפליא,
in [Isa 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029). This is the way in
which it has been taken by the Seventy and others (thus lxx, θαυμαστὸς
σύμβουλος; Theodoret, θαυμαστῶς βουλεύων). If we adopted this
explanation, we might regard יועץ פלא as an inverted form for פלא יועץ:
counselling wonderful things. The possibility of such an inversion is
apparent from [Isa 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#002), מלאה תשׁאות,
i.e., full of tumult. Or, following the analogy of pere' âdâm (a wild
man) in [Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012), we might regard it
as a genitive construction: a wonder of a counsellor; in which case the
disjunctive teilshâh gedolâh in pele' would have to be exchanged for a
connecting mahpach. Both combinations have their doubtful points, and,
so far as the sense is concerned, would lead us rather to expect עצה
מפליא; whereas there is nothing at all to prevent our taking פלא and
יועץ as two separate names (not even the accentuation, which is without
parallel elsewhere, so far as the combination of pashta with teilshah is
concerned, and therefore altogether unique). Just as the angel of
Jehovah, when asked by Manoah what was his name ([Jdg
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#018)), replied פּלי (פּלאי), and
indicated thereby his divine nature - a nature incomprehensible to
mortal men; so here the God-given ruler is also pele', a phenomenon
lying altogether beyond human conception or natural occurrence. Not only
is this or that wonderful in Him; but He Himself is throughout a wonder
- παραδοξασμός, as Symmachus renders it. The second name if yō‛ētz,
counsellor, because, by virtue of the spirit of counsel which He
possesses ([Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)), He can always
discern and given counsel for the good of His nation. There is no need
for Him to surround Himself with counsellors; but without receiving
counsel at all, He counsels those that are without counsel, and is thus
the end of all want of counsel to His nation as a whole. The third name,
El gibbor, attributes divinity to Him. Not, indeed, if we render the
words "Strength, Hero," as Luther does; or "Hero of Strength," as Meier
has done; or "a God of a hero," as Hofmann proposes; or "Hero-God,"
i.e., one who fights and conquers like an invincible god, as Ewald does.
But all these renderings, and others of a similar kind, founder, without
needing any further refutation, on [Isa
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#021), where He, to whom the remnant
of Israel will turn with penitence, is called El gibbor (the mighty
God). There is no reason why we should take El in this name of the
Messiah in any other sense than in Immanu-El; not to mention the fact
that El in Isaiah is always a name of God, and that the prophet was ever
strongly conscious of the antithesis between El and âdâm, as [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003) (cf., [Hos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#009)) clearly shows. And finally, El
gibbor was a traditional name of God, which occurs as early as [Deu
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017), cf., [Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018); [Neh
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032); [Psa
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#008), etc. The name gibbor is used
here as an adjective, like shaddai in El shaddai. The Messiah, then, is
here designated "mighty God." Undoubtedly this appears to go beyond the
limits of the Old Testament horizon; but what if it should go beyond
them? It stands written once for all, just as in [Jer
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006) Jehovah Zidkenu (Jehovah our
Righteousness) is also used as a name of the Messiah - a Messianic name,
which even the synagogue cannot set aside (vid., Midrash Mishle 57a,
where this is adduced as one of the eight names of the Messiah). Still
we must not go too far. If we look at the spirit of the prophecy, the
mystery of the incarnation of God is unquestionably indicated in such
statements as these. But if we look at the consciousness of the prophet
himself, nothing further was involved than this, that the Messiah would
be the image of God as no other man ever had been (cf., El, [Psa
82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)), and that He would have God
dwelling within Him (cf., [Jer 33:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#016)).
Who else would lead Israel to victory over the hostile world, than God
the mighty? The Messiah is the corporeal presence of this mighty God;
for He is with Him, He is in Him, and in Him He is with Israel. The
expression did not preclude the fact that the Messiah would be God and
man in one person; but it did not penetrate to this depth, so far as the
Old Testament consciousness was concerned. The fourth name springs out
of the third: אבי־עד, eternal Father (not Booty Father, with which
Hitzig and Knobel content themselves); for what is divine must be
eternal. The title Eternal Father designates Him, however, not only as
the possessor of eternity (Hengstenberg), but as the tender, faithful,
and wise trainer, guardian, and provider for His people even in eternity
([Isa 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#021)). He is eternal Father, as
the eternal, loving King, according to the description in Ps 72. Now, if
He is mighty God, and uses His divine might in eternity for the good of
His people, He is also, as the fifth name affirms, sar-shâl, a Prince
who removes all peace-disturbing powers, and secures peace among the
nations ([Zac 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010)) - who is, as it
were, the embodiment of peace come down into the world of nations ([Mic
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#004)). To exalt the government of David
into an eternal rule of peace, is the end for which He is born; and
moreover He proves Himself to be what He is not only called, but
actually is.

[Isaiah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 9:7</span></span>

"To the increase of government and to peace without end, upon the throne
of David, and over his Kingdom, to strengthen it, and to support it
through judgment and righteousness from henceforth even for ever. The
jealousy of Jehovah of hosts will fulfil this." למרבּה (written with Mêm
clausum in the middle of the one word, and, according to Elias Levita,
properly to be read רבּה לם, iis magnificando, in accordance with this
way of writing the word)

(Note: When Bar-Kappara says (b. Sanhedrin 94a) that God designed to
make Hezekiah the Messiah and Sennacherib Gog and Magog, but that
Hezekiah was not found worthy of this, and therefore the Mem of l'marbeh
was closed, there is so far some sense in this, that the Messianic hopes
really could centre for a certain time in Hezekiah; whereas the
assertion of a certain Hillel (ib. 98b), that Hezekiah was actually the
Messiah of Israel, and no other was to be expected, is nothing but the
perverted fancy of an empty brain. For an instance of the opposite, see
[Neh 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013), פרוצים הם, on which passage
the Midrash observes, "The broken walls of Jerusalem will be closed in
the day of salvation, and the government which has been closed up to the
time of the King Messiah will be opened then."))

is not a participle here, but a substantive after the forms מראה, מעשׂה,
and that not from הרבּה, but from רבה, an infinitive noun expressing,
according to its formation, the practical result of an action, rather
than the abstract idea.

(Note: We have already observed at p. 101, that this substantive
formation had not a purely abstract meaning even at the first. Frst has
given the correct explanation in his Lehrgebude der Aram. Idiome, 130.)

Ever extending dominion and endless peace will be brought in by the
sublime and lofty King's Son, when He sits upon the throne of David and
rules over David's kingdom. He is a semper Augustus, i.e., a perpetual
increaser of the kingdom; not by war, however, but with the spiritual
weapons of peace. And within He gives to the kingdom "judgment"
(mishpât) and "righteousness" (zedâkâh), as the foundations and pillars
of its durability: mishpât, judgment or right, which He pronounces and
ordains; and righteousness, which He not only exercises Himself, but
transfers to the members of His kingdom. This new epoch of Davidic
sovereignty was still only a matter of faith and hope. But the zeal of
Jehovah was the guarantee of its realization. The accentuation is likely
to mislead here, inasmuch as it makes it appear as though the words
"from henceforth even for ever" (me‛attâh v‛ad ōlâm) belonged to the
closing sentence, whereas the eternal perspective which they open
applies directly to the reign of the great Son of David, and only
indirectly to the work of the divine jealousy. "Zeal," or jealousy,
kin'âh, lit., glowing fire, from קנּא, Arab. kanaa, to be deep red ([Deu
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024)), is one of the deepest of the
Old Testament ideas, and one of the most fruitful in relation to the
work of reconciliation. It is two-sided. The fire of love has for its
obverse the fire of wrath. For jealousy contends for the object of its
love against everything that touches either the object or the love
itself.

(Note: Cf., Weber, On the Wrath of God (p. xxxv). It is evident that by
kin'âh, ζῆλος, we are to understand the energy of love following up its
violated claims upon the creature, from the comparison so common in the
Scriptures between the love of God to His church and connubial
affection. It is the jealousy of absolute love, which seeks to be loved
in return, and indeed demands undivided love, and asserts its claim to
reciprocity of love wherever this claim is refused. In a word, it is the
self-vindication of scornful love. But this idea includes not only
jealousy seeking the recovery of what it has lost, but also jealousy
that consumes what cannot be saved ([Nah
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002); [Heb
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#027)); and the Scriptures therefore
deduce the wrath, by which the love resisted affirms itself, and the
wrath which meets those who have resisted love in the form of absolute
hostility-in other words, the jealousy of love as well as the jealousy
of hatred-not from love and holiness as two entirely distinct sources,
but from the single source of absolute holy love, which, just because it
is absolute and holy, repels and excludes whatever will not suffer
itself to be embraced ([Jos 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019)).)

Jehovah loves His nation. That He should leave it in the hands of such
bad Davidic kings as Ahaz, and give it up to the imperial power of the
world, would be altogether irreconcilable with this love, if continued
long. But His love flares up, consumes all that is adverse, and gives to
His people the true King, in whom that which was only foreshadowed in
David and Solomon reaches its highest antitypical fulfilment. With the
very same words, "the zeal of Jehovah of hosts," etc., Isaiah seals the
promise in [Isa 37:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#032).

[Isaiah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 9:8</span></span>

The great light would not arise till the darkness had reached its
deepest point. The gradual increase of this darkness is predicted in
this second section of the esoteric addresses. Many difficult questions
suggest themselves in connection with this section. 1. Is it directed
against the northern kingdom only, or against all Israel? 2. What was
the historical standpoint of the prophet himself? The majority of
commentators reply that the prophet is only prophesying against Ephraim
here, and that Syria and Ephraim have already been chastised by
Tiglath-pileser. The former is incorrect. The prophet does indeed
commence with Ephraim, but he does not stop there. The fates of both
kingdoms flow into one another here, as well as in [Isa
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#005)., just as they were causally
connected in actual fact. And it cannot be maintained, that when the
prophet uttered his predictions Ephraim had already felt the scourging
of Tiglath-pileser. The prophet takes his stand at a time when judgment
after judgment had fallen upon all Israel without improving it. And one
of these past judgments was the scourging of Ephraim by Tiglath-pileser.
How much or how little of the events which the prophet looks back upon
from this ideal standpoint had already taken place, it is impossible to
determine; but this is a matter of indifference so far as the prophecy
is concerned. The prophet, from his ideal standing-place, had not only
this or that behind him, but all that is expressed in this section by
perfects and aorists (Ges. 129, 2, b). And we already know from [Isa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009); [Isa
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#025), that he sued the future
conversive as the preterite of the ideal past. We therefore translate
the whole in the present tense. In outward arrangement there is no
section of Isaiah so symmetrical as this. In chapter 5 we found one
partial approach to the strophe in similarity of commencement, and
another in chapter 2 in similarity of conclusion. But here [Isa
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#025) is adapted as the refrain of four
symmetrical strophes. We will take each strophe by itself.

Strophe 1. [Isa 9:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008) "The Lord sends
out a word against Jacob, and it descends into Israel. And all the
people must make atonement, Ephraim and the inhabitants of Samaria,
saying in pride and haughtiness of heart, 'Bricks are fallen down, and
we build with square stones; sycamores are hewn down, and we put cedars
in their place.' Jehovah raises Rezin's oppressors high above him, and
pricks up his enemies: Aram from the east, and Philistines from the
west; they devour Israel with full mouth. For all this His anger is not
turned away, and His hand is stretched out still." The word (dâbâr) is
both in nature and history the messenger of the Lord: it runs quickly
through the earth ([Psa 147:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015), [Psa
147:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#018)), and when sent by the Lord,
comes to men to destroy or to heal ([Psa
107:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#020)), and never returns to its
sender void ([Isa 55:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010)). Thus does
the Lord now send a word against Jacob (Jacob, as in [Isa
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005)); and this heavenly messenger
descends into Israel (nâphal, as in [Dan
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#028), and like the Arabic nazala,
which is the word usually employed to denote the communication of divine
revelation), taking shelter, as it were, in the soul of the prophet. Its
immediate commission is directed against Ephraim, which has been so
little humbled by the calamities that have fallen upon it since the time
of Jehu, that the people are boasting that they will replace bricks and
sycamores (or sycamines, from shikmin), that wide-spread tree ([Kg1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027)), with works of art and cedars.
"We put in their place:" nachaliph is not used here as in [Job
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#007), where it signifies to sprout
again (nova germina emittere), but as in [Isa
40:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#031); [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001), where it is construed with כּח
(strength), and signifies to renew (novas vires assumere). In this
instance, when the object is one external to the subject, the meaning is
to substitute (substituere), like the Arabic achlafa, to restore. The
poorest style of building in the land is contrasted with the best; for
"the sycamore is a tree which only flourishes in the plain, and there
the most wretched houses are still built of bricks dried in the sun, and
of knotty beams of sycamore."

(Note: Rosen, Topographisches aus Jerusalem.)

These might have been destroyed by the war, but more durable and stately
buildings would rise up in their place. Ephraim, however, would be made
to feel this defiance of the judgments of God (to "know," as in [Hos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007); [Eze
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014)). Jehovah would give the
adversaries of Rezin authority over Ephraim, and instigate his foes:
sicsēc, as in [Isa 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#002), from sâcac,
in its primary sense of "prick," figere, which has nothing to do with
the meanings to plait and cover, but from which we have the words שׂך,
סך, a thorn, nail, or plug, and which is probably related to שׂכה, to
view, lit., to fix; hence pilpel, to prick up, incite, which is the
rendering adopted by the Targum here and in [Isa
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#002), and by the lxx at [Isa
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#002). There is no necessity to quote
the talmudic sicsēc, to kindle (by friction), which is never met with in
the metaphorical sense of exciting. It would be even better to take our
sicsēc as an intensive form of sâcac, used in the same sense as the
Arabic, viz., to provide one's self with weapons, to arm; but this is
probably a denominative from sicca, signifying offensive armour, with
the idea of pricking and spearing - a radical notion, from which it
would be easy to get at the satisfactory meaning, to spur on or
instigate. "The oppressors of Rezin" tzâr Retzı̄n, a simple play upon the
words, like hoi goi in [Isa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004), and
many others in Isaiah) are the Assyrians, whose help had been sought by
Ahaz against Rezin; though perhaps not these exclusively, but possibly
also the Trachonites, for example, against whom the mountain fortress
Rezı̄n appears to have been erected, to protect the rich lands of eastern
Hauran. In [Isa 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012) the range of
vision stretches over all Israel. It cannot be otherwise, for the
northern kingdom never suffered anything from the Philistines; whereas
an invasion of Judah by the Philistines was really one of the judgments
belonging to the time of Ahaz ([Ch2
28:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#016)). Consequently by Israel here
we are to understand all Israel, the two halves of which would become a
rich prize to the enemy. Ephraim would be swallowed up by Aram - namely,
by those who had been subjugated by Asshur, and were now tributary to it
- and Judah would be swallowed up by the Philistines. But this strait
would be very far from being the end of the punishments of God. Because
Israel would not turn, the wrath of God would not turn away.

[Isaiah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 9:13</span></span>

Strophe 2. "But the people turneth not unto Him that smiteth it, and
they seek not Jehovah of hosts. Therefore Jehovah rooteth out of Israel
head and tail, palm-branch and rush, in one day. Elders and highly
distinguished men, this is the head; and prophets, lying teachers, this
is the tail. The leaders of this people have become leaders astray, and
their followers swallowed up. Therefore the Lord will not rejoice in
their young men, and will have no compassion on their orphans and
widows: for all together are profligate and evil-doers, and every mouth
speaketh blasphemy. With all this His anger is not turned away, and His
hand is stretched out still." As the first stage of the judgments has
been followed by no true conversion to Jehovah the almighty judge, there
comes a second. עד שׁוּב (to turn unto) denotes a thorough conversion,
not stopping half-way. "The smiter of it" (hammaccēhu), or "he who
smiteth it," it Jehovah (compare, on the other hand, [Isa
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#020), where Asshur is intended). The
article and suffix are used together, as in [Isa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#002); [Pro
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004) (vid., Ges. 110, 2; Caspari,
Arab. Gram. 472). But there was coming now a great day of punishment (in
the view of the prophet, it was already past), such as Israel
experienced more than once in the Assyrian oppressions, and Judah in the
Chaldean, when head and tail, or, according to another proverbial
expression, palm-branch and rush, would be rooted out. We might suppose
that the persons referred to were the high and low; but [Isa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015) makes a different application of
the first double figure, by giving it a different turn from its popular
sense (compare the Arabic er-ru 'ūs w-aledhnâb = lofty and low, in
Dietrich, Abhandlung, p. 209). The opinion which has very widely
prevailed since the time of Koppe, that this v. is a gloss, is no doubt
a very natural one (see Hitzig, Begriff der Kritik; Ewald, Propheten, i.
57). But Isaiah's custom of supplying his own gloss is opposed to such a
view; also Isaiah's composition in [Isa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#003) and [Isa
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020), and the relation in which this
v. stands to [Isa 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016); and lastly,
the singular character of the gloss itself, which is one of the
strongest proofs that it contains the prophet's exposition of his own
words. The chiefs of the nation were the head of the national body; and
behind, like a wagging dog's tail, sat the false prophets with their
flatteries of the people, loving, as Persius says, blando caudam jactare
popello. The prophet drops the figure of Cippâh, the palm-branch which
forms the crown of the palm, and which derives its name from the fact
that it resembles the palm of the hand (instar palmae manus), and agmōn,
the rush which grows in the marsh.

(Note: The noun agam is used in the Old Testament as well as in the
Talmud to signify both a marshy place (see Baba mesi'a 36b, and more
especially Aboda zara 38a, where giloi agmah signifies the laying bare
of the marshy soil by the burning up of the reeds), and also the marsh
grass (Sabbath 11a, "if all the agmim were kalams, i.e., writing reeds,
or pens;" and Kiddsin 62b, where agam signifies a talk of marsh-grass or
reed, a rush or bulrush, and is explained, with a reference to [Isa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005), as signifying a tender, weak
stalk). The noun agmon, on the other hand, signifies only the stalk of
the marsh-grass, or the marsh-grass itself; and in this sense it is not
found in the Talmud (see Comm on Job, at [Isa
41:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010)). The verbal meaning upon
which these names are founded is evident from the Arabic mâ āgim
(magūm), "bad water" (see at [Isa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#010)). There is no connection between
this and maugil, literally a depression of the soil, in which water
lodges for a long time, and which is only dried up in summer weather.)

The allusion here is to the rulers of the nation and the dregs of the
people. The basest extremity were the demagogues in the shape of
prophets. For it had come to this, as [Isa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016) affirms, that those who promised
to lead by a straight road led astray, and those who suffered themselves
to be led by them were as good as already swallowed up by hell (cf.,
[Isa 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#014); [Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012)). Therefore the Sovereign Ruler
would not rejoice over the young men of this nation; that is to say, He
would suffer them to be smitten by their enemies, without going with
them to battle, and would refuse His customary compassion even towards
widows and orphans, for they were all thoroughly corrupt on every side.
The alienation, obliquity, and dishonesty of their heart, are indicated
by the word Chânēph (from Chânaph, which has in itself the indifferent
radical idea of inclination; so that in Arabic, Chanı̄f, as a synonym of
‛âdil,

(Note: This is the way in which it should be written in Comm on Job, at
[Isa 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#016); ‛adala has also the
indifferent meaning of return or decision.)

has the very opposite meaning of decision in favour of what is right);
the badness of their actions by מרע (in half pause for מרע

(Note: Nevertheless this reading is also met with, and according to
Masora finalis, p. 52, col. 8, this is the correct reading (as in [Pro
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#004), where it is doubtful whether the
meaning is a friend or a malevolent person). The question is not an
unimportant one, as we may see from Olshausen, 258, p. 581.)

= מרע, maleficus); the vicious infatuation of their words by nebâlâh.
This they are, and this they continue; and consequently the wrathful
hand of God is stretched out over them for the infliction of fresh
strokes.

[Isaiah 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 9:18</span></span>

Strophe 3. "For the wickedness burneth up like fire: it devours thorns
and thistles, and burns in the thickets of the wood; and they smoke
upwards in a lofty volume of smoke. Through the wrath of Jehovah of
hosts the land is turned into coal, and the nation has become like the
food of fire: not one spares his brother. They hew on the right, and are
hungry; and devour on the left, and are not satisfied: they devour the
flesh of their own arm: Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh: these
together over Judah. With all this His anger is not turned away, and His
hand is stretched out still." The standpoint of the prophet is at the
extreme end of the course of judgment, and from that he looks back.
Consequently this link of the chain is also past in his view, and hence
the future conversives. The curse, which the apostasy of Israel carries
within itself, now breaks fully out. Wickedness, i.e., the constant
thirst of evil, is a fire which a man kindles in himself. And when the
grace of God, which damps and restrains this fire, is all over, it is
sure to burst forth: the wickedness bursts forth like fire (the verb is
used here, as in [Isa 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027), with
reference to the wrath of God). And this is the case with the wickedness
of Israel, which now consumes first of all thorns and thistles, i.e.,
individual sinners who are the most ripe for judgment, upon whom the
judgment commences, and then the thicket of the wood (sib-che,

(Note: The metheg (gaya) in סבכי (to be pronounced sib-che) has simply
the caphonic effect of securing a distinct enunciation to the sibilant
letter (in other instances to the guttural, vid., ‛arboth, [Num
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#012)), in cases where the second
syllable of the word commences with a guttural or labial letter, or with
an aspirate.)

as in [Isa 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#034), from sebac, [Gen
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013) = sobec), that is to say, the
great mass of the people, which is woven together by bands of iniquity
(vattizzath is not a reflective niphal, as in [Kg2
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#013), but kal, to kindle into
anything, i.e., to set it on fire). The contrast intended in the two
figures is consequently not the high and low (Ewald), nor the useless
and useful (Drechsler), but individuals and the whole (Vitringa). The
fire, into which the wickedness bursts out, seizes individuals first of
all; and then, like a forest fire, it seizes upon the nation at large in
all its ranks and members, who "whirl up (roll up) ascending of smoke,"
i.e., who roll up in the form of ascending smoke (hith'abbek, a synonym
of hithhappēk, [Jdg 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#013), to curl or
roll). This fire of wickedness was no other than the wrath (ebrâh) of
God: it is God's own wrath, for all sin carries this within itself as
its own self-punishment. By this fire of wrath the soil of the land is
gradually but thoroughly burnt out, and the people of the land utterly
consumed: עתם ἁπ λεγ to be red-hot (lxx συγκέκαυται, also the Targum),
and to be dark or black (Arabic ‛atame, late at night), for what is
burnt out becomes black. Fire and darkness are therefore correlative
terms throughout the whole of the Scriptures. So far do the figures
extend, in which the prophet presents the inmost essence of this stage
of judgment. In its historical manifestation it consisted in the most
inhuman self-destruction during an anarchical civil war. Destitute of
any tender emotions, they devoured one another without being satisfied:
gâzar, to cut, to hew (hence the Arabic for a butcher): zero'o, his arm,
according to [Jer 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#009), equivalent to
the member of his own family and tribe, who was figuratively called his
arm (Arabic ‛adud: see Ges. Thes. p. 433), as being the natural
protector and support. This interminable self-immolation, and the
regicide associated with the jealousy of the different tribes, shook the
northern kingdom again and again to its utter destruction. And the
readiness with which the unbrotherly feelings of the northern tribes
towards one another could turn into combined hostility towards Judah,
was evident enough from the Syro-Ephraimitish war, the consequences of
which had not passed away at the time when these prophecies were
uttered. This hostility on the part of the brother kingdoms would still
further increase. And the end of the judgments of wrath had not come
yet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 10](isa010)

</div>
