<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa053)  [Next](isa055) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 54](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)

[Isaiah 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 54:1</span></span>

After the "Servant of God" has expiated the sin of His people by the
sacrifice of Himself, and Israel has acknowledged its fault in
connection with the rejected One, and entered into the possession and
enjoyment of the salvation procured by Him, the glory of the church,
which has thus become a partaker of salvation through repentance and
faith, is quite ready to burst forth. Hence the prophet can now exclaim,
[Isa 54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001) : "Exult, O barren one, thou
that didst not bear; break forth into exulting, and cry aloud, thou that
didst not travail with child: for there are more children of the
solitary one than children of the married wife, saith Jehovah." The
words are addressed to Jerusalem, which was a counterpart of Sarah in
her barrenness at first, and her fruitfulness afterwards ([Isa
41:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)). She is not תלד לא עקרה ([Job
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021)), but ילדה לא עקרה ([Jdg
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#002)); not indeed that she had never
had any children, but during her captivity and exile she had been robbed
of her children, and as a holy city had given birth to no more ([Isa
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021)). She was shōmēmâh, rendered
solitary ([Sa2 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#020); the allusion is
to her depopulation as a city), whereas formerly she was בּעוּלה, i.e.,
enjoyed the fellowship of Jehovah her husband (ba‛al). But this
condition would not last (for Jehovah had not given her a divorce): she
was therefore to exult and shout, since the number of children which she
would now have, as one desolate and solitary, would be greater than the
number of those which she had as a married wife.

[Isaiah 54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 54:2</span></span>

With this prospect before her, even her dwelling-place would need
enlarging. "Enlarge the space of thy tent, and let them stretch out the
curtains of thy habitations; forbid not! lengthen thy cords, and fasten
thy plugs." She is to widen out the space inside her tent, and they
(יטּוּ has no definite subject, which is often the case where some
subordinate servant is to be thought of) are to spread out far and wide
the coverings of the framework of her dwelling, which is called
mishkenōth (in the plural) on account of its roominess and magnificence:
she is not to forbid it, thinking in her weakness of faith, "It is good
enough as it is; it would be too large." The cords which hold up the
walls, she is to lengthen; and the plugs, to which the cords are
fastened, she is to ram fast into the earth: the former because the tent
(i.e., the holy city, [Jer 31:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038),
and the dwelling-place of the church generally, [Isa
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#015)) has to receive a large number
of inhabitants; the latter because it will not be broken up so soon
again ([Isa 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020)).

[Isaiah 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 54:3</span></span>

The reason why the tent is to be so large and strong is given in [Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003) : "For thou wilt break forth on
the right and on the left; and thy seed will take possession of nations,
and they will people desolate cities." "On the right and on the left" is
equivalent to "on the south and north" ([Psa
89:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#013), the speaker being supposed to
have his face turned towards the east: compare the Sanscrit apân,
situated at the back, i.e., towards the west). We must supply both west
and east, since the promises contained in such passages as [Gen
15:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018) remained unfulfilled even in
the age of David and Solomon. Jerusalem will now spread out, and break
through all her former bounds (pârats is used in the same sense in [Gen
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014)); and her seed (i.e., the seed
acquired by the Servant of Jehovah, the dead yet eternally living One,
the σπέρμα, whose σπέρμα He Himself is) will take possession of nations
(yârash, yârēsh, capessere, occupare; more especially κληρονομεῖν, syn.
nâchal); and they (i.e., the children born to her) will people desolate
cities (hōshı̄bh, the causative of yâshabh, to be inhabited, [Isa
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#020)). Thus will the promise be
fulfilled, that "the meek shall inherit the earth," - a promise not
confined to the Preacher on the mount, but found also in [Psa
37:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#009), and uttered by our own
prophet in [Isa 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021); [Isa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009).

[Isaiah 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 54:4</span></span>

The encouraging promise is continued in [Isa
54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004) : "Fear not, for thou wilt not be
put to shame; and bid defiance to reproach, for thou wilt not blush: no,
thou wilt forget the shame of thy youth, and wilt no more remember the
reproach of thy widowhood." Now that redemption was before the door,
Israel was not to fear any more, or to be overcome (as the niphal
nikhlam implies) by a felling of the shame consequent upon her state of
punishment, or so to behave herself as to leave no room for hope. For a
state of things was about to commence, in which she would have no need
to be ashamed (on bōsh and châphēr or hechpı̄r), but which, on the
contrary (כּי, imo, as in [Isa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007);
[Isa 55:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#009)), would be so glorious that
she would forget the shame of her youth, i.e., of the Egyptian bondage,
in which the national community of Israel was still but like a virgin
(‛almâh), who entered into a betrothal when redeemed by Jehovah, and
became His youthful wife through a covenant of love (ehe = berı̄th) when
the law was given at Sinai ([Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002);
[Eze 16:60](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#060)); so glorious indeed, that
she would never again remember the shame of her widowhood, i.e., of the
Babylonian captivity, in which she, the wife whom Jehovah had taken to
Himself, was like a widow whose husband had died.

[Isaiah 54:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 54:5</span></span>

It was no real widowhood, however, but only an apparent one ([Jer
51:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#005)), for the husband of Jerusalem
was living still, "For thy husband is thy Creator; Jehovah of hosts is
His name; and thy Redeemer the Holy One of Israel; God of the whole
earth is He called." The plurals בעליך and עשׂיך (see at [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)) are to be explained from the
plural 'Elōhı̄m, which is connected with plural attributes in [Jos
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#019); [Sa1
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026), Ps. 58:12 (compare מרימיו in
[Isa 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#015)), and with plural
predicates in [Gen 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013); [Gen
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007), and [Sa2
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#023). By such expressions as these,
which represent all the plurality of the divine nature as inherent in
the One, the religion of revelation, both Israelitish and Christian,
exhibits itself as embodying all that is true in polytheism. He who has
entered into the relation of husband to Jerusalem (בעליך, not בעליך,
[Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003)) is the very same through
whom she first came into existence, the God whose bidding the heavenly
hosts obey; and the Redeemer of Jerusalem, the Holy One of Israel, is
called the God of the whole earth, and therefore has both the power and
the means to help her, as prompted by the relation of love which exists
between them.

[Isaiah 54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 54:6</span></span>

And this relation He now renews. "For Jehovah calleth thee as a wife
forsaken and burdened with sorrow, and as a wife of youth, when once she
is despised, saith thy God." The verb קרא, which is the one commonly
used in these prophecies to denote the call of grace, on the ground of
the election of grace, is used here to signify the call into that
relation, which did indeed exist before, but had apparently been
dissolved. קראך is used here out of pause (cf., [Isa
60:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#009)); it stands, however, quite
irregularly for the form in ēkh, which is the one commonly employed
([Jdg 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#020); [Eze
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026)). "And as a wife:" ואשׁת is
equivalent to וּכאשׁת. The hypothetical תמּאס כּי belongs to the figure.
Jehovah calls His church back to Himself, as a husband takes back the
wife he loved in his youth, even though he may once have been angry with
her. It is with intention that the word נמאסה is not used. The future
(imperfect) indicates what partially happens, but does not become an
accomplished or completed fact: He is displeased with her, but He has
not cherished aversion or hatred towards her.

[Isaiah 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 54:7</span></span>

Thus does Jehovah's displeasure towards Jerusalem pass quickly away; and
all the more intense is the manifestation of love which follows His
merely momentary anger. "For a small moment have I forsaken thee, and
with great mercy will I gather thee. In an effusion of anger I hid my
face from thee for a moment, and with everlasting grace I have
compassion upon thee, saith Jehovah thy Redeemer." "For a small moment"
carries us to the time of the captivity, which was a small moment in
comparison with the duration of the tender and merciful love, with which
Jehovah once more received the church into His fellowship in the person
of its members. רגע in [Isa 54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008) is
not an adverb, meaning momentarily, as in [Isa
47:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#009), but an accusative of duration,
signifying a single moment long. Ketseph signifies wrath regarded as an
outburst (fragor), like the violence of a storm or a clap of thunder;
shetseph, which rhymes with it, is explained by A. Schultens, after the
Arabic, as signifying durum et asperum esse: and hence the rendering
adopted by Hitzig, "in hard harshness." But this yields no antithesis to
"everlasting kindness," which requires that shetseph should be rendered
in some way that expresses the idea of something transitory or of short
duration. The earlier translators felt this, when like the lxx for
example, they adopted the rendering ἐν θυμῷ μικρῷ, and others of a
similar kind; and Ibn Labrt, in his writing against Menahem b. Zerk, who
gives chŏrı̄, burning heat, as a gloss to shetseph, explains it by מעט
(as Kimchi and others did afterwards). But, as Jakob Tam correctly
observes, "this makes the sense purely tautological." In all
probability, shâtsaph is a form allied to shâtaph, as nâshabh ([Isa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)) is to nâshaph ([Isa
40:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#024)), and qâmat ([Job
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008)) to qâmats, which stand in the
same relation to one another, so far as the sense is concerned, as
bubbling over to flowing over: so that the proper rendering would not be
"in the overflowing of glowing heat," as Umbreit thinks, which would
require קצף בּשׁטף ([Pro 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#004)), but in
the gushing up of displeasure, the overflowing of indignation (Meier).
The ketseph is only a shetseph, a vanishing moment (Jer. in momento
indignationis), when compared with the true feeling of Jehovah towards
Jerusalem, which is chesed ‛ōlâm, everlasting kindness.

[Isaiah 54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 54:9</span></span>

The ground of this "everlasting kindness" is given in [Isa
54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009) : "For it is now as at the waters
of Noah, when I swore that the waters of Noah should not overflow the
earth any more; so have I sworn not to be wroth with thee, and not to
threaten thee." The commencement of this v. has been a fluctuating one
from the earliest times. The Sept. reading is ממּי; that of the Targ.,
S., Jerome, Syriac, and Saad., כּימי; and even the Codd. read sometimes
כּי־מי, sometimes כּימי (compare [Mat
24:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037), ὥσπερ αἱ ἡμέραι τοῦ Νῶε οὕτως
κ.τ.λ - a passage which appears to derive its shape from the one before
us, with the reading כימי, and which is expounded in [Luk
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026)). If we read כימי, the word זאת
must refer to the present, as the turning-point between wrath and mercy;
but if we read כי־מי, זאת denotes the pouring out of wrath in connection
with the captivity. Both readings are admissible; and as even the
Septuagint, with its ἀπὸ τοῦ ὕδατος (from the water), gives an indirect
support to the reading כּימי as one word, this may probably merit the
preference, as the one best sustained. אשׁר is ubi, quum, as in [Num
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013); [Psa
95:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#009), etc., although it might also be
taken as the correlate of the kēn which follows, as in [Jer
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#022) (cf., [Isa
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#008)); and in accordance with the
accents, we prefer the former. The present turning-point resembles, in
Jehovah's esteem, the days of Noah - those days in which He swore that a
flood should not any more come upon the earth (min as in [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006) and many other passages): for so
does He now confirm with an oath His fixed purpose that no such judgment
of wrath as that which has just been endured shall ever fall upon
Jerusalem again (גּער denotes threatening with a judicial word, which
passes at once into effect, as in [Isa
51:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#020)). Hendewerk has the following
quibbling remark here: "What the comparison with the flood is worth, we
may gather from the alter history, which shows how soon the new
Jerusalem and the renovated state succumbed to the judicial wrath of God
again." To this we reply: (1.) That the prophecy refers to the converted
Israel of the last days, whose Jerusalem will never be destroyed again.
These last days appear to the prophet, according to the general
character of all prophecy, as though linked on to the close of the
captivity. For throughout all prophecy, along with the far-sightedness
imparted by the Spirit, there was also a short-sightedness which the
Spirit did not remove; that is to say, the directly divine element of
insight into the future was associated with a human element of hope,
which was nevertheless also indirectly divine, inasmuch as it subserved
the divine plan of salvation; and this hope brought, as it were, the far
distant future into the closest proximity with the troubled present. If,
the, we keep this in mind, we shall see that it was quite in order for
the prophet to behold the final future on the very edge of the present,
and not to see the long and undulating way between. (2.) The Israel
which has been plunged by the Romans into the present exile of a
thousand years is that part of the nation ([Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025)), which has thrust away the
eternal mercy and the unchangeable covenant of peace; but this rejection
has simply postponed, and not prevented, the full realization of the
salvation promised to Israel as a people. The covenant still exists,
primarily indeed as an offer on the part of Jehovah, so that it rests
with Israel whether it shall continued one-sided or not; but all that is
wanted on the part of Israel is faith, to enable it to exchange the
shifting soil of its present exile for the rocky foundation of that
covenant of peace which has encircled the ages since the captivity (see
[Hag 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)), as the covenant with Noah
encircled those after the flood with the covenant sign of the rainbow in
the cloud.

[Isaiah 54:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 54:10</span></span>

"For the mountains may depart, and the hills may shake; my grace will
not depart from thee, and my covenant of peace will not shake, saith
Jehovah who hath compassion on thee." Jehovah's grace and covenant of
peace (cf., [Num 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#012)) stand as firm
as the mountains of God ([Psa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007)),
without departing from Jerusalem (מאתּך instead of the usual מאתּך) and
without shaking; and they will be fulfilled. This fulfilment will not
take place either by force or by enchantment; but the church which is to
be glorified must pass through sufferings, until it has attained the
form which answers to the glory promised to it on oath. And this will
also take place; for the old Jerusalem will come forth as a new one out
of the furnace of affliction.

[Isaiah 54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 54:11</span></span>

"O thou afflicted, tossed with tempest, not comforted, behold, I lay thy
stones in stibium, and lay thy foundations with sapphires; and make thy
minarets of ruby, and thy gates into carbuncles, and all thy boundary
into jewels." At the present time the church, of which Jerusalem is the
metropolis, is sunk in misery, driven with tempest like chaff of the
threshing-floor ([Hos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#003)), without
comfort; because till now it has waited in vain for any act of
consolation on the part of God, and has been scorned rather than
comforted by man (סערה is a part. kal, not pual; and נחמה 3rd pers.
praet. like נעזבה, [Isa 62:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#012), and
רחמה, [Hos 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006); [Hos
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#003)). But this will be altered;
Jerusalem will rise again from the dust, like a glorious building of
God. Jerome makes the following apt remark on [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011): "in stibio, i.e., in the
likeness of an elegant woman, who paints her eyes with stibium;
referring to the beauty of the city." Pūkh is eye-black (kohl, cf.,
kâchal, [Eze 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040)), i.e., a sooty
compound, the chief component of which was powdered antimony, or else
manganese or lead, and with which oriental women coloured their
eyebrows, and more particularly the eyelids both above and below the
eyes, that the beauty of the latter might be all the more conspicuous
([Kg2 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030)). The classic φῦκος, fucus,
has a meaning foreign to the Hebrew word, viz., that of rouge for the
cheeks. If, then, stibium (antimony), or any blackening collyrium
generally, served the purpose of mortar in the rebuilding of Jerusalem,
the stones of its walls (not its foundation-stones, אדניך, which is the
reading adopted by Ewald, but, on the contrary, the visible stones of
its towering walls) would look like the eyes of a woman shining forth
from the black framework of their painted lids, i.e., they would stand
out in splendour from their dark ground. The Beth in bassappı̄rı̄m
indicates the means employed. Sapphires serve as foundation-stones, for
the foundation of Jerusalem stands as immoveably firm as the covenant of
God. The sapphire blue is the colour of the heaven, of revelation, and
of the covenant. The shemâshōth, however, i.e., the minarets which stand
out like rays of the sun, and also the gates, have a red appearance. Red
is the colour of blood, and hence of life and of imperishableness; also
the colour of fire and of lightning, and hence of wrath and victory.
Jehovah makes the minarets of "ruby." The Sept. and Jerome adopt the
rendering iaspidem (a jasper); at any rate, כּדכד (which is the proper
way of writing the word: Ewald, 48, c)

(Note: The first כ is dagessatum, the second raphatum: see Norzi. The
word forms one of the eighteen which have a dagesh after a word ending
with a vowel sound (בלא מבטל בתר יה וא דגשין): see Masora Magna on [Dan
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#011), and Heidenheim's הטעמים משפטי,
41a. The object is to secure greater euphony, as in ככרכמישׁ (הלא), [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009), which is one of the eighteen
words.)

is a red sparkling jewel (from kidkēd; cf., kı̄dōd, scintilla). The
arches of the gates He forms of אקדּח אבני, stones of fiery splendour
(from qâdach, to burn: hence qaddachath, πυρετός), that is to say, or
carbuncle stones (from carbunculus, a small red-hot coal), like ruby,
garnet, etc. Jerome has adopted the false rendering lapides sculptos,
after Symm. λίθοι γλυφῆς (from קדח = קדד, findere?). The accusative of
the predicate כדכד is interchanged with עקדח לבני, and then with
לאבני־חפץ, to denote the materia ex qua. The whole territory (precinct)
of Jerusalem is turned by Jehovah into precious stones, that is to say,
it appears to be paved with such stones, just as in Tobit 13:17 the
streets are said to be "paved with beryl, and carbuncle, and stones of
Ophir," i.e., to be covered with a mosaic formed of precious stones. It
is upon the passage before us that Tobit 13:16, 17, and [Rev
21:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018), are founded. The motley
colours of the precious stones, with which the new Jerusalem is adorned,
are something more than a mere childish fancy. Whence, then, do the
precious stones derive their charm? The ultimate ground of this charm is
the fact, that in universal nature everything presses to the light, and
that in the mineral world the jewels represent the highest stage of this
ascending process. It is the self-unfolding process of the divine glory
itself, which is reflected typologically in the several gradations of
the manifold play of colours and the transparency of the precious
stones. For this reason, the high priest wore a breastplate with twelve
precious stones, upon which were the names of the twelve tribes of
Israel; and for this same reason, the author of the Apocalypse carries
out into detail in chapter 21 the picture of the new Jerusalem, which is
here sketched by the prophet of the Old Testament (without
distinguishing time from eternity), adding crystals and pearls to the
precious stones which he there mentions one by one. How can all this be
explained, except on the ground that even the mineral world reflects the
glory of those eternal lights from which God is called the "Father of
lights," or except on the assumption that the saints in light will one
day be able to translate these stony types into the words of God, out of
which they have their being?

[Isaiah 54:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 54:13</span></span>

The outward glory of the city is only the manifestation, which strikes
the senses, of the spiritual glory of the church dwelling therein. "And
all thy children will be the learned of Jehovah; and great the peace of
thy children." We translate both halves of the v. as substantive
clauses, although they might be accusatives of both the object and
predicate, dependent upon שׂמתּי. ה למּוּדי are disciples of Jehovah,
but, as in [Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004), with the
subordinate idea of both docility and learning. The children of
Jerusalem will need no instruction from man, but carry within them the
teaching of heaven, as those who are "taught of God" (διδακτοὶ Θεοῦ,
[Joh 6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045); θεοδίδακτοι, [Th1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#009)). Essentially the same promise is
given in [Joe 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#001), and [Jer
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#034); and represented in [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020) ("Ye have the anointing of the
Holy One, and know all things") as already fulfilled. In the place of
the former inward and outward distress, there has no entered shâlōm,
perfect inward and outward peace, complete salvation, and blessedness as
its result. רב is an adjective, for this form cannot be shown to have
existed as a syncopated third pers. praet., like שׁח, חי (= חיי). The v.
closes palindromically.

[Isaiah 54:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 54:14</span></span>

In perfect keeping with this grace through righteousness, Jerusalem will
then stand firm and impregnable. "Through righteousness wilt thou be
fortified: be far from anxiety, for thou hast nothing to fear; and from
terror, for it will not come near thee. Behold, men crowd together in
crowds; my will is not there. Who crowd together against thee? - he
shall fall by thee." Both the thought and action of Jerusalem will be
righteousness then, and it will thereby acquire strength; תּכּונני is a
pausal future hithpalel, with the ת of the reflective opening syllable
assimilated (Ges. 53, 2, b). With this reciprocal influence of its moral
character and imparted glory, it can, and is to keep far away from all
thought of oppression and terror; for, through divine grace and a
corresponding divine nature, it has nothing to fear. הן ([Isa
54:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#015)), when pointing to any
transaction as possible (as, for example, in [Job
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014); [Job
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#008)), acquires almost the
significance of a conditional particle (Ewald, 103, g). The equally
hypothetical parallel clause is clothed in the form of an interrogative.
For the verb gūr, the meaning "to gather together" (related to אגר),
more especially to join together with hostile intention (cf.,
συνάγεσθαι, [Rev 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019); [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008)), is sustained by [Psa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#007); [Psa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#004); and with גּרה, lacessere, it has
nothing to do (Hitzig and Ewald). אתּך has the force of contra te, as in
the case of verbs of combat. The first apodosis is this: "but it takes
place entirely away from me," i.e., without and against my will; מאותי =
מאתּי (as in [Isa 59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021)), and אותם =
אתּם, are no sure signs of a later usage; for this alternation of the
two forms of את is met with as early as [Jos
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#012). The second apodosis is, "he
will fall upon (or against) thee," or, as we should say, "founder," or
"be wrecked." It is far more likely that this is the meaning of the
words, than that they mean "he will fall to thy lot" (על נפל, like ל נפל
elsewhere, to fall to a person); for the context here is a totally
different one from [Isa 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014), and we
look for nothing more than a declaration of the utter failure and ruin
of the undertaking.

[Isaiah 54:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 54:16</span></span>

Jerusalem will be thus invincible, because Jehovah, the Almighty One, is
its protector. "Behold, I have created the smith who bloweth the
coal-fire, and brings to the light a weapon according to his trade; and
I have created the destroyer to destroy. Every weapon formed against
thee has no success, and every tongue that cometh before the judgment
with thee thou wilt condemn. This the inheritance of the servants of
Jehovah; and their righteousness from me, saith Jehovah." If Jehovah has
created the armourer, who forges a weapon למעסהוּ (i.e., according to
his trade, or according to the thing he has to finish, whether an arrow,
or a sword, or a spear; not "for his own use," as Kimchi supposes), to
be used in the hostile army against Jerusalem, He has also created a
destroyer (לחבּל) to destroy. The very same creative might, to which the
origin of the weapon is to be traced as its primary cause, has opposed
to it beforehand a defender of Jerusalem. And as every hostile weapon
fails, Jerusalem, in the consciousness of its divine right, will convict
every accusing tongue as guilty and deserving of utter condemnation
(הרשׁיע as in [Isa 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009), cf., [Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), where it denotes the punishment
of the guilty). The epiphonem in [Isa
54:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#017), with the retrospective זאת and
the words "saith the Lord," which confirm the certainty of the
fulfilment, forms an unmistakeable close to the prophecy. This is the
position in which Jehovah has placed His servants as heirs of the future
salvation; and this the righteousness which they have received as His
gift, and which makes them strong within and victorious without. The
individual idea of the church, which we find elsewhere personified as
"the servant of Jehovah," equivalent to "the people in whose heart is my
law" ([Isa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#007)), or "my people that
have sought me" ([Isa 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010)), is here
expanded into "the servants of Jehovah" (as in [Isa
65:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008); compare [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021) with [Isa
51:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#016)). But totally different colours
are employed in [Isa 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013) to [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001) to depict the exaltation of
the one "Servant of Jehovah," from those used here to paint the glory of
the church of the "servants of Jehovah," a proof that the ideas do not
cover one another. That which is the reward of suffering in the case of
the former, is the experience of divine mercy in that of the latter: it
becomes a partaker of the salvation purchased by the other. The one
"Servant of Jehovah" is the heart of the church, in which the crisis
which bursts forth into life is passing; the righteousness of the
"servants of Jehovah" is the fruit of the sufferings of this one
"Servant of Jehovah," who is Himself צדיק and מצידק. He is the Mediator
of all the salvation of the church. He is not only its "head," but its
"fulness" (πλήρωμα) also.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 55](isa055)

</div>
