<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa064)  [Next](isa066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)

[Isaiah 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 65:1</span></span>

After the people have poured out their heart before Jehovah, He
announces what they may expect from Him. But instead of commencing with
a promise, as we might anticipate after the foregoing prayer, He begins
with reproach and threatening; for although the penitential portion of
the community had included the whole nation in their prayer, it was
destruction, and not deliverance, which awaited one portion of the
nation, and that portion was the greater one. The great mass were in
that state of "sin unto death" which defies all intercession ([Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016)), because they had so scornfully
and obstinately resisted the grace which had been so long and so
incessantly offered to them. "I was discernible to those who did not
inquire, discoverable by those who did not seek me. I said, 'Here am I,
here am I,' to a nation where my name was not called. I spread out my
hands all the day to a refractory people, who walked in the way that was
not good, after their own thoughts." The lxx (A) render [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001), "I was found by those who did
not seek me, I became manifest to those who did not ask for me" (B
reverses the order); and in [Rom
10:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020), Paul refers [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001) to the Gentiles, and [Isa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002) to Israel. The former, to whom He
has hitherto been strange, enter into fellowship with Him; whilst the
latter, to whom He has constantly offered Himself, thrust Him away, and
lose His fellowship. Luther accordingly adopts this rendering: "I shall
be sought by those who did not ask for me, I shall be found by those who
did not seek me. And to the heathen who did not call upon my name, I
say, Here am I, here am I." Zwingli, again, observes on [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001), "This is an irresistible
testimony to the adoption of the Gentiles." Calvin also follows the
apostle's exposition, and observes, that "Paul argues boldly for the
calling of the Gentiles on the ground of this passage, and says that
Isaiah dared to proclaim and assert that the Gentiles had been called by
God, because he announced a greater thing, and announced it more clearly
than the reason of those times would bear." Of all the Jewish
expositors, where is only one, viz., Gecatilia, who refers v. 1 to the
Gentiles; and of all the Christina expositors of modern times, there is
only one, viz., Hendewerk, who interprets it in this way, without having
been influenced by the quotation made by Paul. Hofman, however, and
Stier, feel obliged to follow the apostle's exposition, and endeavour to
vindicate it. But we have no sympathy with any such untenable efforts to
save the apostle's honour. In [Rom
9:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025), he also quotes [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023) and [Hos
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#001) in support of the calling of the
Gentiles; whereas he could not have failed to know, that it is the
restoration of Israel to favour which is alluded to there. He merely
appeals to Hos 2 in support of the New Testament fact of the calling of
the Gentiles, so far as it is in these words of the Old Testament
prophet that the fact is most adequately expressed. And according to
[Pe1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010), Peter received the same
impression from Hosea's words.

But with the passage before us it is very different. The apostle shows,
by the way in which he applies the Scripture, how he depended in this
instance upon the Septuagint translation, which was in his own hands and
those of his readers also, and by which the allusion to the Gentiles is
naturally suggested, even if not actually demanded. And we may also
assume that the apostle himself understood the Hebrew text, with which
he, the pupil of Rabban Gamaliel, was of course well acquainted, in the
same sense, viz., as relating to the calling of the Gentiles, without
being therefore legally bound to adopt the same interpretation. The
interchange of גּוי (cf., [Isa 55:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#005))
and עם; the attribute בשׁים קרא לא, which applies to heathen, and
heathen only; the possibility of interpreting [Isa
65:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001), in harmony with the context
both before and after, if [Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001) be
taken as referring to the Gentiles, on the supposition that Jehovah is
here contrasting His success with the Gentiles and His failure with
Israel: all these certainly throw weight into the scale. Nevertheless
they are not decisive, if we look at the Hebrew alone, apart altogether
from the lxx. For nidrashtı̄ does not mean "I have become manifest;" but,
regarded as the so-called niphal tolerativum (according to [Eze
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#003); [Eze
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#003), [Eze
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#031); [Eze
36:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#037)), "I permitted myself to be
explored or found out;" and consequently נמצאתי, according to [Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006), "I let myself be found." And so
explained, [Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001) stands in a
parallel relation to [Isa 55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006) :
Jehovah was searchable, was discoverable (cf., [Zep
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006)) to those who asked no questions,
and did not seek Him (ללוא = לא לאשׁר, Ges. 123, 3), i.e., He displayed
to Israel the fulness of His nature and the possibility of His
fellowship, although they did not bestir themselves or trouble
themselves in the least about Him - a view which is confirmed by the
fact that [Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001) merely refers to
offers made to them, and not to results of any kind. Israel, however, is
called בשׁמי אל־קרא גוי, not as a nation that was not called by
Jehovah's name (which would be expressed by נקרא, [Isa
43:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#007); cf., מקראי, κλητός μου, [Isa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012)), but as a nation where (supply
'ăsher) Jehovah's name was not invoked (lxx "who called not upon my
name"), and therefore as a thoroughly heathenish nation; for which
reason we have gōi (lxx ἔθνος) here, and not ‛am (lxx λαός). Israel was
estranged from Him, just like the heathen; but He still turned towards
them with infinite patience, and (as is added in [Isa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)) with ever open arms of love. He
spread out His hands (as a man does to draw another towards him to
embrace him) all the day (i.e., continually, cf., [Isa
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#024)) towards an obstinate people,
who walked in the way that was not good (cf., [Psa
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005); [Pro
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#029); here with the article, which
could not be repeated with the adjective, because of the לא), behind
their own thoughts. That which led them, and which they followed, was
not the will of God, but selfish views and purposes, according to their
won hearts' lusts; and yet Jehovah did not let them alone, but they were
the constant thought and object of His love, which was ever seeking,
alluring, and longing for their salvation.

[Isaiah 65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 65:3</span></span>

But through this obstinate and unyielding rejection of His love they
have excited wrath, which, though long and patiently suppressed, now
bursts forth with irresistible violence. "The people that continually
provoketh me by defying me to my face, sacrificing in the gardens, and
burning incense upon the tiles; who sit in the graves, and spend the
night in closed places; to eat the flesh of swine, and broken pieces of
abominations is in their dishes; who say, Stop! come not too near me;
for I am holy to thee: they are a smoke in my nose, a fire blazing
continually." אלּה (these) in [Isa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005) is retrospective, summing up the
subject as described in [Isa 65:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003),
and what follows in [Isa 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005) contains
the predicate. The heathenish practices of the exiles are here depicted,
and in [Isa 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007) they are expressly
distinguished from those of their fathers. Hence there is something so
peculiar in the description, that we look in vain for parallels among
those connected with the idolatry of the Israelites before the time of
the captivity. There is only one point of resemblance, viz., the
allusion to gardens as places of worship, which only occurs in the book
of Isaiah, and in which our passage, together with [Isa
57:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#005) and [Isa
66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017), strikingly coincides with [Isa
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029). "Upon my face" (‛al-pânai) is
equivalent to "freely and openly, without being ashamed of me, or
fearing me;" cf., [Job 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#011); [Job
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#028); [Job
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#031). "Burning incense upon the
bricks" carries us to Babylonia, the true home of the cocti lateres
(laterculi). The thorah only mentions lebhēnı̄m in connection with
Babylonian and Egyptian buildings. The only altars that it allows are
altars of earth thrown up, or of unhewn stones and wooden beams with a
brazen covering. "They who sit in the graves," according to Vitringa,
are they who sacrifice to the dead. He refers to the Greek and Roman
inferiae and februationes, or expiations for the dead, as probably
originating in the East. Sacrifices for the dead were offered, in fact,
not only in India and Persia, but also in Hither Asia among the
Ssabians, and therefore probably in ancient Mesopotamia and Babylonia.
But were they offered in the graves themselves, as we must assume from
בּקּברים (not על־קברים)? Nothing at all is known of this, and Bttcher
(de inferis, 234) is correct in rendering it "among (inter) the graves,"
and supposing the object to be to hold intercourse there with the dead
and with demons. The next point, viz., passing the night in closed
places (i.e., places not accessible to every one: netsūrı̄m, custodita =
clausa, like ne‛ı̄mı̄m, amaena), may refer to the mysteries celebrated in
natural caves and artificial crypts (on the mysteries of the Ssabians,
see Chwolsohn, Die Ssabier u. der Ssabismus, ii. 332ff.). But the lxx
and Syriac render it ἐν τοῖς σπηλαίοις κοιμῶνται δι ̓ἐνύπνια, evidently
understanding it to refer to the so-called incubare, ἐγκοιμᾶσθαι; and so
Jerome explains it. "In the temples of idols," he says, "where they were
accustomed to lie upon the skins of the victims stretched upon the
ground, to gather future events from their dreams." The expression
ubhannetsūrı̄m points not so much to open temples, as to inaccessible
caves or subterraneous places. G. Rawlinson (Monarchies, ii. 269)
mentions the discovery of "clay idols in holes below the pavement of
palaces." From the next charge, "who eat there the flesh of the swine,"
we may infer that the Babylonians offered swine in sacrifice, if not as
a common thing, yet like the Egyptians and other heathen, and ate their
flesh ("the flesh taken from the sacrifice," 2 Macc. 6:21); whereas
among the later Ssabians (Harranians) the swine was not regarded as
either edible or fit for sacrifice.

On the synecdochical character of the sentence כּליהם פּגּלים וּפרק, see
at [Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012), cf., [Jer
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#002). Knobel's explanation, "pieces"
(but it is not וּפרקי) "of abominations are their vessels, i.e., those
of their ἱεροσκοπία," is a needless innovation. פּגּוּל signifies a
stench, putrefaction ([Eze 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#014), besar
piggūl), then in a concrete sense anything corrupt or inedible, a thing
to be abhorred according to the laws of food or the law generally (syn.
פּסּוּל, פּצוּל); and when connected with פרק (chethib), which bears the
same relation to מרק as crumbs or pieces (from פּרק, to crumble) to
broth (from מתק, to rub off or scald off), it means a decoction, or
broth made either of such kinds of flesh or such parts of the body as
were forbidden by the law. The context also points to such heathen
sacrifices and sacrificial meals as were altogether at variance with the
Mosaic law. For the five following words proceed from the mouths of
persons who fancy that they have derived a high degree of sanctity
either from the mysteries, or from their participation in rites of
peculiar sacredness, so that to every one who abstains from such rites,
or does not enter so deeply into them as they do themselves, they call
out their "odi profanum vulgus et arceo." אליך קרב, keep near to
thyself, i.e., stay where you are, like the Arabic idhab ileika, go away
to thyself, for take thyself off. על־תּגּשׁ־בּי (according to some MSS
with mercha tifchah), do not push against me (equivalent to גּשׁ־הלאה or
גּשׁה־לך, get away, make room; [Gen
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#009); [Isa
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#020)), for qedashtikhâ, I am holy to
thee, i.e., unapproachable. The verbal suffix is used for the dative, as
in [Isa 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021) (Ges. 121, 4), for it
never occurred to any of the Jewish expositors (all of whom give sanctus
prae te as a gloss) that the kal qâdash was used in a transitive sense,
like châzaq in [Jer 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007), as Luther,
Calvin, and even Hitzig suppose. Nor is the exclamation the well-meant
warning against the communication of a burdensome qedusshâh, which had
to be removed by washing before a man could proceed to the duties of
every-day life (such, for example, as the qedusshâh of the man who had
touched the flesh of a sin-offering, or bee sprinkled with the blood of
a sin-offering; [Lev 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020), cf., [Eze
44:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#019); [Eze
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#020)). It is rather a proud demand to
respect the sacro-sanctus, and not to draw down the chastisement of the
gods by the want of reverential awe. After this elaborate picture, the
men who are so degenerate receive their fitting predicate. They are fuel
for the wrath of God, which manifests itself, as it were, in smoking
breath. This does not now need for the first time to seize upon them;
but they are already in the midst of the fire of wrath, and are burning
there in inextinguishable flame.

[Isaiah 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 65:6</span></span>

The justice of God will not rest till it has procured for itself the
fullest satisfaction. "Behold, it is written before me: I will not keep
silence without having recompensed, and I will recompense into their
bosom. Your offences, and the offences of your fathers together, saith
Jehovah, that they have burned incense upon the mountains, and insulted
me upon the hills, and I measure their reward first of all into their
bosom." Vitringa has been misled by such passages as [Isa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#001); [Job
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#026); [Jer
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#030), in which kâthabh (kittēbh) is
used to signify a written decree, and understands by khethūbhâh the
sentence pronounced by God; but the reference really is to their
idolatrous conduct and contemptuous defiance of the laws of God. This is
ever before Him, written in indelible characters, waiting for the day of
vengeance; for, according to the figurative language of Scripture, there
are heavenly books, in which the good and evil works of men are entered.
And this agrees with what follows: "I will not be silent, without having
first repaid," etc. The accentuation very properly places the tone upon
the penultimate of the first shillamtı̄ as being a pure perfect, and upon
the last syllable of the second as a perf. consec. אם כּי preceded by a
future and followed by a perfect signifies, "but if (without having)
first," etc. ([Isa 55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010); [Gen
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#027); [Lev
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#006); [Rut
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#018); cf., [Jdg
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#007)). The original train of thought
was, "I will not keep silence, for I shall first of all keep silence
when," etc. Instead of ‛al chēqâm, "Upon their bosom," we might have 'el
chēqâm, into their bosom, as in [Jer
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#018); [Psa
79:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#012). In [Isa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007) the keri really has 'el instead
of ‛al, whilst in [Isa 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009) the
chethib is ‛al without any keri (for the figure itself, compare [Luk
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038), "into your bosom"). The thing to
be repaid follows in [Isa 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007); it is
not governed, however, by shillamtı̄, as the form of the address clearly
shows, but by 'ăshallēm understood, which may easily be supplied.
Whether 'ăsher is to be taken in the sense of qui or quod (that), it is
hardly possible to decide; but the construction of the sentence favours
the latter. Sacrificing "upon mountains and hills" (and, what is
omitted, here, "under every green tree") is the well-known standing
phrase used to describe the idolatry of the times preceding the
captivity (cf., [Isa 57:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#007); [Hos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#013); [Eze
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#013)). וּמדּתי points back to
veshillamtı̄ in [Isa 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006), after the
object has been more precisely defined. Most of the modern expositors
take ראשׁנה פעלּתם together, in the sense of "their former wages," i.e.,
the recompense previously deserved by their fathers. But in this case
the concluding clause would only affirm, by the side of [Isa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007), that the sins of the fathers
would be visited upon them. Moreover, this explanation has not only the
accents against it, but also the parallel in [Jer
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#018) (see Hitzig), which evidently
stands in a reciprocal relation to the passage before us. Consequently
ri'shōnâh must be an adverb, and the meaning evidently is, that the
first thing which Jehovah had to do by virtue of His holiness was to
punish the sins of the apostate Israelites; and He would so punish them
that inasmuch as the sins of the children were merely the continuation
of the fathers' sins, the punishment would be measured out according to
the desert of both together.

[Isaiah 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 65:8</span></span>

As the word ri'shōnâh (first of all) has clearly intimated that the work
of the future will not all consist in the execution of penal justice,
there is no abruptness in the transition from threatening to promises.
"Thus saith Jehovah, As when the must is found in the cluster, men say,
Do not destroy it, for there is a blessing within it, so will I do for
the sake of my servants, that I may not destroy the whole. And I will
bring forth a seed out of Jacob, and an heir of my mountains out of
Judah, and my chosen ones shall inherit it, and my servants shall dwell
there." Of the two co-ordinate clauses of the protasis ([Isa
65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008)), the first contains the
necessary condition of the second. Hattı̄rōsh (must, or the juice of the
grapes, from yârash, possibly primarily nothing more than receipt, or
the produce of labour) and bâ'eshkōl have both of them the article
generally found in comparisons (Ges. 109, Anm. 1); ואמר signifies, as in
[Isa 45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024), "men say," with the most
general and indefinite subject. As men to not destroy a juicy cluster of
grapes, because they would thereby destroy the blessing of God which it
contains; so will Jehovah for His servants' sake not utterly destroy
Israel, but preserve those who are the clusters in the vineyard ([Isa
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014); [Isa
5:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001)) or upon the vine ([Psa
80:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009).) of Israel. He will not destroy
hakkōl, the whole without exception; that is to say, keeping to the
figure, not "the juice with the skin and stalk," as Knobel and Hahn
explain it, but "the particular clusters in which juice is contained,
along with the degenerate neglected vineyard or vine, which bears for
the most part only sour grapes ([Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004)) or tendrils without fruit (cf.,
[Isa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#005)). The servants of Jehovah,
who resemble these clusters, remain preserved. Jehovah brings out,
causes to go forth, calls to the light of day (הוצי) as in [Isa
54:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#016); here, however, it is by means
of sifting: [Eze 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#034).), out of Jacob
and Judah, i.e., the people of the two captivities (see [Isa
56:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#003)), a seed, a family, that takes
possession of His mountains, i.e., His holy mountain-land ([Isa
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#025), cf., [Psa
121:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001), and har qodshı̄, which is used
in the same sense in [Isa 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009); [Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)). As "my mountain" is equivalent
in sense to the "land of Israel," for which Ezekiel is fond of saying
"the mountains of Israel" (e.g., [Isa
6:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002)), the promise proceeds still
further to say, "and my chosen ones will take possession thereof" (viz.,
of the land, [Isa 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021), cf., [Isa
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021)).

[Isaiah 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 65:10</span></span>

From west to east, i.e., in its whole extent, the land then presents the
aspect of prosperous peace. "And the plain of Sharon becomes a meadow
for flocks, and the valley of Achor a resting-place for oxen, for my
people that asketh for me." Hasshârōn (Sharon) is the plain of rich
pasture-land which stretches along the coast of the Mediterranean from
Yafo to the neighbourhood of Carmel. ‛Emeq ‛Akhōr is a valley which
became renowned through the stoning of Achan, in a range of hills
running through the plain of Jericho (see Keil on [Jos
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024).). From the one to the other will
the wealth in flocks extend, and in the one as well as in the other will
that peace prevail which is now enjoyed by the people of Jehovah, who
inquired for Him in the time of suffering, and therefore bear this name
in truth. The idyllic picture of peace is thoroughly characteristic of
Isaiah: see, for example, [Isa 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020);
and for rēbhets with nâveh, compare [Isa
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007).

[Isaiah 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 65:11</span></span>

The prophecy now turns again to those already indicated and threatened
in [Isa 65:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001). "And ye, who are
enemies to Jehovah, O ye that are unmindful of my holy mountain, who
prepare a table for Gad, and fill up mixed drink for the goddess of
destiny - I have destined you to the sword, and ye will all bow down to
the slaughter, because I have called and ye have not replied, I have
spoken and ye have not heard; and ye did evil in mine eyes, and ye chose
that which I did not like." It may be taken for granted as a thing
generally admitted, that [Isa 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)
refers to two deities, and to the lectisternia (meals of the gods, cf.,
[Jer 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018); [Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044)) held in their honour. שׁלחן ערך
is the other side of the lectum sternere, i.e., the spreading of the
cushions upon which the images of the gods were placed during such meals
of the gods as these. In the passage before us, at any rate, the lectus
answering to the shulchân (like the sella used in the case of the
goddesses) is to be taken as a couch for eating, not for sleeping on. In
the second clause, therefore, ממסך למני והממלאים (which is falsely
accentuated in our editions with tifchah mercha silluk, instead of
mercha tifchah silluk), ממסך מלּא signifies to fill with mixed drink,
i.e., with wine mixed with spices, probably oil of spikenard. מלּא may
be connected not only with the accusative of the vessel filled, but also
with that of the thing with which it is filled (e.g., [Exo
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#017)). Both names have the article,
like הבּעל. הגּד is perfectly clear; if used as an appellative, it would
mean "good fortune." The word has this meaning in all the three leading
Semitic dialects, and it also occurs in this sense in [Gen
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#011), where the chethib is to be read
בּגד (lxx ἐν τύχῃ). The Aramaean definitive is גּדּא (not גּדא), as the
Arabic 'gadd evidently shows. The primary word is גּדד (Arab. 'gadda),
to cut off, to apportion; so that Arab. jaddun, like the synonymous
ḥaḍḍun, signifies that which is appointed, more especially the good
fortune appointed. There can be no doubt, therefore, that Gad, the god
of good fortune, more especially if the name of the place Baal-Gad is to
be explained in the same way as Baal-hammn, is Baal (Bel) as the god of
good fortune. Gecatilia (Mose ha-Cohen) observes, that this is the
deified planet Jupiter. This star is called by the Arabs "the greater
luck" as being the star of good fortune; and in all probability it is
also the rabb-el-bacht (lord of good fortune) worshipped by the Ssabians
(Chwolsohn, ii. 30, 32). It is true that it is only from the passage
before us that we learn that it was worshipped by the Babylonians; for
although H. Rawlinson once thought that he had found the names Gad and
Menni in certain Babylonian inscriptions (Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, xii. p. 478), the Babylonian Pantheon in G. Rawlinson's
Monarchies contains neither of these names. With this want of
corroborative testimony, the fact is worthy of notice, that a Rabbi
named 'Ulla, who sprang from Babylon, explains the דרגשׁ of the Mishna
by דגדא ערסא (a sofa dedicated to the god of prosperity, and often left
unused) (b. Nedarim 56a; cf., Sanhedrin 20a).

(Note: The foreign formula of incantation given in b. Sabbath 67a,
ובושכי עושדי ל וסינוק ידג דג (according to the glosses, "O Fortune, give
good fortune, and be not tardy day and night"), also belongs here;
whereas the name of a place not far from Siloah, called Gad-yavan (Gad
of Greece), contains some allusion to the mythology of Greece, which we
are unable to trace. In the later usage of the language Gad appears to
have acquired the general meaning of numen (e.g., b. Chullin 40a; דהר
גד, the mountain-spirit); and this helps to explain the fact that in
Pehlewi גדמן signifies majesty in a royal, titular sense (see Vuller's
Lex.; and Spiegel in the Indische Studien, 3, 412).)

But if Gad is Jupiter, nothing is more probable than that Meni is Venus;
for the planet Venus is also regarded as a star of prosperity, and is
called by the Arabs "the lesser luck." The name Meni in itself, indeed,
does not necessarily point to a female deity; for meni from mânâh, if
taken as a passive participial noun (like גּרי בּריה, a creature),
signifies "that which is apportioned;" or if taken as a modification of
the primary form many, like גּדי, טלי, צבי, and many others, allotment,
destination, fate. We have synonyms in the Arabic mana-n and meniye, and
the Persian bacht (adopted into the Arabic), which signify the general
fate, and from which bago-bacht is distinguished as signifying that
which is exceptionally allotted by the gods. The existence of a deity of
this name meni is also probably confirmed by the occurrence of the
personal name עבדמני on certain Aramaeo-Persian coins of the
Achaemenides,

(Note: See Rdiger in the concluding part of the thes. p. 97.)

with which Frst associates the personal name Achiman (see his Lex.),
combining מן with Μήν, and מני with Μήνη, as Movers (Phnizier, i. 650)
and Knobel have also done. מן and מני would then be Semitic forms of
these Indo-Germanic names of deities; for Μήν is Deus Lunus, the worship
of which in Carrae (Charran) is mentioned by Spartian in chapter vi. of
the Life of Caracalla, whilst Strabo (xii. 3, 31, 32) speaks of it as
being worshipped in Pontus, Phrygia, and other places; and Μήνη is Dea
Luna (cf., Γενείτη Μάνη in Plut. quaest. rom. 52, Genita Mana in Plin.
h. n. 29, 4, and Dea Mena in Augustine, Civ. 4, 11), which was
worshipped, according to Diodorus (iii. 56) and Nonnus (Dionys. v. 70
ss.), in Phoenicia and Africa. The rendering of the lxx may be quoted in
favour of the identity of the latter with מני (ἑτοιμάζοντες τῷ δαιμονίῳ
(another reading δαίμονι τράπεζαν καὶ πληροῦντες τῇ τύχῃ κέρασμα),
especially if we compare with this what Macrobius says in Saturn. i. 19,
viz., that "according to the Egyptians there are four of the gods which
preside over the birth of men, Δαίμων Τύχη ̓́Ερωσ ̓Ανάγκη. Of these
Daimōn is the sun, the author of spirit, of warmth, and of light. Tychē
is the moon, as the goddess through whom all bodies below the moon grow
and disappear, and whose ever changing course accompanies the multiform
changes of this mortal life."

(Note: See Ge. Zoega's Abhandlungen, edited by Welcker (1817), pp. 39,
40.)

In perfect harmony with this is the following passage of Vettius Valens,
the astrologer of Antioch, which has been brought to light by Selden in
his Syntagma de Diis Syris: Κλῆροι τῆς τύχης καὶ τοῦ δαίμονος
σημαίνουσιν (viz., by the signs of nativity) ἣλιον τε καὶ σελήνην.
Rosenmller very properly traces back the Sept. rendering to this
Egyptian view, according to which Gad is the sun-god, and Meni the lunar
goddess as the power of fate. Now it is quite true that the passage
before us refers to Babylonian deities, and not to Egyptian; at the same
time there might be some relation between the two views, just as in
other instances ancient Babylonia and Egypt coincide.

But there are many objections that may be offered to the combination of
מני (Meni) and Μήνη: (1.) The Babylonian moon-deity was either called
Sı̄n, as among the ancient Shemites generally, or else by other names
connected with ירח (ירח) and châmar. (2.) The moon is called mâs is
Sanscrit, Zendic mâo, Neo-Pers. mâh (mah); but in the Arian languages we
meet with no such names as could be traced to a root mân as the
expansion of mâ (to measure), like μήν μήνη), Goth. mena; for the
ancient proper names which Movers cites, viz., ̓Αριαμένησ ̓Αρταμένης,
etc., are traceable rather to the Arian manas = μένος, mens, with which
Minerva (Menerva, endowed with mind) is connected. (3.) If meni were the
Semitic form of the name for the moon, we should expect a closer
reciprocal relation in the meanings of the words. We therefore subscribe
to the view propounded by Gesenius, who adopts the pairing of Jupiter
and Venus common among the Arabs, as the two heavenly bodies that
preside over the fortunes of men; and understands by Meni Venus, and by
Gad Jupiter. There is nothing at variance with this in the fact that
'Ashtoreth (Ishtar, with 'Ashērâh) is the name of Venus (the morning
star), as we have shown at [Isa 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012).
Meni is her special name as the bestower of good fortune and the
distributor of fate generally; probably identical with Mant, one of the
three leading deities of the prae-Islamitish Arabs.

(Note: See Krehl, Religion der vorislamischen Araber, p. 78. Sprenger in
his Life of Mohammad, 1862, compares the Arabic Manât with מני.)

The address proceeds with umânı̄thı̄ (and I have measured), which forms an
apodosis and contains a play upon the name of Meni, [Isa
65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011) being as it were a protasis
indicating the principal reason of their approaching fate. Because they
sued for the favour of the two gods of fortune (the Arabs call them
es-sa'dâni, "the two fortunes") and put Jehovah into the shade, Jehovah
would assign them to the sword, and they would all have to bow down
(כּרע as in [Isa 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#004)). Another reason
is now assigned for this, the address thus completing the circle, viz.,
because when I called ye did not reply, when I spake ye did not hear
(this is expressed in the same paratactic manner as in [Isa
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004); [Isa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001); [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002)), and ye have done, etc.: an
explanatory clause, consisting of four members, which is repeated almost
word for word in [Isa 66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004) (cf., [Isa
56:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#004)).

[Isaiah 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 65:13</span></span>

On the ground of the sin thus referred to again, the proclamation of
punishment is renewed, and the different fates awaiting the servants of
Jehovah and those by whom He is despised are here announced in five
distinct theses and antitheses. "Therefore thus saith the Lord, Jehovah:
Behold my servants will eat, but ye will hunger; behold my servants will
drink, but ye will thirst; behold my servants will rejoice, but ye will
be put to shame; behold my servants will exult for delight of heart, but
ye will cry for anguish of heart, and ye will lament for brokenness of
spirit. And ye will leave your name for a curse to my chosen ones, and
the Lord, Jehovah, will slay thee; but His servants He will call by
another name, to that whoever blesseth himself in the land will bless
himself by the God of truthfulness, and whoever sweareth in the land
will swear by the God of truthfulness, because the former troubles are
forgotten, and because they have vanished from mine eyes." The name
Adonai is connected with the name Jehovah for the purpose of affirming
that the God of salvation and judgment has the power to carry His
promises and threats into execution. Starving, confounded by the
salvation they had rejected (תּבשׁוּ as in [Isa
66:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#005)), crying and wailing (תּילילוּ,
fut. hiph. as in [Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002), with a
double preformative; Ges. 70, 2 Anm.) for sorrow of heart and crushing
of spirit (shebher, rendered very well by the lxx συντριβή, as in [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001), συντετριμμένους ), the
rebellious ones are left behind in the land of captivity, whilst the
servants of Jehovah enjoy the richest blessings from God in the land of
promise ([Isa 62:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#008)). The former,
perishing in the land of captivity, leave their name to the latter as
shebhū‛âh, i.e., to serve as a formula by which to swear, or rather to
execrate or curse ([Num 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#021)), so that
men will say, "Jehovah slay thee, as He slew them." This, at any rate,
is the meaning of the threat; but the words וגו והמיתך cannot contain
the actual formula, not even if we drop the Vav, as Knobel proposes, and
change לבחירי into לבחיריו; for, in the first place, although in the
doxologies a Hebrew was in the habit of saying "berūkh shemō" (bless his
name) instead of yehı̄ shemō bârukh (his name be blessed), he never went
so far as the Arab with his Allâh tabâr, but said rather יתברך. Still
less could he make use of the perfect (indicative) in such sentences as
"may he slay thee," instead of the future (voluntative) ימיתך, unless
the perfect shared the optative force of the previous future by virtue
of the consecutio temporum. And secondly, the indispensable כּהם or
כּאלּה would be wanting (see [Jer
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#022), cf., [Gen
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#020)). We may therefore assume, that
the prophet has before his mind the words of this imprecatory formula,
though he does not really express them, and that he deduces from it the
continuation of the threat. And this explains his passing from the
plural to the singular. Their name will become an execration; but
Jehovah will call His servants by another name (cf., [Isa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#002)), so that henceforth it will be
the God of the faithfully fulfilled promise whose name men take into
their mouth when they either desire a blessing or wish to give assurance
of the truth (hithbâr be, to bless one's self with any one, or with the
name of any one; Ewald, 133, Anm. 1). No other name of any god is now
heard in the land, except this gloriously attested name; for the former
troubles, which included the mixed condition of Israel in exile and the
persecution of the worshippers of Jehovah by the despisers of Jehovah,
are now forgotten, so that they no longer disturb the enjoyment of the
present, and are eve hidden from the eyes of God, so that all thought of
ever renewing them is utterly remote from His mind. This is the
connection between [Isa 65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016) and [Isa
65:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013). אשׁר does not mean eo quod
here, as in [Gen 31:49](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#049) for example,
but ita ut, as in [Gen 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#016). What
follows is the result of the separation accomplished and the promise
fulfilled. For the same reason God is called Elohē'âmēn, "the God of
Amen," i.e., the God who turns what He promises into Yea and Amen ([Co2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020)). The epithet derived from the
confirmatory Amen, which is thus applied to Jehovah, is similar to the
expression in [Rev 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014), where Jesus
is called "the Amen, the faithful and true witness." The explanatory kı̄
(for) is emphatically repeated in וכי, as in [Gen
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#011) and [Sa1
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#004) (compare [Job
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#020)). The inhabitants of the land
stand in a close and undisturbed relation to the God who has proved
Himself to be true to His promises; for all the former evils that
followed from the sin have entirely passed away.

[Isaiah 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 65:17</span></span>

The fact that they have thus passed away is now still further explained;
the prophet heaping up one kı̄ (for) upon another, as in [Isa
9:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003). "For behold I create a new
heaven and a new earth; and men will not remember the first, nor do they
come to any one's mind. No, be ye joyful and exult for ever at that
which I create: for behold I turn Jerusalem into exulting, and her
people into joy. And I shall exult over Jerusalem, and be joyous over my
people, and the voice of weeping and screaming will be heard in her no
more." The promise here reaches its culminating point, which had already
been seen from afar in [Isa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#016).
Jehovah creates a new heaven and a new earth, which bind so fast with
their glory, and which so thoroughly satisfy all desires, that there is
no thought of the former ones, and no one wishes them back again. Most
of the commentators, from Jerome to Hahn, suppose the ri'shōnōth in [Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016) to refer to the former sorrowful
times. Calvin says, "The statement of the prophet, that there will be no
remembrance of former things, is supposed by some to refer to the heaven
and the earth, as if he meant, that henceforth neither the fame nor even
the name of either would any more be heard; but I prefer to refer them
to the former times." But the correctness of the former explanation is
shown by the parallel in [Jer 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#016),
which stands in by no means an accidental relation to this passage, and
where it is stated that in the future there will be no ark of the
covenant, "neither shall it come to mind, neither shall they remember
it," inasmuch as all Jerusalem will be the throne of Jehovah, and not
merely the capporeth with its symbolical cherubim. This promise is also
a glorious one; but Jeremiah and all the other prophets fall short of
the eagle-flight of Isaiah, of whom the same may be said as of John,
"volat avis sine meta." Luther (like Zwingli and Stier) adopts the
correct rendering, "that men shall no more remember the former ones
(i.e., the old heaven and old earth), nor take it to heart." But ‛âlâh
‛al-lēbh signifies to come into the mind, not "to take to heart," and is
applied to a thing, the thought of which "ascends" within us, and with
which we are inwardly occupied. There is no necessity to take the
futures in [Isa 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017) as commands
(Hitzig); for אם־שׂישׂוּ כּי (כי with muach, as in Ven. 1521, after the
Masora to [Num 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033)) fits on quite
naturally, even if we take them as simple predictions. Instead of such a
possible, though not actual, calling back and wishing back, those who
survive the new times are called upon rather to rejoice for ever in that
which Jehovah is actually creating, and will have created then. אשׁר, if
not regarded as the accusative-object, is certainly regarded as the
object of causality, "in consideration of that which" (cf., [Isa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006); [Gen
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017); [Jdg
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#015)), equivalent to, "on account of
that which" (see at [Isa 64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004); [Isa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001)). The imperatives sı̄sū vegı̄lū are
not words of admonition so much as words of command, and kı̄ gives the
reason in this sense: Jehovah makes Jerusalem gı̄lâh and her people mâsōs
(accusative of the predicate, or according to the terminology adopted in
Becker's syntax, the "factitive object," Ges. 139, 2), by making joy its
perpetual state, its appointed condition of life both inwardly and
outwardly. Nor is it joy on the part of the church only, but on the part
of its God as well (see the primary passages in [Deu
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009)). When the church thus rejoices
in God, and God in the church, so that the light of the two commingle,
and each is reflected in the other; then will no sobbing of weeping
ones, no sound of lamentation, be heard any more in Jerusalem (see the
opposite side as expressed in [Isa
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#003)).

[Isaiah 65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 65:20</span></span>

There will be a different measure then, and a much greater one, for
measuring the period of life and grace. "And there shall no more come
thence a suckling of a few days, and an old man who has not lived out
all his days; for the youth in it will die as one a hundred years old,
and the sinner be smitten with the curse as one a hundred years old."
Our editions of the text commence [Isa
65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020) with לא־יהיה, but according to
the Masora (see Mas. finalis, p. 23, col. 7), which reckons five
ולא־יהיה at the commencement of verses, and includes our v. among them,
it must read ולא־יהיה, as it is also rendered by the lxx and Targum. The
meaning and connection are not affected by this various reading.
Henceforth there will not spring from Jerusalem (or, what hâyâh really
means, "come into existence;" "thence," misshâm, not "from that time,"
but locally, as in [Hos 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#017) and
elsewhere, cf., [Isa 58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)) a suckling
(see p. 90) of days, i.e., one who has only reached the age of a few
days (yâmı̄m as in [Gen 24:55](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#055), etc.),
nor an old man who has not filled his days, i.e., has not attained to
what is regarded as a rule as the full measure of human life. He who
dies as a youth, or is regarded as having died young, will not die
before the hundredth year of his life; and the sinner (והחוטא with
seghol, as in [Ecc 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012); [Ecc
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#018); Ges. 75, Anm. 21) upon whom the
curse of God falls, and who is overwhelmed by the punishment, will not
be swept away before the hundredth year of his life. We cannot maintain
with Hofmann (Schriftbeweis, ii. 2, 567), that it is only in appearance
that less is here affirmed than in [Isa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008). The reference there is to the
ultimate destruction of the power of death; here it is merely to the
limitation of its power.

[Isaiah 65:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 65:21</span></span>

In the place of the threatened curses of the law in [Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016) (cf., [Deu
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030)), the very opposite will now
receive their fullest realization. "And they will build houses and
inhabit them, and plant vineyards and enjoy the fruit thereof. They will
not build and another inhabit, nor plant and another enjoy; for like the
days of trees are the days of my people, ad my chosen ones will consume
the work of their hands. They will not weary themselves in vain, nor
bring forth for sudden disaster; for they are a family of the blessed of
Jehovah, and their offspring are left to them." They themselves will
enjoy what they have worked for, without some one else stepping in,
whether a countryman by violence or inheritance, or a foreigner by
plunder or conquest ([Isa 62:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#008)), to
take possession of that which they have built and planted (read יטעוּ
without dagesh); for the duration of their life will be as great as that
of trees (i.e., of oaks, terebinths, and cedars, which live for
centuries), and thus they will be able thoroughly to enjoy in their own
person what their hands have made. Billâh does not mean merely to use
and enjoy, but to use up and consume. Work and generation will be
blessed then, and there will be no more disappointed hopes. They will
not weary themselves (יגעוּ with a preformative י without that of the
root) for failure, not get children labbehâlâh, i.e., for some calamity
to fall suddenly upon them and carry them away ([Lev
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#016), cf., [Psa
78:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#033)). The primary idea of bâhal is
either acting, permitting, or bearing, with the characteristic of being
let loose, of suddenness, of overthrow, or of throwing into confusion.
The lxx renders it εἰς κατάραν, probably according to the Egypto-Jewish
usage, in which behâlâh may have signified cursing, like bahle, buhle in
the Arabic (see the Appendices). The two clauses of the explanation
which follows stand in a reciprocal relation to the two clauses of the
previous promise. They are a family of the blessed of God, upon whose
labour the blessing of God rests, and their offspring are with them,
without being lost to them by premature death. This is the true meaning,
as in [Job 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#008), and not "their
offspring with them," i.e., in like manner, as Hitzig supposes.

[Isaiah 65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 65:24</span></span>

All prayer will be heard then. "And it will come to pass: before they
call, I will answer; they are still speaking, and I already hear." The
will of the church of the new Jerusalem will be so perfectly the will of
Jehovah also, that He will hear the slightest emotion of prayer in the
heart, the half-uttered prayer, and will at once fulfill it (cf., [Isa
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#019)).

[Isaiah 65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 65:25</span></span>

And all around will peace and harmony prevail, even in the animal world
itself. "Wolf and lamb then feed together, and the lion eats chopped
straw like the ox, and the serpent-dust is its bread. They will neither
do harm not destroy in all my holy mountain, saith Jehovah." We have
frequently observed within chapters 40-66 (last of all at [Isa
65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012), cf., [Isa
66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004)), how the prophet repeats entire
passages from the earlier portion of his prophecies almost word for
word. Here he repeats [Isa 11:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#006) with
a compendious abridgment. [Isa 65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)
refers to the animals just as it does there. But whilst this custom of
self-repetition favours the unity of authorship, כּאחד for יחדּו = unâ,
which only occurs elsewhere in Ezra and Ecclesiastes (answering to the
Chaldee כּחדה), might be adduced as evidence of the opposite. The only
thing that is new in the picture as here reproduced, is what is said of
the serpent. This will no longer watch for human life, but will content
itself with the food assigned it in [Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014). It still continues to wriggle in
the dust, but without doing injury to man. The words affirm nothing more
than this, although Stier's method of exposition gets more out, or
rather puts more in. The assertion of those who regard the prophet
speaking here as one later than Isaiah, viz., that [Isa
65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025) is only attached quite loosely
to what precedes, is unjust and untrue. The description of the new age
closes here, as in chapter 11, with the peace of the world of nature,
which stands throughout chapters 40-66 in the closest reciprocal
relation to man, just as it did in chapters 1-39. If we follow Hahn, and
change the animals into men by simply allegorizing, we just throw our
exposition back to a standpoint that has been long passed by. But to
what part of the history of salvation are we to look for a place for the
fulfilment of such prophecies as these of the state of peace prevailing
in nature around the church, except in the millennium? A prophet was
certainly no fanatic, so that we could say, these are beautiful dreams.
And if, what is certainly true, his prophecies are not intended to be
interpreted according to the letter, but according to the spirit of the
letter; the letter is the sheath of the spirit, as Luther calls it, and
we must not give out as the spirit of the letter what is nothing more
than a quid-pro-quo of the letter. The prophet here promises a new age,
in which the patriarchal measure of human life will return, in which
death will no more break off the life that is just beginning to bloom,
and in which the war of man with the animal world will be exchanged for
peace without danger. And when is all this to occur? Certainly not in
the blessed life beyond the grave, to which it would be both absurd and
impossible to refer these promises, since they presuppose a continued
mixture of sinners with the righteous, and merely a limitation of the
power of death, not its utter destruction. But when then? This question
ought to be answered by the anti-millenarians. They throw back the
interpretation of prophecy to a stage, in which commentators were in the
habit of lowering the concrete substance of the prophecies into mere
doctrinal loci communes. They take refuge behind the enigmatical
character of the Apocalypse, without acknowledging that what the
Apocalypse predicts under the definite form of the millennium is the
substance of all prophecy, and that no interpretation of prophecy on
sound principles is any longer possible from the standpoint of an
orthodox antichiliasm, inasmuch as the antichiliasts twist the word in
the mouths of the prophets, and through their perversion of Scripture
shake the foundation of all doctrines, every one of which rests upon the
simple interpretation of the words of revelation. But one objection may
be made to the supposition, that the prophet is here depicting the state
of things in the millennium; viz., that this description is preceded by
an account of the creation of a new heaven and a new earth. The prophet
appears, therefore, to refer to that Jerusalem, which is represented in
the Apocalypse as coming down from heaven to earth after the
transformation of the globe. But to this it may be replied, that the Old
Testament prophet was not yet able to distinguish from one another the
things which the author of the Apocalypse separates into distinct
periods. From the Old Testament point of view generally, nothing was
known of a state of blessedness beyond the grave. Hades lay beyond this
present life; and nothing was known of a heaven in which men were
blessed. Around the throne of God in heaven there were angels and not
men. And, indeed, until the risen Saviour ascended to heaven, heaven
itself was not open to men, and therefore there was no heavenly
Jerusalem whose descent to earth could be anticipated then. Consequently
in the prophecies of the Old Testament the eschatological idea of the
new Cosmos does unquestionably coincide with the millennium. It is only
in the New Testament that the new creation intervenes as a party-wall
between this life and the life beyond; whereas the Old Testament
prophecy brings down the new creation itself into the present life, and
knows nothing of any Jerusalem of the blessed life to come, as distinct
from the new Jerusalem of the millennium. We shall meet with a still
further illustration in chapter 66 of this Old Testament custom of
reducing the things of the life to come within the limits of this
present world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 66](isa066)

</div>
