<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg013)  [Next](jdg015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001)

[Judges 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 14:1</span></span>

Samson's First Transactions with the Philistines. - [Jdg
14:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001). At Tibnath, the present Tibne,
an hour's journey to the south-west of Sur'a (see at [Jos
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010)), to which Samson had gone down
from Zorea or Mahaneh-dan, he saw a daughter of the Philistines who
pleased him; and on his return he asked his parents to take her for him
as a wife (לקח, to take, as in [Exo
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#009)).

[Judges 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 14:3</span></span>

His parents expressed their astonishment at the choice, and asked him
whether there was not a woman among the daughters of his brethren (i.e.,
the members of his own tribe), or among all his people, that he should
want to fetch one from the Philistines, the uncircumcised. But Samson
repeated his request, because the daughter of the Philistines pleased
him. The aversion of his parents to the marriage was well founded, as
such a marriage was not in accordance with the law. It is true that the
only marriages expressly prohibited in [Exo
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016) and [Deu
7:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003), are marriages with Canaanitish
women; but the reason assigned for this prohibition was equally
applicable to marriages with daughters of the Philistines. In fact, the
Philistines are reckoned among the Canaanites in [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003) upon the very same ground. But
Samson was acting under a higher impulse, whereas his parents did not
know that it was from Jehovah, i.e., that Jehovah had so planned it;
"for Samson was seeking an opportunity on account of the Philistines,"
i.e., an occasion to quarrel with them, because, as is afterwards added
in the form of an explanatory circumstantial clause, the Philistines had
dominion over Israel at that time. תּאנה, ἁπ. λεγ., an opportunity (cf.
התאנּה, [Kg2 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#007)).

[Judges 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 14:5</span></span>

When Samson went down with his parents to Timnath, a young lion came
roaring towards him at the vineyards of that town. Then the Spirit of
Jehovah came upon him, so that he tore the lion in pieces as a kid is
torn (lit. "like the tearing in pieces of the kid"), although he had
nothing, i.e., no weapon, in his hand. David, when a shepherd, and the
hero Benaiah, also slew lions ([Sa1
17:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034); [Sa2
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020)); and even at the present day
Arabs sometimes kill lions with a staff (see Winer, Bibl. R. W. Art.
Lwe). Samson's supernatural strength, the effect of the Spirit of
Jehovah, which came upon him, was simply manifested in the fact that he
tore the lion in pieces without any weapon whatever in his hand. But he
said nothing about it to his parents, who were not eyewitnesses of the
deed. This remark is introduced in connection with what follows.

[Judges 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 14:7</span></span>

When he came to Timnath he talked with the girl, and she pleased him. He
had only seen her before ([Jdg 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001));
but now that his parents had asked for her, he talked with her, and
found the first impression that he had received of her fully confirmed.

[Judges 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 14:8</span></span>

When some time had elapsed after the betrothal, he came again to fetch
her (take her home, marry her), accompanied, as we learn from [Jdg
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#009), by his parents. On the way "he
turned aside (from the road) to see the carcase of the lion; and behold
a swarm of bees was in the body of the lion, also honey." The word
מפּלת, which only occurs here, is derived from נפל, like πτῶμα from
πίπτω, and is synonymous with נבלה, cadaver, and signifies not the mere
skeleton, as bees would not form their hive in such a place, but the
carcase of the lion, which had been thoroughly dried up by the heat of
the sun, without passing into a state of putrefaction. "In the desert of
Arabia the heat of a sultry season will often dry up all the moisture of
men or camels that have fallen dead, within twenty-four hours of their
decease, without their passing into a state of decomposition and
putrefaction, so that they remain for a long time like mummies, without
change and without stench" (Rosenmller, Bibl. Althk. iv. 2, p. 424). In
a carcase dried up in this way, a swarm of bees might form their hive,
just as well as in the hollow trunks of trees, or clefts in the rock, or
where wild bees are accustomed to form them, notwithstanding the fact
that bees avoid both dead bodies and carrion (see Bochart, Hieroz, ed.
Ros. iii. p. 355).

[Judges 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 14:9</span></span>

Samson took it (the honey) in his hands, ate some of it as he went, and
also gave some to his father and mother to eat, but did not tell them
that he had got the honey out of the dead body of the lion; for in that
case they would not only have refused to eat it as being unclean, but
would have been aware of the fact, which Samson afterwards took as the
subject of the riddle that he proposed to the Philistines. רדה, to
tread, to tread down; hence to get forcible possession of, not to break
or to take out, neither of which meanings can be established. The
combination of רדה and אל־כּפּיו is a pregnant construction, signifying
to obtain possession of and take into the hands.

[Judges 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 14:10</span></span>

Samson's Wedding and Riddle. - [Jdg
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#010). When his father had come down
to the girl (sc., to keep the wedding, not merely to make the necessary
preparations for his marriage), Samson prepared for a feast there (in
Timnath), according to the usual custom (for so used the young men to
do).

[Jdg 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#011)

"And when they saw him, they fetched thirty friends, and they were with
him." The parents or relations of the bride are the subject of the first
clause. They invited thirty of their friends in Timnath to the marriage
feast, as "children of the bride-chamber" ([Mat
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)), since Samson had not brought
any with him. The reading כּראותם from ראה needs no alteration, though
Bertheau would read כּראתם daer from ירא, in accordance with the
rendering of the lxx (Cod. Al.) and Josephus, ἐν τῷ φοβεῖσθαι αὐτούς.
Fear of Samson would neither be in harmony with the facts themselves,
nor with the words אתּו ויּהיוּ, "they were with him," which it is felt
to be necessary to paraphrase in the most arbitrary manner "they watched
him."

[Jdg 14:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012)

At the wedding feast Samson said to the guests, "I will give you a
riddle. If you show it to me during the seven days of the meal (the
wedding festival), and guess it, I will give you thirty sedinim
(σινδόνες, tunicae, i.e., clothes worn next to the skin) and thirty
changes of garments (costly dresses, that were frequently changed: see
at [Gen 45:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#022)); but if ye cannot show
it to me, ye shall give me the same number of garments." The custom or
proposing riddles at banquets by way of entertainment is also to be met
with among the ancient Grecians. (For proofs from Athenaeus, Pollux,
Gellius, see Bochart, Hieroz. P. ii. l. ii. c. 12; and K. O. Mller,
Dorier, ii. p. 392). As the guests consented to this proposal, Samson
gave them the following riddle ([Jdg
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#014)): "Out of the eater came forth
meat, and out of the strong came forth sweetness." This riddle they
could not show, i.e., solve, for three days. That is to say, they
occupied themselves for three days in trying to find the solution; after
that they let the matter rest until the appointed term was drawing near.

[Jdg 14:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#015)

On the seventh day they said to Samson's wife, "Persuade thy husband to
show us the riddle," sc., through thee, without his noticing it, "lest
we burn thee and thy father's house with fire. Have ye invited us to
make us poor; is it not so?" In this threat the barbarism and
covetousness of the Philistines came openly to light. הלירשׁנוּ without
Metheg in the י is the inf. Kal of ירשׁ, to make poor-a meaning derived
from inheriting, not the Piel of ירשׁ = רוּשׁ, to be poor. הלא, nonne,
strengthens the interrogative clause, and has not the signification
"here" = הלם. Samson's wife, however, wept over him, i.e., urged him
with tears in her eyes, and said, "Thou dost but hate me, and lovest me
not; thou hast put forth a riddle unto the children of my people (my
countrymen), and hast not shown it to me." חדתּה is from חוּד. Samson
replied, that he had not even shown it to his father and mother, "and
shall I show it to thee?"

[Jdg 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#017)

"Thus his wife wept before him the seven days of the banquet." This
statement is not at variance with that in [Jdg
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#015), to the effect that it was only
on the seventh day that the Philistine young men urged her with threats
to entice Samson to tell the riddle, but may be explained very simply in
the following manner. The woman had already come to Samson every day
with her entreaties from simple curiosity; but Samson resisted them
until the seventh day, when she became more urgent than ever, in
consequence of this threat on the part of the Philistines. And "Samson
showed it to her, because she lay sore upon him;" whereupon she
immediately betrayed it to her countrymen.

[Jdg 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#018)

Thus on the seventh day, before the sun went down (חרסה = חרס, [Jdg
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#013); [Job
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#007), with a toneless ah, a softening
down of the feminine termination: see Ewald, 173, h.), the men of the
city (i.e., the thirty young men who had been invited) said to Samson,
"What is sweeter than honey, and what stronger than a lion?" But Samson
saw through the whole thing, and replied, "If ye had not ploughed with
my heifer, ye had not hit upon (guessed) my riddle,"-a proverbial
saying, the meaning of which is perfectly clear.

[Jdg 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#019)

Nevertheless he was obliged to keep his promise ([Jdg
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#012)). Then the Spirit of Jehovah
came upon him. He went down to Ashkelon, slew thirty men of them, i.e.,
of the Ashkelonites, took their clothes (חליצות, exuviae: see [Sa2
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#021)), and gave the changes of
garments to those who had shown the riddle. This act is described as the
operation of the Spirit of Jehovah which came upon Samson, because it
showed to the Philistines the superior power of the servants of Jehovah.
It was not carnal revenge that had impelled Samson to the deed. It was
not till the deed itself was done that his anger was kindled; and even
then it was not against the Philistines, to whom he had been obliged to
pay or give the thirty garments, but against his wife, who had betrayed
his secret to her countrymen, so that he returned to his father's house,
viz., without his wife.

[Jdg 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#020)

"And Samson's wife was given to his friend, whom he had chosen as a
friend." מרע is not doubt to be understood here in the sense of "the
friend of the bridegroom" ([Joh 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#029)),
ὁ νυμφαγωγός (lxx), the conductor of the bride-namely, one of the thirty
companions ([Jdg 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#010)), whom Samson
had entrusted with this office at the marriage festival. The
faithlessness of the Philistines towards the Israelites was no doubt
apparent here; for even if Samson went home enraged at the treacherous
behaviour of his wife, without taking her with him, he did not intend to
break the marriage tie, as [Jdg 15:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#001)
clearly shows. So that instead of looking at the wrong by which Samson
felt himself aggrieved, and trying to mitigate his wrath, the parents of
the woman made the breach irreparable by giving their daughter as a wife
to his companion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 15](jdg015)

</div>
