<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg008)  [Next](jdg010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 9:0</span></span>

Judgment upon the House of Gideon, or Abimelech's Sins and End - Judges
9

After the death of Gideon, Abimelech, his bastard son, opened a way for
himself to reign as king over Israel, by murdering his brethren with the
help of the Shechemites ([Jdg 9:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001)).
For this grievous wrong Jotham, the only one of Gideon's seventy sons
who escaped the massacre, reproached the citizens of Shechem in a
parable, in which he threatened them with punishment from God ([Jdg
9:7-21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007)), which first of all fell upon
Shechem within a very short time (vv. 22-49), and eventually reached
Abimelech himself ([Jdg 9:50-57](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#050)).

[Judges 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 9:1</span></span>

[Jdg 9:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001)

Having gone to Shechem, the home of his mother ([Jdg
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#031)), Abimelech applied to his
mother's brothers and the whole family (all the relations) of the
father's house of his mother, and addressed them thus: "Speak, I pray
you, in the ears of all the lords of Shechem," i.e., speak to them
publicly and solemnly. שׁכם בּעלי, the lords, i.e., the possessors or
citizens of Shechem (compare [Jdg 9:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046)
with [Jdg 9:49](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#049), where מגדּל בּעלי is
interchangeable with אנשׁי a; also [Jdg
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#005), and [Jos
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#011)): they are not merely
Canaanitish citizens, of whom there were some still living in Shechem
according to [Jdg 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#028), but all the
citizens of the town; therefore chiefly Israelites. "What is better for
you, that seventy men rule over you, all the sons of Jerubbaal, or
(only) one man (i.e., Abimelech)? and remember that I am your flesh and
bone" (blood relation, [Gen 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#014)).
The name "sons of Jerubbaal," i.e., of the man who had destroyed the
altar of Baal, was just as little adapted to commend the sons of Gideon
to the Shechemites, who were devoted to the worship of Baal, as the
remark that seventy men were to rule over them. No such rule ever
existed, or was even aspired to by the seventy sons of Gideon. But
Abimelech assumed that his brothers possessed the same thirst for ruling
as he did himself; and the citizens of Shechem might be all the more
ready to put faith in his assertions, since the distinction which Gideon
had enjoyed was thoroughly adapted to secure a prominent place in the
nation for his sons.

[Jdg 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#003)

When his mother's brethren spake to the citizens of Shechem concerning
him, i.e., respecting him and his proposal, their heart turned to
Abimelech.

[Jdg 9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#004)

They gave him seventy shekels of silver from the house of Baal-berith,
i.e., from the treasury of the temple that was dedicated to the covenant
Baal at Shechem, as temple treasures were frequently applied to
political purposes (see [Kg1 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#018)).
With this money Abimelech easily hired light and desperate men, who
followed him (attached themselves to him); and with their help he
murdered his brethren at Ophrah, seventy men, with the exception of
Jotham the youngest, who had hidden himself. The number seventy, the
total number of his brethren, is reduced by the exception mentioned
immediately afterwards to sixty-nine who were really put to death. ריק,
empty, i.e., without moral restraint. פּחז lit. gurgling up, boiling
over; figuratively, hot, desperate men. "Upon (against) one stone," that
is to say, by a formal execution: a bloody omen of the kingdom of ten
tribes, which was afterwards founded at Shechem by the Ephraimite
Jeroboam, in which one dynasty overthrew another, and generally sought
to establish its power by exterminating the whole family of the dynasty
that had been overthrown (see [Kg1
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#027)., [Kg2
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001).). Even in Judah, Athaliah the
worshipper of Baal sought to usurp the government by exterminating the
whole of the descendants of her son (2 Kings 11). Such fratricides have
also occurred in quite recent times in the Mohammedan countries of the
East.

[Jdg 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#006)

"Then all the citizens of Shechem assembled together, and all the house
of Millo, and made Abimelech king at the memorial terebinth at Shechem."
Millo is unquestionably the name of the castle or citadel of the town of
Shechem, which is called the tower of Shechem in [Jdg
9:46-49](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046). The word Millo (Chaldee
מלּיתא) signifies primarily a rampart, inasmuch as it consisted of two
walls, with the space between them filled with rubbish. There was also a
Millo at Jerusalem ([Sa2 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009); [Kg1
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015)). "All the house of Millo" are
all the inhabitants of the castle, the same persons who are described in
[Jdg 9:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046) as "all the men (baale) of
the tower." The meaning of מצּב אלון is doubtful. מצּב, the thing set
up, is a military post in [Isa 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#003);
but it may also mean a monument of memorial, and here it probably
denotes the large stone set up as a memorial at Shechem under the oak or
terebinth (see [Gen 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#004)). The
inhabitants of Shechem, the worshippers of Baal-berith, carried out the
election of Abimelech as king in the very same place in which Joshua had
held the last national assembly, and had renewed the covenant of Israel
with Jehovah the true covenant God ([Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001), [Jos
24:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#025)). It was there in all
probability that the temple of Baal-berith was to be found, namely,
according to [Jdg 9:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046), near the tower
of Shechem or the citadel of Millo.

[Judges 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 9:7</span></span>

When Jotham, who had escaped after the murder, was told of the election
which had taken place, he went to the top of Mount Gerizim, which rises
as a steep wall of rock to the height of about 800 feet above the valley
of Shechem on the south side of the city (Rob. iii. p. 96), and cried
with a loud voice, "Hearken to me, ye lords of Shechem, and God will
also hearken to you." After this appeal, which calls to mind the
language of the prophets, he uttered aloud a fable of the trees which
wanted to anoint a king over them-a fable of true prophetic
significance, and the earliest with which we are acquainted ([Jdg
9:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#008)). To the appeal which is made
to them in succession to become king over the trees, the olive tree, the
fig tree, and the vine all reply: Shall we give up our calling, to bear
valuable fruits for the good and enjoyment of God and men, and soar
above the other trees? The briar, however, to which the trees turn last
of all, is delighted at the unexpected honour that is offered it, and
says, "Will ye in truth anoint me king over you? Then come and trust in
my shadow; but if not, let fire go out of the briar and consume the
cedars of Lebanon." The rare form מלוכה (Chethib, [Jdg
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#008), [Jdg
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#012)) also occurs in [Sa1
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008); [Isa
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#011); [Psa
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002) : see Ewald, 228, b.). מלכי ([Jdg
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#010)) is also rare (see Ewald, 226,
b). The form החדלתּי ([Jdg 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#009), [Jdg
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#011), [Jdg
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013)), which is quite unique, is not
"Hophal or Hiphil, compounded of ההחד or ההחד" (Ewald, 51, c), for
neither the Hophal nor the Hiphil of חדל occurs anywhere else; but it is
a simple Kal, and the obscure o sound is chosen instead of the a sound
for the sake of euphony, i.e., to assist the pronunciation of the
guttural syllables which follow one after another. The meaning of the
fable is very easy to understand. The olive tree, fig tree, and vine do
not represent different historical persons, such as the judges Othniel,
Deborah, and Gideon, as the Rabbins affirm, but in a perfectly general
way the nobler families or persons who bring forth fruit and blessing in
the calling appointed them by God, and promote the prosperity of the
people and kingdom in a manner that is well-pleasing to God and men.
Oil, figs, and wine were the most valuable productions of the land of
Canaan, whereas the briar was good for nothing but to burn. The noble
fruit-trees would not tear themselves from the soil in which they had
been planted and had borne fruit, to soar (נוּע, float about) above the
trees, i.e., not merely to rule over the trees, but obire et circumagi
in rebus eorum curandis. נוּע includes the idea of restlessness and
insecurity of existence. The explanation given in the Berleb. Bible, "We
have here what it is to be a king, to reign or be lord over many others,
namely, very frequently to do nothing else than float about in such
restlessness and distraction of thoughts, feelings, and desires, that
very little good or sweet fruit ever falls to the ground," if not a
truth without exception so far as royalty is concerned, is at all events
perfectly true in relation to what Abimelech aimed at and attained, to
be a king by the will of the people and not by the grace of God.
Wherever the Lord does not found the monarchy, or the king himself does
not lay the foundations of his government in God and the grace of God,
he is never anything but a tree, moving about above other trees without
a firm root in a fruitful soil, utterly unable to bear fruit to the
glory of God and the good of men. The expression "all the trees" is to
be carefully noticed in [Jdg 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#014).
"All the trees" say to the briar, Be king over us, whereas in the
previous verse only "the trees" are mentioned. This implies that of all
the trees not one was willing to be king himself, but that they were
unanimous in transferring the honour to the briar. The briar, which has
nothing but thorns upon it, and does not even cast sufficient shadow for
any one to lie down in its shadow and protect himself from the burning
heat of the sun, is an admirable simile for a worthless man, who can do
nothing but harm. The words of the briar, "Trust in my shadow," seek
refuge there, contain a deep irony, the truth of which the Shechemites
were very soon to discover. "And if not," i.e., if ye do not find the
protection you expect, fire will go out of the briar and consume the
cedars of Lebanon, the largest and noblest trees. Thorns easily catch
fire (see [Exo 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#005)). The most
insignificant and most worthless man can be the cause of harm to the
mightiest and most distinguished.

[Judges 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 9:16</span></span>

In [Jdg 9:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#016) Jotham gives the
application of his fable, for there was no necessity for any special
explanation of it, since it was perfectly clear and intelligible in
itself. These verses form a long period, the first half of which is so
extended by the insertion of parentheses introduced as explanations
([Jdg 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#017), [Jdg
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#018)), that the commencement of it
([Jdg 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#016)) is taken up again in [Jdg
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#019) for the purpose of attaching the
apodosis. "If ye have acted in truth and sincerity, and (i.e., when he)
made Abimelech king; if ye have done well to Jerubbaal and his house,
and if ye have done to him according to the doing of his hands ... as my
father fought for you ... but ye have risen up to-day against my
father's house, and have slain ... if (I say) ye have acted in truth and
sincerity to Jerubbaal and his house this day: then rejoice in Abimelech
...." נפשׁו השׁליך, to throw away his life, i.e., expose to death.
מנּגד, "from before him," serves to strengthen the השׁליך. Jotham
imputes the slaying of his brothers to the citizens of Shechem, as a
crime which they themselves had committed ([Jdg
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#018)), because they had given
Abimelech money out of their temple of Baal to carry out his designs
against the sons of Jerubbaal ([Jdg
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#004)). In this reproach he had,
strictly speaking, already pronounced sentence upon their doings. When,
therefore, he proceeds still further in [Jdg
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#019), "If ye have acted in truth
towards Jerubbaal ... then rejoice," etc., this turn contains the
bitterest scorn at the faithlessness manifested towards Jerubbaal. In
that case nothing could follow but the fulfilment of the threat and the
bursting forth of the fire. In carrying out this point the application
goes beyond the actual meaning of the parable itself. Not only will fire
go forth from Abimelech and consume the lords of Shechem and the
inhabitants of Millo, but fire will also go forth from them and devour
Abimelech himself. The fulfilment of this threat was not long delayed,
as the following history shows ([Jdg
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#023).).

[Judges 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 9:21</span></span>

But Jotham fled to Beer, after charging the Shechemites with their
iniquity, and dwelt there before his brother Abimelech ("before," i.e.,
"for fear of." - Jerome). Beer in all probability is not the same place
as Beeroth in the tribe of Benjamin ([Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017)), but, according to the Onom. (s.
v. Βηρά), a place eight Roman miles to the north of Eleutheropolis,
situated in the plain; at present a desolate village called el Breh,
near the mouth of Wady es Surr, not far from the former Beth-shemesh
(Rob. Pal. ii. p. 132).

[Judges 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 9:22</span></span>

Abimelech's reign lasted three years. ויּשׂר, from שׂוּר to govern, is
used intentionally, as it appears, in the place of ויּמלך, because
Abimelech's government was not a monarchical reign, but simply a
tyrannical despotism. "Over Israel," that is to say, not over the whole
of the twelve tribes of Israel, but only over a portion of the nation,
possibly the tribes of Ephraim and half Manasseh, which acknowledged his
sway.

[Jdg 9:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#023)

Then God sent an evil spirit between Abimelech and the citizens of
Shechem, so that they became treacherous towards him. "An evil spirit"
is not merely "an evil disposition," but an evil demon, which produced
discord and strife, just as an evil spirit came upon Saul ([Sa1
16:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014); [Sa1
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#010)); not Satan himself, but a
supernatural spiritual power which was under his influence. This evil
spirit God sent to punish the wickedness of Abimelech and the
Shechemites. Elohim, not Jehovah, because the working of the divine
justice is referred to here. "That the wickedness to the seventy sons of
Jerubbaal might come, and their blood (the blood of these sons that had
been shed), to lay it upon Abimelech. " "And their blood" is only a more
precise definition of "the wickedness to the seventy sons;" and "to lay
it" is an explanation of the expression "might come." The introduction
of לשׂוּם, however, brings an anakolouthon into the construction, since
the transitive שׂוּם presupposes Elohim as the subject and דּמם as the
object, whereas the parallel חמס is the subject to the intransitive
לבוא: that the wickedness might come, and that God might lay the blood
not only upon Abimelech, the author of the crime, but also upon the
lords of Shechem, who had strengthened his hands to slay his brethren;
had supported him by money, that he might be able to hire worthless
fellows to execute his crime ([Jdg
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#004), [Jdg
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#005)).

[Judges 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 9:25</span></span>

The faithlessness of the Shechemites towards Abimelech commenced by
their placing liers in wait for him (לו, dat. incomm., to his
disadvantage) upon the tops of the mountains (Ebal and Gerizim, between
which Shechem was situated), who plundered every one who passed by them
on the road. In what way they did harm to Abimelech by sending out liers
in wait to plunder the passers-by, is not very clear from the brevity of
the narrative. The general effect may have been, that they brought his
government into discredit with the people by organizing a system of
robbery and plunder, and thus aroused a spirit of discontent and
rebellion. Possibly, however, these highway robbers were to watch for
Abimelech himself, if he should come to Shechem, not only to plunder
him, but, if possible, to despatch him altogether. This was made known
to Abimelech. But before he had put down the brigandage, the treachery
broke out into open rebellion.

[Jdg 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#026)

Gaal, the son of Ebed, came to Shechem with his brethren. עבר with בּ,
to pass over into a place. Who Gaal was, and whence he came, we are not
informed. Many of the MSS and early editions, e.g., the Syriac and
Arabic, read "son of Eber," instead of "son of Ebed." Judging from his
appearance in Shechem, he was a knight-errant, who went about the
country with his brethren, i.e., as captain of a company of freebooters,
and was welcomed in Shechem, because the Shechemites, who were
dissatisfied with the rule of Abimelech, hoped to find in him a man who
would be able to render them good service in their revolt from
Abimelech. This may be gathered from the words "and the lords of Shechem
trusted in him."

[Jdg 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#027)

At the vintage they prepared הלּוּלים, "praise-offerings," with the
grapes which they had gathered and pressed, eating and drinking in the
house of their god, i.e., the temple of Baal-berith, and cursing
Abimelech at these sacrificial meals, probably when they were excited
with wine. הלּוּלים signifies, according to [Lev
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#024), praise-offerings of the fruits
which newly-planted orchards or vineyards bore in the fourth years. The
presentation of these fruits, by which the vineyard or orchard was
sanctified to the Lord, was associated, as we may learn from the passage
before us, with sacrificial meals. The Shechemites held a similar
festival in the temple of their covenant Baal, and in his honour, to
that which the law prescribes for the Israelites in [Lev
19:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023).

[Jdg 9:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#028)

At this feast Gaal called upon the Shechemites to revolt from Abimelech.
"Who is Abimelech," he exclaimed, "and who Shechem, that we serve him?
Is he not the son of Jerubbaal, and Zebul his officer? Serve the men of
Hamor, the father of Shechem! and why should we, we serve him
(Abimelech)?" The meaning of these words, which have been misinterpreted
in several different ways, is very easily seen, if we bear in mind (1)
that מי (who is?) in this double question cannot possibly be used in two
different and altogether opposite senses, such as "how insignificant or
contemptible is Abimelech," and "how great and mighty is Shechem," but
that in both instances it must be expressive of disparagement and
contempt, as in [Sa1 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010); and (2)
that Gaal answers his own questions. Abimelech was regarded by him as
contemptible, not because he was the son of a maid-servant or of very
low birth, nor because he was ambitious and cruel, a patricide and the
murderer of his brethren (Rosenmller), but because he was a son of
Jerubbaal, a son of the man who destroyed the altar of Baal at Shechem
and restored the worship of Jehovah, for which the Shechemites
themselves had endeavoured to slay him ([Jdg
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#027).). So also the meaning of the
question, Who is Shechem? may be gathered from the answer, "and Zebul
his officer." The use of the personal מי (how) in relation to Shechem
may be explained on the ground that Gaal is speaking not so much of the
city as of its inhabitants. The might and greatness of Shechem did not
consist in the might and authority of its prefect, Zebul, who had been
appointed by Abimelech, and whom the Shechemites had no need to serve.
Accordingly there is no necessity either for the arbitrary paraphrase of
Shechem, given in the Sept., viz., υἱὸς Συχέμ (son of Shechem); or for
the perfectly arbitrary assumption of Bertheau, that Shechem is only a
second name for Abimelech, who was a descendant of Shechem; or even for
the solution proposed by Rosenmller, that Zebul was "a man of low birth
and obscure origin," which is quite incapable of proof. To Zebul, that
one man whom Abimelech had appointed prefect of the city, Gaal opposes
"the men of Hamor, the father of Shechem," as those whom the Shechemites
should serve (i.e., whose followers they should be). Hamor was the name
of the Hivite prince who had founded the city of Shechem ([Gen
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019); [Gen
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#002); compare [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)). The "men of Hamor" were the
patricians of the city, who "derived their origin from the noblest and
most ancient stock of Hamor" (Rosenmller). Gaal opposes them to
Abimelech and his representative Zebul.

(Note: Bertheau maintains, though quite erroneously, that serving the
men of Hamor is synonymous with serving Abimelech. But the very opposite
of this is so clearly implied in the words, that there cannot be any
doubt on the question. All that can be gathered from the words is that
there were remnants of the Hivite (or Canaanitish) population still
living in Shechem, and therefore that the Canaanites had not been
entirely exterminated-a fact which would sufficiently explain the
revival of the worship of Baal there.)

In the last clause, "why should we serve him" (Abimelech or his officer
Zebul)? Gall identifies himself with the inhabitants of Shechem, that he
may gain them fully over to his plans.

[Jdg 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#029)

"O that this people," continued Gaal, "were in my hand," i.e., could I
but rule over the inhabitants of Shechem, "then would I remove (drive
away) Abimelech. " He then exclaimed with regard to Abimelech (ל אמר, as
in [Jdg 9:54](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#054), [Gen
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013), etc.), "Increase thine army and
come out!" Heated as he was with wine, Gaal was so certain of victory
that he challenged Abimelech boldly to make war upon Shechem. תּבּה,
imper. Piel with Seghol. צאה, imperative, with ה of motion or emphasis.

[Judges 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 9:30</span></span>

This rebellious speech of Gaal was reported to Abimelech by the
town-prefect Zebul, who sent messengers to him בּתרמה, either with
deceit (תּרמה from רמה), i.e., employing deceit, inasmuch as he had
listened to the speech quietly and with apparent assent, or "in Tormah,"
the name of a place, תּרמה being a misspelling for ארמה = ארוּמה ([Jdg
9:41](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#041)). The Sept. and Chaldee take the
word as an appellative = ἐν κρυφῇ, secretly; so also do Rashi and most
of the earlier commentators, whilst R. Kimchi the elder has decided in
favour of the second rendering as a proper name. As the word only occurs
here, it is impossible to decide with certainty in favour of either
view. צרים הנּם, behold they stir up the city against thee (צרים from
צוּר in the sense of צרר).

[Judges 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jdg 9:32</span></span>

At the same time he called upon Abimelech to draw near, with the people
that he had with him, during the night, and to lie in wait in the field
(ארב, to place one's self in ambush), and the next morning to spread out
with his army against the town; and when Gaal went out with his
followers, he was to do to him "as his hand should find," i.e., to deal
with him as he best could and would under the circumstances. (On this
formula, see at [Sa1 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007); [Sa1
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#008).)

[Judges 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 9:34</span></span>

On receiving this intelligence, Abimelech rose up during the night with
the people that were with him, i.e., with such troops as he had, and
placed four companies ("heads" as in [Jdg
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016)) in ambush against Shechem.

[Judges 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 9:35</span></span>

When Gaal went out in the morning with his retinue upon some enterprise,
which is not more clearly defined, and stood before the city gate,
Abimelech rose up with his army out of the ambush. On seeing this
people, Gaal said to Zebul (who must therefore have come out of the city
with him): "Behold, people come down from the tops of the mountains."
Zebul replied, for the purpose of deceiving him and making him feel
quite secure, "Thou lookest upon the shadow of the mountains as men."

[Judges 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jdg 9:37</span></span>

But Gaal said again, "Behold, people come down from the navel of the
land," i.e., from the highest point of the surrounding country, "and a
crowd comes by the way of the wizard's terebinths," - a place in the
neighbourhood of Shechem that is not mentioned anywhere else, and
therefore is not more precisely known.

[Judges 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jdg 9:38</span></span>

Then Zebul declared openly against Gaal, and reproached him with his
foolhardy speech, whilst Abimelech was drawing nearer with his troops:
"Where is thy mouth now with which thou saidst, Who is Abimelech? Is not
this the people that thou hast despised? Go out now and fight with him!"

[Judges 9:39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jdg 9:39</span></span>

Then Gaal went out "before the citizens of Shechem;" i.e., not at their
head as their leaders, which is the meaning of לפני in [Gen
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#003); [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021); [Num
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035), etc., - for, according to [Jdg
9:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#033), Gaal had only gone out of the
town with his own retinue, and, according to [Jdg
9:42](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#042), [Jdg
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#043), the people of Shechem did not go
out till the next day, - but "in the sight of the lords of Shechem," so
that they looked upon the battle. But the battle ended unfortunately for
him. Abimelech put him to flight (רדף as in [Lev
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036)), and there fell many slain up
to the gate of the city, into which Gaal had fled with his followers.

[Judges 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jdg 9:41</span></span>

Abimelech did not force his way into the city, but remained (ישׁב, lit.
sat down) with his army in Arumah, a place not mentioned again, which
was situated, according to [Jdg 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#042),
somewhere in the neighbourhood of Shechem. It cannot possibly have been
the place called Ῥουμὰ ἡ καὶ Ἄριμα in the Onom. of Eusebius, which was
named Ῥέμφις in his day, and was situated in the neighbourhood of
Diospolis (or Lydda). Zebul, however, drove Gaal and his brethren (i.e.,
his retinue) out of Shechem.

[Judges 9:42](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">jdg 9:42</span></span>

The next day the people of Shechem went into the field, apparently not
to make war upon Abimelech, but to work in the field, possibly to
continue the vintage. But when Abimelech was informed of it, he divided
the people, i.e., his own men, into three companies, which he placed in
ambush in the field, and then fell upon the Shechemites when they had
come out of the city, and slew them.

[Judges 9:44](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jdg 9:44</span></span>

That is to say, Abimelech and the companies with him spread themselves
out and took their station by the city gate to cut off the retreat of
the Shechemites into the city, whilst the other two companies fell upon
all who were in the field, and slew them.

[Judges 9:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jdg 9:45</span></span>

Thus Abimelech fought all that day against the city and took it; and
having slain all the people therein, he destroyed the city and strewed
salt upon it. Strewing the ruined city with salt, which only occurs
here, was a symbolical act, signifying that the city was to be turned
for ever into a barren salt desert. Salt ground is a barren desert (see
[Job 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#006); [Psa
107:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#034)).

[Judges 9:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jdg 9:46</span></span>

When the inhabitants of the castle of Shechem ("lords of the tower of
Shechem" = "all the house of Millo," [Jdg
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#006)) heard of the fate of the town of
Shechem, they betook themselves to the hold of the house (temple) of the
covenant god (Baal-berith), evidently not for the purpose of defending
themselves there, but to seek safety at the sanctuary of their god from
fear of the vengeance of Abimelech, towards whom they also had probably
acted treacherously. The meaning of the word צריח, which answers to an
Arabic word signifying arx, palatium, omnis structura elatior, cannot be
exactly determined, as it only occurs again in [Sa1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006) in connection with caves and
clefts of the rock. According to v. 49, it had a roof which could be set
on fire. The meaning "tower" is only a conjecture founded upon the
context, and does not suit, as צריח is distinguished from מגדּל.

[Jdg 9:47-49](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#047)

As soon as this was announced to Abimelech, he went with all his men to
Mount Zalmon, took hatchets in his hand, cut down branches from the
trees, and laid them upon his shoulders, and commanded his people to do
the same. These branches they laid upon the hold, and set the hold on
fire over them (the inhabitants of the tower who had taken refuge
there), so that all the people of the tower of Shechem (about one
thousand persons) perished, both men and women. Mount Zalmon, which is
mentioned again in [Psa 68:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015), was a
dark, thickly-wooded mountain near Shechem, - a kind of "Black Forest,"
as Luther has rendered the name. The plural kardumoth, "axes," may be
explained on the ground that Abimelech took axes not only for himself
but for his people also. מה in a relative sense, as in [Num
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#003) (see Ewald, 331, b.).

[Judges 9:50](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">jdg 9:50</span></span>

At length the fate predicted by Jotham ([Jdg
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#020)) overtook Abimelech.

[Jdg 9:50-54](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#050)

He went from Shechem to Thebez, besieged the town, and took it. Thebez,
according to the Onom. thirteen miles from Neapolis (Shechem) on the
road to Scythopolis (Beisan), has been preserved in the large village of
Tubs on the north of Shechem (see Rob. Pal. iii. p. 156, and Bibl. Res.
p. 305). This town possessed a strong tower, in which men and women and
all the inhabitants of the town took refuge and shut themselves in. But
when Abimelech advanced to the tower and drew near to the door to set it
on fire, a woman threw a millstone down upon him from the roof of the
tower and smashed his skull, whereupon he called hastily to the
attendant who carried his weapons to give him his death-blow with his
sword, that men might not say of him "a woman slew him." רכב פּלח, the
upper millstone which was turned round, lapis vector (see [Deu
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006)). תּריץ: from רצץ, with a
toneless i, possibly to distinguish it from ותּרץ (from רוּץ).
גּלגּלתּו, an unusual form for גּלגּלתּו, which is found in the edition
of Norzi (Mantua, 1742).

[Jdg 9:55-57](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#055)

After the death of Abimelech his army was dissolved. ישׂראל אישׁ are the
Israelites who formed Abimelech's army. In [Jdg
9:56](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#056), [Jdg
9:57](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#057), the historian closes this
account with the remark, that in this manner God recompensed Abimelech
and the citizens of Shechem, who had supported him in the murder of his
brothers ([Jdg 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#002)), according to
their doings. After the word "rendered" in [Jdg
9:56](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#056) we must supply "upon his head,"
as in [Jdg 9:57](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#057). Thus Jotham's curse
was fulfilled upon Abimelech and upon the Shechemites, who had made him
king.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 10](jdg010)

</div>
