<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg002)  [Next](jdg004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

[Judges 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 3:1</span></span>

Nations which the Lord left in Canaan: with a repetition of the reason
why this was done.

[Jdg 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)

The reason, which has already been stated in [Jdg
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#022), viz., "to prove Israel by them,"
is still further elucidated here. In the first place ([Jdg
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001)), את־ישׂראל is more precisely
defined as signifying "all those who had not known all the wars of
Canaan," sc., from their own observation and experience, that is to say,
the generation of the Israelites which rose up after the death of
Joshua. For "the wars of Canaan" were the wars which were carried on by
Joshua with the almighty help of the Lord for the conquest of Canaan.
The whole thought is then still further expanded in [Jdg
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#002) as follows: "only (for no other
purpose than) that the succeeding generations (the generations which
followed Joshua and his contemporaries) of the children of Israel, that
He (Jehovah) might teach them war, only those who had not known them
(the wars of Canaan)." The suffix attached to ידעוּם refers to "the wars
of Canaan," although this is a feminine noun, the suffix in the
masculine plural being frequently used in connection with a feminine
noun. At first sight it would appear as though the reason given here for
the non-extermination of the Canaanites was not in harmony with the
reason assigned in [Jdg 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#022), which is
repeated in [Jdg 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#004) of the present
chapter. But the differences are perfectly reconcilable, if we only give
a correct explanation of the two expression, "learning war," and the
"wars of Canaan." Learning war in the context before us is equivalent to
learning to make war upon the nations of Canaan. Joshua and the
Israelites of his time had not overcome these nations by their own human
power or by earthly weapons, but by the miraculous help of their God,
who had smitten and destroyed the Canaanites before the Israelites. The
omnipotent help of the Lord, however, was only granted to Joshua and the
whole nation, on condition that they adhered firmly to the law of God
([Jos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007)), and faithfully observed
the covenant of the Lord; whilst the transgression of that covenant,
even by Achan, caused the defeat of Israel before the Canaanites (Josh
7). In the wars of Canaan under Joshua, therefore, Israel had
experienced and learned, that the power to conquer its foes did not
consist in the multitude and bravery of its own fighting men, but solely
in the might of its God, which it could only possess so long as it
continued faithful to the Lord. This lesson the generations that
followed Joshua had forgotten, and consequently they did not understand
how to make war. To impress this truth upon them-the great truth, upon
which the very existence as well as the prosperity of Israel, and its
attainment of the object of its divine calling, depended; in other
words, to teach it by experience, that the people of Jehovah could only
fight and conquer in the power of its God-the Lord had left the
Canaanites in the land. Necessity teaches a man to pray. The distress
into which the Israelites were brought by the remaining Canaanites was a
chastisement from God, through which the Lord desired to lead back the
rebellious to himself, to keep them obedient to His commandments, and to
train them to the fulfilment of their covenant duties. In this respect,
learning war, i.e., learning how the congregation of the Lord was to
fight against the enemies of God and of His kingdom, was one of the
means appointed by God to tempt Israel, or prove whether it would listen
to the commandments of God ([Jdg 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#004)),
or would walk in the ways of the Lord. If Israel should so learn to war,
it would learn at the same time to keep the commandments of God. But
both of these were necessary for the people of God. For just as the
realization of the blessings promised to the nation in the covenant
depended upon its hearkening to the voice of the Lord, so the conflicts
appointed for it were also necessary, just as much for the purification
of the sinful nation, as for the perpetuation and growth of the kingdom
of God upon the earth.

[Jdg 3:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003)

The enumeration of the different nations rests upon [Jos
13:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#002), and, with its conciseness and
brevity, is only fully intelligible through the light thrown upon it by
that passage. The five princes of the Philistines are mentioned singly
there. According to [Jos 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#004)., "all
the Canaanites and the Sidonians and the Hivites," are the Canaanitish
tribes dwelling in northern Canaan, by the Phoenician coast and upon
Mount Lebanon. "The Canaanites:" viz., those who dwelt along the
sea-coast to the south of Sidon. The Hivites: those who were settled
more in the heart of the country, "from the mountains of Baal-hermon up
to the territory of Hamath." Baal-hermon is only another name for
Baal-gad, the present Banjas, under the Hermon (cf. [Jos
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005)). When it is stated still further
in [Jdg 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#004), that "they were left in
existence (i.e., were not exterminated by Joshua) to prove Israel by
them," we are struck with the fact, that besides the Philistines, only
these northern Canaanites are mentioned; whereas, according to Judg 1,
many towns in the centre of the land were also left in the hands of the
Canaanites, and therefore here also the Canaanites were not yet
exterminated, and became likewise a snare to the Israelites, not only
according to the word of the angel of the Lord ([Jdg
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#003)), but also because the Israelites
who dwelt among these Canaanitish tribes contracted marriages with them,
and served their gods. This striking circumstance cannot be set aside,
as Bertheau supposes, by the simple remark, that "the two lists (that of
the countries which the tribes of Israel did not conquer after Joshua's
death in Judg 1, and the one given here of the nations which Joshua had
not subjugated) must correspond on the whole," since the correspondence
referred to really does not exist. It can only be explained on the
ground that the Canaanites who were left in the different towns in the
midst of the land, acquired all their power to maintain their stand
against Israel from the simple fact that the Philistines on the
south-west, and several whole tribes of Canaanites in the north, had
been left by Joshua neither exterminated nor even conquered, inasmuch as
they so crippled the power of the Israelites by wars and invasions of
the Israelitish territory, that they were unable to exterminate those
who remained in the different fortresses of their own possessions.
Because, therefore, the power to resist the Israelites and oppress them
for a time resided not so much in the Canaanites who were dwelling in
the midst of Israel, as in the Philistines and the Canaanites upon the
mountains of Lebanon who had been left unconquered by Joshua, these are
the only tribes mentioned in this brief survey as the nations through
which the Lord would prove His people.

[Jdg 3:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#005)

But the Israelites did not stand the test. Dwelling in the midst of the
Canaanites, of whom six tribes are enumerated, as in [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008), [Exo
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#017), etc. (see at [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)), they contracted marriages with
them, and served their gods, contrary to the express prohibition of the
Lord in [Exo 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016); [Exo
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#024), and [Deu
7:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003).

[Judges 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 3:7</span></span>

II\. History of the People of Israel under the Judges - Judges 3:7-16:31

In order that we may be able to take a distinct survey of the
development of the Israelites in the three different stages of the their
history duringthe times of the judges, the first thing of importance to
be done is to determine the chronology of the period of the judges,
inasmuch as not only have greatly divergent opinions prevailed upon this
point, but hypotheses have been set up, which endanger and to some
extent directly overthrow the historical character of the accounts which
the book of Judges contains.

(Note: Rud. Chr. v. Bennigsen, for example, reckons up fifty different
calculations, and the list might be still further increased by the
addition of both older and more recent attempts (see Winer, Bibl.
Real-Wrterb. ii. pp. 327-8). Lepsius (Chronol. der. Aeg. i. 315-6,
365ff. and 377-8) and Bunsen (Aegypten, i. pp. 209ff. iv. 318ff., and
Bibelwerk, i. pp. 237ff.), starting from the position maintained by
Ewald and Bertheau, that the chronological data of the book of Judges
are for the most part to be regarded as round numbers, have sought for
light to explain the chronology of the Bible in the darkness of the
history of ancient Egypt, and with their usual confidence pronounce it
an indisputable truth that the whole of the period of the Judges did not
last longer than from 169 to 187 years.)

If we take a superficial glance at the chronological data contained in
the book, it appears a very simple matter to make the calculation
required, inasmuch as the duration of the different hostile oppressions,
and also the length of time that most of the judges held their office,
or at all events the duration of the peace which they secured for the
nation, are distinctly given. The following are the numbers that we
find: -

1\. Oppression by Chushan-rishathaim, ([Jdg
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008)), 8 years. Deliverance by Othniel,
and rest, ([Jdg 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011)), 40 years. 2.
Oppression by the Moabites, ([Jdg
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#014)), 18 years. Deliverance by Ehud,
and rest, ([Jdg 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030)), 80 years. 3.
Oppression by the Canaanitish king Jabin, ([Jdg
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003)), 20 years. Deliverance by Deborah
and Barak, and rest, ([Jdg 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031)), 40
years. 4. Oppression by the Midianites, ([Jdg
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001)), 7 years. Deliverance by Gideion,
and rest, ([Jdg 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#028)) 40 years.
Abimelech's reign, ([Jdg 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#022)), 3
years. Tola, judge, ([Jdg 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#002)), 23
years. Jair, judge, ([Jdg 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#003)), 22
years. Total, 301 years. 5. Oppression by the Ammonites, ([Jdg
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#008)), 18 years. Deliveance by
Jephthah, who judged Israel, ([Jdg
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#007)), 6 years. Ibzan, judge, ([Jdg
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#009)), 7 years. Elon, judge, ([Jdg
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#011)), 10 years. Abdon, judge, ([Jdg
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#014)), 8 years. 6. Oppression by the
Philistines, ([Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)), 40 years. At
this time Samson judged Israel for 20 years ([Jdg
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#020); [Jdg
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#031) Total, 390 years. For if to this
we add -

(a.) the time of Joshua, which is not distinctly mentioned, and 20
years. (b.) the time during which Eli was judge ([Sa1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018)) 40 years.

We obtain 450 years.

(Note: The earlier chronologists discovered a confirmation of this as
the length of time that the period of the judges actually lasted in [Act
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#020), where Paul in his speech at
Antioch in Pisidia says, according to the textus receptus, "After that
He gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred and fifty years
until Samuel the prophet." The discrepancy between this verse and the
statement in [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001), that Solomon
built the temple in the four hundred and eightieth year after the
children of Israel were come out of Egypt, many have endeavoured to
remove by a remark, which is correct in itself, viz., that the apostle
merely adopted the traditional opinion of the Jewish schools, which had
been arrive at by adding together the chronological data of the book of
Judges, without entering into the question of its correctness, as it was
not his intention to instruct his hearers in chronology. But this
passage cannot prove anything at all; for the reading given in the lect.
rec. is merely founded upon Cod Al., Vat., Ephr. S. rescr., but
according to the Cod. Sinait., ed. Tischendorf and several minuscula, as
well as the Copt. Sahid. Arm. Vers. and Vulg., is, καὶ καθελὠν ἔθνη ἑπτὰ
ἐν γῇ Χαναὰν κατεκλληρονόμησεν αὐτοῖς τὴν γῆν αὐτῶν ὡς ἔτεσιν
τετπακοσίοις καὶ πεντήκοντα, καὶ μετὰ ταῦτα ἔδωκεν κριτὰς ἕως Σαμουήλ τ.
πρ. This text is rendered thus in the Vulgate: et destruens gentes
septem in terra Chanaan sorte distribuit eis terram eorum quasi post
quadringentos et quinquaginta annos: et post haec dedit judices usque ad
Samuel prophetam, and can hardly be understood in any other sense than
this, that Paul reckoned 450 as the time that elapsed between the call
of Abraham (or the birth of Isaac) and the division of the land, namely
215 + 215 (according to the Alex. reading of [Exo
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040) : see the comm. on this passage)
+ 40 = 470, or about 450.)

And if we add still further -

(c.) The times of Samuel and Saul combined, 40 years. (d.) The reign of
David ([Sa2 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#004); [Kg1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#011)), 40 years. (e.) The reign of
Solomon to the building of the temple ([Kg1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)), 3 years. The whole time from the
entrance of Israel into Canaan to the building of the temple amounted
to,

533 years. Or if we add the forty years spent in the wilderness, the
time that elapsed between the exodus from Egypt and the building of the
temple 573 years. But the interval was not so long as this; for,
according to [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001), Solomon built
the house of the Lord in the 480th year after the children of Israel
came out of Egypt, and in the fourth year of his reign. And no
well-founded objections can be raised as to the correctness and
historical credibility of this statement. It is true that the lxx have
"the 440th year" instead of the 480th; but this reading is proved to be
erroneous by Aquila and Symmachus, who adopt the number 480 in common
with all the rest of the ancient versions, and it is now almost
unanimously rejected (see Ewald, Gesch. ii. p. 479). In all probability
it owed its origin to an arbitrary mode of computing the period referred
to by reckoning eleven generations of forty years each (see Ed Preuss;
die Zeitrechnung der lxx pp. 78ff.). On the other hand, the number 480
of the Hebrew text cannot rest upon a mere reckoning of generations,
since the year and month of Solomon's reign are given in [Kg1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001); and if we deduct this date from
the 480, there remain 477 of 476 years, which do not form a cyclical
number at all.

(Note: Bertheau has quite overlooked this when he endeavors to make the
480 years from the exodus to the building of the temple into a cyclical
number, and appeals in support of this to [Ch1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#005)., where twelve generations are
reckoned from Aaron to Ahimaaz, the contemporary of David. But it is
perfectly arbitrary on his part to include Ahimaaz who was a boy in the
time of David ([Sa2 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#027), [Sa2
15:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#036); [Sa2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#019), [Sa2
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#022), [Sa2
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#027).), as the representative of a
generation that was contemporaneous with David; whereas it was not
Ahimaaz, but his father Zadok, i.e., the eleventh high priest from
Aaron, who anointed Solomon as king ([Kg1
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039); [Kg1
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#035)), and therefore there had been
only eleven high priests from the exodus to the building of the temple.
If therefore this period was to be divided into generations of forty
years each on the ground of the genealogies in the Chronicles, there
could only be eleven generations counted, and this is just what the lxx
have done.)

Again, the exodus of Israel from Egypt was an "epoch-making" event,
which was fixed in the recollection of the people as no other ever was,
so that allusions to it run through the whole of the Old Testament.
Moreover, the very fact that it does not tally with the sum total of the
numbers in the book of Judges is an argument in favor of its
correctness; whereas all the chronological calculations that differ from
this bring us back to these numbers, such, for example, as the different
statements of Josephus, who reckons the period in question at 592 years
in Ant. viii. 3, 1, and on the other hand, at 612 years in Ant. xx. 10
and c. Ap. ii. 2.

(Note: Josephus adds together the numbers which occur in the book of
JudGes. Reckoning from the invasion of Chushan-rishathaim to the forty
years' oppression of the Philistines (inclusive), these amount to 390
years, if we regard Samson's twenty years as forming part of the
Philistine oppression, or to 410 years if they are reckoned separately.
Let us add to this the forty years of the journey through the
wilderness, the twenty-five years which Josephus assigns to Joshua (Ant.
5:1, 29), the forty years of Eli, the twelve years which he allots to
Samuel before the election of Saul as king (6:13, 5), and the forty
years which he reckons to Samuel and Saul together, and lastly, the
forty and a half years of David's reign and the four years of Solomon's
up to the time when the temple was built, and we obtain 40 + 25 + 40 +
12 + 40 + 401/2 + 4 = 2011/2 years; and these added to 390 make 5911/2,
or added to 410 they amount to 611 years.)

Lastly, it may easily be shown that there are several things assumed in
this chronological survey which have no foundation in the text. This
applies both to the assumed succession of the Ammonitish and Philistine
oppressions, and also to the introduction of the forty years of Eli's
life as judge after or in addition to the forty years that the
Philistines ruled over Israel.

The current view, that the forty years of the oppression on the part of
the Philistines did not commence till after the death of Jephthah or
Abdon, is apparently favored, no doubt, by the circumstance, that this
oppression is not described till after the death of Abdon ([Jdg
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#015)), and is introduced with the
usual formula, " And the children of Israel did evil again in the sight
of the Lord," etc. ([Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)). But
this formula, taken by itself, does not furnish any certain proof that
the oppression which it introduces did not take place till after what
has been already described, especially in the absence of any more
definite statement, such as the clause introduced into [Jdg
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001), "when Ehud was dead," or the
still more definite remark, that the land had rest so many years ([Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011), [Jdg
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030); [Jdg
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031); cf. [Jdg
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#032)). Now in the case before us,
instead of any such statement as to time, we find the general remark in
[Jdg 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006)., that when the Israelites
sank into idolatry again, Jehovah sold them into the hands of the
Philistines, and into the hands of the children of Ammon; and after this
there simply follows an account of the oppression on the part of the
Ammonites, and the eventual deliverance effected by Jephthah (Judg
10:8-12:7), together with an enumeration of three judges who succeeded
Jephthah ([Jdg 12:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008)); but we learn
nothing further about the oppression on the part of the Philistines
which is mentioned in [Jdg 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007). When
therefore, it is still further related, in [Jdg
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001), that the Lord delivered the
Israelites into the hand of the Philistines forty years, this cannot
possibly refer to another oppression on the part of the Philistines
subsequent to the one noticed in [Jdg
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007); but the true explanation must
be, that the historian proceeds here for the first time to describe the
oppression noticed in [Jdg 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007), and
introduces his description with the formula he generally adopted: "And
the children of Israel did evil again in the sight of the Lord," etc.
The oppression itself, therefore, commenced at the same time as that of
the Ammonites, and continued side by side with it; but it lasted much
longer, and did not come to an end till a short time before the death of
Elon the judge. This is confirmed beyond all doubt by the fact, that
although the Ammonites crossed the Jordan to fight against Judah,
Benjamin, and Ephraim, it was chiefly the tribes of Israel who dwelt on
the other side of the Jordan that were oppressed by them ([Jdg
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#008), [Jdg
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#009)), and that it was only by these
tribes that Jephthah was summoned to make war upon them, and was elected
as their head and prince ([Jdg
11:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#005)), and also that it was only
the Ammonites in the country to the east of the Jordan whom he subdued
then before the Israelites ([Jdg
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#032), [Jdg
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#033)). From this it is very evident
that Jephthah, and his successors Ibzan, Elon, and Abdon, were not
judges over all Israel, and neither fought against the Philistines nor
delivered Israel from the oppression of the enemies who invaded the land
from the south-west; so that the omission of the expression, "the land
had rest," etc., from Judg 11 and [Jdg
12:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#001), is very significant.

(Note: Even Hitzig, who denies that the oppression of the Philistines
was contemporaneous with that of the Ammonites, is obliged to
acknowledge that "it is true, the author first of all disposed very
properly of the Ammonitish war before entering into the details of the
war with the Philistines, with which it had no connection, and which was
not brought to a close so soon." When therefore, notwithstanding this,
he adduces as evidence that they were not contemporaneous, the fact that
"according to the context, and to all analogy (cf. [Jdg
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001); [Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011), [Jdg
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012)), the author intends to write, in
[Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001), that after the death of
Abdon, when there was no judge in Israel, the nation fell back into its
former lawlessness, and as a punishment was given up to the
Philistines," a more careful study of the passages cited ([Jdg
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001); [Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011), [Jdg
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012)) will soon show that the supposed
analogy does not exist at all, since the expression, "the land had
rest," etc. really occurs in both instanced (se [Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011) and [Jdg
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)), whereas it is omitted before
[Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001). The still further
assertion, however, that the account of the Philistine war ought to have
followed immediately upon that of the war with the Ammonites, if the
intention was to describe this with equal fulness, has no force
whatever. If neither Jephthah nor the three judges who followed him had
anything to do with the Philistines, if they merely judged the tribes
that were oppressed and threatened by the Ammonites, it was natural that
everything relating to them should be attached to the account of the
defeat of the Ammonites, in order that there might be no unnecessary
separation of what was so intimately connected together. And whilst
these objections are thus proved to have no force, the objection raised
to the contemporaneous occurrence of the two oppressions is wrecked
completely upon the distinct statement in [Jdg
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007), that Jehovah sold the Israelites
into the hands of the Philistines and Ammonites, which Hitzig can only
get over by declaring, without the slightest foundation, that the words
"into the hands of the Philistines" are spurious, simply because they
stand in the way of his own assumption.)

But if the Ammonitish and Philistine oppressions occurred at the same
time, of course only one of them must be taken into account in our
chronological calculations as to the duration of the period of the
judges; and the one selected must be the one to the close of which the
chronological data of the next period are immediately appended. But this
is not the case with the account of the Ammonitish oppression, of the
deliverance effected by Jephthah, and of the judges who succeeded him
(Ibzan, Elon, and Abdon), because the chronological thread of this
series of events is broken off with the death of Abdon, and is never
resumed again. It is so, however, with the Philistine oppression, which
is said to have lasted forty years, though the termination of it is not
given in the book of JudGes. Samson merely began to deliver Israel out
of the power of the Philistines ([Jdg
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#005)), but did not accomplish their
complete deliverance. He judged Israel for twenty years in the days of
the Philistines, i.e., during the oppression of the Philistines ([Jdg
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#020)); consequently the twenty years
of his labours must not be taken into account in the chronology of the
period of the judges, inasmuch as they are all included in the forty
years of the Philistines' rule. At the death of Samson, with which the
book of Judges closes, the power of the Philistines was not yet broken;
and in Judg 4 of the first book of Samuel we find the Philistines still
fighting against the Israelites, and that with such success that the
Israelites were defeated by them, an even lost the ark of the covenant.
This war must certainly be a continuation of the Philistine oppression,
to which the acts of Samson belonged, since the termination of that
oppression is not mentioned in the book of Judges; and on the other
hand, the commencement of the oppression referred to in [Sa1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#009). is not given in the book of
Samuel. Consequently even Hitzig supports the view which I have
expressed, that the forty years' supremacy of the Philistines, noticed
in [Jdg 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001), is carried on into the
book of Samuel, and extends to [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003), [Sa1
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007), and that it was through Samuel
that it was eventually brought to a termination ([Sa1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010).). But if this is established,
then the forty years during which Eli was judge cannot have followed the
Philistine oppression and the deeds performed by Samson, and therefore
must not be reckoned separately. For since Eli died in consequence of
the account of the capture of the ark by the Philistines ([Sa1
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018)), and seven months ([Sa1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#001)) and twenty years elapsed after
this catastrophe before the Philistines were defeated and humiliated by
Samuel ([Sa1 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002)), only the last half
of the forty years of Eli's judicial life falls within the forty years
of the Philistine rule over Israel, whilst the first half coincides with
the time of the judge Jair. Eli himself was not a judge in the strict
sense of the word. He was neither commander of the army, nor secular
governor of the nation, but simply the high priest; and in this capacity
he administered the civil law in the supreme court, altogether
independently of the question whether there was a secular governor at
the time or not. After the death of Eli, Israel continued for more than
twenty years utterly prostrate under the yoke of the Philistines. It was
during this period that Samson made the Philistines feel the power of
the God of Israel, though he could not deliver the Israelites entirely
from their oppression. Samuel laboured at the same time, as the prophet
of the Lord, to promote the inward and spiritual strength of Israel, and
that with such success, that the people came to Mizpeh at his summons,
and there put away the strange gods that they had hitherto worshipped,
and worshipped the Lord alone; after which the Lord hearkened to
Samuel's prayer, and gave them a complete victory over the Philistines
([Sa1 7:2-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002)). After this victory,
which was gained not very long after the death of Samson, Samuel
undertook the supreme government of Israel as judge, and eventually at
their own desire, and with the consent of God, gave them a king in the
person of Saul the Benjaminite. This was not till Samuel himself was
old, and had appointed as his successors in the office of judge his own
sons, who did not walk in their father's ways (1 Sam. 8-10). Even under
Saul, however Samuel continued to the very end of his life to labour as
the prophet of the Lord for the well-being of Israel, although he laid
down his office of judge as soon as Saul had been elected king. He
announced to Saul how he had been rejected by God on account of his
disobedience; he anointed David as king; and his death did not occur
till after Saul had began to be troubled by the evil spirit, and to plot
for David's life ([Sa1 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)), as we
may learn from the fact that David fled to Samuel at Ramah when Saul
resolved to slay him ([Sa1 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#018))

How long Samuel judged Israel between the victory gained at Ebenezer (1
Sam. 7) and the election of Saul as king of Israel, is not stated in the
Old Testament, nor even the length of Saul's reign, as the text of [Sa1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001) is corrupt. But we shall not be
very far from the truth, if we set down about forty years as the time
covered by the official life of Samuel as judge after that event and the
reign of Saul, and reckon from seventeen to nineteen years as the
duration of Samuel's judgeship, and from twenty to twenty-two as the
length of Saul's reign. For it is evident from the accounts that we
possess of the lives and labours of Samuel and Saul, that Saul did not
reign forty years (the time given by Paul in [Act
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021) according to the traditional
opinion current in the Jewish schools), but at the most from twenty to
twenty-two; and this is now pretty generally admitted (see at [Sa1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001)). When David was chosen king of
Judah at Hebron after the death of Saul, he was thirty years old ([Sa2
5:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)), and can hardly have been
anointed king by Samuel at Bethlehem before the age of twenty. For
though his father Jesse was still living, and he himself was the
youngest of Jesse's eight sons, and was feeding the flock ([Sa1
16:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006)), and even after this is still
described as נער ([Sa1 17:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#042), [Sa1
17:55](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#055)), Jesse was זקן (an old man) at
the time ([Sa1 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012)), at any rate
sixty years old or more, to that his eldest son might be forty years
old, and David, the youngest, as much as twenty. For נער was not only
applied to a mere boy, but to a young man approaching twenty; and the
keeping of sheep was not merely as task performed by shepherd boys, but
also by the grown-up sons of a family, among whom we must certainly
reckon David, since he had already contended with lions and bears in the
steppe, and slain these beasts of prey ([Sa1
17:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034)), and shortly afterwards was
not only recommended to king Saul by his courtiers, as "a mighty valiant
man, and a man of war, and wise in speech," to cheer up the melancholy
king by his playing upon the harp ([Sa1
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018)), but also undertook to fight
with the giant Goliath (1 Sam. 17), and was placed in consequence over
the men of war, and was afterwards made captain of a thousand, and
betrothed to his daughter Michal ([Sa1
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#005), [Sa1
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#013), [Sa1
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017).). But if David was anointed by
Samuel at the age of about twenty years, Saul could not have reigned
more than ten years after that time, as David was made king at the age
of thirty. And he cannot have reigned much longer before that time. For,
apart from the fact that everything which is related of his former wars
and deeds could easily have occurred within the space of ten years, the
circumstance that Samuel lived till the last years of Saul's reign, and
died but a few years before Saul's death ([Sa1
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)), precludes the assumption that
he reigned any longer than that. For Samuel was already so old that he
had appointed his sons as judges, whereupon the people desired a king,
and assigned as the reason, that Samuel's sons did not walk in his ways
([Sa1 8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001)), from which it is very
evident that they had already filled the office of judge for some
considerable time. If we add to this the fact that Samuel was called to
be a prophet before the death of Eli, and therefore was no doubt
twenty-five or thirty years old when Eli died, and that twenty years and
seven months elapsed between the death of Eli and the defeat of the
Philistines, so that Samuel may have been about fifty years old at that
time, and that he judged the people from this time forward till he had
become an old man, and then gave the nation a king in the person of
Saul, we cannot assign more than forty years as the interval between the
defeat of the Philistines and the death of Saul, without attributing to
Samuel an age of more than ninety years, and therefore we cannot reckon
more than forty or thirty-nine years as the time that intervened between
the installation of Samuel in his office as judge and the commencement
of the reign of Saul.

According to this, the chronology of the times of the judges may be
arranged as follows: -

a\. From the oppression of Cushan-rishathaim to the death of Jair the
judge (vid. p. 202), 301 years. b. Duration of the Philistine
oppression, 40 years. c. Judgeship of Samuel and reign of Saul, 39
years. d. David's reign (7 and 33 years) 40 years. e. Solomon's reign to
the building of the temple, 3 years. 423 years. a. The wandering in the
desert, 40 years. b. the time between the entrance into Canaan and the
division of the land,

7 years. c. From the division of Canaan to the invasion of
Chushan-rishathaim, 10 years. 480 years. These numbers are as thoroughly
in harmony with [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001), and also
with the statement made by Jephthah in his negotiations with the king of
the Ammonites, that Israel dwelt in Heshbon and the cities along the
bank of the Arnon for three hundred years ([Jdg
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#026)), as we could possibly expect so
general a statement in round numbers to be. For instance, as the
chronological data of the book of Judges give 301 years as the interval
between the invasion of Chushan-rishathaim and the commencement of the
Ammonitish oppression, and as only about ten years elapsed between the
division of Canaan, after which the tribes on the east of the Jordan
first established themselves firmly in Gilead, and the invasion of
Chushan, the Israelites had dwelt 310 years in the land on the other
side of the Jordan at the time of Jephthah's negotiations with the
Ammonites, or at the most 328, admitting that these negotiations may
possibly not have taken place till towards the end of the eighteen
years' oppression on the part of the Ammonites, so that Jephthah could
appeal with perfect justice to the fact that they had been in possession
of the land for 300 years.

This statement of Jephthah, however, furnishes at the same time an
important proof that the several chronological data contained in our
book are to be regarded as historical, and also that the events are to
be reckoned as occurring successively; so that we have no right to
include the years of oppression in the years of rest, as is frequently
done, or to shorten the whole period from Othniel to Jephthah by
arbitrary assumptions of synchronisms, in direct opposition to the text.
This testimony removes all foundation from the hypothesis that the
number forty which so frequently occurs is a so-called round number,
that is to say, is nothing more than a number derived from a general
estimate of the different periods according to generations, or cyclical
periods. For if the sum total of the different chronological notices
tallies on the whole with the actual duration of the period in question
as confirmed by this testimony, the several notices must be regarded as
historically true, and that all the more because the greater part of
these data consist of such numbers as 6, 8, 18, 20, 22, 23, which can
neither be called round nor cyclical. Moreover, the purely cyclical
significance of the number forty among the Israelites must first of all
be proved. Even Ewald (Gesh. ii. pp. 480, 481) most justly observes,
that "it is very easy to say that the number forty was a round number in
the case of different nations; but this round number must first of all
have had its origin in life, and therefore must have had its limited
application." If, however, we look more closely at the different
occasions on which the space of forty years is mentioned, between the
exodus from Egypt and the building of the temple, we shall find that at
any rate the first and last passages contain very definite notices of
time, and cannot possibly be regarded as containing merely round or
cyclical numbers. In the case of the forty years' wandering in the
wilderness, this is placed beyond the reach of doubt by the fact that
even the months are given of both the second and fortieth years ([Num
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011); [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001); [Deu
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#003)), and the intervening space is
distinctly stated to have been thirty-eight years ([Deu
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#014)). And the forty years that David
is said to have reigned also give the precise number, since he reigned
seven and a half years at Hebron, and thirty-three at Jerusalem ([Sa2
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#004), [Sa2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005); [Kg1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#011)). Between these two extreme
points we certainly meet with the number forty five times: viz., forty
years of rest under Othniel ([Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011)), the same under Barak and
Deborah ([Jdg 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031)), and the same
again Gideon ([Jdg 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#028)); also forty
years of the oppression by the Philistines ([Jdg
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)), and the forty years that Eli
was judge ([Sa1 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#018)); and in addition
to these, we find eighty years of rest after Ehud's victory ([Jdg
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030)). But there are also twelve or
thirteen passages in which we find either odd numbers, or at all events
numbers that cannot be called cyclical or round (viz., [Jdg
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#008), [Jdg
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#014); [Jdg
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003); [Jdg
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001); [Jdg
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#022); [Jdg
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#002), [Jdg
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#003); [Jdg
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#007), [Jdg
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#009), [Jdg
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#011), [Jdg
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#014); [Jdg
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#020); [Jdg
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#031)). What is there then to justify
our calling the number forty cyclical or round? It is the impossibility
or improbability that in the course of 253 years Israel should have had
rest from hostile oppression on three occasions for forty years, and on
one for eighty? Is there anything impossible in this? Certainly not. Is
there even an improbability? If there be, surely improbabilities have
very often been perfectly true. And in the case before us, the
appearance itself loses all significance, when we consider that although
if we take entire years the number forty is repeated, yet it cannot be
taken so literally as that we are to understand that entire years are
intended every time. If David's reign is reckoned as forty years in [Sa2
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#004), although, according to [Sa2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005), he reigned seven years and six
months in Hebron and thirty-three years in Jerusalem, it may also be the
case that, although forty years is the number given in the book of
Judges, the period referred to may actually have been only thirty-nine
years and a half, or may have been forty and a half. To this must be
added the fact that the time during which the war with the enemy lasted
is also included in the years of rest; and this must always have
occupied several months, and may sometimes have lasted even more than a
year.

Now, if we give all these circumstances their due weight, every
objection that can be raised as to the correctness and historical
credibility of the chronological data of the book of Judges vanishes
away, whilst all the attempts that have been made to turn these data
into round or cyclical numbers are so arbitrary as to need no special
refutation whatever.

(Note: The principal representatives of this hypothesis are Ewald and
his pupil Bertheau. According to Ewald Gesch. ii. pp. 473ff.), the
twelve judges from Othniel to Samson form the historical groundwork of
the book, although there are distinct traces that there were many more
such rulers, because it was only of these that any reminiscences had
been preserved. When, therefore, after the expiration of the whole of
this period, the desire arose to bring out into distinct prominence the
most important points connected with it, the first thing that was done
was to group together these twelve judges, with such brief remarks as we
find in the case of five of them (Tola, Jair, Ibzan, Elon, and Abdon) in
[Jdg 10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001) and [Jdg
12:8-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008). In their case, too, the
precise time was given, so far as it could be still remembered. But,
independently of this, the attempt was also made to connect the order of
the many alternations of war and peace during these 480 years which
occurred, according to [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001),
between the exodus from Egypt and the building of Solomon's temple, to
certain grand and easily remembered divisions; and for this the number
forty at once presented itself. For since, according to the oldest
traditions, Israel spent forty years in the wilderness, and since David
also reigned forty years, it might easily be regarded as a suitable
thing to divide the whole into twelve equal parts, and to assign to each
forty years a great hero and some striking event: e.g., (1) Moses and
the wilderness; (2) Joshua and the prosperous rule of the elders; (3)
the war with Chushan-rishathaim, and Othniel; (4) the Moabites and Ehud;
(5) the Aramaeans and Jair; (6) the Canaanites under Jabin, and Deborah;
(7) the Midianites and Gideon; (8) Tola, with whose opponents we are not
acquainted; (9) the Ammonites and Philistines, or Jephthah and Samson;
(10) the Philistines and Eli; (11) Samuel and Saul; (12) David.
"Finally, then these twelve judges from Othniel to Samson were
necessarily connected with this different mode of reckoning, so that the
several numbers, as well as the order in which the judges occur, which
show so evidently (?) that the last editor but one compiled the section
extending from Judg 3-16 out of a great variety of sources, must have
been the resultant of many chanGes." But Ewald looks in vain for any
reason for this "must". And the question starts up at once, how could
the idea ever have entered any one's mind of dividing these 480 years,
from the exodus to the building of the temple, among the twelve judges
in this particular manner; that to all the judges, concerning whom it
was not known how long their period of labour lasted, forty years each
were assigned, when it was known that Israel had wandered forty years in
the wilderness, that Joshua had governed forty years with the elders,
and Samuel and Saul together had ruled for the same time, and David
also, so that there only remained for the judges from Othniel to Samson
480 - 4 x 40, i.e., only 320 years, or, deducting the first three or
four years of Solomon's reign, only 317 or 316 years? These years, if
divided among twelve judges, would give only twenty-six or twenty-seven
years for each. Or how did they come to allot eighty years to Ehud, and
only twenty-two to Jair and twenty-three to Tola, if the two latter had
also conquered the hostile oppressors of Israel? And lastly, why was
Shamgar left without any, when he delivered Israel from the Philistines?
To these and many other questions the author of this hypothesis is
unable to give any answer at all; and the arbitrary nature of his mode
of manufacturing history is so obvious, that it is unnecessary to waste
words in proving it. It is not better with Bertheau's hypothesis (Judg.
pp. xvi.ff.). According to this hypothesis, out of the twelve
generations from Moses to David which he derives from [Ch1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#005)., only six (or 240 years) belong
to the judges from Othniel to Samson. These have been variously
reckoned. One calculation takes them as six generations of forty years
each; another reckons them more minutely, adopting smaller numbers which
were assigned to the twelve judges and the son of Gideon. But six
generations and twelve judges could not be combined in any other way
than by assigning twenty years to each judge. Now there was not a single
judge who judged Israel for twenty years, with the exception of Samson
And the total number of the years that they judged is not 240, but 296
years (40 + 80 + 40 + 40 + 23 + 22 + 6 + 7 + 10 + 8 +20 + x).
Consequently we do not find any trace throughout the book, that the
period of the judges was reckoned as consisting of six generations of
forty years each. (Compare with this a more elaborate refutation by
Bachmann, pp. 3ff.).)

Chonological Survey of the Principal Events from the Exodus to the
Building of Solomon's Temple

The historical character of the chronological data of the book of Judges
being thus established, we obtain a continuous chronology for the
history of the Israelitish nation, as we may see from the following
survey, to which we append a calculation of the years before Christ: -

The Principle Events Duration Years before the birth of Christ Exodus of
Israel from Egypt - 1492 The law given at Sinai - 1492-1491 Death of
Aaron and Moses in thefortieth year of the wandering in the desert 40
1453 Conquest of Canaan by Joshua 7 1452-1445 From the division of the
landto the invasion of Chushan-rishathaim 10 1445-1435 Death of Joshua -
c. 1442 Wars of the tribes of Israel with the Canaanites - 1442 onwards
Oppression by Chushan-rishathaim 8 1435-1427 Deliverance by Othniel, and
rest 40 1427-1387 Oppression by the Moabites 18 1387-1369 Deliverance by
Ehud, and rest 80 1369-1289 Victory of Shamgar over the Philistines - x
Oppression by Jabin 20 1289-1269 Deliverance by Deborah and Barak, and
rest 40 1269-1229 Oppression by the Midianites 7 1229-1222 Deliverance
by Gideon, and rest 40 1222-1182 Rule of Abimelech 3 1182-1179 Tola,
judge 23 1179-1156 Jair, judge 22 1156-1134 Eli, high priest and judge
forty years - 1154-1114 After repeated apostasy, oppression (a) In the
East (b) In the West By the Ammonites,18 years By the Philistines 40
1134-1094 from 1134 to 1116 b.c. Loss of the Ark - c. 1114
Jephthath,judge 6 years Samson's deeds - 1116-1096 from 1116 to 1110
b.c. Samuel's prophetic labours - 1114 onwards Ibzan, judge 7 years
Defeat of the Philistines - 1094 from 1110 to 1103 b.c. Samuel, judge 19
1094-1075 Elon, judge 10 years Saul, king 20 1075-1055 from 1103 to 1093
b.c. David, king at Hebron 7 1055-1048 Abdon, judge 7 years David, king
at Jerusalem 33 1048-1015 from 1093 to 1085 b.c. Solomon's reign to the
building of the temple 3 1015-1012 Total 480 years. All that is required
to establish our calculation as to the period of the judges, is to
justify our estimate of ten years as the time that intervened between
the division of the land and the invasion by Chushan-rishathaim, since
the general opinion, founded upon the statement of Josephus (Ant. v. 1,
29), that Joshua was στρατηγός of the nation for twenty-five years after
the death of Moses, and (6:5, 4) that his death was followed by a state
of anarchy for eighteen years, is that it was at least thirty-five
years. But Josephus at all events ought not to be appealed to, as he had
no other sources of information with regard to the earlier portion of
the Israelitish history than the Old Testament itself; and he so
frequently contradicts himself in his chronological statements, that no
reliance can be place upon them even in cases where their incorrectness
cannot be clearly proved. And if we consider, on the other hand, that
Joshua was an old man when the two great campaigns in the south and
north of Canaan were over, and in fact was so advanced in years, that
God commanded him to divide the land, although many districts were still
unconquered ([Jos 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001).), in order
that he might finish this part of his calling before his death, there is
very little probability that he lived for twenty-five years after that
time. The same words are used to describe the last days of his life in
[Jos 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001), that had previously been
employed to describe his great age ([Jos
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001).). No doubt the statement in [Jos
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#001), to the effect that "many days
after that the Lord had given rest unto Israel from all their foes,"
Joshua called together the representatives of the nation, to renew the
covenant of the nation with the Lord before his death, when taken in
connection with the statement in [Jos
19:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#050), that he built the city of
Timnathserah, which the tribes had given him for an inheritance after
the distribution of the land by lot was over, and dwelt therein, proving
very clearly that there were certainly "many days" (Eng. Ver. "a long
time") between the division of the land and the death of Joshua. But
this is so comparative a term, that it hardly embraces more than two or
three years. And Joshua might build, i.e., fortify Timnath-serah, and
dwell therein, even if he only lived for two or three years after the
division of the land. On the other hand, there appears to have been a
longer interval than the seven or eight years allowed in our reckoning
between the death of Joshua and the invasion of Chushan; since it not
only includes the defeat of Adoni-bezek, the capture of Jerusalem,
Hebron, and other towns, by the tribes of Judah and Simeon ([Jdg
1:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)), and the conquest of Bethel by
the tribe of Joseph ([Jdg 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#022).), but
also the war of the congregation with the tribe of Benjamin (Judg
19-21). But it is only in appearance that the interval allowed is too
short. All these events together would not require many years, but might
very well have occurred within the space of about five years. And it is
quite possible that the civil war of the Israelites might have been
regarded by king Chushan-rishathaim as a favourable opportunity for
carrying out his design of making Israel tributary to himself, and that
he took advantage of it accordingly. The very fact that Othniel
delivered Israel from this oppression, after it had continued for eight
years, precludes us from postponing the invasion itself to a longer
period after the death of Joshua. For Othniel was not Caleb's nephew, as
many suppose, but his younger brother (see at [Jos
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#017)). Now Caleb was eighty-five
years old when the distribution of the land commenced ([Jos
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010)); so that even if his brother
Othniel was thirty, or even forty years younger, he would still be
fifty-five, or at any rate forty-five years old, when the division of
the land commenced. If the statements of Josephus were correct,
therefore, Othniel would have been ninety-one years old, or at any rate
eighty-one, when he defeated the Aramaean king Chushan-rishathaim;
whereas, according to our calculation, he would only have been fifty or
sixty years old when Debir was taken, and sixty-three or seventy-three
when Chushan was defeated. Now, even if we take the lower number as the
correct one, this would be a sufficiently great age for such a warlike
undertaking, especially when we consider that Othniel lived for some
time afterwards, as is evident from the words of [Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011), "And the land had rest forty
years: and Othniel the son of Kenaz died," though they may not
distinctly affirm that he did not die till the termination of the forty
years' rest.

The fact that Caleb's younger brother Othniel was the first judge of
Israel, also upsets the hypothesis which Bertheau has founded upon a
mistaken interpretation of Judg 2:11-3:6, that a whole generation of
forty years is to be reckoned between the death of Joshua and the
invasion of Chushan, and also the misinterpretation of [Jdg
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007), [Jdg
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#010) (cf. [Jos
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#031)), according to which the sinful
generation did not grow up until after Joshua and all the elders who
lived a long time after him were dead, - an interpretation which has no
support in [Jdg 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007), since האריך ימים
אחרי does not mean "to live long after a person", but simply "to survive
him." The "other generation which knew not the Lord," etc., that arose
after the death of Joshua and the elders who outlived him, was not a
different generation from the succeeding generations, which were given
up to the power of their foes on account of their apostasy from the
Lord, but the younger generation generally, which took the place of the
older men who had seen the works of the Lord under Joshua; in other
words, this is only a comprehensive expression for all the succeeding
generations who forgot Jehovah their God and served Baalim. So much may
be said in vindication of our calculations as to the period of the
judges.

1\. Times Of The Judges: Othniel; Ehud And Shamgar, Deborah And Barak -
Judges 3:7-5:31

In this first stage of the times of the judges, which embraces a period
of 206 years, the Israelites were oppressed by hostile nations on three
separate occasions: first of all by the Mesopotamian king
Chushan-rishathaim, whom they were obliged to serve for eighteen years,
until Othniel brought them deliverance, and secured them rest for forty
years ([Jdg 3:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007)); secondly by the
Moabitish king Eglon for eighteen years, until Ehud slew this king and
smote the Moabites, and so humiliated them, that the land had rest for
eighty years (Judg 3:12-30), whilst Shamgar also smote a host of
Philistines during the same period ([Jdg
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)); and lastly by the Canaanitish
king Jabin of Hazor, who oppressed them heavily for twenty years, until
Barak gathered an army together at the summons of Deborah the prophetess
and with her assistance, and completely defeated the foe (Judg 4). After
this victory, which Deborah celebrated in a triumphal song, the land had
rest again for forty years (Judg 5).

Oppression of Israel by Chushan-rishathaim, and Deliverance by Othniel -
[Jdg 3:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007)

[Jdg 3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007)

The first chastisement which the Israelites suffered for their apostasy
from the Lord, is introduced with the same formula which had been used
before to describe the times of the judges generally ([Jdg
2:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011)), except that instead of את־יי
ויּעזבוּ ("they forsook the Lord") we have here את־יי ויּשׁכּחוּ ("they
forgot the Lord their God") from [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018) (cf. [Sa1
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#009)), and Asheroth (rendered
"groves") instead of Ashtaroth (see at [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013)). As a punishment for this
apostasy, the Lord sold them ([Jdg
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#014)) into the hand of
Chushan-rishathaim, the king of Mesopotamia, whom they were obliged to
serve for eight years. All that we know about this king of Mesopotamia
is what is recorded here. His name, Chushan-rishathaim, is probably only
a title which was given to him by the Israelites themselves. Rishathaim
signifies "double wickedness," and the word was rendered as an
appellative with this signification in the Targums and the Syriac and
Arabic versions. Chushan is also formed as an adjective from Cush, and
may denote the Cushites. According to M. v. Niebuhr (Gesch. Assurs u.
Babels, p. 272), the rulers of Babylon at that time (1518-1273) were
Arabs. "Arabs, however, may have included not only Shemites of the tribe
of Joktan or Ishmael, but Cushites also." The invasion of Canaan by this
Mesopotamian or Babylonian king has a historical analogy in the campaign
of the five allied kings of Shinar in the time of Abraham (Gen 14).

[Jdg 3:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009)

In this oppression the Israelites cried to the Lord for help, and He
raised them up מושׁיע, a deliverer, helper, namely the Kenizzite
Othniel, the younger brother and son-in-law of Caleb (see at [Jos
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#017)). "The Spirit of Jehovah came
upon him." The Spirit of God is the spiritual principle of life in the
world of nature and man; and in man it is the principle both of the
natural life which we received through birth, and also of the spiritual
life which we received through regeneration (vid., Auberlen, Geist des
Menschen, in Herzog's Cycl. iv. p. 731). In this sense the expressions
"Spirit of God" (Elohim) and "Spirit of the Lord" (Jehovah) are
interchanged even in [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002),
compared with [Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003), and so
throughout all the books of the Old Testament; the former denoting the
Divine Spirit generally in its supernatural causality and power, the
latter the same Spirit in its operations upon human life and history in
the working out of the plan of salvation. In its peculiar operations the
Spirit of Jehovah manifests itself as a spirit of wisdom and
understanding, of counsel and might, of knowledge and of the fear of the
Lord ([Isa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#002)). The communication of
this Spirit under the Old Testament was generally made in the form of
extraordinary and supernatural influence upon the human spirit. The
expression employed to denote this is usually יי רוּח עליו ותּהי ("the
Spirit of Jehovah came upon him:" thus here, [Jdg
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#029); [Sa1
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020), [Sa1
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#023); [Ch2
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#014); [Num
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#002)). This is varied, however, with
the expressions יי רוּח עליו (צלחה) ותּצלח ([Jdg
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#006), [Jdg
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#019); [Jdg
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#014); [Sa1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010); [Sa1
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#006); [Sa1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013)) and את־פ לבשׁה יי רוּח, "the
Spirit of Jehovah clothed the man" ([Jdg
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#034); [Ch1
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#018); [Ch2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020)). Of these the former denotes
the operations of the Divine Spirit in overcoming the resistance of the
natural will of man, whilst the latter represents the Spirit of God as a
power which envelopes or covers a man. The recipients and bearers of
this Spirit were thereby endowed with the power to perform miraculous
deeds, in which the Spirit of God that came upon them manifested itself
generally in the ability to prophesy (vid., [Sa1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010); [Sa1
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#020), [Sa1
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#023); [Ch1
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#018); [Ch2
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#014); [Ch2
24:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#020)), but also in the power to work
miracles or to accomplish deeds which surpassed the courage and strength
of the natural man. The latter was more especially the case with the
judges; hence the Chaldee paraphrases "the Spirit of Jehovah" in [Jdg
6:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#034) as the spirit of might from the
Lord;" though in the passage before us it gives the erroneous
interpretation נבוּאה רוּח, "the spirit of prophecy." Kimchi also
understands it as signifying "the spirit of bravery, under the
instigation of which he was able fearlessly to enter upon the war with
Chushan." But we are hardly at liberty to split up the different powers
of the Spirit of God in this manner, and to restrict its operations upon
the judges to the spirit of strength and bravery alone. The judges not
only attacked the enemy courageously and with success, but they also
judged the nation, for which the spirit of wisdom and understanding was
indispensably necessary, and put down idolatry ([Jdg
2:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#018)), which they could not have
done without the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. "And
he judged Israel and went out to war." The position of ויּשׁפּט before
למּלחמה ויּצא does not warrant us in explaining ויּשׁפּט as signifying
"he began to discharge the functions of a judge," as Rosenmller has
done: for שׁפט must not be limited to a settlement of the civil disputes
of the people, but means to restore right in Israel, whether towards its
heathen oppressors, or with regard to the attitude of the nation towards
the Lord. "And the Lord gave Chushan-rishathaim into his hand (cf. [Jdg
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002); [Jdg
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#028), etc.), and his hand became
strong over him;" i.e., he overcame him (cf. [Jdg
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002)), or smote him, so that he was
obliged to vacate the land. In consequence of this victory, and the land
had rest from war (cf. [Jos 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023))
forty years. "And then Othniel died:" the expression ויּמת with ו
consec. does not necessarily imply that Othniel did not die for forty
years, but simply that he died after rest had been restored to the land.

[Judges 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 3:12</span></span>

In vv. 12-30 the subjugation of the Israelites by Eglon, the king of the
Moabites, and their deliverance from this bondage, are circumstantially
described. First of all, in [Jdg
3:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012), the subjugation. When the
Israelites forsook the Lord again (in the place of וגו את־הרע ...
ויּעשׂוּ, [Jdg 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007), we have here the
appropriate expression ... הרע הרע לעשׂות, they added to do, i.e., did
again, evil, etc., as in [Jdg 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001);
[Jdg 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006); [Jdg
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001)), the Lord made Eglon the king of
the Moabites strong over Israel. על חזּק, to give a person strength to
overcome or oppress another. כּי על, as in [Deu
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#017), instead of the more usual אשׁר
על (cf. [Jer 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#028); [Mal
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014); [Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014)). Eglon allied himself with the
Ammonites and Amalekites, those arch-foes of Israel, invaded the land,
took the palm-city, i.e., Jericho (see at [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016)), and made the Israelites
tributary for eighteen years. Sixty years had passed since Jericho had
been burnt by Joshua. During that time the Israelites had rebuilt the
ruined city, but they had not fortified it, on account of the curse
pronounced by Joshua upon any one who should restore it as a fortress;
so that the Moabites could easily conquer it, and using it as a base,
reduce the Israelites to servitude.

[Judges 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 3:15</span></span>

But when the Israelites cried to the Lord for help, He set them free
through the Benjaminite Ehud, whom He raised up as their deliverer. Ehud
was "the son of Gera." This probably means that he was a descendant of
Gera, since Gera himself, according to [Ch1
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#003), was a son of Bela the son of
Benjamin, and therefore was a grandson of Benjamin; and Shimei the
contemporary of David, a man belonging to the tribe of Benjamin, is also
called a son of Gera in [Sa2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005);
[Sa2 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#017). At the same time, it is
possible that the name Gera does not refer to the same person in these
different passages, but that the name was repeated again and again in
the same family. "A man shut with regard to his right hand," i.e.,
hindered in the use of his right hand, not necessarily crippled, but in
all probability disabled through want of use from his youth upwards.
That the expression does not mean crippled, is confirmed by the fact
that it is used again in connection with the 700 brave slingers in the
army of the Benjaminites in [Jdg
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016), and it certainly cannot be
supposed that they were all actual cripples. So much is certain,
however, that it does not mean ἀμφοτεροδέξιος, qui utraque manu pro
dextera utebatur (lxx, Vulg.), since אטר signifies clausit (shut) in
[Psa 69:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#016). It is merely with
reference to what follows that this peculiarity is so distinctly
mentioned. - The Israelites sent a present by him to king Eglon. בידו
does not mean in, but through, his hand, i.e., through his intervention,
for others were actually employed to carry the present ([Jdg
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#018)), so that Ehud merely
superintended the matter. Minchah, a gift or present, is no doubt a
euphemism for tribute, as in [Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002),
[Sa2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006); [Kg1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001).

[Judges 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 3:16</span></span>

Ehud availed himself of the opportunity to approach the king of the
Moabites and put him to death, and thus to shake off the yoke of the
Moabites from his nation. To this end he provided himself with a sword,
which had two edges (פּיות from פּה, like שׂיו, [Deu
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#001), from שׂה), a cubit long (גּמר,
ἁπ. λεγ., signified primarily a staff, here a cubit, according to the
Syriac and Arabic; not "a span," σπιθαμή, lxx), and "did gird it under
his raiment upon his right thigh."

[Judges 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 3:17</span></span>

Provided with this weapon, he brought the present to king Eglon, who -
as is also mentioned as a preparation for what follows - was a very fat
man.

[Judges 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 3:18</span></span>

After presenting the gift, Ehud dismissed the people who had carried the
present to their own homes; namely, as we learn from [Jdg
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#019), after they had gone some
distance from Jericho. But he himself returned from the stone-quarries
at Gilgal, sc., to Jericho to king Eglon. הפּסילים מן refers to some
place by Gilgal. In [Deu 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#025); [Isa
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009); [Jer
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#019), pesilim signifies idols. And if
we would retain this meaning here, as the lxx, Vulg., and others have
done, we must assume that in the neighbourhood of Gilgal there were
stone idols set up in the open air-a thing which is very improbable. The
rendering "stone quarries," from פּסל, to hew out stones ([Exo
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001), etc.), which is the one adopted
in the Chaldee, and by Rashi and others, is more likely to be the
correct one. Gilgal cannot be the Gilgal between Jericho and the Jordan,
which was the first encampment of the Israelites in Canaan, as is
commonly supposed, since Ehud passed the Pesilim on his flight from the
king's dwelling-place to the mountains of Ephraim ([Jdg
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#026), [Jdg
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#027)); and we can neither assume, as
Bertheau does, that Eglon did not reside in the conquered palm-city
(Jericho), but in some uncultivated place in the neighbourhood of the
Jordan, nor suppose that after the murder of Eglon Ehud could possibly
have gone from Jericho to the Gilgal which was half an hour's journey
towards the east, for the purpose of escaping by a circuitous route of
this kind to Seirah in the mountains of Ephraim, which was on the
north-west of Jericho. Gilgal is more likely to be Geliloth, which was
on the west of Jericho opposite to the ascent of Adummim (Kaalat ed
Dom), on the border of Judah and Benjamin ([Jos
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#017)), and which was also called
Gilgal ([Jos 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007)). Having returned to
the king's palace, Ehud sent in a message to him: "I have a secret word
to thee, O king." The context requires that we should understand "he
said" in the sense of "he had him told" (or bade say to him), since Ehud
himself did not go in to the king, who was sitting in his room, till
afterwards ([Jdg 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#020)). In consequence
of this message the king said: הס, lit. be silent (the imperative of הסה
fo); here it is a proclamation, Let there be quiet. Thereupon all who
were standing round (viz., his attendants) left the room, and Ehud went
in ([Jdg 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#020)). The king was sitting
"in his upper room of cooling alone." The "room of cooling" (Luther,
Sommerlaube, summer-arbour) was a room placed upon the flat roof of a
house, which was open to the currents of air, and so afforded a cool
retreat, such as are still met with in the East (vid., Shaw, pp. 188-9).
Then Ehud said, "A word of God I have to thee;" whereupon the king rose
from his seat, from reverence towards the word of God which Ehud
pretended that he had to deliver to him, not to defend himself, as
Bertheau supposes, of which there is not the slightest intimation in the
text.

[Judges 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 3:21</span></span>

But when the king stood up, Ehud drew his sword from under his garment,
and plunged it so deeply into his abdomen that even the hilt followed
the blade, and the fat closed upon the blade (so that there was nothing
to be seen of it in front, because he did not draw the sword again out
of his body), and the blade came out between the legs. The last words
have been rendered in various ways. Luther follows the Chaldee and
Vulgate, and renders it "so that the dirt passed from him," taking the
ἁπ. λεγ. פּרשׁדנה as a composite noun from פּרשׁ, stercus, and שׁדה,
jecit. But this is hardly correct, as the form of the word פּרשׁדנה, and
its connection with יצא, rather points to a noun, פּרשׁדן, with ה local.
The explanation given by Gesenius in his Thes. and Heb. lex. has much
more in its favour, viz., interstitium pedum, the place between the
legs, from an Arabic word signifying pedes dissitos habuit, used as a
euphemism for anus, podex. The subject to the verb is the blade.

(Note: At any rate the rendering suggested by Ewald, "Ehud went into the
open air, or into the enclosure, the space in front of the Alija," is
untenable, for the simple reason that it is perfectly irreconcilable
with the next clause, "Ehud went forth," etc. (consequently Fr. Bttcher
proposes to erase this clause from the text, without any critical
authority whatever). For if Ehud were the subject to the verb, the
subject would necessarily have been mentioned, as it really is in the
next clause, [Jdg 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#023).)

[Judges 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 3:23</span></span>

As soon as the deed was accomplished, Ehud went out into the porch or
front hall, shut the door of the room behind him (בּעדו, not behind
himself, but literally round him, i.e., Eglon; cf. [Gen
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#016); [Kg2
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#004)) and bolted it (this is only added
as a more precise explanation of the previous verb).

[Judges 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 3:24</span></span>

When the servants of Eglon came (to enter in to their lord) after Ehud's
departure and saw the door of the upper room bolted, they thought
"surely (אך, lit. only, nothing but) he covers his feet" (a euphemism
for performing the necessities of nature; cf. [Sa1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003)), and waited to shaming (cf. 2
King [Jdg 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#017); [Jdg
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#011)), i.e., till they were ashamed of
their long waiting (see at [Jdg 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028)).
At length they opened the door with the key, and found their lord lying
dead upon the floor.

Ehud's conduct must be judged according to the spirit of those times,
when it was thought allowable to adopt any means of destroying the enemy
of one's nation. The treacherous assassination of a hostile king is not
to be regarded as an act of the Spirit of God, and therefore is not set
before us as an example to be imitated. Although Jehovah raised up Ehud
as a deliverer to His people when oppressed by Eglon, it is not stated
(and this ought particularly to be observed) that the Spirit of Jehovah
came upon Ehud, and still less that Ehud assassinated the hostile king
under the impulse of that Spirit. Ehud proved himself to have been
raised up by the Lord as the deliverer of Israel, simply by the fact
that he actually delivered his people from the bondage of the Moabites,
and it by no means follows that the means which he selected were either
commanded or approved by Jehovah.

[Judges 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 3:26</span></span>

Ehud had escaped whilst the servants of Eglon were waiting, and had
passed the stone quarries and reached Seirah. Seirah is a place that is
never mentioned again; and, judging from the etymology (the hairy), it
was a wooded region, respecting the situation of which all that can be
decided is, that it is not to be sought for in the neighbourhood of
Jericho, but "upon the mountains of Ephraim" ([Jdg
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#027)). For when Ehud had come to
Seirah, he blew the trumpet "upon the mountains of Ephraim," to announce
to the people the victory that was placed within their reach by the
death of Eglon, and to summon them to war with the Moabites, and then
went down from the mountain into the plain near Jericho; "and he was
before them," i.e., went in front as their leader, saying to the people,
"Follow me; for Jehovah has given your enemies the Moabites into your
hand." Then they went down and took (i.e., took possession of) the fords
near Jericho (see at [Jos 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#007)), למואב,
either "from the Moabites" or "towards Moab," and let no one (of the
Moabites) cross over, i.e., escape to their own land.

[Judges 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 3:29</span></span>

Thus they smote at that time about 10,000 Moabites, all fat and powerful
men, i.e., the whole army of the enemy in Jericho and on this side of
the Jordan, not letting a man escape. The expression "at that time"
seems to imply that they did not destroy this number in one single
engagement, but during the whole course of the war.

[Judges 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 3:30</span></span>

Thus Moab was subdued under the hand of Israel, and the land had rest
for eighty years.

[Judges 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 3:31</span></span>

After him (Ehud) was, i.e., there rose up, Shamgar the son of Anath. He
smote the Philistines, who had probably invaded the land of the
Israelites, six hundred men, with an ox-goad, so that he also (like
Othniel and Ehud, [Jdg 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009) and [Jdg
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015)) delivered Israel. הבּקר מלמד,
ἁπ. λεγ., signifies, according to the Rabbins and the ancient versions,
an instrument with which they trained and drove oxen; and with this the
etymology agrees, as למד is used in [Hos
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011) and [Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018) to denote the training of the
young ox. According to Rashi, בּקר מלמד is the same as דּרבן,
βούκεντρον, in [Sa1 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#021). According
to Maundrell in Paulus' Samml. der merkw. Reisen nach d. Or. i. p. 139,
the country people in Palestine and Syria use when ploughing goads about
eight feet long and six inches in circumference at the thick end. At the
thin end they have a sharp point to drive the oxen, and at the other end
a small hoe, to scrape off any dirt that may stick to the plough.
Shamgar may have smitten the Philistines with some such instrument as
this, just as the Edonian prince Lycurgus is described by Homer (Il. vi.
135) as putting Dionysius and the Bacchantines to flight with a βουπλήξ.
Nothing is recorded about the descent of Shamgar, either here or in the
Song of Deborah, in [Jdg 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#006). The
heroic deed recorded of him must be regarded, as O. v. Gerlach affirms,
as "merely the result of a holy inspiration that suddenly burst forth
within him, in which he seized upon the first weapon that came to his
hand, and put to flight the enemy when scared by a terror for God, just
as Samson did on a later occasion." For he does not seem to have secured
for the Israelites any permanent victory over the Philistines. Moreover,
he is not called judge, nor is the period of his labours taken into
account, but in [Jdg 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#001) the renewed
apostasy of Israel from the Lord is dated from the death of Ehud.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 4](jdg004)

</div>
