<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer007)  [Next](jer009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001)

[Jeremiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 8:1</span></span>

But even then the judgment has not come to a height. Even sinners long
dead must yet bear the shame of their sins. "At that time" points back
to "days come" in [Jer 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#032). The
Masoretes wished to have the ו before יוציאוּ deleted, apparently
because they took it for ו consec. But it here stands before the
jussive, as it does frequently, e.g., [Jer
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#010), [Exo
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003). They will take the bones of the
kings, princes, priests, and prophets, the rulers and leaders of the
people (cf. [Jer 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026)), and the bones
of the other inhabitants of Jerusalem, out of their graves, and spread
them out before the sun, the moon, and the stars, i.e., expose them
under the open sky to the influence of the heavenly bodies, so that they
shall rot away, become "dung on the face of the earth." The worst
dishonour that could be done to the dead, a just return in kind for
their worship of sun, moon, and stars: cf. [Exo
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#018); [Kg2
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#005); [Kg2
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011). This worship the prophet
describes in its various stages: "Inclination of the heart, the act of
devoting and dedicating themselves to the service, the frequenting of
gods' sanctuary in order to worship and to obtain oracles; while he
strives to bring out in strong relief the contrast between the zeal of
their service and the reward they get by it" (Hitz.). They shall not be
gathered, i.e., for burial: cf. [Sa2
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#013).; [Sa1
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#013). The dead shall suffer this at
the hands of enemies despoiling the land. The reason for so doing was,
as Jerome observes, the practice of burying ornaments and articles of
value along with the dead. Seeking for such things, enemies will turn up
the graves (cf. acts of this kind the case of Ibn Chaldun, in Sylv. de
Sacy, Abdollat. p. 561), and, in their hatred and insolence, scatter the
bones of the dead all about.

[Jeremiah 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 8:3</span></span>

Not less dreadful will be the fate of those who remain in life; so
appalling that they will prefer death to life, since every kind of
hardship in exile and imprisonment amongst the heathen is awaiting them:
cf. [Lev 26:36-39](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036); [Deu
28:65-67](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065). המּקמות strikes us as
peculiar, seeing that the latter word cannot be adjective to the former;
for "in all the remaining places of Judah" (Umbr.) gives no suitable
sense, and "in all remaining places outside of Judah" is contrary to
usage. But הנּשׁארים may be taken as genitive, in spite of the article
prefixed to the stat. constr. מקמות; and we may then translate, with
Maur.: in all the places of those who remain whither I have driven them.
The lxx have omitted the second word; and it is possible it may have
found its way hither from the preceding line by an error of
transcription. And so Hitz., Ew., and Graf have deleted it as a gloss;
but the arguments adduced have little weight. The lxx have also omitted
"and say to them," [Jer 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004), have
changed כּה into כּי, and generally have treated Jeremiah in a quite
uncritical fashion: so that they may have omitted the word from the
present verse because it seemed awkward to them, and was not found in
the parallel passages, [Jer 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#014);
[Jer 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#003), which are not, however,
precisely similar to the present verse.

[Jeremiah 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 8:4</span></span>

The People's Obstinacy in Wickedness, and the Dreadfulness of the
Judgment. - Since the people cleaves stedfastly to its sin ([Jer
8:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004)), the Lord must punish sorely
([Jer 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014) -23). - [Jer
8:4-13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004). "And say to them, Thus hath
the Lord said: Doth one fall, and not rise again? or doth one turn away,
and not turn back again? [Jer 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005). Why
doth this people of Jerusalem turn itself away with a perpetual turning?
They hold fast by deceit, they refuse to return. [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006). I listened and heard: they speak
not aright; no one repenteth him of his wickedness, saying, What have I
done? They all turn to their course again, like a horse rushing into the
battle. [Jer 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007). Yea, the stork in
the heaven knoweth her appointed times; and turtle-dove, and swallow,
and crane, keep the time of their coming; but my people know not the
judgment of Jahveh. [Jer 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008). How can
ye say, Wise are we, and the law of Jahve we have? Certainly the lying
pen of the scribes hath made it a lie. [Jer
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009). Ashamed the wise men become,
confounded and taken; lo, the word of Jahveh they spurn at; and whose
wisdom have they? [Jer 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010). Therefore
will I give their wives unto others, their fields to new heirs: for from
the small to the great, they are all greedy for gain; from the prophet
even unto the priest, they all use deceit. [Jer
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011). And they heal the hurt of the
daughter of my people as it were a light matter, saying, Peace, peace;
and yet there is no peace. [Jer 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#012).
They have been put to shame because they have done abomination; yet they
take not shame to themselves, ashamedness they know not. Therefore they
shall fall amongst them that fall: in the time of their visitation they
shall stumble, that Jahve said. [Jer
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013). Away, away will I sweep them,
saith Jahveh: no grapes on the vine, and no figs on the fig-tree, and
the leaf is withered; so I appoint unto them those that shall pass over
them."

This strophe connects itself with what precedes. A judgment, dreadful as
has been described in Jer 7:32-8:3, will come on Judah, because the
people cleaves stiffneckedly to its sins. The ואמרתּ of [Jer
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004) corresponds to that in [Jer
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#028). The questioning clauses in [Jer
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004) contain universal truths, which
are applied to the people of Judah in [Jer
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005). The subjects to יפּלוּ and ישׁוּב
are indefinite, hence singular and plural with like significance: cf.
Gesen. 137, 3; Ew. 294, b. The verb ישׁוּב, turn oneself, turn about, is
here used in a double sense: first, as turn away from one; and then turn
towards him, return again. In the application in [Jer
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005), the Pilel is used for to turn
away from, and strengthened by: with perpetual turning away or
backsliding. נצּחת is not partic. Niph. fem. from נצח, but an adjectival
formation, continual, enduring, from נצח, continuance, durableness.
"Jerusalem" belongs to "this people:" this people of Jerusalem; the
loose grammatical connection by means of the stat. constr. not being
maintained, if the first idea gives a sense intelligible by itself, so
that the second noun may then be looked on rather in the light of an
apposition conveying additional information; cf. Ew. 290, c. תּרמית,
equivalent to מרמה, deceit against God. they refuse to return. Sense:
they will not receive the truth, repent and return to God. The same idea
is developed in [Jer 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006). The first
person: I have listened and heard, Hitz. insists, refers to the prophet,
"who is justified as to all he said in [Jer
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005) by what he has seen." But we
cannot account that even an "apt" view of the case, which makes the
prophet cite his own observations to show that God had not spoken
without cause. It is Jahveh that speaks in [Jer
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005); and seeing that [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006) gives not the slightest hint of
any change in the speaker, we are bound to take [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006) also as spoken by God. Thus, to
prove that they cleave unto deceit, Jahveh says that He has given heed
to their deeds and habits, and heard how they speak the לוא־כן, the not
right, i.e., lies and deceit. The next clause: not one repents him of
his wickedness, corresponds to: they refuse to return; cf. [Jer
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005) (נחם is partic.). Instead of this,
the whole of it, i.e., all of them, turn again to their course. שׁוּב
with ב, construed as in [Hos 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#007) :
turn oneself to a thing, so as to enter into it. For מרוּצה, the sig.
course is certified to by [Sa2 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#027).
The Chet. מרצותם .tehC e is doubtless merely an error of transcription
for מרוּצתם, as is demanded by the Keri. Turn again into their course.
The thought is: instead of considering, of becoming repentant, they
continue their evil courses. This, too, is substantially what Hitz.
gives. Ros., Graf, and others, again, take this in the sense of turning
themselves away in their course; but it is not fair to deduce this sense
for שׁוּב without מן from [Jer 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004);
nor is the addition of "from me" justifiable. Besides, this explanation
does not suit the following comparison with the horse. It is against
analogy to derive מרצותם from רצה with the sig. desire, cupidity. Ew.,
following the Chald., adopts this sense both here and in [Jer
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#017) and [Jer
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#010), though it is not called for in
any of these passages, and is unsuitable in [Jer
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#017). As a horse rusheth into the
battle. שׁטף, pour forth, overflow, hence rush on impetuously; by Jerome
rightly translated, cum impetu vadens. Several commentators compare the
Latin se effundere (Caes. Bell. Gall. v. 19) and effundi (Liv. xxviii.
7); but the cases are not quite in point, since in both the words are
used of the cavalry, and not of the steed by itself. This simile makes
way for more in [Jer 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007). Even the
fowls under the heaven keep the time of their coming and departure, but
Israel takes no concern for the judgment of its God; cf. [Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003). חסידה, (avis) pia, is the stork,
not the heron; see on [Lev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#019). "In
the heaven" refers to the flight of the stork. All the birds mentioned
here are birds of passage. תּור and סוּס are turtle-dove and pigeon. For
סוּס the Masoretes read סיס, apparently to distinguish the word from
that for horse; and so the oriental Codd. propose to read in [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014), although they wrote עגוּר .סוּס
is the crane (acc. to Saad. and Rashi), both here and in [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014), where Gesen., Knob., and
others, mistaking the asyndeton, take it as an adjective in the sig.
sighing.

(Note: Starting from this unproved interpretation of [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014), and supporting their case from
the lxx translation of the present passage, τρυγὼν καὶ χελιδὼν ἀγροῦ
στρουθία, Hitz. and Graf argue that עגוּר is not the name of any
particular bird, but only a qualifying word to סוּס, in order to
distinguish the swallow from the horse, the sense more commonly attached
to the same word. But that confused text of the lxx by no means
justifies us in supposing that the ו cop. was introduced subsequently
into the Heb. text. It is possible that ἁγροῦ is only a corrupt
representation of עגוּר, and the στρουθία came into the lxx text in
consequence of this corruption. but certainly the fact that the lxx, as
also Aquil. and Symm., both here and in [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014), did not know what to make of
the Hebrew word, and so transcribed it in Greek letters, leads us to
conclude that these translators permitted themselves to be guided by Isa
38, and omitted here also the copula, which was there omitted before
עגוּר.

מועדים are the fixed times for the arrival and departure of the birds of
passage.

[Jeremiah 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 8:8</span></span>

In spite of this heedlessness of the statutes, the judgment of God, they
vainly boast in their knowledge and possession of God's law. Those who
said, We are wise, are mainly the priests and false prophets; cf. [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010), [Jer
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008); [Jer
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#031). The wisdom these people claimed
for themselves is, as the following clause shows, the knowledge of the
law. They prided themselves on possessing the law, from which they
conceived themselves to have drawn their wisdom. The second clause, as
Hitz. observed, shows that it is the written law that is meant. The law
is with us. This is not to be understood merely of the outward
possession of it, but the inward, appropriated knowledge, the mastery of
the law. The law of Jahveh, recorded in the Pentateuch, teaches not only
the bearing towards God due by man, but the bearing of God towards His
people. The knowledge of this law begets the wisdom for ruling one's
life, tells how God is to be worshipped, how His favour is to be
procured and His anger appeased.

As against all this, Jeremiah declares: Assuredly the lying pen (style)
of the scribes hath made it a lie. Ew., Hitz., Graf, translate ספרים,
authors, writers; and the two latter of them take עשׂה = labour: "for a
lie (or for deception) hath the lying style (pen) of the writers
laboured." This transl. is feasible; but it seems simpler to supply
'תּורת יי: hath made it (the law); and there is no good reason for
confining סופר to the original composers of works. The words are not to
be limited in their reference to the efforts of the false prophets, who
spread their delusive prophecies by means of writings: they refer
equally to the work of the priests, whose duty it was to train the
people in the law, and who, by false teaching as to its demands, led the
people astray, seduced them from the way of truth, and deceived them as
to the future. The labours both of the false prophets and of the wicked
priests consisted not merely in authorship, in composing and circulating
writings, but to a very great extent in the oral teaching of the people,
partly by prophetic announcements, partly by instruction in the law;
only in so far as it was necessary was it their duty to set down in
writing and circulate their prophecies and interpretations of the law.
But this work by word and writing was founded on the existing written
law, the Torah of Moses; just as the true prophets sought to influence
the people chiefly by preaching the law to them, by examining their
deeds and habits by the rule of the divine will as revealed in the
Torah, and by applying to their times the law's promises and
threatenings. For this work with the law, and application of it to life,
Jer. uses the expression "style of the Shoferim," because the
interpretation of the law, if it was to have valid authority as the rule
of life, must be fixed by writing. Yet he did not in this speak only of
authors, composers, but meant such as busied themselves about the book
of the law, made it the object of their study. But inasmuch as such
persons, by false interpretation and application, perverted the truth of
the law into a lie, he calls their work the work of the lying style
(pen).

[Jeremiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 8:9</span></span>

Those who held themselves wise will come to shame, will be dismally
disabused of their hopes. When the great calamity comes on the
sin-hardened people, they shall be confounded and overwhelmed in ruin
(cf. [Jer 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011)). They spurn at the
word of Jahveh; whose wisdom then have they? None; for the word of the
Lord alone is Israel's wisdom and understanding, [Deu
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006).

The threatening in [Jer 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010) includes
not only the wise ones, but the whole people. "Therefore" attaches to
the central truth of [Jer 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005) and [Jer
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006), which has been elucidated in [Jer
8:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007). The first half of [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010) corresponds, in shorter compass,
to what has been said in [Jer 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#012),
and is here continued in [Jer 8:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010)
in the same words as in [Jer 6:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013).
יורשׁים are those who take possession, make themselves masters of a
thing, as in [Jer 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#002) and [Mic
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015). This repetition of the three
verses is not given in the lxx, and Hitz. therefore proposes to delete
them as a supplementary interpolation, holding that they are not only
superfluous, but that they interrupt the sense. For he thinks [Jer
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013) connects remarkably well with
[Jer 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010), but, taken out of its
connection with what precedes as we have it, begins baldly enough. To
this Graf has made fitting answer: This passage is in no respect more
superfluous or awkward than [Jer
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013).; nor is the connection of [Jer
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013) with [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010) at all closer than with [Jer
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#012). And Hitz., in order to defend
the immediate connection between [Jer
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013) and [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010), sees himself compelled, for the
restoration of equilibrium, to delete the middle part of [Jer
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013) (from "no grapes" to "withered")
as spurious; for which proceeding there is not the smallest reason,
since this passage has neither the character of an explanatory gloss,
nor is it a repetition from any place whatever, nor is it awanting in
the lxx. Just as little ground is there to argue against the genuineness
of the two passages from the variations found in them. Here in [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010) we have מקּטן ועד־גּדול instead
of the מקּטנּםof [Jer 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013); but the
suffix, which in the latter case pointed to the preceding "inhabitants
of the land," was unnecessary here, where there is no such reference. In
like manner, the forms הכּלם for הכלים, and עת פּקדּתם for עת־פּקדתּים,
are but the more usual forms used by Jeremiah elsewhere. So the omission
of the א in ירפּוּ for ירפּאוּ, as coming either from the writer or the
copyist, clearly does not make against the genuineness of the verses.
And there is the less reason for making any difficulty about the
passage, seeing that such repetitions are amongst the peculiarities of
Jeremiah's style: cf. e.g., [Jer
7:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031) with [Jer
19:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#005); [Jer
10:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#012) with [Jer
51:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#015); [Jer
15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013), with [Jer
17:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003); [Jer
16:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#014), with [Jer
23:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#007), [Jer
23:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005), with [Jer
33:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015); [Jer
23:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#019), with [Jer
30:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#023), and other shorter
repetitions.

[Jeremiah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 8:13</span></span>

The warning of coming punishment, reiterated from a former discourse, is
strengthened by the threatening that God will sweep them utterly away,
because Judah has become an unfruitful vine and fig-tree. In אסף we have
a combination of אסף, gather, glean, carry away, and הסיף, Niph. of
סוּף, make an end, sweep off, so as to heighten the sense, as in [Zep
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001). - a passage which was doubtless
in the prophet's mind: wholly will I sweep them away. The circumstantial
clauses: no grapes - and the leaves are withered, show the cause of the
threatening: The people is become an unfruitful vine and fig-tree, whose
leaves are withered. Israel was a vineyard the Lord had planted with
noble vines, but which brought forth sour grapes, [Jer
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021); [Isa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002). In keeping with this figure,
Israel is thought of as a vine on which are no grapes. With this is
joined the like figure of a fig-tree, to which Micah in [Mic
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001) makes allusion, and which is
applied by Christ to the degenerate race of His own time in His
symbolical act of cursing the fig-tree ([Mat
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#019)). To exhaust the thought that
Judah is ripe for judgment, it is further added that the leaves are
withered. The tree whose leaves are withered, is near being parched
throughout. Such a tree was the people of Judah, fallen away from its
God, spurning at the law of the Lord; in contrast with which, the man
who trusts in the Lord, and has delight in the law of the Lord, is like
the tree planted by the water, whose leaves are ever green, and which
bringeth forth fruit in his season, [Jer
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008); [Psa
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001). Ros. and Mov. are quite wrong
in following the Chald., and in taking the circumstantial clauses as a
description of the future; Mov. even proceeds to change אסף אסיפם into
אסף . The interpretation of the last clause is a disputed point. Ew.,
following the old translators (Chald., Syr., Aq., Symm., Vulg.; in the
lxx they are omitted), understands the words of the transgression of the
commands of God, which they seem to have received only in order to break
them. ואתּן seems to tell in favour of this, and it may be taken as
praeter. with the translation: and I gave to them that which they
transgress. But unless we are to admit that the idea thus obtained
stands quite abruptly, we must follow the Chald., and take it as the
reason of what precedes: They are become an unfruitful tree with faded
leaves, because they have transgressed my law which I gave them. But
ואתּן with ו consec. goes directly against this construction. Of less
weight is the other objection against this view, that the plural suffix
in יעברוּם has no suitable antecedent; for there could be no difficulty
in supplying "judgments" (cf. [Jer
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008)). But the abrupt appearance of the
thought, wholly unlooked for here, is sufficient to exclude that
interpretation. We therefore prefer the other interpretation, given with
various modifications by Ven., Rose., and Maur., and translate: so I
appoint unto them those that shall pass over them. The imperf. c. ו
consec. attaches itself to the circumstantial clauses, and introduces
the resulting consequence; it is therefore to be expressed in English by
the present, not by the praeter.: therefore I gave them (Ng.). נתן in
the general sig. appoint, and the second verb with the pron. rel.
omitted: illos qui eos invadent. עבר, to overrun a country or people, of
a hostile army swarming over it, as e.g., [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008); [Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015). For the construction c. accus.
cf. [Jer 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009); [Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022). Hitz.'s and Graf's mode of
construction is forced: I deliver them up to them (to those) who pass
over them; for then we must not only supply an object to אתּן, but adopt
the unusual arrangement by which the pronoun להם is made to stand before
the words that explain it.

[Jeremiah 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 8:14</span></span>

The horrors of the approaching visitation. - [Jer
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014). "Why do we sit still? Assemble
yourselves, and let us go into the defenced cities, and perish there;
for Jahveh our God hath decreed our ruin, and given us water of gall to
drink, because we have sinned against Jahveh. [Jer
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#015). We looked for safety, and there
is no good; for a time of healing, and behold terrors. [Jer
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016). From Dan is heard the snorting
of his horses; at the loud neighing of his steeds the whole earth
trembles: they come, and devour the land and its fulness, the city and
those that dwell therein. [Jer 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017).
For, behold, I send among you serpents, vipers, of which there is no
charming, which shall sting you, saith Jahve. [Jer
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018). Oh my comfort in sorrow, in me
my heart grows too sock. [Jer 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#019).
Behold, loud sounds the cry of the daughter from out of a far country:
'Is Jahveh not in Zion, nor her King in her?' Why provoked they me with
their images, with vanities of a foreign land? [Jer
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#020). Past is the harvest, ended is
the fruit-gathering, and we are not saved. [Jer
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#021). For the breaking of the daughter
of my people am I broken, am in mourning; horror hath taken hold on me.
[Jer 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022). Is there no balm in Gilead,
or no physician there? why then is no plaister laid upon the daughter of
my people? V. 23. Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain
of tears! then would I weep day and night for the slain of the daughter
of my people."

In spirit the prophet sees the enemy forcing his way into the country,
and the inhabitants fleeing into the fortified cities. This he
represents to his hearers with graphic and dramatic effect. In [Jer
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014) the citizens of Judah are made to
speak, calling on one another to flee and give up hope of being saved.
"Why do we sit still?" i.e., remain calmly where we are? We will
withdraw into the strong cities (cf. [Jer
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005)), and perish there by famine and
disease (נדּמה for נדּמּה, imperf. Niph., from דּמם: cf. Gesen. 67, 5,
Rem. 11; in Niph. be destroyed, perish). The fortresses cannot save them
from ruin, since they will be besieged and taken by the enemy. For our
sin against Him, God has decreed our ruin. The Hiph. from דמם, prop. put
to silence, bring to ruin, here with the force of a decree. מי ראשׁ,
bitter waters; ראשׁ or רושׁ, [Deu
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032), is a plant with a very bitter
taste, and so, since bitterness and poison were to the Jews closely
connected, a poisonous plant; see on [Deu
29:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017). So they call the bitter
suffering from the ruin at hand which they must undergo. Cf. the similar
figure of the cup of the anger of Jahveh, [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015).

[Jer 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#015)

Instead of peace and safety hoped for, there is calamity and terror. The
infin. abs. קוּה is used emphatically for the imperf.: We looked for
safety, and no good has come to us: for healing, sc. of our injuries,
and instead comes terror, by reason of the appearance of the foe in the
land. This hope has been awakened and cherished in the people by false
prophets (see on [Jer 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010)), and now,
to their sore suffering, they must feel the contrary of it. The same
idea is repeated in [Jer 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019). מרפּה
is a mis-spelling of מרפּא, [Jer
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019), etc.

[Jer 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016)

From the northern borders of Canaan (from Dan; see on [Jer
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#015)) is already heard the dreadful
tumult of the advancing enemy, the snorting of his horses. The suffix in
סוּסיו refers to the enemy, whose invasion is threatened in [Jer
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022), and is here presumed as known.
אבּיריו, his strong ones, here, as in [Jer
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#003); [Jer
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011), a poetical name for strong
horses, stallions; elsewhere for strong animals, e.g., [Psa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013); [Psa
50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013). The whole earth, not the whole
land. With "devour the land," cf. [Jer
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#017). עיר and ארץ have an indefinite
comprehensive force; town and country on which the enemy is marching.

[Jer 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017)

The terribleness of these enemies is heightened by a new figure. They
are compared to snakes of the most venomous description, which cannot be
made innocuous by any charming, whose sting is fatal. "Vipers" is in
apposition to "serpents;" serpents, namely basilisks. צפעני is, acc. to
Aq. and Vulg. on [Isa 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#008), serpens
regulus, the basilisk, a small and very venomous species of viper, of
which there is no charming. Cf. for the figure, Cant. 10:11; and fore
the enemies' cruelty thereby expressed, cf. [Jer
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#023); [Isa
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#018).

[Jer 8:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018)

The hopeless ruin of his people cuts the prophet to the very heart. In
[Jer 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018) -23 his sore oppressed heart
finds itself vent in bitter lamentations. Oh my comfort in sorrow! is
the cry of sore affliction. This may be seen from the second half of the
verse, the sense of which is clear: sick (faint) is my heart upon me.
עלי shows that the sickness of heart is a sore burden on him, crushes
him down; cf. Ew. 217, i. "My comfort" is accordingly vocative: Oh my
comfort concerning the sorrow! Usually מי יתּן is supplied: Oh that I
had, that there were for me comfort! The sense suits, but the ellipse is
without parallel. It is simpler to take the words as an exclamation: the
special force of it, that he knows not when to seek comfort, may be
gathered from the context. For other far-fetched explanations, see in
Ros. ad h. l. The grief which cuts so deeply into his heart that he
sighs for relief, is caused by his already hearing in spirit the
mourning cry of his people as they go away into captivity.

[Jer 8:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#019)

From a far country he hears the people complain: Is Jahveh not in Zion?
is He no longer the King of His people there? The suffix in מלכּהּ
refers to "daughter of my people," and the King is Jahveh; cf. [Isa
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#022). They ask whether Jahveh is no
longer King in Zion, that He may release His people from captivity and
bring them back to Zion. To this the voice of God replies with the
counter-question: Why have they provoked me with their idolatry, sc. so
that I had to give them over into the power of the heathen for
punishment? "Images" is expounded by the apposition: vanities (no-gods;
for הבל, see on [Jer 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005)) of a foreign
land. Because they have chosen the empty idols from abroad ([Isa
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#022)) as their gods, Jahveh, the
almighty God of Zion, has cast them out into a far country amidst
strange people. The people goes on to complain in [Jer
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#020) : Past is the harvest...and we
are not saved. As Schnur. remarked, these words have something of the
proverb about them. As a country-man, hoping for a good harvest, falls
into despair as to his chances, so the people have been in vain looking
for its rescue and deliverance. The events, or combinations of events,
to which it looked for its rescue are gone by without bringing any such
result. Many ancient commentators, following Rashi, have given too
special a significance to this verse in applying it to the assistance
expected from Egypt in the time of Jehoiakim or Zedekiah. Hitz. is yet
more mistaken when he takes the saying to refer to an unproductive
harvest. From [Jer 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#019) we see that
the words are spoken by the people while it pines in exile, which sets
its hopes of being saved not in the productiveness of the harvest, but
in a happy turn of the political situation.

[Jer 8:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#021)

The hopeless case of the people and kingdom moves the seer so deeply,
that he bursts forth with the cry: For the breaking of my people I am
broken (the Hoph. השׁבּרתּי, of the breaking of the heart, only here; in
this sig. usu. the Niph., e.g., [Jer
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#007). Horror hath taken hold on me, is
stronger than: Anguish hath taken hold on me, [Jer
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#024), [Mic
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009). Help is nowhere to be found. This
thought is in [Jer 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022) clothed in the
question: Is there no balm in Gilead, or no physician there? "There"
points back to Gilead. Graf's remark, that "it is not known that the
physicians were got from that quarter," shows nothing more than that its
author has mistaken the figurative force of the words. צרי, balsam, is
mentioned in [Gen 37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025) as an article
of commerce carried by Midianite merchants to Egypt (cf. [Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017)), but is hardly the real balsam
from Mecca (amyris opobalsamum), which during the Roman sovereignty was
grown under culture in the gardens of Jericho, and which only succeeds
in a climate little short of tropical. It was more likely the resina of
the ancients, a gum procured from the terebinth or mastic tree
(lentiscus, σχῖνος), which, acc. to Plin. h. nat. xxiv. 22, was held in
esteem as a medicament for wounds (resolvitur resina ad vulnerum usus et
malagmata oleo). Acc. to our passage and [Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011), cf. [Gen
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025), it was procured chiefly from
Gilead; cf. Movers, Phniz. ii. 3, S. 220ff., and the remarks on [Gen
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025). To these questions a negative
answer is given. From this we explain the introduction of a further
question with כּי: if there were balm in Gilead, and a physician there,
then a plaister would have been laid on the daughter of my people, which
is not the case. As to עלתה , lit., a plaister comes upon, see on [Jer
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#017).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 9](jer009)

</div>
