<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer045)  [Next](jer047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 46:0</span></span>

IV\. Prophecies Directed Against Foreign Nations - Jeremiah 46-51

Like Amos, Isaiah, and Ezekiel, Jeremiah has uttered predictions
concerning a number of heathen nations, and incorporated them with the
collection of his prophecies regarding Judah and Israel. But while in
Amos the utterances regarding six nations round about the kingdom of
God, as representatives of the whole heathen world, merely pave the way
for announcing judgment on Judah and Israel, and are given for the
purpose of teaching the necessity for judgment on the whole world that
is opposed to God, in order that the kingdom of God may be advanced;
Isaiah, on the other hand, when the power of Assyria appeared against
the kingdom of God, brought forward the thought, in a pretty long series
of oracles against the nations, Jer 13-23, that all kingdoms and
peoples, cities and men of the world that had apostatized from God, and
still continued in apostasy, shall be humbled, and compelled by
judgments inflicted on them to seek refuge with the God of Israel, - to
submit to Him, and to offer their gifts for the establishment of His
kingdom; and he concludes this announcement with an apocalyptic
description of the judgment on the whole earth, and the consummation of
the kingdom of God in glory, Jer 24-27. The object aimed at by Ezekiel
and Jeremiah in their oracles against the heathen nations is more
specific. Ezekiel, in view of the destruction of Jerusalem and the
kingdom of Judah, directs a series of oracles against seven nations; and
in these addresses he predicts the destruction of the heathen world, and
the fall of all heathen powers into Sheol, in order that these may not
exult over the fall of the people of God, but rather, in the judgment on
Israel, recognise the omnipotence and justice of the Lord, the Judge of
all the earth. And Jeremiah, in his addresses to the nations, Jer 46-51,
merely brings out more fully the execution of that sentence which he had
already proclaimed (Jer 25) to all the peoples and kingdoms of the
earth, shortly before the appearance of Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon in the fourth year of Jehoiakim's reign. The multitude of
nations and tribes, far and near, to which, in [Jer
25:17-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#017), he gives the cup of the
divine wrath out of Jahveh's hand, is in Jer 46-51 reduced to nine
nations; and these are named in such order, that here, as there (Jer
25), Egypt heads the list (Jer 46), while Babylon closes it (Jer 50;
51). Of the rest of these nations, those related to Israel, viz.,
Moabites, Ammonites, and Edomites, have special prophecies addressed to
them, Jer 48 and Jer 49:1-22; but the others are more summarily
addressed. Thus, in the oracle pronounced against the Philistines, the
Phoenicians also (Tyre and Sidon) are threatened with extermination
([Jer 47:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)); the many Arabian tribes
severally named in Jer 25 are comprehended under the general
designations "Kedar" and "the kingdoms of Hazor" ([Jer
49:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028)); while the kingdoms of the
north are represented by Damascus ([Jer
49:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023)), and the distant nations of
the east (Media and Elam) by Elam, [Jer
49:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034).

Ewald, Hitzig, Graf, and Ngelsbach would account for several smaller
nations being taken together in one prophecy, on the ground that the
prophet wished to make out the significant number seven, - just as Amos
(Amos 1:1-2:5) brings forward seven kingdoms before his address is
directed to Israel, and as Ezekiel also has arranged his prophecies
against the nations in accordance with the number seven. But though the
number seven plainly appears in Amos and Ezekiel, such an assumption
cannot be established in the case of Jeremiah. To make out this number,
the oracles against Elam and Babylon are viewed as later additions, on
the ground that both of them are connected with the first years of the
reign of Zedekiah. But the assertion that the first seven belong to the
fourth year of Jehoiakim cannot be proved. The second prophecy regarding
Egypt ([Jer 46:14-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)), and that
against the Philistines ([Jer 47:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)),
contain, in their headings, indications of the time of composition,
which do not point to the fourth year of Jehoiakim. With this also
accords the remark further brought to bear on the alleged composition of
those seven prophecies in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, - that this
follows, not merely from the general agreement of their contents with
Jer 46 as well as with Jer 25, but also from the fact that "the same
expressions which the prophet uses in Jer 25 with reference to the
judgment of all nations, are re-echoed in Jer 46-49:33: e.g., cf [Jer
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#031), [Jer
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034), with [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010); [Jer
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#035) with [Jer
46:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005); [Jer
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#029), [Jer
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#031), with [Jer
47:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#006); and particularly [Jer
25:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#028), with [Jer
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012) (Caspari on Obadiah, p. 16): cf.
also [Jer 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#027) with [Jer
48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026); [Jer
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030) with [Jer
48:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#033); [Jer
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#034) with [Jer
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#020); [Jer
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038) with [Jer
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019) and [Jer
46:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#016)." For, of all these passages,
none belongs to the second prophecy against Egypt ([Jer
46:14-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)), and to that against the
Philistines ([Jer 47:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)), except the
last-quoted passage, [Jer 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#016), in
which the expression חרב agrees with [Jer
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038), if in the latter passage we
read חרב for חרון. But this expression is also repeated in the oracle
against Babylon, [Jer 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#016); so that
no proof can be drawn, from a consideration of the language employed, to
show that the prophecies against Egypt ([Jer
46:14-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)) and against the Philistines
([Jer 47:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)) belong to the same time,
as has been supposed. And the assertion that the prophecy against Elam
forms an appendix to those which precede, could have been made only by a
mind in a state of perplexity. Its position, after that against the
Arabian tribes, and before that against Babylon, exactly agrees with the
place occupied by Elam in [Jer 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#005).

(Note: From the above statement, the propriety and correctness of
arrangement among these oracles in the Hebrew text will both be
apparent. On the other hand, the transposition made in the Greek text of
the lxx (already referred to in the note on p. 22) is characterized,
even by Ewald and Hitzig, as "arbitrary" and "incorrect." Ewald remarks:
"We cannot find that any other principle was acted upon in their
arrangement than that the large portion about Babylon, Jer 50ff., should
be made as prominent as possible; the small piece about the Elamites
which precedes it, [Jer 49:34-39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034), was
put the very first, probably because it was thought desirable that,
seeing they were then under Persian rule, what plainly referred to
Persia should be made conspicuous; the portion directed against the
Babylonians was then placed immediately after that referring to Egypt;
that referring to the Philistines was then put in its place, but that
referring to Edom, as being longer, was inserted after it; then the
three small pieces on Ammon, Kedar, and Damascus were put together,
while the large one about Moab concluded this much-distorted series."
But the assertion of Movers and Hitzig - that this arrangement in the
Greek text did not originate with the translator, but was found in the
original, and that, too (according to Movers), at the time of
Alexander's campaign against Persia - rests on critical conjectures
regarding [Jer 46:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027), which are
decidedly erroneous. Moreover, the insertion of these oracles into the
middle of Jer 25, between [Jer 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#013)
and [Jer 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015), in the lxx text, is
due to the arbitrary conduct of the Alexandrine translator, as even
Hitzig allows that whoever arranged the chapter did not find it in a
fragmentary condition, but had himself dismembered it. Yet Hitzig is of
opinion that these oracles originally belonged to somewhere about Jer
25, - a view that rests on grounds which, in the note on p. 233, we have
already shown to be untenable.)

When we examine the contents of these nine oracles, we find that the one
against Babylon differs from all the preceding in this, that it
announces not merely the ruin of Babylon, but also the salvation of
Israel; but this peculiarity is the very point in which it agrees with
the prophecies against Egypt, of which the second ends with a promise in
Israel's favour ([Jer 46:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027)). This
correspondence shows us that we cannot separate the prophecy regarding
Babylon from the others, or even place it in contrast with them. Egypt
and Babylon were, at that time, the two great powers of this world which
sought to oppress and destroy the kingdom of God. The fall of one or the
other of these powers was thus for Israel a pledge that they would be
preserved and saved. In the remaining oracles, the reference to the
theocracy is quite placed in the background. Only in that against Ammon
do we meet with the complaint that it had taken possession of the cities
of Israel, as if Israel had no heir ([Jer
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001)). In the others there is no
mention made of offence against the theocracy, but only of pride,
arrogance, and carnal reliance on their earthly power, for which they
shall be humbled and punished. Further, it is to be observed that the
oracles against Egypt, Moab, Ammon, and Elam conclude with the promise
of restoration at the end of the days, i.e., in the Messianic future
(cf. [Jer 46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026); [Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047); [Jer
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#006) and [Jer
49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039)). All these things plainly show
that these oracles against the people merely repeat, in greater detail,
the sentence already pronounced, Jer 25, against all nations: God the
Lord has appointed the king of Babylon to execute this sentence, and for
this end will give him, in the immediate future, and till his appointed
time shall end, supremacy over the nations; after that, Babylon also
shall succumb to the sentence of ruin passed on it; and for Israel, with
the deliverance from Babylon, there will arise a state of prosperity in
which all nations will afterwards participate. In giving details with
regard to these announcements of judgment, Jeremiah throughout falls
back on the expressions of the older prophet, just as he does in his
prophecies regarding Israel and Judah; these expressions he reproduces
in a manner suited to the circumstances of his time, and still further
developes. Cf. the collection of these references in Kueper on Jeremiah,
p. 79ff.; see further the proofs given in the following commentary on
each particular case.

[Jeremiah 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 46:1</span></span>

Superscriptions. - [Jer 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001) contains
the title for the whole collection of prophecies regarding the nations
(הגּוים, as contrasted with Israel, mean the heathen nations), Jer
46-51. As to the formula, "What came as the word of Jahveh to Jeremiah,"
etc., cf. the remarks on [Jer 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001). -
In [Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002), the special heading of
this chapter begins with the word מצרים .למצרים is subordinated by ל to
the general title, - properly, "with regard to Egypt:" cf. למואב, etc.,
[Jer 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001); [Jer
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001), [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007),[Jer
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023), [Jer
49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028), also [Jer
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009). This chapter contains two
prophecies regarding Egypt, [Jer
46:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002), and vv. 13-28. למצרים refers
to both. After this there follows an account of the occasion for the
first of these two prophecies, in the words, "Concerning the army of
Pharaoh-Necho, the king of Egypt, which was at the river Euphrates, near
Carchemish, which Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon smote in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah." נכו, as in [Ch2
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#020), or נכּה, as in [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029), in lxx Νεχαώ; Egyptian,
according to Brugsch (Hist. d'Egypte, i. p. 252), Nekaaou; in Herodotus
Νεκώς, - is said by Manetho to have been the sixth king of the
twenty-sixth (Sate) dynasty, the second Pharaoh of this name, the son of
Psammetichus I, and grandson of Necho I. Brugsch says he reigned from
611 to 595 b.c. See on 2 Chr. 23:29. The two relative clauses are
co-ordinate, i.e., אשׁר in each case depends on חיל. The first clause
merely states where Pharaoh's army was, the second tells what befall it
at the Euphrates. It is to this that the following prophecy refers.
Pharaoh-Necho, soon after ascending the throne, in the last year of
Josiah's reign (610 b.c.), had landed in Palestine, at the bay of Acre,
with the view of subjugating Hither Asia as far as the Euphrates, and
had defeated the slain King Josiah, who marched out against him. He next
deposed Jehoahaz, whom the people had raised to the throne as Josiah's
successor, and carried him to Egypt, after having substituted Eliakim,
the elder brother of Jehoahaz, and made him his vassal-king, under the
name of Jehoiakim. When he had thus laid Judah under tribute, he
advanced farther into Syria, towards the Euphrates, and had reached
Carchemish on that river, as is stated in this verse: there his army was
defeated by Nebuchadnezzar, in the fourth year of the reign of Jehoiakim
(606 b.c.); see on [Kg2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029).
Carchemish is Κιρκήσιον, Circesium, or Cercusium of the classical
writers,

(Note: See the opinion of Rawlinson in Smith's Bible Dictionary, vol. i.
p. 278. - Tr.)

Arabic karqi=si=yat, a fortified city at the junction of the Chebar with
the Euphrates, built on the peninsula formed by the two rivers (Ammian.
Marc. xxiii. 5, Procop. bell. Pers. ii. 5, and Maras. under Karkesija).
All that now remains of it are ruins, called by the modern Arabs Abu
Psera, and situated on the Mesopotamian side of the Euphrates, where
that river is joined by the Chebar (Ausland, 1864, S. 1058). This
fortress was either taken, or at least besieged, by Necho. The
statement, "in the fourth year of Jehoiakim," can be referred
exegetically only to the time of the defeat of the Egyptians at
Carchemish, or the year of the battle, and is actually so understood by
most interpreters. No one but Niebuhr (Gesch. Ass. u. Babl. S. 59, 86,
370ff.) alters the date of the battle, which he places in the third year
of Jehoiakim, partly from consideration of [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001), partly from other chronological
calculations; he would refer the date given in our verse to the time
when the following song was composed or published. But [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001) does not necessarily require us to
make any such assumption (see on that passage), and the other
chronological computations are quite uncertain. Exegetically, it is as
impossible to insert a period after "which Nebuchadnezzar the king of
Babylon smote" (Nieb. p. 86, note 3), as to connect the date "in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim" with "which word came to Jeremiah" ([Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010)). The title in [Jer
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001) certainly does not refer
specially to the prophecy about Egypt, but to על־הגּוים. But if we
wished to make the whole of [Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002)
dependent on 'אשׁר היה דבר , which would, at all events, be a forced,
unnatural construction, then, from the combination of the title in [Jer
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001) with the specification of time at
the end of [Jer 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#002), it would follow
that all the prophecies regarding the nations had come to Jeremiah in
the fourth year of Jehoiakim, - which would contradict what is said in
the heading to the oracle against Elam ([Jer
49:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#034)), not to mention the oracle
against Babylon.

Moreover, there is nothing to prevent us from assuming that the first
prophecy against Egypt was revealed to Jeremiah, and uttered by him, in
the same fourth year of Jehoiakim in which Necho was defeated by
Nebuchadnezzar. In this way, the argument brought forward by Niebuhr in
support of his forced interpretation, viz., that all specifications of
time in the addresses of Jeremiah refer to the period of composition,
loses all its force. In [Jer 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001)
also, and in [Jer 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#009), the time when
the event occurred coincides with the time when the utterance regarding
it was pronounced. Although we assume this to hold in the case before
us, yet it by no means follows that what succeeds, in [Jer
46:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003), is not a prophecy, but a song
or lyric celebrating so important a battle, "the picture of an event
that had already occurred," as Niebuhr, Ewald, and Hitzig assume. This
neither follows from the statement in the title, "which Nebuchadnezzar
in the fourth year of Jehoiakim smote," nor from the contents of the
succeeding address. The superscription does not naturally belong to what
Jeremiah has said or uttered, but must have been prefixed, for the first
time, only when the address was committed to writing and inserted in the
collection, and this not till after the battle had been fought; but it
is evident that the address is to be viewed as substantially a prophecy
(see [Jer 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#006) and [Jer
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010)), although Jeremiah depicts, in
the most lively and dramatic way, not merely the preparation of the
mighty host, [Jer 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003), and its
formidable advance, [Jer 46:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007), but
also its flight and annihilation, in [Jer
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005) and in [Jer
46:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010).

[Jeremiah 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 46:3</span></span>

"Prepare shield and target, and advance to the battle. [Jer
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#004). Yoke the horses \[to the
chariots\]; mount the steeds, and stand with helmets on; polish the
spears, put on the armour. [Jer 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005).
Why do I see? they are terrified and turned back, and their heroes are
beaten, and flee in flight, and do not turn: terror is round about,
saith Jahveh. [Jer 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#006). Let not the
swift one flee, nor let the hero escape; towards the north, by the side
of the river Euphrates, they stumble and fall. [Jer
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007). Who is this that cometh up like
the Nile? his waters wave like the rivers. [Jer
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#008). Egypt cometh up like the Nile,
\[his\] waters are moved like the rivers; and he saith, I will go up, I
will cover the earth; I will destroy the city, and those who dwell in
it. [Jer 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009). Go up, ye horses; and
drive furiously, ye chariots; and let the heroes go forth; Cushites and
Phutites, bearing the shield; and Lydians, handling \[and\] bending the
bow. [Jer 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010). But that day
\[belongs\] to the Lord Jahveh of hosts, a day of vengeance for avenging
Himself on His enemies: and the sword shall devour and be satisfied, and
shall drink its fill of their blood; for the Lord Jahveh of hosts
holdeth a slaying of sacrifices in the land of the north at the river
Euphrates. [Jer 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011). Go up to
Gilead, and take balsam, O virgin, daughter of Egypt: in vain hast thou
multiplied medicines; cure there is none for thee. [Jer
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#012). The nations have heard of thine
ignominy, and thy cry hath filled the earth: for heroes stumble against
heroes, both of them fall together."

This address falls into two strophes, [Jer
46:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003) and [Jer
46:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007). In both are depicted in a
lively manner, first the advance of the Egyptian host to the battle,
then their flight and destruction. The whole has been arranged so as to
form a climax: in the first strophe, the admirable equipment of the
armies, and their sudden flight and defeat, are set forth in brief
sentences; in the second, there is fully described not merely the
powerful advance of the host that covers the earth, but also the
judgment of inevitable destruction passed on them by God: the reason for
the whole is also assigned. [Jer 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003).
In order to represent the matter in a lively way, the description begins
with the call addressed to the army, to make ready for the battle. "Make
ready shield and target," the two main pieces of defensive armour. מגן
was the small \[round\] shield; צנּה, scutum, the large shield, covering
the whole body. "Advance to the fight," i.e., go forward into the
battle. Then the address turns to the several portions of the army:
first to those who fight from chariots, who are to yoke the horses; then
to the horsemen, to mount the steeds. פּרשׁים are not horsemen, but
riding-horses, as in [Kg1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006); [Kg1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#026); [Eze
27:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#014). עלה is construed with the
accus., as in [Gen 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004). The rendering
given by Dahler and Umbreit, "Mount, ye horsemen," and that of Hitzig,
"Advance, ye horsemen," are against the parallelism; and the remark of
the last-named writer, that "Mount the steeds" would be רכבוּ, does not
accord with [Sa1 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#017). Next, the
address is directed to the foot-soldiers, who formed the main portion of
the army. These are to take up their position with helmets on, to polish
the spears, i.e., to sharpen them, and to put on the pieces of armour,
in order to be arrayed for battle. מרק, to rub, polish, remove rust from
the spear, and thereby sharpen it. סריון, here and in [Jer
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#003) for שׁריון, a coat of mail,
pieces of armour.

[Jeremiah 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 46:5</span></span>

Thus well arrayed, the host advances to the fight; but suddenly the seer
perceives the magnificent army terror-stricken, retreating, and breaking
out into a disorderly flight. The question, "Why (wherefore) do I see?"
points to the unexpected and incomprehensible turn in the progress of
events. המּה חתּים is not an accus. dependent on ראיתי, but an
independent clause: "What do I see? They are terror-stricken" (חתּים,
terrified, broken-spirited through terror). יכּתּוּ, Hoph. from כּתת, to
be broken, here and in [Job 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#020)
applied to persons. מנוס is added to the verb instead of the inf. abs.,
to give emphasis to the idea contained in the word; cf. Ewald, 281, a.
מגור מסּביב .a , "horror, terror around" (cf. [Jer
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#025)), is taken by Ewald as the reply
of Jahveh to the question, "Wherefore is this? On every side there is
danger;" and this is appropriately followed by the imperatives in [Jer
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#006), "Let no one, then, attempt to
flee; not one shall escape to Egypt, but they must fall at the
Euphrates." The perfects כּשׁלוּ ונפלוּ are prophetic; the stumbling and
falling are as certain as if they had already happened. The second
strophe commences at [Jer 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007). The
description begins anew, and that with a question of astonishment at the
mighty host advancing like the Nile when it bursts its banks and
inundates the whole country. יאר is the name of the Nile, taken from the
Egyptian into the Hebrew language; cf. Gen. 41ff., [Exo
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#022), etc. התגּעשׁ, dash about ([Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022)), wave backwards and forwards:
the Hithpa. is here interchanged with the Hithpo. without any difference
of meaning.

[Jeremiah 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 46:8</span></span>

brings the answer to the question of astonishment: "Egypt approaches,
its hosts cover the land like the waves of the Nile, to destroy cities
and men." On the form אבידה (with א contracted from אא), cf. Ewald, 192,
d; Gesenius, 68, Rem. 1. עיר is used in an indefinite general sense,
"cities," as in [Jer 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016). - In [Jer
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009), the imperat. stands as in [Jer
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003).: "Let the formidable army
approach, - cavalry, chariots, and infantry, with all their splendidly
equipped auxiliaries, - nevertheless it shall perish." עלוּ הסּוּסים
does not here mean "Mount the steeds," which is against the parallelism,
but "Get up (i.e., prance), ye horses;" this meaning is guaranteed by
the Hiphil מעלה, as used in [Nah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#003).
התהללוּ הרכב is an imitation of [Nah
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005). As auxiliaries, and very brave
ones too (גבּורים), are mentioned "Cush," i.e., the Ethiopians; "Phut,"
the Libyans; and "Ludim," i.e., Hamitic, African Lydians, as in [Eze
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005). On the double construct in
תּפשׂי דר, "holding, bending bows," cf. Ew. 280, c.

[Jeremiah 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 46:10</span></span>

This formidable army shall perish; for the day of the battle is the day
of the Lord of hosts, on which He will take vengeance upon His enemies.
Among these enemies are the Egyptians, who have grievously sinned
against Israel, the people of the Lord, not merely of late, by making
war upon and killing King Josiah, by carrying away Jehoahaz, and making
Jehoiakim his vassal, but also from the earliest times. For this, Egypt
is now to be brought low. The sword shall devour and be refreshed by
drinking the blood of the Egyptians. For the Lord is preparing for a
slaying of sacrifices (זבח) in the north, at the Euphrates. [Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006) forms the basis of these words.

[Jeremiah 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 46:11</span></span>

The blow which shall there come on the Egyptians is one from which they
shall never recover, and the wound shall be one not to be healed by any
balm. As to the balm of Gilead, see on [Jer
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022); on רפאות and תּעלה, see [Jer
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013). "Virgin daughter of Egypt" is
equivalent to virgin-like people of Egypt, i.e., not hitherto forced,
but now ravished, violated, so that all nations shall hear of the
dishonour done them, and their cry shall fill the whole earth, for (as
at the conclusion, the threat is added by way of confirmation) all the
heroes of Egypt stumble and fall. גּבּור בּגבּור, "hero against hero,"
i.e., one against another, or over the others, as usually happens in a
flight where confusion reigns; cf. Jer. 26:37.

[Jeremiah 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 46:13</span></span>

The second prophecy regarding Egypt, with a message for Israel attached
to it, was uttered after the preceding. This is evident even from the
superscription, [Jer 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#013) : "The word
which Jahveh spake to Jeremiah the prophet of the coming of
Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon to smite the land of Egypt." The
formula, "The word which," etc., agrees with that in [Jer
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#001); and דּבר, in contrast with היה,
the word usually met with in headings, perhaps means that this prophecy,
like that concerning Babylon, was not uttered in public by Jeremiah, but
only written down. לבוא is used in reference to the coming of
Nebuchadrezzar to smite the land. Graf puts down this heading as an
addition, not made till a late edition of the prophecies was brought
out, and even then added through a mistake on the part of the compiler.
In support of this, he urges that the announcement in [Jer
46:14-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014) does not form an independent
prophecy, but merely constitutes the second portion of the description
given in [Jer 46:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003) of the defeat of
the Egyptians. But the ground assigned for this view, viz., that if this
prophecy formed a separate and distinct piece, written at another time,
then Jeremiah would have predicted the conquest of the other countries,
Philistia, Moab, Ammon, etc., in consequence of the battle of
Carchemish; and as regards Egypt, would have contented himself with a
triumphal song over its fall - which is in itself unlikely: this
argument is utterly null. It has no meaning whatever; for [Jer
46:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003) contain, not a triumphal song
over a defeat that had already taken place, but a prophecy regarding the
defeat about to take place. To this the prophet added a second prophecy,
in which he once more announces beforehand to Egypt that it shall be
conquered. In this way, more is foretold regarding Egypt than the
neighbouring countries, because Egypt was of much greater consequence,
in relation to the theocracy, than Philistia, Moab, etc. According to
the superscription, this second prophecy refers to the conquest of Egypt
by Nebuchadnezzar. According to [Jer
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#005), this did not take place so long
as Zedekiah was king; and according to [Jer
43:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#008)., it was foretold by Jeremiah,
after the destruction of Jerusalem, when the Jews were fleeing to Egypt
after the murder of Gedaliah. From this, one might conclude, with
Ngelsbach, that the piece now before us is contemporaneous with [Jer
43:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#008). But this inference is not a
valid one. The threat uttered in [Jer
43:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#008). of a conquest to befall Egypt
had a special occasion of its own, and we cannot well regard it in any
other light than as a repetition of the prophecy now before us, for the
Jews; for its contents seem to show that it was composed not long after
that in [Jer 46:3-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#003), or soon after
the defeat of the Egyptians at Carchemish. This address also falls into
two strophes, [Jer 46:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014) and [Jer
46:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020), while [Jer
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027), [Jer
46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028) form an additional message for
Israel. The line of thought is this: Egypt may arm herself as she
chooses, but her power shall fall, and her auxiliaries shall flee ([Jer
46:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)). Pharaoh's fall is certain;
the enemy shall come in force, and turn all Egypt into a desert ([Jer
46:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017)). The destroyer comes from
the north, the mercenaries flee, and the enemy hews down countless hosts
of men like trees in a forest ([Jer
46:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020)). Egypt will be given into
the hand of the people out of the north; for Jahveh will punish gods,
princes, and people, and deliver up Egypt to the king of Babylon. But
afterwards, Egypt will again be inhabited as it was before ([Jer
46:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#024)). On the other hand, Israel
need fear nothing, for their God will lead them back out of their
captivity ([Jer 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027), [Jer
46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028)).

[Jer 46:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)

"Tell ye it in Egypt, and make it to be heard in Migdol, and make it be
heard in Noph and Tahpanhes: say, Stand firm, and prepare thee; for the
sword hath devoured around thee. [Jer
46:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#015). Why hath thy strong one been
swept away? he stood not, for Jahveh pushed him down. [Jer
46:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#016). He made many stumble, yea, one
fell on another; and they said, Arise, and let us return to our own
people, and to the land of our birth, from before the oppressing sword.
[Jer 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017). They cried there, Pharaoh
the king of Egypt is undone; he hath let the appointed time pass. [Jer
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#018). As I live, saith the King,
whose name is Jahveh of hosts, Surely as Tabor among the mountains, and
as Carmel by the sea, shall he come. [Jer
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#019). Prepare thee things for exile,
O daughter dwelling in Egypt: for Noph will become a desolation, and be
destroyed by fire, without an inhabitant."

Like the last prophecy, this one also begins with the summons to arms
([Jer 46:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014)), in order to prepare the
way for the description given immediately afterwards of the defeat ([Jer
46:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#015).). The summons to make the
proclamation is addressed to some persons not named, who are to announce
through the country, particularly in the frontier towns and in the
northern capital of Egypt, that the foe, in his devastating career, has
advanced to the borders of the land. This is evident from the clause
which states the reason: "The sword hath devoured what lay round thee."
Regarding Migdol, i.e., Magdolos, and Tahpanhes, i.e., Daphne, the two
frontier towns in the north, and Noph, i.e., Memphis, the northern
capital of the kingdom, see on [Jer
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#016) and 54:1. התיצּב, to take up
one's position for the fight; cf. [Jer
46:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#004). סביביך, "thy surroundings," are
the frontier countries, but especially those on the north, - Judah,
Philistia, Edom, - since the enemy comes from the north. However, we
cannot with certainty infer from this, that by that time the kingdom of
Judah had already fallen, and Jerusalem been laid waste. Immediately
after Necho had been vanquished at the Euphrates, Nebuchadnezzar marched
after the fugitive foe, pursuing him as far as the borders of Egypt;
hence we read, in [Kg2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007), "The king
of Egypt went no more out of his land; for the king of Babylon had taken
all that had belonged to the king of Egypt, from the river of Egypt to
the river Euphrates." Even at that time, in the fourth and fifth years
of Jehoiakim, it could be said, "His sword hath devoured the countries
contiguous to Egypt." And Nebuchadnezzar was prevented on that occasion
from advancing farther, and penetrating into Egypt itself, only by
hearing of his father's death at Babylon, in consequence of which he was
compelled to return to Babylon as speedily as possible, for the purpose
of assuming the reins of government, and to let his army with the
prisoners follow him at their leisure (Berosus in Josephus, contra Ap.
i. 19).

[Jer 46:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#015)

The prophet in spirit looks on the power of Egypt as already broken.
This is shown by the question of astonishment, מדּוּע נסחף אבּיריך,
which has been variously rendered. אבּירים .deredner ylsuoirav neeb sa,
"strong ones," is used in [Jer 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016);
[Jer 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#003), and [Jer
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011), of stallions, but elsewhere as
an epithet of bulls, especially the strong bulls of Bashan; see on [Jer
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016). In the present passage the
reference may be to the mighty men of war, who do not maintain their
position (Chald. and most of the old interpreters); the verb in the
singular forms no sufficient objection to this view, the irregularity
being due to the fact that the verb precedes its subject see Ewald, 316,
t; Gesenius, 147\]. It is more difficult to combine with this the
singulars of the verbs עמד and הדפו which follow; these, and especially
the suffix in the singular, appear to indicate that אבּידיך really
refers to a noun in the singular. But the form of this noun seems
against such a view; for the words adduced in support of the position
that singular nouns sometimes assume plural suffixes, are insufficient
for the purpose: thus, תּהלּתיך, [Psa
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015), and שׂנאתיך, [Eze
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#011), are plainly nouns in the
singular. And in support of the averment that, in pausal forms with
Segol, the י is a mere mater lectionis, only כּפּיך, [Pro
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001), can be adduced: the other
instances brought forward by Hitzig fail to establish his position. For
איביך, [Deu 28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048), may be plural;
בּיני, [Gen 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#005), is far from being a
case in point, for the preposition often takes plural suffixes; and even
in the case of חסידיך, [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010), the
י is marked in the Qeri as superfluous; most codices, too, rather give
the form חסידך. But even in the verse now before us, many codices,
according to Kennicott and de Rossi, read אבּירך, so that the word
should perhaps be taken as a singular. The singulars, however, which
occur in the following clauses do not form conclusive proofs of this,
since they may be taken in a distributive sense; and more generally the
address often suddenly changes from the plural to the singular. In
connection with the possibility of taking אבּיריך as a singular, the
paraphrase of the lxx deserves mention and consideration, ὁ μόσχος ὁ
ἔκλετός σου, to which a gloss adds ὁ But we cannot agree with Kennicott,
J. D. Michaelis, Ewald, Hitzig, Graf, and Nδgelsbach, in holding this as
certainly the correct rendering; nor can we give to אבּיר the sense of
"bull," for this meaning is not made out for the singular simply because
the plural is used of strong bulls: this holds especially in Jeremiah,
who constantly applies the plural to strong steeds. Still less ground is
there for appealing to the fact that Jahveh is repeatedly called אבּיר
ישׂראל or אבּיר יעקוב, [Gen 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024),
[Isa 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024); [Isa
39:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#001) :26 etc.; for this epithet of
Jahveh (who shows Himself in or towards Israel as the Mighty One) cannot
be applied to the helpless images of Apis. In [Psa
68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031), אבּירים means "strong ones" -
bulls as emblems of kings. If the word be used here with such a
reference, it may be singular or plural. In the former case it would
mean the king; in the latter, the king with his princes and magnates.
Against the application of the word to the images of Apis, there is the
fact that Apis, a symbol of Osiris, was neither the only nor the chief
god of Egypt, but was worshipped nowhere except in Memphis (Herodotus,
ii. 153); hence it was not suited to be the representative of the gods
or the power of Egypt, as the context of the present passage requires.

[Jer 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#016)

As the mighty one of Egypt does not stand, but is thrust down by God, so
Jahveh makes many stumble and fall over one another, so that the
strangers return to their own home in order to escape the violence of
the sword. The subject of ויּאמרוּ is indefinite; the speakers, however,
are not merely the hired soldiers or mercenaries ([Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011)), or the allied nations ([Eze
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#005)), but strangers generally, who
had been living in Egypt partly for the sake of commerce, partly for
other reasons (Hitzig, Graf). As to חרב היּונה, see on [Jer
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#038).

[Jer 46:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017)

In [Jer 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017), "they cry there" is not
to be referred to those who fled to their native land; the subject is
undefined, and "there" refers to the place where one falls over the
other, viz., Egypt. "There they cry, 'Pharaoh the king of Egypt is
שׁאון, desolation, destruction, ruin:' " for this meaning, cf. [Jer
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#031); [Psa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003); the signification "noise,
bustle," is unsuitable here.

(Note: The word שׁם has been read by the lxx and the Vulgate as if it
had been שׁם, ὄνομα, nomen; accordingly the lxx render, καλέσατε τὸ
ὄνομα Φαραὼ Νεχαὼ βασίλεως Αἰγύπτου Σαὼν ̓Εσβεὶ ̓Εμωήδ (or ̓Εσβειὲ
Μωὴδe'd); Vulgate, vocate nomen Pharaonis regis Aegypti: Tumultum
adduxit tempus. This reading is preferred by J. D. Michaelis, Ewald,
Hitzig, and Graf, with this difference, that Hitzig and Graf take only
שׁאון as a name. Hence Ewald translates, "They call Pharaoh's name
'Noise-which-a-wink-can-hush.' " This rendering is decidedly false, for
מועד nowhere has the sense of "wink, nod," not even in [Jdg
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038), where it means an agreement
made. For the reading שׁם instead of שׁם there are no sufficient
grounds, although such passages as [Jer
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#003) and [Isa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007) may be adduced in support of the
idea obtained by such a change in the word. The translation of the lxx
is merely a reproduction of the Hebrew words by Greek letters, and shows
that the translator did not know how to interpret them. The Vulgate
rendering, tumultum adduxit tempus, is also devoid of meaning. Moreover,
these translators have read קראוּ as the imperative קראוּ; if we reject
this reading, as all moderns do, then we may also lay no weight on שׁם
instead of שׁם. Besides, the meaning is not materially affected by this
reading, for the giving of a name to a person merely expresses what he
is or will be.)

The meaning of העביר המּועד also is disputed; it is quite inadmissible,
however, to join the words with שׁאון, as Ewald does, for the purpose of
making out a name. No suitable meaning can be extracted from them.
Neither שׁאון nor המּועד can be the subject of העביר; the translation
given by Schnurrer, "devastation that goes beyond all bounds," is still
more arbitrary than that of Ewald given in the note. Since the Hiphil
העביר is never used except with a transitive meaning, the subject can be
none else than Pharaoh; and the words העביר המּועד must be intended to
give the reason for this becoming a desolation: they are thus to be
rendered, "he has allowed המּועד to pass by," not "the precise place,"
as Rosenmller explains it ("he did not stop in his flight at the place
where the army could be gathered again, on the return"), but "the
precise time." The reference, however, is not to the suitable time for
action, for self-defence and for driving off the enemy (Grotius, C. B.
Michaelis, Maurer, Umbreit), because the word does not mean suitable,
convenient time, but appointed time. As Hitzig rightly perceived, the
time meant is that within which the desolation might still be averted,
and after which the judgment of God fell on him ([Isa
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#025); [Isa
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018)), - the time of grace which God
had vouchsafed to him, so that Nebuchadnezzar did not at once, after the
victory at Carchemish, invade and conquer Egypt. Pharaoh let this time
pass by; because, instead of seeing in that defeat a judgment from God,
he provoked the anger of Nebuchadnezzar by his repeated attacks on the
Chaldean power, and brought on the invasion of Egypt by the king of
Babylon (see above, p. 354). - In [Jer
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#018). there is laid down a more
positive foundation for the threat uttered in [Jer
46:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#017). With an oath, the Lord
announces the coming of the destroyer into Egypt. Like Tabor, which
overtops all the mountains round about, and like Carmel, which looks out
over the sea as if it were a watch-tower, so will he come, viz., he from
whom proceeds the devastation of Egypt, the king of Babylon. the power
of Nebuchadnezzar, in respect of its overshadowing all other kings,
forms the point of comparison. Tabor has the form of a truncated cone.
Its height is given at 1805 feet above the level of the sea, or 1350
from the surface of the plain below; it far surpasses in height all the
hills in the vicinity, ad affords a wide prospect on every side; cf.
Robinson's Phys. Geogr. of Palestine, p. 26f. Carmel stretches out in
the form of a long ridge more than three miles wide, till it terminates
on the shore of the Mediterranean Sea, as a bold, lofty promontory,
which rises in an imposing manner at least 500 feet above the sea; cf.
Robinson, p. 26f. Then the inhabitants of Egypt will be driven into
exile. כּלי גולה .e, "vessels of wandering;" outfit for an exile, as in
[Eze 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#003). "Daughter of Egypt" is not
a personification of the country, whose inhabitants are the people, but
of the population, which is viewed as the daughter of the country; it
stands in apposition to יושׁבת, like בּתוּלת בּת מצרי, [Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011). For Noph, i.e., Memphis, the
capital, is laid waste and burned, so as to lose its inhabitants. With
[Jer 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020) begins the second strophe,
in which the fate impending on Egypt is still more plainly predicted.

[Jer 46:20-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020)

"Egypt is a very beautiful young heifer; a gadfly from the north comes -
comes. [Jer 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021). Her mercenaries,
too, in her midst, are like fatted calves; for they also turn their
backs, they flee together: they do not stand, for the day of her
destruction is some on her, the time of her visitation. [Jer
46:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#022). Its sound is like \[that of\]
the serpent \[as it\] goes; for they go with an army, and come against
her with axes, like hewers of trees. [Jer
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023). They cut down her forest, saith
Jahveh, for it is not to be searched; for they are more numerous than
locusts, and they cannot be numbered. [Jer
46:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#024). The daughter of Egypt is
disgraced; she is given into the hand of the people of the north. [Jer
46:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#025). Jahveh of hosts, the God of
Israel, saith, Behold, I will visit Amon of No, and Pharaoh, and Egypt,
her gods, and her kings; Pharaoh, and all those who trust in him. [Jer
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026). And I will give them into the
hand of those who seek their life, even into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar
the king of Babylon, and into the hand of his servants; but afterwards
it shall be inhabited, as in the days of old, saith Jahveh."

[Jer 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020)

In [Jer 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020) the address begins
afresh, in order to carry out further, under new images, the description
of the desolation already threatened. Egypt is a very beautiful עגלה;
this feminine is chosen with a regard to "the daughter of Egypt."
יפה־פיּה is an adjective formed from the Peal of יפה, "very beautiful,"
not "coquetting" (Hitzig, who follows the κεκαλλωπισμένη of the lxx). A
very beautiful heifer is the people when carefully and abundantly fed in
their beautiful and fertile land (Hitzig). Upon this heifer there comes
from the north קרץ. This ἁπ. λεγ. is variously rendered. קרץ means, in
the Hebrew, to pinch, nip ([Job 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006)),
to compress together, as in winking ([Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019)), to bring the lips closely
together ([Pro 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#030)), and to nip off;
cf. Arab. qaras\[a to pinch, nip, cut off. Hence A. Schultens (Orig.
Heb. ii. 34ff.), after Cocceius, and with a reference to Virgil, Georg.
iii. 147, has rendered קרץ by morsus vellicans oestri. Hitzig (with whom
Roediger, in his additions to Gesenius' Thesaurus, agrees) takes Arab.
qârṣ, insectum cimici simile as his warrant for rendering it by oestrus,
"the gadfly," which gives a more suitable meaning. Ewald, on the
contrary, compares קרץ with Arab. qrs\], and translates it "whale," a
huge sea-monster; but this is quite arbitrary, for קרץ does not
correspond to the Arabic qrs\], and the whale or shark does not afford
any figure that would be suitable for the context: e.g., [Jer
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021), "her mercenaries also flee,"
shows that the subject treated of is not the devouring or destruction,
but the expulsion of the Egyptians out of their land; this is put as an
addition to what is said about exile in [Jer
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#019). Still less suitable is the
general rendering excidium, destruction (Rabbins, Gesenius, Umbreit);
and there is no lexical foundation for the Vulgate translation
stimulator, nor for "taskmaster," the rendering of J. D. Michaelis and
Rosenmller. The old translators have only made guesses from the context.
The figure of the gadfly corresponds to the bee in the land of Assyria,
[Isa 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018). The repetition of בּא gives
emphasis, and points either to the certainty of the coming, or its
continuance.

[Jer 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021)

The mercenaries, also, of the daughter of Egypt, well fed, like fatted
calves, betake themselves to flight. שׂכרים are "mercenaries," as
distinguished from the allies mentioned in [Jer
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009). It was Carians and Ionians
through whom Psammetichus attained the supremacy over all Egypt: these
had settled down in στρατόπεδα of their own, between Bubastis and
Pelusium, on both banks of the eastern arm of the Nile (Herodotus, ii.
152, 154), and were very well cared for, since the king relied on them
(Herod. ii. 152, 163). Hence the comparison with fatted calves, which,
moreover, are co-ordinated with the subject, as is shown by the
resumption of the subject in גּם המּה. כּי stands in the middle of the
sentence, with an asseverative meaning: "Yea, these also turn their
back, they flee together, do not stand; for the day of their destruction
is come." "The day of their destruction" is used as in [Jer
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#017). On "the time of their
visitation" (which stands in apposition to the preceding expression (cf.
[Jer 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#023); [Jer
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#012) : it is not an accusative of
time (Graf), for this always expresses the idea of continuance during a
space of time.

[Jer 46:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#022)

In [Jer 46:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#022), [Jer
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023), the annihilation of the power
of Egypt is portrayed under another figure. A difficult expression is
קולהּ כּנּחשׁ ילך, "her (viz., that of the daughter of Egypt) voice is
like (the voice of) the serpent (which) goes." ילך must be taken as part
of a relative sentence, since this verb is nowhere used of a voice or
sound; hence it cannot be so joined here. Ewald, following the
συρίζοντος of the lxx, would read שׁרק, "hissing," instead of ילך, and
translates, "it makes a noise like the hissing serpent." He more fully
defines the meaning thus: "Even though Egypt were hidden like a serpent
in a thicket, yet it would be heard in its flight, like a nasty serpent
hissing fiercely, while it hurries away from the axe of the
wood-cutter." But, apart from the arbitrary change of ילך into שׁרק (the
former word is used in [Gen 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014) of
the going, i.e., crawling, of a serpent), Ewald puts into the words an
idea altogether foreign to them. The nasty, fierce hissing of the
serpent that is forced to flee, is quite unsuitable; for there is no
further mention made of the flight of the Egyptians, but Egypt is hewn
down like a forest by woodcutters. Moreover, as Graf has already well
remarked, Egypt is not compared to a serpent, but only its voice to the
voice or hiss of a serpent. For קול signifies, not merely the voice, but
any sound, even the rustling and rattling of leaves (cf. [Gen
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008); [Lev
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#036); [Sa2
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024)); hence it may denote the noise
caused by a serpent crawling on its belly in the thicket. The
comparison, as Graf has correctly observed, is like that in [Isa
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#004). There it is the daughter of
Zion, but here it is the daughter of Egypt that lies on the ground,
deeply humbled; weeping softly and moaning, making a sound like that of
a serpent in a moss among fallen leaves, fleeing before the woodcutters.

(Note: The old translators have quite misunderstood these words, and
attempted to apply them, each one according to his own fancy, to the
enemy. Thus the lxx translate: Φωνὴ αὐτῶνקולם( ) ὡς ὄφεοως συρίζοντος,
ὅτι ἐν ἄμμῳבּחול( for בּחיל) πορεύσονται, κ.τ.λ. Chald.: vox collisionis
armorum eorum est sicut vox serpentum repentium; and similarly the
Syriac. The Vulgate is: vox ejus quasi aerisנחשׁת( for נחשׁ) sonabit,
quoniam cum exercitu properabunt et cum securibus venient. The
translator of the Vulgate has thus read קולהּ, and referred the suffix
to קרץ, which he renders stimulator. Luther follows the Vulgate: "Sie
faren daher, das der Harnisch brasselt, und kommen mit Heeres Krafft."
Hitzig also seeks to change the text, after the lxx, turning קולהּ into
קולם, and בּחיל into בּחול. But this alteration disturbs the order of
the sentence. Not only in [Jer 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020)
and [Jer 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021), but also in [Jer
46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023), [Jer
46:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#024), the first clause always treats
of Egypt, and what befalls her is only stated in the clauses which
follow: so is it in [Jer 46:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#022). Thus
the alteration made affords a very trivial result, viz., that the enemy
advancing on Egypt march through the very sandy desert between Gaza and
Egypt, and make slow progress, like serpents, because they wade through
the sand; so that they make their appearance suddenly and unexpectedly.)

Thus she lies on the ground, for the enemy comes in force, with axes
like woodcutters, to hew down the forest of men in Egypt. The mention of
the axes is occasioned by the comparison of the foe to woodcutters; we
are not to think of battle-axes as weapons of the Massagetae, Scythians,
Persians, and other nations (Herodotus, i. 215, iv. 70, vii. 64;
Xenophon, Cyroped. i. 2, 9). Axes here form the type of murderous
weapons generally. On the comparison of a multitude of people to a
forest, cf. [Jer 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#014); [Isa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#018)., [Isa
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#033). The clause כּי לא יחקר is
referred by L. de Dieu, J. D. Michaelis, Hitzig, Ngelsbach, etc., to the
wood, "for it cannot be explored or penetrated;" thus a road must be
made in order to get through it. However, the question is not about the
enemy going or marching through Egypt, but about the destruction of
Egypt and her powers. Rosenmller and Graf, with Raschi, are more correct
in referring the clause to the hostile army, "for it cannot be
investigated," i.e., it is impossible to learn the number of them. It is
no great objection to this interpretation that the verb occurs in the
singular: this must be retained as it is, since it is not the individual
enemies that cannot be searched out, but it is the number of the whole
army that cannot be reckoned. On the employment of חקר in the Niphal in
connection with the impossibility of counting a multitude, cf. [Kg1
7:47](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#047), and the expression לא in [Job
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009); [Job
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#010); 36:36. The clauses which follow,
and conclude [Jer 46:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#023), explain the
thought further: "more numerous than grasshoppers," i.e., innumerable.

[Jer 46:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#024)

In [Jer 46:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#024). the result of the
overthrow of Egypt, which has hitherto been set forth in figurative
language, is stated in words which describe the exact realities: Egypt
will be given up to ignominy, delivered into the power of a people from
the north, i.e., the Chaldeans. The Lord of hosts, the Almighty God of
Israel, punishes it for its sins. He visits, i.e., punishes, Amon of No,
the chief idol of Egypt; Pharaoh, and the land, with all its gods and
its kings, and with Pharaoh, all those who place their trust in his
power. Words are accumulated for the purpose of showing that the
judgment will be one which shall befall the whole land, together with
its gods, its rulers, and its inhabitants. First of all is mentioned
Amon of No, as in [Eze 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#014). נא is an
abbreviation of נא אמון , i.e., dwelling of Amon, the sacred name of the
royal city in Upper Egypt, famous in antiquity, which the Greeks called
Διὸς πόλις, or Θήβη, or Θῆβαι it is supposed, after the vulgar Egyptian
name Tapet or Tape (Throne or Seat); see on [Nah
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#008). Amon - in Greek ̓Αμμοῦν
(Herodotus, ii. 42), ̓Αμοῦν (Plutarch, de Is. Ch. 9), ̓Αμῶν (Jamblichus,
de myst. 5, 8) - was a sun-god (Amon-R), probably a symbol of the sun as
it appears in the spring, in the sign of the Ram; hence he was
represented with rams' horns. By the Greeks he was compared to Jupiter,
or Zeus, and named Jupiter Ammon. The chief seat of his worship was
Thebes, where he had a temple, with a numerous learned priesthood and a
famous oracle (cf. Strabo, xvii. 1. 43; Justin. xi. 11), which Cambyses
destroyed (Diodorus, Siculus, Fragm. Lib. x.). Under the expression
"kings of Egypt" we are not to include governors or vassal-kings, but
all the kings who ever ruled Egypt; for in the judgment now falling on
Egypt, all the kings it ever had, together with all its gods, are
punished. In the last part of the verse the name of Pharaoh is once more
given, for the purpose of attaching to it the words "and all who trust
in him;" these are intended for the Jews who expected help from Egypt.
The punishment consists in their being all given into the hand of their
enemies, namely (ו explic.) into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar and his
servants. This defeat, however, is not to be the end of the Egyptian
kingdom. The threat of judgment concludes, in [Jer
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026), with a promise for the future.
"Afterwards, it shall be inhabited, as in the days of yore." שׁכן is
used in a neuter sense, as in [Jer
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006); [Jer
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#016), etc. Since this verb also
signifies to settle down, be encamped ([Num
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#002)), and to lie quiet, to rest, or
keep oneself quiet, inactive ([Jdg
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#017); [Pro
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011)), Hitzig and Graf, with Kimchi,
give the explanation: "because the power of Egypt shall be broken, it
will keep quiet, and remain at home in its own country, instead of
marching forth and fighting other nations, as it has lately begun again
to do ([Jer 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#007)) after centuries of
peace." But although, in support of this view, we are pointed to [Eze
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#013), where the restoration of Egypt
is predicted, with the further remark, "it will be an abject kingdom,"
yet this idea is not contained in the words of our verse. To render שׁכן
by "to keep quiet, be inactive," does not suit the words "as in the days
of old." In former days, Egypt was neither inactive nor remained at home
in peace in its own land. From the remotest antiquity, the Pharaohs made
wars, and sought to enlarge their dominions by conquest. Add to this,
that we must view the concluding portion of this prophecy in a manner
analogous to the closing thought of the prophecies regarding Moab ([Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047)), Ammon ([Jer
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#006)), and Elam ([Jer
49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039)), where the turning of the
captivity in the last times is given in prospect to these nations, and
"afterwards," in [Jer 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#006), alternates
with "in the latter days" found in [Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047) and [Jer
49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039). From this it follows that, in
the verse now before us also, it is not the future in general, but the
last time, i.e., the Messianic future, that is pointed out; hence שׁכן
does not express the peaceful condition of the land, but its being
inhabited, in contrast with its depopulation in the immediate future, in
consequence of its inhabitants being killed or carried away. On the
fulfilment of this threatening, see p. 351ff.

[Jer 46:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027)

A promise for Israel. - [Jer 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027).
"But fear not thou, O my servant Jacob, nor be dismayed: for, behold, I
will save thee from afar, and thy seed from the land of their captivity;
and Jacob shall return, and be at rest and secure, and no one shall make
him afraid. [Jer 46:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#028). Fear thou not,
my servant Jacob, saith Jahveh, for I am with thee; for I will make
complete destruction of all the nations whither I have driven thee, but
of thee will I not make complete destruction: yet I will correct thee in
a proper manner, and I will not leave thee wholly unpunished." These
verses certainly form no integral portion of the prophecy, but an
epilogue; yet they are closely connected with the preceding, and are
occasioned by the declaration in [Jer
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026), that the Lord, when He visits
Pharaoh, shall also visit all those who trust in Him. This word, which
is directed to Judah, might be understood to declare that it is Judah
chiefly which will share the fate of Egypt. In order to prevent such a
misconception, Jeremiah adds a word for Israel, which shows how the true
Israel has another destiny to hope for. Their deliverer is Jahveh, their
God, who certainly punishes them for their sins, gives them up to the
power of the heathen, but will also gather them gain after their
dispersion, and then grant them uninterrupted prosperity. This promise
of salvation at the close of the announcement of judgment on Egypt is
similar to the promise of salvation for Israel inserted in the threat of
judgment against Babylon, [Jer 50:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#004)
and [Jer 50:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#019), [Jer
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#020), [Jer
51:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#005), [Jer
51:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#010), [Jer
51:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#035), [Jer
51:45-46](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#045), [Jer
51:50](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#050); and this similarity furnishes a
proof in behalf of the genuineness of the verse, which is denied by
modern critics. For, although what Ngelsbach remarks is quite correct,
viz., that the fall of the kingdom of Babylon, through its conquest by
Cyrus, directly brought about the deliverance of Israel, while the same
cannot be said regarding the conquest of Egypt, yet even Egypt had a
much greater importance, in relation to Judah, than the smaller
neighbouring nations, against which the oracles in Jer 47-49 are
directed; hence there is no ground for the inference that, because there
is nothing said in these three chapters of such a connection between
Egypt and Israel, it did not really exist. But when Ngelsbach further
asks, "How does this agree with the fact that Jeremiah, on other
occasions, while in Egypt, utters only the strongest threats against the
Israelites - Jer 42-44?" - there is the ready answer, that the
expressions in Jer 42-44 do not apply to the whole covenant people, but
only to the rabble of Judah that was ripe for the sentence of
destruction, that had fled to Egypt against the will of God. What Hitzig
and Graf have further urged in another place against the genuineness of
the verses now before us, is scarcely worth mention. The assertion that
the verses do not accord with the time of the foregoing prophecy, and
rather presuppose the exile, can have weight only with those who priori
deny that the prophet could make any prediction. But if Jeremiah, in the
fourth year of Jehoiakim, distinctly announces not merely the carrying
away of Judah to Babylon, but also fixes the duration of the exile at
seventy years, then he might well speak at the same time, or later, of
the restoration of Israel from their captivity.

But there are two other considerations which support the genuineness of
these verses: (1) The fact that Hitzig and Graf are obliged to confess
it remains a problem how they came to form a part of the oracle against
Egypt. The attempt made by the former writer to solve this problem
partly rests on the assumption, already refuted by Graf, that the verses
were written by the second Isaiah (on this point, see our remarks at p.
263, note), and partly on a combination of results obtained by
criticism, in which even their author has little confidence. But (2) we
must also bear in mind the nature of the verses in question. They form a
repetition of what we find in [Jer
30:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010), and a repetition, too, quite
in the style of Jeremiah, who makes variations in expression. Thus here,
in [Jer 46:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#027), נאם יהוה is omitted
after יעקוב, perhaps simply because [Jer
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026) concludes with נאם יהוה; again,
in [Jer 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020), תּה אל־תּירא is
repeated with נאם יהוה, which is wanting in [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011). On the other hand, להושׁיעך in
[Jer 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011), and אך in [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011), have been dropped; הפיצותיך שׁם
([Jer 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011)) has been exchanged for
הדּחתּיך שׁמּה. Hence Hitzig has taken the text here to be the better
and the original one; and on this he founds the supposition that the
verses were first placed here in the text, and were only afterwards, and
from this passage, inserted in [Jer
30:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010), where, however, they stand
in the best connection, and even for that reason could not be a gloss
inserted there. Such are some of the contradictions in which critical
scepticism involves itself. We have already given an explanation of
these verses under Jer 30.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 47](jer047)

</div>
