<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer047)  [Next](jer049.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 48:0</span></span>

Concerning Moab

The Moabites had spread themselves on the eastern side of the Dead Sea,
where the Emims dwelt in former times ([Deu
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010).md). But previous to the immigration
of the Israelites into Canaan, the Amorites, under King Sihon, had
already taken forcible possession of the northern portion of this
territory as far as the Arnon ([Num
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013).md). The Israelites, on their march
through the desert, were not to treat the Moabites as enemies, nor touch
their territory ([Deu 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009.md); cf. [Jdg
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#015.md), [Jdg
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#018).md). But when Sihon, king of the
Amorites, had been slain by the Israelites, and his kingdom subdued, the
Israelites took possession of the territory north of the Arnon, that had
formerly belonged to the Moabites, but had been conquered by Sihon: this
was given to the tribe of Reuben for an inheritance ([Num
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#024.md).; [Deu
2:32-36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#032.md); [Jos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#015)..md). The Moabites could not get
over this loss of the northern half of their country. The victory of the
Israelites over the powerful kings of the Amorites, viz., Sihon in
Heshbon and Og of Bashan, inspired them with terror for the power of
this people; so that their king Balak, while the Israelites were
encamped in the steppes of Moab opposite Jericho, fetched Balaam the
sorcerer from Mesopotamia, with the design of destroying Israel through
the power of his anathema. And when this plan did not succeed, since
Balaam was obliged, against his will, to bless Israel instead of cursing
them, the Moabites sought to weaken them, and to render them powerless
to do any injury, by seducing them to idolatry (cf. Num 22-25). Such
malicious conduct was shown repeatedly afterwards. Not long after the
death of Joshua, Eglon the king of Joab, aided by the Ammonites and
Amalekites, crossed the Jordan and took Jericho, which he made the
centre of operations for keeping the Israelites under subjection: these
were thus oppressed for eighteen years, until they succeeded in
defeating the Moabites and driving them back into their own land, after
Ehud had assassinated King Eglon ([Jdg
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012)..md). At a later period, Saul made
war on them ([Sa1 14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047).md); and David
completely subdued them, severely chastised them, and made them
tributary ([Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002).md). But after the
death of Ahab, to whom King Mesha had paid a very considerable yearly
tribute ([Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004).md), they revolted from
Israel ([Kg2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md); [Kg2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#005).md). In the time of Jehoshaphat, in
conjunction with the Ammonites and a portion of the Edomites, they even
invaded Judah, with the design of taking Jerusalem; but they ruined
themselves through mutual discords, so that Jehoshaphat obtained a
glorious victory over them (2 Chron 20). It was possibly also with the
view of taking revenge for this exhibition of malicious spirit that the
king of Judah afterwards, in conjunction with Joram king of Israel,
carried war into their country, and defeated them (2 Kings 3:6-27).
Still later, mention is made of an invasion of Israel by Moabite hosts
during the reign of Joash ([Kg2
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#020).md); and in the time of Hezekiah,
we find them once more in possession of their ancient territory to the
north of the Arnon, at a time when the trans-Jordanic tribes of Israel
had been carried away by the Assyrians into exile.

Judging from these aphoristic notices, the Moabites, on the division of
the kingdom after Solomon's death, seem to have remained tributary to
the kingdom of the ten tribes until the death of Ahab; then they
revolted, but soon afterwards were once more reduced to subjection by
Joram and Jehoshaphat. Still later, they certainly made several
invasions into Israel, but without permanent result; nor was it till the
carrying away of the trans-Jordanic tribes by the Assyrians that they
succeeded in regaining permanent possession of the depopulated land of
Reuben, their former territory. This account, however, has been modified
in several important respects by the recent discovery of an inscription
on a monument raised by King Mesha after a victory he had gained; this
"Moabite stone" was found in the neighbourhood of the ancient Dibon. The
deciphering of the long inscription of thirty-four liens on this
memorial stone, so far as success has followed the attempts hitherto
made, has issued in its giving important disclosures concerning the
relation of Moab to Israel.

(Note: On the discovery of this memorial stone, of which Count de Vog
gave the first account in a paper entitled "Le stle de Msa: Lettre Mr.
le Comte de Vog par Ch. Clermont-Ganneau," Paris 1870, cf. the detailed
notice by Petermann in the Zeitschr. der Deutschen Morg. Gesell. xxiv.
(for 1870), S. 640ff. The stone was broken to pieces by the Arabs; thus,
unfortunately, the whole of the inscription has not been preserved. So
much, however, of the fragments has been saved, that from these the
contents of the inscription may be substantially obtained with tolerable
certainty. The work of deciphering has been undertaken by Konst.
Schlottmann (Ueber die Siegessule Mesa's, Knigs der Moabiter, Hall.
Osterprogr. 1870, with these additions: "Die Inschrift Mesa's;
Transcription u. Uebersetzung revidirt," in the Zeitschr. der Morg.
Gesell. xxv. S. 253ff.; "Additamenta" in the same periodical, S. 415ff.,
438ff., 645ff.; and "Der Moabiterknig Mesa nach seiner Inschrift und
nach den bibl. Berichten," in the Theol. Stud. u. Kritiken, 1871, S.
587ff.), also by Theod. Nldeke "(Die Inschrift des K. Mesa," Keil 1870),
Ferd. Hitzig ("Die Inschrift des Mesha," Heidelb. 1870), Himpel (in the
Tb. Theol. Quartalschr. 1870, H. 4, and in Merx' Archiv, ii. S. 96ff.),
Diestel ("Die moabit. Gedenktafel," in the Jahrb.f. deutsche Theol. 1871
(H. 4), S. 215ff.), Rabbi Dr. Geiger "(Die Sule des Mesa," in the
Zeitschr. der Morg. Ges. xxiv. S. 212ff.), Dr. Ginsburg ("The Moabite
Stone," Lond. 1870), Ganneau (in the Rvue archol.); by Derenburg and
others (in German, English, and French periodicals). In addition to the
work of Dr. Ginsburg, mentioned above, the English reader may consult an
able article by Professor Wright in the North British Review for October
1870; one by W. H. Ward in the Bibliotheca Sacra of the same date; and
another by Prof. A. B. Davidson in the British and Foreign Evangelical
Review for January 1871. - Tr.\])

From these we gather that Omri, king of Israel, had taken possession of
the district of Medeba, and that the Moabites were heavily oppressed by
him and his successor for forty years, until King Mesha succeeded,
through the help of his god Chemosh, in regaining the territory that had
been seized by the Israelites. We may further with certainty conclude,
from various statements in this inscription, that the Moabites were by
no means exterminated by the Israelites, when they took possession of
the country to the north of the Arnon, which had been seized by the
Amorites; they continued to live beside and among the Israelites.
Moreover, since the tribe of Reuben was chiefly engaged in the rearing
of cattle, and thus appropriated the pastoral districts of the country,
the Moabites were not utterly, at least not permanently subdued, but
rather took every opportunity of weakening the Israelites, in order not
merely to reclaim their old possessions, but also to make themselves
independent of Israel. This object they seem to have actually attained,
even so soon as immediately after the death of Solomon. They continued
independent until the powerful Omri restored the supremacy of Israel in
the territory of Reuben; and Moab continued subject for forty years, at
the end of which King Mesha again succeeded in breaking the yoke of
Israel after the death of Ahab. Thenceforward, Israel never again got
the upper hand, though Jeroboam II (as we are entitled to conclude from
[Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025).md) may have disputed the
supremacy with the Moabites for a time.

Amos ([Amo 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001).md) and Isaiah (Jer 15
and 16) have already, before Jeremiah, threatened Moab with destruction,
because of the acts of hostility against Israel of which they have been
guilty. We have no historical notice concerning the fulfilment of these
threatenings. Inasmuch as the power of the Assyrians in Eastern Asia was
broken through the defeat of Sennacherib before Jerusalem, the Moabites
may possibly have asserted their independence against the Assyrians.
Certainly it seems to follow, from the remark in [Ch1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#017.md) (that the families of Gad were
reckoned by genealogies in the days of Jotham king of Judah), that some
of the Israelites on the east of Jordan came for a time under the sway
of Judah. But even though this were allowed to hold true of the tribe of
Reuben also, such a mastery could not have lasted long, since even
towards the end of Jotham's reign, Pekah the king of Israel joined with
Hazael king of Syria in war against Judah ([Kg2
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037).md); and during the reign of Ahaz,
Rezin invaded Gilead, and penetrating as far as the seaport of Elath,
took it from Judah ([Kg2 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006).md). At all
events, up till the time of Nebuchadnezzar, the threats of Amos and
Isaiah had attained only the feeblest beginnings of fulfilment; and (as
is abundantly evident from the prophecy in this chapter) the Moabites
were then more powerful than ever they had been before, and in
undisturbed possession also of that portion of their ancient territory
lying north of the Arnon, which had been taken from them by Sihon the
Amorite; and after his defeat, the victorious Israelites had again
apportioned it to the tribe of Reuben.

This prophecy of Jeremiah concerning Moab is to be explained on the
ground of these historical relations. The day of ruin was to begin with
the appearance of the Chaldeans in Palestine; this day had been
predicted not merely by Amos and Isaiah, but even by Balaam, on the
occasion of the first conflict of the Moabites with Israel. Jeremiah
accordingly takes up anew the utterances of the old prophets regarding
Moab which had not yet been fulfilled, but were now about to receive
their accomplishment: these he reproduces in his own peculiar manner,
taking as his foundation the oracular sentences of Isaiah concerning
Moab, and combining these by means of the utterances of Amos and Balaam,
not only regarding Moab, but also regarding the whole heathen world now
ripe for judgment; and out of all this he frames a comprehensive
announcement of the ruin to fall on this people, so haughty, and so
filled with hatred against Israel.

(Note: This reproduction Gesenius (on Isaiah, p. 511) characterizes as
"a feeble imitation, by which the text of the older author is made quite
diffuse and watery, frequently mixed through in a wonderful manner, made
into a kind of patchwork, and enlivened now and again by a stiff turn."
Movers and Hitzig have spoken still more deprecatingly of this chapter,
and excised a great number of verses, on the ground of their having been
introduced later by way of touching up; in this manner, Hitzig rejects
as spurious verses which Movers recognises as exhibiting marks of
Jeremiah's peculiar style, - a method of procedure which Graf has
already denounced as arbitrary criticism. We hope to show in the
commentary the total want of foundation for this pseudo-critical mode of
dealing; we only make the further remark here by anticipation, that
Keuper (on Jeremiah, p. 83ff.) has very clearly accounted for and
vindicated the conduct of Jeremiah in making use of the expressions of
previous prophets, while Movers and Hitzig have paid no regard to this
thorough kind of work.)

The contents of this announcement are as follow: - The chief cities of
Moab are perished, and with them their fame. Plans are being concocted
for their destruction. On all sides there is a crying over the
devastation, and wailing, and flight; Chemosh, with his priests and
princes, wanders into exile, and country and city are laid waste ([Jer
48:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001).md). Let Moab escape with wings,
in order to avoid the destruction; for although they have, in all time
past, lived securely in their own land, they shall now be driven out of
their dwellings, and come to dishonour with their god Chemosh, in spite
of the bravery of their heroes ([Jer
48:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#009).md). The destruction of Moab
draws near, their glory perishes, the whole country and all its towns
are laid waste, and the power of Moab is broken ([Jer
48:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#016).md). All this befalls them for
their pride and loftiness of spirit; because of this they are punished,
with the destruction of their glorious vines and their harvest; and the
whole land becomes filled with sorrow and lamentation over the
desolation, and the extermination of all those who make offerings to
idols ([Jer 48:26-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026).md). Meanwhile the
prophet mourns with the hapless people, who are broken like a despised
vessel ([Jer 48:36-38](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036).md). Moab becomes
the laughing-stock and the horror of all around: the enemy captures all
their fortresses, and none shall escape the ruin ([Jer
48:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#039).md). Fire goes out from Heshbon
and destroys the whole land, and the people must go into captivity; but
at the end of the days, the Lord will turn the captivity of Moab ([Jer
48:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045).md). According to this view of
the whole, this prophecy falls into seven strophes of unequal length, of
which every one concludes either with אמר יהוה or נאם. The middle one,
which is also the longest ([Jer
48:26-35](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026).md), forms an apparent
exception, inasmuch as נאם יהוה does not stand at the end, but in the
middle of [Jer 48:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#035.md); while in the
second last strophe ([Jer 48:39-44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#039).md),
the last two verses ([Jer 48:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043.md) and
[Jer 48:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#044).md) end with this formula.

[Jeremiah 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 48:1</span></span>

Calamities to come on Moab. - [Jer
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001.md). "Thus saith Jahveh of hosts, the
God of Israel, Woe to Nebo, for it is laid waste! Kiriathaim is come to
dishonour, it is taken: the fortress is come to dishonour and broken
down. [Jer 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002.md). Moab's glory is no
more. In Heshbon they have devised evil against her, \[saying\], Come,
and let us cut her off from \[being\] a nation: thou also, O Madmen, art
brought to silence; the sword shall go after thee. [Jer
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#003.md). A sound of crying from Horonaim,
desolation and great destruction. [Jer
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004.md). Moab is destroyed; her little
ones have caused a cry to be heard. [Jer
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#005.md). For they ascend the ascent of
Luhith with weeping - weeping: for on the descent of Horonaim the
enemies have heard a cry of destruction. [Jer
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006.md). Flee, save your life! and be
like one destitute in the wilderness. [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007.md). For, because they trust \[was\]
in thy works, and in thy treasures, thou also shalt be taken; and
Chemosh shall go into captivity, his priests and his princes together.
[Jer 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#008.md). The destroyer shall come to
every city, and no city shall escape; and the valley shall perish, and
the plain shall be laid waste, as Jahveh hath said."

With the exclamation "Woe!" Jeremiah transports the hearers of the word
of God at once into the midst of the catastrophe which is to come on
Moab; this is with the view of humbling the pride of this people, and
chastening them for their sins. The woe is uttered over Nebo, but holds
also of the towns named afterwards. Nebo is not the mountain of that
name ([Deu 32:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049.md); [Deu
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001).md), but the city, which probably
did not lie far from the peak in the mountain-range of Abarim, which
bore the same name ([Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003.md), [Num
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038.md); [Isa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002).md), although in the Onomasticon,
s.v. Ναβαῦ, the situation of the mountain is given as being six Roman
miles from Heshbon, towards the west, and s.v. Ναβώρ, that of the city,
eight Roman miles south from Heshbon, for both accounts point to a
situation in the south-west. The Arab. name nba= is still applied to
some ruins; cf. Robinson's Palestine, iii. p. 170. "Kiriathaim is
taken." The site of this town, mentioned as early as [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005.md), has been fixed, since the time
of Burckhardt, as that of a mass of ruins called et Teim, about five
miles south of Heshbon; but Dietrich, in Merx' Archiv. i. S. 337ff., has
shown this is incorrect. According to Eusebius, in his Onomasticon,
Kiriathaim lay ten Roman miles to the west of Medeba: this suits not
merely the position of et Teim, but also the ruins of Kereyat south-west
from Medeba, on the ridge of Mount Attarus, a little to the south of
M'kaur (Machaerus), and of Baara in the Wady Zerka Maein, where also is
the plain mentioned in [Gen 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005.md),
either in the plain stretching direct east from Kereyat between Wady
Zerka Maein and Wady Wal, or south-east in the beautiful plain el Kura,
described by Burckhardt, p. 371ff., between the Wal and the Mojeb. Nebo
and Kiriathaim lay on the eastern border of the high range of mountains,
and seem to be comprehended under המּשׂגּב, "the height, the high
fortress," in the third clause of [Jer
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001.md), as the representatives of the
mountain country of Moab. Various expositors, certainly, take the word
as a proper name designating an elevated region; Graf and Ngelsbach take
it to be a name of Kir-Moab (Kir-heres, Kir-haresheth, [Jer
48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md), [Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036).md), the chief fortress in the
country, the modern Kerek in the southern part of Moab; but no valid
proof has been adduced. By "the height" Hitzig understands the
highlands, which learn of the fall of these towns in the lowlands, and
feel this disgrace that has come on Moab, but have not yet themselves
been taken. But this view is untenable, because the towns of Nebo and
Kiriathaim are not situated in the level country. Again, since הובשׁה is
common to the two clauses, the distinction between נלכּדה and חתּה could
hardly be pressed so far as to make the latter the opposite of the
former, in the sense of being still unconquered. The meaning rather is,
that through Nebo's being laid waste, and the capture of Kiriathaim, the
fortress on which the Moabites trusted is no more. And to this [Jer
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#003.md) appropriately adds, "the boasting
of Moab is gone," i.e., Moab has no more ground for boasting. "In
Heshbon they (the enemy, or the conquerors) plot evil against Moab."
Heshbon was formerly the capital of the Amorite kingdom of Sihon ([Num
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#026.md); [Deu
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024), etc..md), and was assigned to the
tribe of Reuben ([Jos 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017).md); but
because it lay on the boundary of the territory belonging to the tribe,
it was given up to the Gadites, and set apart as a Levitical city ([Jos
21:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#037).md). It lay ten Roman miles east
from the Jordan, opposite Jericho, almost intermediate between the Arnon
and the Jabbok, and is still pointed out, though in ruins, under the old
name Heshbn (see on [Num 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#037).md). At
the time of Jeremiah it was taken possession of by the Ammonites ([Jer
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003).md), consequently it was the
frontier town of the Moabite territory at that time; and being such, it
is here named as the town where the enemy, coming from the north,
deliberate regarding the conquest of Moab - "meditate evil," i.e.,
decide upon conquest and devastation. The suffix of עליה refers to Moab
as a country, and hence is feminine; cf. v. 4. "We will destroy it
(Moab) מגּוי, so that it shall no longer be a nation." Just as in
בּחשׁבּון חשׁבוּ there is a play on the words, so is there also in the
expression מדמן תּדּמּי which follows. This very circumstance forms an
argument for taking Madmen as a proper name, instead of an appellative,
as Venema and Hitzig have done, after the example of the lxx: "Yea, thou
shalt be destroyed (and made into) a dunghill." In support of this
rendering they point to [Kg2 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#027.md);
[Ezr 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#011.md). But the verb דּמם, in its
meaning, ill accords with מדמן in the sense of a dung-heap, and in this
case there would be no foundation for a play upon the words (Graf). It
is no proof of the non-existence of a place called Madmen in Moab, that
it is not mentioned elsewhere; Madmena in the tribe of Benjamin ([Isa
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#031).md), and Madmanna in Judah ([Jos
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#031).md), are also mentioned but once.
These passages rather show that the name Madmen was not uncommon; and it
was perhaps with reference to this name that Isaiah ([Isa
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#010).md) chose the figure of the
dunghill. דּמם, to be silent, means, in the Niphal, to be brought to
silence, be exterminated, perish; cf. [Jer
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#026.md); [Jer
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#037.md); [Jer
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014.md), etc. As to the form תּדּמּי
instead of תּדּמּי , cf. Ewald, 140, b; Gesenius, 67, Rem. 5. The
following clause refers to Madmen: "after thee shall the sword go;" cf.
[Jer 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015.md).

[Jer 48:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#003.md)

A cry is heard from Horonaim against violence and destruction. The words
שׁד ושׁב are to be taken as the cry itself; cf. [Jer
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#020.md); [Jer
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#008.md). The city of Horonaim, mentioned
both here and in [Isa 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md) in
connection with Luhith, lay on a slope, it would seem, not far from
Luhith. Regarding this latter place we find it remarked in the
Onomasticon: est usque hodie vicus inter Areopolim et Zoaram nomine
Luitha (Λουειθά). As to ̓Ωροναείμ, the Onomasticon says no more than
πόλις Μωὰβ ὲν ̔Ιερεμίᾳ (ed. Lars. p. 376). The destruction over which
the outcry is made comes on Moab. By "Moab" Graf refuses to understand
the country or its inhabitants, but rather the ancient capital of the
country, Ar-Moab ([Num 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028.md); [Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001).md), in the valley of the Arnon,
which is also simply called Ar in [Num
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#015.md); [Deu
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009.md). But, as Dietrich has already
shown (S. 329ff.), the arguments adduced in support of this view are
insufficient to prove the point.

(Note: The mention of Moab among names if cities in [Jer
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004.md), and in connection with Kir-heres
in [Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md) and [Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036.md) proves nothing; for in [Jer
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004.md) Moab is not named among towns,
and the expression in [Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md) and
[Jer 48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036.md) is analogous to the phrase
"Judah and Jerusalem." Nor can any proof be derived from the fact that
Rabbath-Moab is merely called "Moab" in the Onomasticon of Eusebius, and
Mb in Abulfeda, and Rabbath-Ammon, now merely "Amman;" because this mode
of speaking will not admit of being applied for purposes of proof to
matters pertaining to Old Testament times, since it originated only in
the Christian ages,at a time, too, when Rabbath had become the capital
of the country, and when Rabbath-Moab could easily be shortened by the
common people into "Moab." Rabbath (of Moab), however, is not mentioned
at all in the Old Testament.)

שׁבר, to break,of a nation or a city ([Jer
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#011.md); [Isa
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#025), etc..md), as it were, to ruin, -
is here used of the country or kingdom. צעוריה is for צעיריה, as in [Jer
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#003.md). The little ones of Moab, that
raise a cry, are neither the children (Vulgate, Dahler, Maurer), nor the
small towns (Hitzig), nor the people of humble condition, but cives
Moabi ad statum miserum dejecti (Kueper). The lxx have rendered εἰς
Ζογόρα (i.e., צעורה), which reading is preferred by J. D. Michaelis,
Ewald, Umbreit, Graf, Ngelsbach, but without sufficient reason; for
neither the occurrence of Zoar in combination with Horonaim in [Jer
48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034.md), nor the parallel passage [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md), will prove the point. [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md) is not a parallel to this verse,
but to [Jer 48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034.md); however, the train
of thought is different from that before us here. Besides, Jeremiah
writes the name of the town צער (not צוער), cf. v. 34, as in [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md); [Deu
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#003.md); [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010.md) (צוער occurs only in [Gen
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#022.md), [Gen
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#030).md); hence it is unlikely that צעור
has been written by mistake for צוער.

[Jer 48:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#005.md)

In [Jer 48:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#005.md) this idea is further
elucidated. The inhabitants flee, weeping as they go, towards the south,
before the conquering enemy advancing from the north, up the ascent of
Luhith, and down the descent of Horonaim. The idea is taken from [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md), but applied by Jeremiah in his
own peculiar manner; יעלה בּו is changed into יעלה בּכי, and the notion
of weeping is thereby intensified. We take בּכי as an adverbial
accusative, but in fact it is to be rendered like the preceding בּבכי;
and יעלה stands with an indefinite nominative: "one ascends = they
ascend," not "weeping rises over weeping," as Hitzig, Graf, and others
take it. For, in the latter case, בּבכי could not be separated from
בּכי, nor stand first; cf. the instances adduced by Graf, שׁנה בּשׁנה
and עין בּעין. The form חלּחות for חלּחית is either an error of
transcription or an optional form, and there is no ground for taking the
word as appellative, as Hitzig does, "the ascent of boards, i.e., as
boards tower one above another, so does weeping rise," - an unnatural
figure, and one devoid of all taste. The last words of the second member
of the verse present some difficulty, chiefly on account of צרי, which
the lxx have omitted, and which Ewald and Umbreit set down as spurious,
although (as Graf rightly remarks) they do not thereby explain how it
came into the text. To suppose, with the Rabbinical writers, that the
construct state צרי stands for the absolute, is not only inadmissible,
as being against the principles of grammar, but also contrary to the
whole scope of the passage. The context shows that the clamour cannot
proceed from the enemy, but only from the fugitive Moabites. Only two
explanations are possible: either צרי must be taken in the sense of
angustiae, and in connection with צעקת, "straits, distress of crying," a
cry of distress, as De Wette does; or, "oppressors of the cry of
distress," as Ngelsbach takes it. We prefer the former, in spite of the
objection of Graf, that the expression "distress of crying," for "a cry
of distress," would be a strange one: for this objection may be made
against his own explanation, that צרי means the bursting open of the
mouth in making a loud cry; and צרי זעקה is a loud outcry for help.

[Jer 48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006.md)

Only by a precipitate flight into the desert can the Moabites save even
their lives. The summons to flee is merely a rhetorical expression for
the thought that there is no safety to be had in the country. To ותּהינה
in [Jer 48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006.md) we must supply נפשׁות as
the subject: "your souls shall be." Ewald would change נפשׁכם into
נפשׁיכם; but this proposal has against it the fact that the plural form
נפשׁים is found in but a single case, [Eze
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#020.md), and נפשׁות everywhere else:
besides, נפשׁ is often used in the singular of several persons, as in
[Sa2 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#006.md), and may further be easily
taken here in a distributive sense; cf. מלּטוּ אישׁ נפשׁו, [Jer
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#006.md). The assumption of C. B.
Michaelis, Rosenmller, Maurer, and of the translators of our
"Authorized" English Version, that תּהינה is the second person, and
refers to the cities, i.e., their inhabitants, is against the context.
ערוער cannot here be the name of a town, because neither Aroer in the
tribe of Reuben, which was situated on the Arnon, nor Aroer of the tribe
of Gad, which was before Rabbath-Ammon, lay in the wilderness; the
comparison, too, of the fugitives to a city is unsuitable. The clause
reminds us of [Jer 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006.md), and ערוער =
the ערער of that passage; the form found here is either an error of
transcription caused by thinking of Aroer, or a play upon the name of
the city, for the purpose of pointing out the fate impending over it.

[Jer 48:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007.md)

Moab will not be saved from destruction by any trust on their works or
on their treasures. The lxx, Vulgate, and Syriac render מעשׂיך by
fortresses, hence Ewald would read מעוניך instead; but there is no
ground for the change, since the peculiar rendering alluded to has
evidently originated from מעשׂה having been confounded with מעוז.
Others, as Dahler, refer the word to idols; but these are always
designated as מעשׂי יד. Graf translates "property," and points to [Sa1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002.md); [Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016.md); but this meaning also has
really nothing to support it, for מעשׂה in these passages denotes only
agriculture and its produce, and the combination of the word with אוצרות
in this passage does not require such a rendering. We abide by the
common meaning of "doings" or "works," not evil deeds specially
(Hitzig), but "all that Moab undertakes." Neither their efforts to
maintain and increase their power, nor their wealth, will avail them in
any way. They shall be overcome. Moab is addressed as a country or
kingdom. לכד, to seize, capture; of a land, to take, conquer. Chemosh,
with his priests and princes, shall go into exile. כּמישׁ is perhaps a
mere error of the copyist for כּמושׁ, Chemosh, the chief deity of the
Moabites and Ammonites, worshipped as a king and the war-god of his
people: see on [Num 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029.md). As in the
last-named passage the Moabites are called the people of Chemosh, so
here, not merely the priests, but also the princes of Moab, are called
his priests and his princes. The Kethib יחד is not to be changed,
although Jeremiah elsewhere always uses יחדּו, which is substituted in
the Qeri; cf. [Jer 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003.md). In
confirmation of this, it is added, in [Jer
48:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#008.md), that all the cities of Moab,
without exception, shall be laid waste, and the whole country, valley
and plain, shall be brought to ruin. המּישׁור, "the level," is the
table-land stretching from the Arnon to Heshbon, and north-eastwards as
far as Rabbath-Ammon, and which originally belonged to the Moabites,
hence called "the fields of Moab" in Num. 21:40; but it was taken from
them by the Amorites, and after the conquest of the latter was taken
possession of by the Israelites ([Deu
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010.md); [Deu
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043.md); [Jos
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#009).md), but at that time had been taken
back once more by the Moabites. העמק is the valley of the Jordan,
commonly called הערבה, as in [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027.md) and [Jos
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#019.md); here it is that portion of the
valley towards the west which bounds the table-land. אשׁר can only be
taken in a causal signification, "because," as in [Jer
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#013.md), or in a relative meaning, quod,
or "as."

[Jeremiah 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 48:9</span></span>

Moab is laid waste, and its inhabitants carried captive. - [Jer
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#009.md). "Give pinions to Moab, for he
will flee and get away, and his cities shall become a waste, with no one
dwelling in them. [Jer 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010.md). Cursed
is he that doeth the work of Jahveh negligently, and cursed is he that
restraineth his sword from blood. [Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011.md). Moab hath been at ease from his
youth, and lay still upon his lees; he was not poured out from vessel to
vessel, neither hath he gone into captivity, therefore his taste hath
remained in him, and his smell hath not changed. [Jer
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#012.md). Therefore, behold, days come,
saith Jahveh, when I will send to him those who pour out, and they shall
pour him out; and they shall empty his vessels, and break their bottles.
[Jer 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013.md). And Moab shall be ashamed
of Chemosh, as the house of Israel was ashamed of Bethel their
confidence. [Jer 48:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#014.md). How can ye
say, We are mighty, and men of valour for the war? [Jer
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#015.md). Moab is laid waste, and people
ascend into his cities, and the choice of his young men go down to the
slaughter, saith the King, whose name is Jahveh of hosts."

The devastation will come so suddenly, that Moab, in order to escape it,
uses wings for enabling him to flee from it. The request "give" is not
ironical, but a mere rhetorical employment of the idea that wings would
be necessary in order to escape. ציץ, which elsewhere means a flower,
here signifies wings or waving plumes, as in the Targum on [Psa
139:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#009.md), and in the Rabbinical writings.
נצא, written with א for the sake of obtaining similarity of sound,
stands for נצה = נצץ, to flee.

[Jer 48:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010.md)

The devastation is a work of the Lord, and those who execute it must
carry out the divine decree, so that they may not bring the curse upon
themselves. The first clause is taken quite generally: the more exact
specification of the work of the Lord follows in the second clause; it
is the employment of the sword against Moab. "His sword" does not mean
Jahveh's, but the sword carried by the devastator. רמיּה is used
adverbially, but not in the sense of "deceitfully," rather "carelessly,
negligently;" cf. כּף רמיּה, [Pro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004.md); [Pro
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#024.md). In [Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011.md) follows the reason why the
judgment has necessarily come on Moab. Moab is compared to old wine that
has lain long on its lees, and thereby preserved its flavour and smell
unchanged. The taste and odour of Moab signify his disposition towards
other nations, particularly towards Israel, the people of God. Good wine
becomes stronger and more juicy by lying pretty long on its lees (see on
[Isa 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006).md); inferior wine, however,
becomes thereby more harsh and thick. The figure is used here in the
latter sense, after [Zep 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012.md). Moab's
disposition towards Israel was harsh and bitter; the people were
arrogant and proud ([Jer 48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md).; [Isa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006).md), and so hostile towards Israel,
that they sought every opportunity of injuring them (see above, p.
385f., and the comments on [Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002).md).
From his youth, i.e., from the time when Moab, after subduing the Emims
([Deu 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010).md), had established himself
in his own land, or had become enrolled among the nations of history, -
from that time forward had he remained undisturbed in his own land,
i.e., without being driven out of it, had not gone into captivity (as is
shown by the figure of the wine poured from one vessel into another). In
this way there is a qualification made of the general statement that he
remains at rest on his lees, and undisturbed. For Moab has often carried
on wars, and even suffered many defeats, but has never yet been driven
from his own land; nor had the temporary dependence on Israel exercised
any transforming influence on the ordinary life of the people, for they
were simply made tributary. This quiet continuance in the country is to
cease. The God of Israel "will send to them cellarmen (Germ. Schrter),
who shall bring them out of the cellar" (Germ. ausschroten), as Luther
translates [Jer 48:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#012.md). "Schrter" are
men who bring the wine-casks out of the cellar; for "schroten" means to
bring out heavy burdens, especially full casks on a strong kind of
hand-barrow (Germ. Hebewerkzeug), like a ladder in appearance. צעים
(from צעה, to bend, incline) are those who incline a barrel or vessel
for the purpose or pouring out its contents. These will not merely empty
the vessels, but also break the pitchers; i.e., not merely carry away
the Moabites, but also break down their political organization, and
destroy their social arrangements.

[Jer 48:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#013.md)

In this way Moab will come to dishonour through his god Chemosh, i.e.,
experience his powerlessness and nothingness, and perish with him, just
as Israel (the ten tribes) came to dishonour through Bethel, i.e.,
through their golden calf at Bethel. As to the form מבטחם, with Segol in
the pretone, cf. Ewald, 70, a; Olshausen, Gram. S. 377. Moab will then
be no longer able to boast of his valour; this is the meaning of the
question in [Jer 48:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#014.md) : on this term
in the address, cf. [Jer 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023.md); [Jer
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008.md). In [Jer
48:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#015.md) it is further stated that the
result will show this: "Moab is laid waste." ועריה עלה is variously
interpreted. An explanation which has met with much acceptance, but
which nevertheless is really untenable, is founded on [Jdg
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040.md) ("The whole city went up towards
heaven" i.e., in smoke and fire): "As for his cities, fire or smoke
ascends;" but there is no mention here either of smoke or fire. Kimchi
long ago came near the truth when he sought to find the subject שׁדד in
shudad שׁדּד: "and the devastator comes against his cities." However,
the contrast between עלה and ירדוּ is not fully brought out in this way:
it is better to leave the subject indeterminate: "and his cities they
climb" (Kueper), or: "they go up to his cities" (Bttcher, Neue
Aehrenlese, ii. 163). The enemy who mounts the cities is evidently
intended. The change שׁדּד into שׁדד is both unnecessary and unsuitable;
but J. D. Michaelis, Ewald, Dahler, Graf, after making the alteration,
translate, "The destroyer of Moab and of his cities draws near." Hitzig
justly remarks, in opposition to this conjecture: "There is nothing to
justify the mere placing of the subject at the head of the sentence
(contrast [Jer 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#008.md), [Jer
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018).md); besides, one does not see why
the cities of Moab are distinguished from Moab itself; and cf. 20b." ירד
לבּטח, "to sink down to the slaughter," cf. [Jer
50:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#027.md); and on this use of ירד, [Isa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#007.md). The enemy ascends into the
cities, the young soldiers of Moab descend to the shambles. This
threatening is enforced by the addition, "saith the King," etc. Jahveh
is called the King, in contrast with the belief of the Moabites, that
their god Chemosh was the king of his people (see on [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007).md). The true King of the Moabites
also is Jahveh, the God of hosts, i.e., the Ruler of the whole world.

[Jeremiah 48:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 48:16</span></span>

Moab's glory is departed. - [Jer
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#016.md). "The destruction of Moab is
near to come, and his trouble hastens rapidly. [Jer
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#017.md). Bewail him, all \[ye who are\]
round about him, and all who know his name! Say, How the rod of strength
is broken, the staff of majesty! [Jer
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018.md). Come down from \[thy\] glory,
and sit in the drought, \[thou\] inhabitants, daughter of Dibon; for the
destroyer of Moab hath come up against thee, he hath destroyed thy
strongholds. [Jer 48:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#019.md). Stand by the
way, and watch, O inhabitants of Aroer! ask him who flees, and her that
has escaped; say, What has happened? [Jer
48:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#020.md). Moab is ashamed, for it is
broken down: howl and cry out; tell it in Arnon, that Moab is laid
waste. [Jer 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#021.md). And judgment hath
come upon the country of the plain, upon Holon, and upon Jahzah, and
upon Mephaath, [Jer 48:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#022.md). And upon
Dibon, and upon Nebo, and upon Beth-diblathaim, [Jer
48:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#023.md). And upon Kirjathaim, and upon
Beth-gamul, and upon Beth-meon, [Jer
48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024.md). And upon Kerioth, and upon
Bozrah, and upon all the cities of the land of Moab, those that are far
off and those that are near. [Jer
48:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#025.md). The horn of Moab is cut off, ad
his arm is broken, saith Jahveh."

The downfall of Moab will soon begin. [Jer
48:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#016.md) is an imitation of [Deu
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#035.md); cf. [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022.md); [Isa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#001.md). The fall of the Moabite power
and glory will be so terrible, that all the nations, near ad distant,
will have pity on him. The summons to lament, [Jer
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#017.md), is not a mockery, but is
seriously meant, for the purpose of expressing the idea that the
downfall of so mighty and glorious a power will rouse compassion. The
environs of Moab are the neighbouring nations, and "those who know his
name" are those who live far off, and have only heard about him. The
staff, the sceptre, is the emblem of authority; cf. [Eze
19:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#011.md), [Eze
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#014.md), and [Psa
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002.md).

[Jeremiah 48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 48:18</span></span>

In [Jer 48:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018.md) is further described
the downfall of this strong and glorious power. The inhabitants if Dibon
are to come down from their glory and sit in misery; those of Aroer are
to ask the fugitives what has happened, that they may learn that the
whole table-land on to the Arnon has been taken by the enemy; and they
are to howl over the calamity. The idea presented in [Jer
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018.md) is an imitation of that in [Isa
47:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#001.md), "Come down, O daughter of
Babylon, sit in the dust;" but רדי is intensified by the addition of
מכּבוד, and וּשׁבי על is changed into וּשׁבי בצּמא (the Kethib ישׁבי has
evidently been written by mistake for וּשׁבי, the Qeri). צמא elsewhere
means "thirst;" but "sit down in the thirst" would be too strange an
expression; hence צמא must here have the meaning of צמא, [Isa
44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003.md), "the thirsty arid land:" thus it
remains a question whether we should point the word צמא, or take צמא as
another form of צמא, as חלב sa ,צמא fo mro is of חלב, [Eze
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#019.md). There is no sufficient reason
why Hitzig and Ewald should give the word a meaning foreign to it, from
the Arabic or Syriac. Dibon lay about four miles north from the Arnon,
at the foot of a mountain, in a very beautiful plain, where, under the
name of Dibn, many traces of walls, and a well by the wayside, hewn out
of the rock, are still to be found (Seetzen, i. S. 409f.). Hence it must
have been well provided with water, even though we should be obliged to
understand by "the water of Dimon" (Dibon), which Isaiah mentions ([Isa
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#009).md), the river Arnon, which is about
three miles off. The command to "sit down in an arid land" thus forms a
suitable figure, representing the humiliation and devastation of Dibon.
That the city was fortified, is evident from the mention of the
fortifications in the last clause. ישׁבת , as in [Jer
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#019.md). Aroer was situated on the north
bank of the Arnon (Mojeb), where its ruins still remain, under the old
name Arג'ir (Burckhardt, p. 372). It was a frontier town, between the
kingdom of Sihon (afterwards the territory of the Israelites) and the
possession of the Moabites ([Deu 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036.md);
[Deu 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012.md); [Deu
4:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#048.md); [Jos
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#002.md); [Jos
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#009.md), [Jos
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#016).md). But after the Moabites had
regained the northern portion of their original territory, it lay in the
midst of the land. The fugitives here represented as passing by are
endeavouring, by crossing the Arnon, to escape from the enemy advancing
from the north, and subduing the country before them. נס ונמלטה means
fugitives of every kind. The co-ordination of the same word or
synonymous terms in the masc. and fem. serves to generalize the idea;
see on [Isa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#001.md), and Ewald, 172, c. In
נמלטה the tone is retracted through the influence of the distinctive
accent; the form is participial. The question, "What has happened?" is
answered in [Jer 48:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#020.md). כּי חתּה, "for
(= certainly) it is broken down." The Kethib הלילי וּזעקי must not be
changed. Moab is addressed: with הגּידוּ is introduced the summons,
addressed to individuals, to proclaim at the Arnon the calamity that has
befallen the country to the north of that river.

[Jeremiah 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 48:21</span></span>

In [Jer 48:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#021.md) the general idea of
Moab's being laid waste is specialized by the enumeration of a long list
of towns on which judgment has come. They are towns of ארץ המּישׁור, the
table-land to the north of the Arnon, the names of which early all occur
in the Pentateuch and Joshua as towns in the tribe of Reuben. But Holon
is mentioned only here. According to Eusebius, in the Onomasticon, s.v.
̓Ιεσσά, Jahzah was situated between Μηδαβῶν (Medeba) and Δηβοῦς (Dibon);
according to Jerome, between Medeba and Debus, or Deblathai; but from
[Num 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023.md), we conclude that it lay in
an easterly direction, on the border of the desert, near the
commencement of the Wady Wale. Mophaath or Mephaath, where, according to
the Onomasticon, a Roman garrison was placed, on account of the near
proximity of the desert, is to be sought for in the neighbourhood of
Jahzah; see on [Jos 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#018.md). As to
Dibon, see on [Jer 48:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018.md); for Nebo,
see on [Jer 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001.md). Beth-diblathaim is
mentioned only in this passage. It is probably identical with
Almon-diblathaim, [Num 33:46](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#046.md), and to
be sought for somewhere north from Dibon. For Kirjahthaim see [Jer
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001.md). Beth-gamul is nowhere else
mentioned; its site, too, is unknown. Eli Smith, in Robinson's
Palestine, iii. App. p. 153, is inclined to recognise it in the ruins of
Um-el-Jemel, lying on the southern boundary of the Hauran, about twenty
miles south-west from Bozrah; but a consideration of the position shows
that they cannot be the same. Beth-meon, or Baal-meon ([Num
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038).md), or more fully, Beth-baal-meon
([Jos 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017).md), lay about three miles
south from Heshbon, where Burckhardt (p. 365) found some ruins called
Mi-n (Robinson, iii. App. p. 170, Ma-n); see on [Num
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038.md). Kerioth, [Jer
48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024.md) and [Jer
48:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#041.md), and [Amo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002.md), is not to be identified with the
ruins called Kereyath or Kreiyath, mentioned by Burckhardt (p. 367) and
Seetzen (Reisen, ii. 342, iv. 384), as Ritter has assumed; for this
Kereyath is more probably Kirjathaim (see on [Jer
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001).md). Rather, as is pretty fully
proved by Dietrich (in Merx' Archiv. i. 320ff.), it is a synonym of Ar,
the old capital of Moab, [Num 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#036.md);
and the plural form is to be accounted for by supposing that Ar was made
up of two or several large portions. We find two great arguments
supporting this position: (1.) When Ar, the capital, occurs among the
names of the towns of Moab, as in the list of those in Reuben, [Jos
13:16-21](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#016.md), and in the prophecy against
Moab in Isaiah, Jer 15 and 16, where so many Moabitic towns are named,
we find no mention of Kerioth; and on the other hand, where Kerioth is
named as an important town in Moab, [Amo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002.md); [Jer
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001), there is no mention of Ar. (2..md)
Kerioth is mentioned as an important place in the country in [Amo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002.md), where, from the whole arrangement
of the prophecy, it can only be the capital of Moab; in this present
chapter also, [Jer 48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024.md), Kerioth and
Bozrah are introduced as two very important towns which maintained the
strength of Moab; and immediately afterwards it is added, "The horn of
Moab is cut off," etc. Further, in [Jer
48:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#041.md) the capture of Kerioth is put on
a level with the taking of the fortresses; while it is added, that the
courage of the mighty men has failed, just as in [Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022.md) the capture of Bozrah is coupled
with the loss of courage on the part of Edom's heroes. Bozrah is not to
be confounded with Bozrah in Edom ([Jer
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#013).md), nor with the later flourishing
city of Bostra in Hauran: it is the same with Bezer (בּצר), which,
according to [Deu 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043.md) and [Jos
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008.md), was situated in the Mishor of
the tribe of Reuben, but has not yet been discovered; see on [Deu
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043.md). For the purpose of completing
the enumeration, it is further added, "all the towns of the land of
Moab, those which are far off (i.e., those which are situated towards
the frontier) and those which are near" (i.e., the towns of the
interior, as Kimchi has already explained). Thereby the horn of Moab is
cut off, and his arm broken. Horn and arm are figures of power: the horn
an emblem of power that boldly asserts itself, and pushes down all that
opposes (cf. [Psa 75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005), 11.md); the arm
being rather an emblem of dominion.

[Jeremiah 48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 48:26</span></span>

Moab's haughtiness and deplorable fall. - [Jer
48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md). "Make him drunk - for he hath
boasted against Jahveh - so that Moab shall splash down into his vomit,
and himself become a laughing-stock. [Jer
48:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#027.md). Was not Israel a laughing-stock
to thee, or was he found among thieves? for whenever thou spakest of
him, thou didst shake thine head. [Jer
48:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#028.md). Leave the cities and dwell in
the rock, ye inhabitants of Moab; and be ye like a dove \[that\] builds
its nest in the sides of the mouth of a pit. [Jer
48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md). We have heard the very arrogant
pride of Moab, his haughtiness, and his arrogance, and his
high-mindedness, and his elation of mind. [Jer
48:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#030.md). I know, saith Jahveh, his
wrath, and the untruthfulness of his words; they have done what is
untrue. [Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md). Therefore will I
howl over Moab, and for all Moab will I cry; they mourn for the people
of Kir-heres. [Jer 48:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032.md). I will weep
for thee \[with more\] than the weeping of Jazer, O vine of Sibmah, thou
whose tendrils have gone over the sea, have reached even to the sea of
Jazer; on thy fruit-harvest and thy vintage a spoiler has fallen. [Jer
48:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#033.md). And joy and gladness are taken
from the garden, and from the land of Moab; and I have caused wine to
fail from the wine-vats: they shall not tread \[with\] a shout; the
shout shall be no shout. [Jer 48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034.md).
From the cry of Heshbon as far as Elealeh, as far as Jahaz, they utter
their voice; from Zoar as far as Horonaim and the third Eglath; for even
the waters of Nimrim shall become desolations. [Jer
48:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#035.md). And I will destroy from Moab,
saith Jahveh, him that offers on a high place and burns incense to his
gods."

Through his pride, Moab has incurred the sentence of destruction to his
power. In arrogance and rage he has exalted himself over Jahveh and His
people Israel; therefore must he now be humbled, [Jer
48:26-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md). The summons to make Moab
drunk is addressed to those whom God has charged with the execution of
the sentence; cf. [Jer 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#010.md) and [Jer
48:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#021.md). These are to present to the
people of Moab the cup of the divine wrath, and so to intoxicate them,
that they shall fall like a drunk man into his vomit, and become a
laughing-stock to others (cf. [Jer
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#013.md); [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015).md), because they have boasted
against Jahveh by driving the Israelites from their inheritance, and by
deriding the people of God; cf. [Zep
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008.md). ספק, to strike, frequently of
striking the hands together; here it signifies to fall into his vomit,
i.e., to tumble into it with a splash. No other explanation of the word
can find support from the language used. Cf. [Isa
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#014.md) and [Isa
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#010.md). In the last clause of [Jer
48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md), the emphasis lies on גּם הוּא:
"he also (Moab, like Israel before) shall become a laughing-stock." This
statement is enforced by the question put in [Jer
48:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#027.md), "Was not Israel a
laughing-stock to thee?" ואם־אם shows a double question, like ה־אם; and
ואם in the first clause may be further strengthened by the interrogative
ה before שׂחק, as in [Gen 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#017.md). For
other forms of the double question, see [Psa
94:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009.md); [Job
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#004.md); [Jer
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#026.md). On Dagesh dirimens in השּׂחק,
cf. Ewald, 104, b. There is no sufficient reason for questioning the
feminine form נמצאה in the Qeri; Israel is personified as a woman, just
as Moab in [Jer 48:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#020.md), where חתּה is
found. On מדּי דב, cf. [Jer 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#020.md),
where, however, דּבּר בּ is used in another meaning. התנודד, to shake
oneself, is a stronger expression than הניד בּראשׁ, to shake the head
([Jer 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016).md), a gesture denoting
mockery and rejoicing over another's injury; cf. [Psa
64:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#009.md).

[Jeremiah 48:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 48:28</span></span>

A transition is now made from figurative to literal language, and Moab
is summoned to leave the cities and take refuge in inaccessible rocks,
because he will not be able to offer resistance to the enemy; cf. [Jer
48:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#006.md) and [Jer
48:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#009.md). "Like a dove that builds its
nest over deep crevices." The reference is to wild pigeons, which occur
in large numbers in Palestine, and make their nests in the clefts of
high rocks ([Sol 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014).md) even at the
present day, e.g., in the wilderness of Engedi; cf. Robinson's
Palestine, ii. 203. בּעברי , lit., "on the other side of the mouth of
the deep pit," or of the abyss, i.e., over the yawning hollows. בּעברי
is a poetic form for בּעבר, as in [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020.md). The humiliation of Moab finds
its justification in what is brought out in [Jer
48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md)., his boundless pride and hatred
against Israel.

[Jeremiah 48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 48:29</span></span>

[Jer 48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md) and [Jer
48:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#030.md) only more fully develop the idea
contained in [Isa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006.md). Those who
"heard" are the prophet and the people of God. There is an accumulation
of words to describe the pride of Moab. Isaiah's expression also, עברתו
לא־כן בּדּיו, is here expanded into two clauses, and Jahveh is named as
the subject. Not only have the people of God perceived the pride of
Moab, but God also knows his wrath. בּדּיו belongs to לא־כן as a
genitive, as in Isaiah לא־כן means "not right," contrary to actual
facts, i.e., untrue.

(Note: The Masoretic accentuation, according to which Athnach is placed
under כּן, exhibits another view of the words in the text: this is shown
by the Chaldee paraphrase, "their nobles endure not, they have not done
what is right." The Masoretes took בּדּים in the sense of "staves," and
took staves as a symbol of princes, as in [Hos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#006.md). Luther, in his translation, "I
know his anger well, that he cannot do so very much, and attempts to do
more than he can," follows the Vulgate, Ego scio jactantiam ejus, et
quod non sit juxta eam virtus ejus, nec juxta quod poterat conata sit
facere, which again seems to have followed the lxx in taking בּדיּו for
בּדּיו.)

[Jeremiah 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 48:31</span></span>

[Jer 48:31-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md) are also an imitation of
[Isa 16:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007.md). V. 31 is a reproduction
of [Isa 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007.md). In [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007.md), Isaiah sets forth the
lamentation of Moab over the devastation of his country and its precious
fruits; and not until v. 9 does the prophet, in deep sympathy, mingle
his tears with those of the Moabites. Jeremiah, on the other hand, with
his natural softness, at once begins, in the first person, his lament
over Moab. על־כּן, "therefore," is not immediately connected with [Jer
48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md)., but with the leading idea
presented in [Jer 48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md) and [Jer
48:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#028.md), that Moab will fall like one
intoxicated, and that he must flee out of his cities. If we refer it to
[Jer 48:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#030.md), there we must attach it to
the thought implicitly contained in the emphatic statement, "I (Jahveh)
know his wrath," viz., "and I will punish him for it." The I who makes
lament is the prophet, as in [Isa 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009.md)
and [Isa 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md). Schnurrer, Hitzig, and
Graf, on the contrary, think that it is an indefinite third person who
is introduced as representing the Moabites; but there is no analogous
case to support this assumption, since the instances in which third
persons are introduced are of a different kind. But when Graf further
asserts, against referring the I to the prophet, that, according to what
precedes, especially what we find in [Jer
48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md)., such an outburst of sympathy
for Moab would involve a contradiction, he makes out the prophet to be a
Jew thirsting for revenge, which he was not. Raschi has already well
remarked, on the other hand, under [Isa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md), that "the prophets of Israel
differ from heathen prophets like Balaam in this, that they lay to heart
the distress which they announce to the nations;" cf. [Isa
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003.md). The prophet weeps for all Moab,
because the judgment is coming not merely on the northern portion ([Jer
48:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#018).md), but on the whole of the
country. In [Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md), Jeremiah has
properly changed לאשׁישׁי (cakes of dried grapes) into אל־אנשׁי, the
people of Kir-heres, because his sympathy was directed, not to dainties,
but to the men in Moab; he has also omitted "surely they are smitten,"
as being too strong for his sympathy. יהגּה, to groan, taken from the
cooing of doves, perhaps after [Isa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#015.md); [Isa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#011.md). The third person indicates a
universal indefinite. Kir-heres, as in [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011.md), or Kir-haresheth in [Isa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007.md); [Kg2
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025.md), was the chief stronghold of
Moab, probably the same as Kir-Moab, the modern Kerek, as we may
certainly infer from a comparison of [Isa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007.md) with [Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001.md) see on [Kg2
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025.md), and Dietrich, S. 324.

[Jer 48:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#032.md)

מבּכי יעזר, "more than the weeping of Jazer," may signify, "More than
Jazer weeps do I weep over thee;" or, "More than over Jazer weeps do I
weep over thee;" or, "More than over Jazer do I weep over thee."
However, the former interpretation is the more obvious, and is confirmed
by the reading in [Isa 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009.md). According
to the Onomasticon, Jazer was fifteen Roman miles north from Heshbon.
Seetzen recognises it in the ruins called es Szir at the source of the
Nahr Szir; see on [Num 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#032.md).
According to Jerome, on [Isa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008.md),
Sibmah was only five hundred paces from Heshbon; see on [Num
32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038.md). Judging from the verse now
before us, and from Isa. l.c., the vines of Sibmah must have been famed
for the strength and excellence of their clusters. Even now, that region
produces excellent grapes in abundance. From Szalt, which lies only ten
miles north from Szir, raisins and grapes are carried to Jerusalem, and
these of excellent quality (Seetzen, i. S. 399; Burckhardt, p. 350). In
what follows, "his tendrils crossed the sea," etc., the extensive
cultivation of the grape is set forth under the figure of a vine whose
tendrils stretch out on all sides. "They have crossed over the sea" has
reference in Isaiah ([Isa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008).md) to the
Dead Sea (ים, as in [Psa 68:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023.md); [Ch2
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#002).md); not merely, however, in the
sense of the shoots reaching close to the Dead Sea, but also over it,
for Engedi was famed for its vines ([Sol
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#014).md). Jeremiah also has reproduced
the words taken from Isaiah in this sense. From the following clause,
"they reached to the sea of Jazer," it does not follow that he has
specified "the sea" by "Jazer." What tells rather the other way is the
fact that עבר, which means to cross over, cannot possibly be used as
equivalent to נגע עד, "to reach to." "They crossed over the sea" shows
extension towards the west, while "they reached to the sea of Jazer"
indicates extension towards the north. This latter statement also is an
imitation of what we find in [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008.md); and "Jazer" is merely further
specified as "the sea of Jazer." In spite of the most diligent
inquiries, Seetzen (i. S. 406) could learn nothing from the people of
that region regarding an inland lake; but in the beautiful green vale in
the vicinity of Szr (i.e., Jazer) there were several ponds, which he
supposes may possibly be the mare Jazer, since this valley lying among
the mountains is somewhat depressed, and in ancient times was probably
filled with water. The "sea" (ים) of Solomon's temple further shows that
ים does not necessarily denote only a large lake, but might also be
applied to a large artificial basin of water. So also, at the present
day, the artificial water-basins on the streets of Damascus are called
baharat, "seas;" cf. Wetzstein in Delitzsch on [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008.md). This cultivation of the vine is
at an end; for the destroyer has fallen upon the fruit-harvest and the
vintage. Jeremiah, by "the destroyer has fallen," explains the words of
Isaiah ([Isa 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009).md), "shouting has
fallen." - In [Jer 48:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#033.md), [Isa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#010.md) is reproduced. "Joy and gladness
are taken away from the gardens, and from the whole land of Moab." כּרמל
is not here a proper name, for Mount Carmel does not at all suit the
present context; it is an appellative, fruit-land, i.e., the fruitful
wine-country near Jazer. Jeremiah adds, "and from the land (i.e., the
whole land) of Moab." The pressing of the grapes comes to an end; there
is no wine in the vat; no longer is the wine pressed with "Hedad." הידד
is an adverbial accusative. This is further specified by the oxymoron: a
"Hedad, and yet not a Hedad." This word generally signifies any loud
shout, - not merely the shout of the wine-pressers as they tread the
grapes (see on [Jer 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030).md), but also a
battle-cry; cf. [Jer 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#014.md). Hence the
meaning is, "Hedad is heard, but not a merry shout of the
wine-pressers."

[Jeremiah 48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 48:34</span></span>

[Jer 48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034.md) is based on [Isa
15:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004.md). "From the cry of Heshbon is
heard the echo as far as Elealeh and Jahaz," or "from Heshbon to Elealeh
and Jahaz is heard a cry, and from Zoar to Horonaim." Heshbon and
Elealeh are only about two miles distant from each other; their ruins
are still visible under the names of Hesbn (Husban, see on [Jer
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002).md) and El Al (see on [Num
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#037).md). They were both built on hills;
Elealeh in particular was situated on the summit of a hill whence the
whole of the southern Belka may be seen (Burckhardt, p. 365), so that a
shout thence emitted could be heard at a great distance, even as far as
Jahaz, which is pretty far off to the south-west from Heshbon (see on
[Jer 48:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#021).md). The words "from Zoar to
Horonaim" also depend on "they uttered their voice." Both places lay in
the south of the land; see on [Jer
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#003.md) and [Jer
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#004.md). The wailing resounds not merely
on the north, but also on the south of the Arnon. There is much dispute
as to the meaning of עגלת שׁלישׁיּה, which is here mentioned after
Horonaim, but in [Isa 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005.md) in
connection with, or after Zoar. To take the expression as an
appellative, juvenca tertii anni (lxx, Vulgate, Targum, Gesenius, etc.),
would perhaps be suitable, if it were an apposition to Moab, in which
case we might compare with it passages like [Jer
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020.md); [Jer
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#011.md); but this does not accord with
its position after Horonaim and Zoar, for we have no analogy for the
comparison of cities or fortresses with a juvenca tertii anni, h. e.
indomita jugoque non assueta; and it cannot even be proved that Zoar and
Horonaim were fortresses of Moab. Hence we take 'עגלת שׁ as the proper
name of a place, "the third Eglath;" this is the view of Rosenmller,
Drechsler, and Dietrich (in Merx' Archiv. i. S. 342ff.). The main reason
for this view, is, that there would be no use for an addition being
made, by way of apposition, to a place which is mentioned as the limit
of the Moabites' flight, or that reached by their wailing. The
parallelism of the clauses argues in favour of its being a proper name;
for, on this view of it, three towns are named in both members, the
first one, as the starting-point of the cry of wailing, the other two as
points up to which it is heard. The preposition עד, which is omitted,
may be supplied from the parallel member, as in [Isa
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#008.md). Regarding the position of Eglath
Shelishijah, it is evident from the context of both passages that we
must look for it on the southern frontier of Moab. It is implied in the
epithet "the third" that there were three places (villages), not far
from one another, all bearing the same name. Dietrich (S. 344f.) has
adduced several analogous cases of towns in the country to the east of
the Jordan, - two, and sometimes even three, towns of the same name,
which are distinguished from each other by numerals. "The waters of
Nimrim also shall become desolations," because the enemy fill up the
springs with earth. Nimrim is not the place called נמרה or בּית נמרה
mentioned in [Num 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003.md), [Num
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036.md); [Jos
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#027.md), whose ruins lie on the way from
Szalt to Jericho, in the Wady Shaib, on the east side of the Jordan (see
on [Num 32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036).md), for this lies much too
far to the north to be the place mentioned here. The context points to a
place in the south, in Moab proper. where Burckhardt (p. 355), Seetzen
(Reisen, ii. S. 354), and de Saulcy (Voyage, i. 283, ii. 52) have
indicated a stream fed by a spring, called Moiet Numre (i.e., brook
Nimrah), in the country at the south end of the Dead Sea, and in that
wady a mass of ruins called Numre (the Nimmery of Seetzen, iii. 18).

[Jeremiah 48:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 48:35</span></span>

[Jer 48:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#035.md) ends the strophe of which
it is a part; here the Lord declares that He will make to cease למואב
(for, or from Moab, lit., to Moab), every one who offers on a high place
and burns incense to his gods. מעלה cannot be a substantive, else the
parallelism would be destroyed. Nor may we, with Hitzig, render "he who
raises a high place," i.e., builds it, for העלה is not used in this
sense.

[Jeremiah 48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 48:36</span></span>

Further lamentation over the fall of Moab. - [Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036.md). "Therefore my heart sounds like
pipes for Moab, and my heart sounds like pipes for the men of Kir-heres;
therefore the savings which he has made are perished. [Jer
48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037.md). For every head is baldness, and
every beard is shorn; on all hands there are cuts, and on loins
sackcloth. [Jer 48:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#038.md). On all the
roofs of Moab, and in its streets, it is all mourning; for I have broken
Moab like a vessel, in which there is no pleasure, saith Jahveh."

The prophet once more lifts up his lamentation over Moab ([Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036.md) corresponds to [Jer
48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031).md), and gives reason for it in the
picture he draws of the deep affliction of the Moabites. [Jer
48:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#036.md) is an imitation of [Isa
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#011.md); the thought presented in v. 36b
accords with that found in [Isa 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007.md).
Isaiah says, "My bowels sound (groan) like the harp," whose strings give
a tremulous sound when struck with the plectrum. Instead of this,
Jeremiah puts the sounding of pipes, the instruments used in dirges
([Mat 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023).md). Moab and Kir-heres are
mentioned together, as in [Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031.md).
על־כּן, in the second clause, does not stand for כּי על־כּן, "on this
account that" (Kimchi, Hitzig, Graf, etc.), but is co-ordinated with the
first על־כּן. The idea is not, "Therefore my heart mourns over Moab,
because the savings are perished;" but because the sentence of
desolation has been passed on the whole of Moab, therefore the heart of
the prophet makes lament, and therefore, too, all the property which
Moab has acquired is lost. יתרה, as a collective noun, is joined with
the plural verb אבדוּ. On the construction יתרת עשׂה, cf. Gesenius, 123,
3, Rem. 1; Ewald, 332, c. The proof of this is given by the deep sorrow
and wailing of the whole Moabite nation, [Jer
48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037.md). On all sides are tokens of the
deepest sadness, - heads shorn bald, beards cut off, incisions on the
hands, sackcloth round the loins.

[Jer 48:37-38](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037.md)

[Jer 48:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#037.md) is formed out of pieces
taken from [Isa 15:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002.md). קרחה is a
substantive, "baldness," i.e., quite bald. גּרוּעה, decurtata, instead
of גּדוּעה (in Isaiah), is weaker, but more suitable for the present
connection. גּדדת, i.e., cuts or scratches inflicted on the body, as
signs of mourning; cf. [Jer 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#006.md); [Jer
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#005.md). כּלּה , "It is all wailing;"
nothing is heard but wailing, for God has broken Moab in pieces like a
useless vessel. On the simile employed, cf. [Jer
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#028.md).

[Jeremiah 48:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jer 48:39</span></span>

No escape from destruction. - [Jer
48:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#039.md). "How it is broken! they howl.
How hath Moab turned the back, for shame! And Moab becomes a
laughing-stock and a terror to all his neighbours. [Jer
48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040.md). For thus saith Jahveh: Behold,
he shall fly like the eagle, and spread his wings over Moab. [Jer
48:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#041.md). Kerioth is taken, and the
strongholds are seized, and the heart of the heroes of Moab on that day
become like the heart of a travailing woman. [Jer
48:42](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#042.md). And Moab is destroyed from
being a people, because he hath boasted against Jahveh. [Jer
48:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043.md). Fear, and a pit, and a snare,
are against thee, O inhabitants of Moab, saith Jahveh. [Jer
48:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#044.md). He who flees from the fear
shall fall into the pit, and he who goes up out of the pit shall be
taken in the snare; for I will bring against it, against Moab, the year
of their recompense, saith Jahveh."

The subject of חתּה in [Jer 48:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#039.md) is
Moab viewed as a nation. הילילוּ might be imperative, but in this case
we would be obliged to take בּושׁ also as an imperative (as Hitzig and
Graf do). It is simpler to take both forms as perfects: "they
howl...Moab turns the back, is ashamed" (= for shame). On היה לשׂחק, cf.
[Jer 48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md). מחתּה, object of terror,
as in [Jer 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#017.md). "All who are round
about him," as in [Jer 48:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#017.md). "For
([Jer 48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040).md) the enemy rushes down
upon Moab like an eagle, and seizes Kerioth and all his strongholds."
The subject is left unnamed, as in [Jer
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#018.md), but it is Nebuchadnezzar. The
figure of the eagle, darting down in flight on its prey, is founded on
[Deu 28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049.md) (on אל- for על, cf. [Jer
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022).md). Kerioth, the capital, is taken
(see on [Jer 48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024).md); so are the other
strongholds or fastnesses of the country. The mere fact that קריּות has
the article does not justify any one in taking it as an appellative,
"the cities;" this appears from a comparison of [Amo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002.md) with this verse. No plural of קריה
occurs anywhere. Then the fear of death falls on the heroes of Moab like
a woman in labour. מצרה, partic. Hiphil from צרר, uterum comprimens, is
found only here and in [Jer 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#022.md),
where the figure is repeated. Moab is annihilated, so that it is no
longer a nation (cf. [Jer 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002).md),
because it has risen up in pride against the God of Israel; cf. [Jer
48:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#026.md). He who flees from one danger
falls into the other. The play on the words פּחד, fear, horror, פּחת,
pit, and פּח, spring-trap, as well as the mode in which it is carried
out, is taken from [Isa 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#017.md)., - a
prophecy of the judgment on the world; see a similar idea presented in
[Amo 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#019.md), but somewhat differently
expressed. The Kethib הניס, perfect Hiphil, "he flees," is less suitable
than the Qeri הנּס (after Isaiah). The last clause, "for I will bring,"
etc., is quite in Jeremiah's peculiar style; cf. [Jer
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023.md); [Jer
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#012.md). אליה belongs to אל־מואב: the
noun is anticipated by the pronoun, as frequently occurs; cf. [Jer
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#014.md); [Jer
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#003.md); [Jer
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#011.md).

[Jeremiah 48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jer 48:45</span></span>

Conclusion. - [Jer 48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045.md). "Under the
shadow of Heshbon stand fugitives, powerless; for a fire goes out from
Heshbon, and a flame from Sihon, and devours the region of Moab, and the
crown of the head of the sons of tumult. [Jer
48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046.md). Woe unto thee, Moab! the people
of Chemosh are perished! for thy sons are taken away into captivity, and
thy daughters into captivity. [Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047.md). Yet will I turn the captivity
of Moab at the end of the days, saith Jahveh. Thus far is the judgment
of Moab."

From Heshbon issued the resolution to annihilate Moab ([Jer
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002).md); to Heshbon the prophecy finally
returns. "In the shadow of Heshbon stand fugitives, powerless' (מכּח,
with מן privative), where, no doubt, they were seeking refuge; cf. [Isa
30:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002.md). The fugitives can only be
Moabites. Here it is astonishing that they seek refuge in Heshbon, since
the enemy comes from the north, and according to [Jer
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002.md), it is in Heshbon that the
resolution to destroy Moab was formed; and judging from [Jer
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003.md), that city was then in the hands
of the Ammonites. Hence Hitzig and Graf miss the connection. Hitzig
thinks that the whole clause was inserted by a glosser, who imagined the
town belonged to Moab, perhaps allowing himself to be misled in this by
[Num 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#027.md), "Come to Heshbon." Graf,
on the other hand, is of opinion that the fugitives are seeking the
protection of the Ammonites in Heshbon, but do not find it: hence he
would take the כּי which follows in the adversative sense of "however"
or "rather;" but this is against the use of the word, and cannot be
allowed. The tenor of the words, "Fugitives stand under the shadow of
Heshbon," does not require us to assume that people had fled to Heshbon
out of the whole of Moab. Let us rather think of fugitives from the
environs of Heshbon, who seek refuge in this fortified town, from the
enemy advancing from the north, but who find themselves disappointed in
their expectation, because from this city there bursts forth the fire of
war which destroys Moab. The thought merely serves the purpose of
attaching to it the utterances which follow regarding Moab; but from
[Jer 48:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043.md) and [Jer
48:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#044.md) alone, it is evident that escape
will be impossible. In proof of this he mentions the flight to Heshbon,
that he may have an opportunity of introducing a portion of the old
triumphal songs of the Mosaic age, with which he wished to conclude his
prophecy, [Jer 48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045.md) and [Jer
48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046.md). The fugitives stand powerless,
i.e., exhausted and unable to flee any further, while Heshbon affords
them no refuge. For there bursts forth from it the fire that is to
destroy the whole of Moab. The words from "for a fire," etc., on to the
end of [Jer 48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046.md), are a free
imitation of some strophes out of an ancient song, in which poets of the
Mosaic period celebrated the victory of Israel over Sihon the king of
the Amorites, who had conquered the greater portion of Moab; but with
this here is interwoven a passage from the utterances of Balaam the
seer, regarding the fall of Moab, found in [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017.md), viz., from ותּאכל to בּני
שׁאון. These insertions are made for the purpose of showing that,
through this judgment which is now coming upon Moab, not only those
ancient sayings, but also the prophecy of Balaam, will find their full
accomplishment. Just as in the time of Moses, so now also there again
proceeds from Heshbon the fire of war which will consume Moab. The
words, "for a fire has gone out from Heshbon," are a verbatim repetition
of what we find in [Num 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028.md), with
the single exception that אשׁ is here, as in [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004.md), construed as masculine, and
thus takes יצא instead of יצאה; but this change, of course, does not
affect the meaning of the words. The next clause runs, in Numbers, l.c.,
להבה מקּרית סיחון, but here ולהבה מבּין; this change into מבּין is
difficult to account for, so that J. D. Michaelis and Ewald would alter
it into מבּית.

There is no need for refuting the assumption of Raschi and Ngelsbach,
that Sihon stands for the city of Sihon; or the fancy of Morus and
Hitzig, that an old glosser imagined Sihon was a town instead of a king.
When we consider that the burning of Heshbon by the Israelites,
celebrated in that ancient song, was brought on by Sihon the Amorite
king, since the Israelites were not to make war on Moab, and only fought
against Sihon, who had made Heshbon his residence, there can be no doubt
that Jeremiah purposely changed מקּרית into מבּין סיחון, in order to
show that Sihon was the originator of the fire which consumed Heshbon.
By this latter expression Jeremiah seeks to intimate that, in
Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldean army, there will arise against the
Moabites another Sihon, from whose legions will burst forth the flame
that is to consume Moab. מבּין, "from between," is to be explained on
the ground that Sion is not viewed as a single individual, but as the
leader of martial hosts. This fire will "devour the region of Moab, and
the crown of the head of the sons of tumult." These words have been
taken by Jeremiah from Balaam's utterance regarding Moab, [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017.md), and embodied in his address
after some transformation. What Balaam announces regarding the ruler
(Star and Sceptre) that is to arise out of Israel, viz., "he shall smite
the region of Moab, and dash in pieces the sons of tumult," Jeremiah has
transferred to the fire: accordingly, he has changed וּמחץ into ותּאכל,
and וקרקר into וקדקד. Several commentators understand פאה as signifying
the margin of the beard ([Lev 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027.md);
[Lev 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005).md); but the mention of the
crown of the head in the parallel member does not require this meaning,
for פאה does not signify the corner of the beard, except when found in
combination with ראשׁ or זקן. The singeing of the margin of the beard
seems, in connection with the burning of the crown, too paltry and
insignificant. As in the fundamental passage פּאתי signify the sides of
Moab, so here פאה is the side of the body, and קדקד the head. בּני
שׁאון, homines tumultuosi, are the Moabites with their imperious
disposition; cf. [Jer 48:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#029.md).

[Jer 48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046.md)

[Jer 48:46](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#046.md) is again derived from the
ancient poem in Num 21, but the second half of the verse is altered. The
bold figure which represents Chemosh the god of the Moabites as
delivering his people up to captivity, is continued in the literal
statement of the case; Moab's sons and daughters, i.e., its population,
are carried away by the enemy into captivity.

[Jer 48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047.md)

This infliction of judgment, however, on the Moabites, is not to prove a
complete annihilation of them. At the end of the days, i.e., in the
Messianic times (see on [Jer 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#020).md),
there is in store for them a turn in their fortunes, or a restoration.
For שׁוּב שׁבוּת, see on [Jer 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#014.md).
Cf. the similar promise for Egypt, [Jer
46:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#026.md); Ammon and Elam, [Jer
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#006.md) and [Jer
49:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#039.md). The last clause, "Thus far,"
etc., is an addition made by the editor, when this oracle was received
into the collection of Jeremiah's prophecies; cf. [Jer
51:64](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#064.md). משׁפּט means the prophecy
regarding Moab with respect to its contents.

As to the fulfilment of the threatened ruin, Josephus (Antt. x. 9. 7)
states that Nebuchadnezzar, in the fifth year after the destruction of
Jerusalem, made war on the Moabites and subdued them. This statement is
not to be questioned, though the date given should be incorrect. We have
no other sources of information regarding this people. After the return
of the Israelites from Babylon, the Moabites are no longer mentioned as
a people, except in [Ezr 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001.md); [Neh
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#001.md), [Neh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023.md), where it is stated that some
Israelites had married Moabitish wives; nor is any mention made of this
people in the books of the Maccabees, which, however, relate the wars of
Judas Maccabeus with the Ammonites and Edomites (1 Macc. 5:3 and 6, cf.
4:61); neither is there any further notice taken of them in Josephus,
who only now and then speaks of Moab, i.e., the country and its towns
(Antt. xiii. 14. 2, 15. 4; Bell. Jud. iii. 3. 3, iv. 8. 2). This name
seems to have been merged, after the exile, in that of the Arabians. But
the disappearance of the name of this people does not exclude the
probability that descendants continued to exist, who, when Christianity
spread in the country to the east of the Jordan, were received into the
communion of the Christian church.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 49](jer049.md)

</div>
