<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer020)  [Next](jer022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 21:0</span></span>

II\. Special Predictions of the Judgment to Be Accomplished by the
Chaldeans, and of the Messianic Salvation - Jeremiah 21-33

These predictions are distinguished from the discourses of the first
section, in regard to their form, by special headings assigning
precisely the occasion and the date of the particular utterances; and in
regard to their substance, by the minute detail with which judgment and
salvation are foretold. They fall into two groups. In Jer 21-29 is set
forth in detail the judgment to be executed upon Judah and the nations
by Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon; and in Jer 30-33 the restoration of
Judah and Israel on the expiry of the period of punishment.

A. The Predictions of Judgment on Judah and the Nations - Jeremiah 21-29

Although these prophecies deal first and chiefly with the judgment which
the king of Babylon is to execute on Judah, yet they at the same time
intimate that a like fate is in store for the surrounding nations. And
in them there is besides a foreshadowing of the judgment to come on
Babylon after the expiration of the period appointed for the domination
of the Chaldeans, and in brief hints, of the redemption of Israel from
captivity in Babylon and other lands into which it has been scattered.
They consist of three prophetic pieces, of which the middle one only,
Jer 25, forms one lengthy continuous discourse, while the two others are
composed of several shorter or longer utterances; the latter two being
arranged around the former as a centre. In the first piece the necessity
of judgment is shown by means of an exposure of the profound corruption
of the leaders of the people, the kings and the false prophets, and of
the people itself; this being done with a view to check the reigning
depravity and to bring back Israel to the true God. In the discourse of
Jer 25 the judgment is set forth with comprehensive generalness. In the
third piece, Jer 26-29, the truth of this declaration is confirmed, and
defended against the gainsaying of priests and prophets, by a series of
utterances which crush all hopes and all attempts to avert the ruin of
Jerusalem and Judah. - This gathering together of the individual
utterances and addresses into longer discourse-like compositions, and
the grouping of them around the central discourse Jer 25, is evidently a
part of the work of editing the book but was doubtless carried out under
the direction of the prophet by his assistant Baruch.

The Shepherds and Leaders of the People - Jeremiah 21-24

Under this heading may be comprehended the contents of these four
chapters; for the nucleus of this compilation is formed by the prophecy
concerning the shepherds of the people, the godless last kings of Judah
and the false prophets, in Jer 22 and 23, while [Jer
21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001) is to be regarded as an
introduction thereto, and [Jer 24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001)
a supplement. The aim of this portion of prophetic teaching is to show
how the covenant people has been brought to ruin by its corrupt temporal
and spiritual rulers, that the Lord must purge it by sore judgments,
presently to fall on Judah through Nebuchadnezzar's instrumentality.
This is to be done in order to root out the ungodly by sword, famine,
and pestilence, and so to make the survivors His true people again by
means of right shepherds whom He will raise up in the true branch of
David. The introduction, [Jer 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001),
contains deliverances regarding the fate of King Zedekiah, the people,
and the city, addressed by Jeremiah, at the beginning of the siege of
Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, to the men sent to him from the king, in
reply to the request for intercession with the Lord; the answer being to
the effect that God will punish them according to the fruit of their
doings. Then follow in order the discourse against the corrupt rulers,
especially Kings Jehoahaz, Jehoiakim, and Jechoniah, Jer 22, with a
promise that the remainder of the Lord's flock will be gathered again
and blessed with a righteous shepherd ([Jer
23:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001)), and next threatenings against
the false prophets (Jer 23:9-40); the conclusion of the whole being
formed by the vision of the two baskets of figs, [Jer
24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001), which foreshadows the fate of
the people carried away to Babylon with Jehoiachin and of those that
remained in the land with Zedekiah. - The several long constituent
portions of this "word of God," united into a whole by the heading [Jer
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001), belong to various times. The
contents of [Jer 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001) belong to the
first period of the Chaldean siege, i.e., the ninth year of Zedekiah;
the middle portion, Jer 22 and 23, dates from the reigns of Jehoiakim
and Jehoiachin; the conclusion, [Jer
24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001), is from the beginning of the
reign of Zedekiah, not long after Jehoiachin and the best part of the
people had been carried off to Babylon. - As to the joining of Jer 22
and 23 with [Jer 21:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001), Ewald
rightly says that Jeremiah made use of the opportunity furnished by the
message of the king to him of speaking plainly out regarding the future
destiny of the whole kingdom, as well as in an especial way with regard
to the royal house, and the great men and leaders of the people; and
that he accordingly gathered into this part of the book all he had
hitherto publicly uttered concerning the leaders of the people, both
kings and temporal princes, and also prophets and priests. This he did
in order to disclose, regardless of consequences, the causes for the
destruction of the kingdom of Judah and the city Jerusalem by the
Chaldean; while the brief promise of a future gathering again of the
remnant of the scattered flock, introduced at [Jer
23:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#001), is to show that, spite of the
judgment to fall on Judah and Jerusalem, the Lord will yet not wholly
cast of His people, but will at a future time admit them to favour
again. For the confirmation of this truth there is added in [Jer
24:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#001) the vision of the two baskets
of figs.

[Jeremiah 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 21:1</span></span>

The Taking of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans. - [Jer
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001) and [Jer
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002). The heading specifying the
occasion for the following prediction. "The word of the Lord came to
Jeremiah when King Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Malchiah,
and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, saying: Inquire now of
Jahveh for us, for Nebuchadrezzar the king of Babylon maketh war against
us; if so be that the Lord will deal with us according to all His
wondrous works, that he may go up from us." The fighting of
Nebuchadrezzar is in [Jer 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004) stated
to be the besieging of the city. From this it appears that the siege had
begun ere the king sent the two men to the prophet. Pashur the son of
Malchiah is held by Hitz., Graf, Ng., etc., to be a distinguished priest
of the class of Malchiah. But this is without sufficient reason; for he
is not called a priest, as is the case with Zephaniah the son of
Maaseiah, and with Pashur the son of Immer ([Jer
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001)). Nor is anything proved by the
circumstance that Pashur and Malchiah occur in several places as the
names of priests, e.g., [Ch1 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#012); for
both names are also used of persons not priests, e.g., Malchiah, [Ezr
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#025), [Ezr
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#031), and Pashur, [Jer
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#001), where this son of Gedaliah is
certainly a laic. From this passage, where Pashur ben Malchiah appears
again, it is clear that the four men there named, who accused Jeremiah
for his speech, were government authorities or court officials, since in
[Jer 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004) they are called שׂרים. Ros.
is therefore right in saying of the Pashur under consideration: videtur
unus ex principibus sive aulicis fuisse, cf. [Jer
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004). Only Zephaniah the son of
Maaseiah is called priest; and he, acc. to [Jer
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#025); [Jer
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#003); [Jer
52:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024), held a high position in the
priesthood. Inquire for us of Jahveh, i.e., ask for a revelation for us,
as [Kg2 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#013), cf. [Gen
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022). It is not: pray for His help on
our behalf, which is expressed by התפּלּל בּעדנוּ, [Jer
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#003), cf. [Jer
52:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#002). In the request for a revelation
the element of intercession is certainly not excluded, but it is not
directly expressed. But it is on this that the king founds his hope:
Peradventure Jahveh will do with us (אותנוּ for אתּנוּ) according to all
His wondrous works, i.e., in the miraculous manner in which He has so
often saved us, e.g., under Hezekiah, and also, during the blockade of
the city by Sennacherib, had recourse to the prophet Isaiah and besought
his intercession with the Lord, [Kg2
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#002)., [Isa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#002). That he (Nebuch.) may go up from
us. עלה, to march against a city in order to besiege it or take it, but
with מעל, to withdraw from it, cf. [Jer
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#005); [Kg1
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#019). As to the name Nebuchadrezzar,
which corresponds more exactly than the Aramaic-Jewish Nebuchadnezzar
with the Nebucadurriusur of the inscriptions (נבו כדר אצר, i.e., Nebo
coronam servat), see Comm. on Daniel at [Dan
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 21:3</span></span>

The Lord's reply through Jeremiah consists of three parts: a. The answer
to the king's hope that the Lord will save Jerusalem from the Chaldeans
([Jer 21:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004)); b. The counsel given to
the people and the royal family as to how they may avert ruin ([Jer
21:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008)); c. The prediction that
Jerusalem will be punished for her sins ([Jer
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013) and [Jer
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#014)).

[Jer 21:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003)

The answer. - [Jer 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003). "And Jeremiah
said to them: Thus shall ye say to Zedekiah: [Jer
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004). Thus hath Jahveh the God of
Israel said: Behold, I turn back the weapons of war that are in your
hands, wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon and the Chaldeans,
which besiege you without the walls, and gather them together into the
midst of this city. [Jer 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#005). And I
fight against you with outstretched hand and strong arm, and with anger
and fury and great wrath, [Jer 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#006).
And smite the inhabitants of this city, both man and beast; of a great
plague they shall die. [Jer 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007). And
afterward, saith Jahveh, I will give Zedekiah the king of Judah, and his
servants, and the people - namely, such as in this city are left of the
plague, of the sword, and of the famine - into the hand of
Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon, and into the hand of their enemies, and
into the hand of those that seek after their life, that he may smite
them according to the sharpness of the sword, not spare them, neither
have pity nor mercy." This answer is intended to disabuse the king and
his servants of all hope of help from God. So far from saving them from
the Chaldeans, God will fight against them, will drive back into the
city its defenders that are still holding out without the walls against
the enemy; consume the inhabitants by sword, pestilence, famine; deliver
the king, with his servants and all that survive inside the lines of the
besiegers, into the hand of the latter, and unsparingly cause them to be
put to death. "I make the weapons of war turn back" is carried on and
explained by "I gather them into the city." The sense is: I will bring
it about that ye, who still fight without the walls against the
beleaguerers, must turn back with your weapons and retreat into the
city. "Without the walls" is not to be joined to מסב, because this is
too remote, and מחוּץ is by usage locative, not ablative. It should go
with "wherewith ye fight," etc.: wherewith ye fight without the walls
against the beleaguering enemies. The siege had but just begun, so that
the Jews were still trying to hinder the enemy from taking possession of
stronger positions and from a closer blockade of the city. In this they
will not succeed, but their weapons will be thrust back into the city.

[Jer 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007)

The Lord will make known His almighty power not for the rescue but for
the chastisement of Judah. The words "with outstretched hand and strong
arm" are a standing figure for the miraculous manifestation of God's
power at the release of Israel from Egypt, [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034); [Deu
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015); [Deu
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008). This power He will now exercise
upon Israel, and execute the punishment threatened against apostasy at
the renewal of the covenant by Moses in the land of Moab. The words
גּדול...בּאף are from [Deu 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#027). The
inhabitants of Jerusalem are to perish during the siege by pestilence
and disease, and the remainder, including the king and his servants, to
be mercilessly massacred. "Great pestilence" alone is mentioned in [Jer
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#006), but in [Jer
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007) there are sword and famine along
with it. The ואת before הנּשׁארים seems superfluous and unsuitable,
since besides the king, his servants and the people, there could be none
others left. The lxx have therefore omitted it, and Hitz., Ew., Graf,
and others propose to erase it. But the ו may be taken to be
explicative: namely, such as are left, in which case ואת serves to
extend the participial clause to all the persons before mentioned, while
without the ואת the 'הנּשׁארים וגו could be referred only to העם. "Into
the hand of their enemies" is rhetorically amplified by "into the hand
of those that seek," etc., as in [Jer
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#007), [Jer
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#009); [Jer
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#020), etc.; לפי חרב, according to the
sharpness (or edge) of the sword, i.e., mercilessly (see on [Gen
34:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#026); in Jer. only here), explained
by "not spare them," etc., cf. [Jer
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#014).

[Jer 21:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008)

The counsel given to the people and royal family how to escape death. -
[Jer 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008). "And unto the people thou
shalt say: Thus hath Jahveh said: Behold, I set before you the way of
life and the way of death. [Jer 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#009).
He that abideth in this city shall die by sword, by famine, and by
pestilence; but he that goeth out and falleth to the Chaldeans that
besiege you, he shall live, and have his soul for a prey. [Jer
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010). For I have set my face on this
city for evil and not for good, saith Jahveh; into the hand of the king
of Babylon shall it be given, who shall burn it with fire. [Jer
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011). And to the house of the king of
Judah: Hear the word of Jahveh: [Jer
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012). House of David! thus hath
Jahveh said: Hold judgment every morning, and save the despoiled out of
the hand of the oppressor, lest my fury break forth as fire, and burn
unquenchably, because of the evil of your doings." What the prophet is
here to say to the people and the royal house is not directly addressed
to the king's envoy, but is closely connected with the answer he was to
give to the latter, and serves to strengthen the same. We need not be
hampered by the assumption that Jeremiah, immediately after that answer,
communicated this advice, so that it might be made known to the people
and to the royal house. The counsel given in [Jer
21:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008) to the people was during the
siege repeatedly given by Jeremiah both to the king and to the people,
cf. [Jer 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#001)., [Jer
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017)., and [Jer
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#011)., and many of the people acted
by his advice, cf. [Jer 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#019); [Jer
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009); [Jer
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#015). But the defenders of the city,
the authorities, saw therein treason, or at least a highly dangerous
discouragement to those who were fighting, and accused the prophet as a
traitor, [Jer 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#004)., cf. [Jer
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#013). Still Jeremiah, holding his
duty higher than his life, remained in the city, and gave as his
opinion, under conviction attained to only by divine revelation, that
all resistance is useless, since God has irrevocably decreed the
destruction of Jerusalem as a punishment for their sins. The idea of
[Jer 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007) is clothed in words taken
from [Deu 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015), cf. [Deu
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#026). ישׁב , [Jer
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#009), as opposed to יצא, does not
mean: to dwell, but: to sit still, abide. To fall to the Chaldeans,
i.e., to go over to them, cf. [Jer
37:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#014); [Jer
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#009); [Kg2
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#011); על is interchanged with אל,
[Jer 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#013); [Jer
38:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#019); [Jer
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#015). The Chet. יחיה is right,
corresponding to ימוּת; the Keri וחיה is wrong. His life shall be to him
for a prey, i.e., he shall carry it thence as a prey, i.e., preserve it.
[Jer 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010) gives the reason for the
advice given. For I have set my face, cf. [Jer
44:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#011), recalls [Amo
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#004), only there we have עיני for פּני,
as in [Jer 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#006). To set the face or
eye on one means: to pay special heed to him, in good (cf. [Jer
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#012)) or in evil sense; hence the
addition, "for evil," etc.

[Jer 21:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011)

(Note: According to Hitz., Gr., and Ng., the passage [Jer
21:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011) stands in no inner connection
with the foregoing, and may, from the contents of it, be seen to belong
to an earlier period than that of the siege which took place under
Zedekiah, namely, to the time of Jehoiakim, because, a. in the period of
[Jer 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001). such an exhortation and
conditional threatening must have been out of place after their
destruction had been quite unconditionally foretold to Zedekiah and the
people in [Jer 21:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004); b. the defiant
tone conveyed in [Jer 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013) is
inconsistent with the cringing despondency shown by Zedekiah in [Jer
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002); c. it is contrary to what we
would expect to find the house of the king addressed separately after
the king had been addressed in [Jer
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003), the king being himself
comprehended in his "house." But these arguments, on which Hitz. builds
ingenious hypotheses, are perfectly valueless. As to a, we have to
remark: In [Jer 21:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004) unconditional
destruction is foretold against neither king nor people; it is only said
that the Chaldeans will capture the city - that the inhabitants will be
smitten with pestilence, famine, and sword - and that the king, with his
servants and those that are left, will be given into the hand of the
king of Babylon, who will smite them unsparingly. But in [Jer
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012) the threatening is uttered
against the king, that if he does not practise righteousness, the wrath
of God will be kindled unquenchably, and, [Jer
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#014), that Jerusalem is to be burnt
with fire. In [Jer 21:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004) there is no
word of the burning of the city; it is first threatened, [Jer
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010), against the people, after the
choice has been given them of escaping utter destruction. How little the
burning of Jerusalem is involved in [Jer
21:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004) may be seen from the history of
the siege and capture of Jerusalem under Jehoiachin, on which occasion,
too, the king, with his servants and the people, was given into the hand
of the king of Babylon, while the city was permitted to stand, and the
deported king remained in life, and was subsequently set free from his
captivity by Evil-Merodach. But that Zedekiah, by hearkening to the word
of the Lord, can alleviate his doom and save Jerusalem from destruction,
this Jeremiah tells him yet later in very plain terms, [Jer
38:17-23](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#017), cf. [Jer
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#004). Lastly, the release of Hebrew
man-servants and maid-servants, recounted in [Jer
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#008)., shows that even during the
siege there were cases of an endeavour to turn and follow the law, and
consequently that an exhortation to hold by the right could not have
been regarded as wholly superfluous. - The other two arguments, b and c,
are totally inconclusive. How the confidence of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem in the strength of its fortifications ([Jer
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013)) is contradictory of the fact
related in [Jer 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002), does not appear.
That Zedekiah should betake himself to the prophet, desiring him to
entreat the help of God, is not a specimen of cringing despondency such
as excludes all confidence in any earthly means of help. Nor are
defiance and despondency mutually exclusive opposites in psychological
experience, but states of mind that rapidly alternate. Finally, Ng.
seems to have added the last argument (c) only because he had no great
confidence in the two others, which had been dwelt on by Hitz. and Graf.
Why should not Jeremiah have given the king another counsel for warding
off the worst, over and above that conveyed in the answer to his
question ([Jer 21:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004))? - These
arguments have therefore not pith enough to throw any doubt on the
connection between the two passages ([Jer
21:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008), and [Jer
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011), [Jer
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012)) indicated by the manner in
which "and to the house (וּלבית) of the king of Judah" points back to
"and unto this people thou shalt say" ([Jer
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008)), or to induce us to attribute
the connection so indicated to the thoughtlessness of the editor.)

The kingly house, i.e., the king and his family, under which are here
comprehended not merely women and children, but also the king's
companions, his servants and councillors; they are counselled to hold
judgment every morning. דּין משׁפּט = דּין דּין, [Jer
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028); [Jer
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#016), or שׁפט, [Lam
3:59](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#059); [Kg1
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#028). לבּקר distributively, every
morning, as [Amo 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#004). To save the
despoiled out of the hand of the oppressor means: to defend his just
cause against the oppressor, to defend him from being despoiled; cf.
[Jer 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#003). The form of address; House
of David, which is by a displacement awkwardly separated from שׁמעוּ, is
meant to remind the kingly house of its origin, its ancestor David, who
walked in the ways of the Lord. - The second half of the verse, "lest my
fury," etc., runs like [Jer 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004).

[Jer 21:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013)

The chastisement of Jerusalem. - [Jer
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013). "Behold, I am against thee,
inhabitress of the valley, of the rock of the plain, saith Jahveh, ye
who say: Who shall come down against us, and who shall come into our
dwellings? [Jer 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#014). And will visit
you according to the fruit of your doings, saith Jahveh, and kindle a
fire in her forest, that it may devour all her surroundings." This
threatening is levelled against the citizens of Jerusalem, who vaunted
the impregnableness of their city. The inhabitress of the valley is the
daughter of Zion, the population of Jerusalem personified. The situation
of the city is spoken of as עמק, ravine between mountains, in respect
that Jerusalem was encircled by mountains of greater height ([Psa
125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002)); and as rock of the plain,
i.e., the region regarded as a level from which Mount Zion, the seat of
the kingdom, rose, equivalent to rock of the field, [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003). In the "rock" we think specially
of Mount Zion, and in the "valley" of the so-called lower city. The two
designations are chosen to indicate the strong situation of Jerusalem.
On this the inhabitants pride themselves, who say: Who shall come down
against us? יחת for ינחת, from נחת; cf. Ew. 139, c. Dwellings, cf. [Jer
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#030), not cities or refuge or coverts
of wild animals; מעון has not this force, but can at most acquire it
from the context; see Del. on [Psa
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008). The strength of the city will
not shield the inhabitants from the punishment with which God will visit
them. "According to the fruit," etc., cf. [Jer
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010). I kindle fire in her forest.
The city is a forest of houses, and the figure is to be explained by the
simile in [Jer 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006), but was not
suggested by מעון = lustra ferarum (Hitz.). All her surroundings, how
much more then the city itself!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 22](jer022)

</div>
