<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job020)  [Next](job022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#001)

[Job 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 21:1</span></span>

1 Then began Job, and said:

2 Hear, oh hear, my speech,

And let this be instead of your consolations.

3 Suffer me, and I will speak,

And after I have spoken thou mayest mock.

4 As for me, then, doth my complaint concern man,

Or wherefore should I not become impatient?

5 Turn ye to me and be astonished,

And lay your hand upon your mouth.

6 Even if I think of it I am bewildered,

And my flesh taketh hold on trembling - :

The friends, far from being able to solve the enigma of Job's
affliction, do not once recognise the mystery as such. They cut the knot
by wounding Job most deeply by ever more and more frivolous accusations.
Therefore he entreats them to be at least willing to listen (שׁמעוּ with
the gerund) to his utterance (מלּה) respecting the unsolved enigma; then
(Waw apodosis imper.) shall this attention supply the place of their
consolations, i.e., be comforting to him, which their previous supposed
consolations could not be. They are to bear with him, i.e., without
interruption allow him to answer for himself (שׂאוּני with Kametz before
the tone, as [Jon 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#012), comp. קחהוּ,
[Kg1 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#033), not as Hirz. thinks under
the influence of the distinctive accent, but according to the
established rule, Ges. 60, rem. 1); then he will speak (אנכי contrast to
the "ye" in שׂאוני without further force), and after he has expressed
himself they may mock. It is, however, not תלעיגוּ (as Olshausen
corrects), but תלעיג (in a voluntative signific. = תלעג), since Job here
addresses himself specially to Zophar, the whole of whose last speech
must have left the impression on him of a bitter sarcasm (sarkasmo's
from sarka'zein in the sense of [Job
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022)), and has dealt him the freshest
deep blow. In [Job 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#004) שׂיחת is not
to be understood otherwise than as in [Job
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#013); [Job
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#027); [Job
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001); [Job
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#002), and is to be translated "my
complaint." Then the prominently placed אנכי is to be taken, after [Eze
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#017), Ges. 121, 3, as an emphatic
strengthening of the "my": he places his complaint in contrast with
another. This emphasizing is not easily understood, if one, with Hupf.,
explains: nonne hominis est querela mea, so that ה is equivalent to הלא
(which here in the double question is doubly doubtful), and ל is the
sign of the cause. Schultens and Berg, who translate לאדם more humano,
explain similarly, by again bringing their suspicious ל comparativum

(Note: In the passage from Ibn-Kissa quoted above, p. 421, Schultens, as
Fleischer assures me, has erroneously read Arab. lmchâlı̂b instead of
kmchâlı̂b, having been misled by the frequent failing of the upper stroke
of the Arab. k, and in general Arab. l is never = k, and also ל never =
כ, as has been imagined since Schultens.)

here to bear upon it. The ל by שׂיחי (if it may not also be compared
with [Job 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#008)) may certainly be
expected to denote those to whom the complaint is addressed. We
translate: As for me, then, does my complaint concern men? The אנכי
which is placed at the beginning of the sentence comes no less under the
rule, Ges. 145, 2, than 121, 3. In general, sufferers seek to obtain
alleviation of their sufferings by imploring by words and groans the
pity of sympathizing men; the complaint, however, which the three hear
from him is of a different kind, for he has long since given up the hope
of human sympathy, - his complaint concerns not men, but God (comp. [Job
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#020)).

(Note: An Arabian proverb says: "The perfect patience is that which
allows no complaint to be uttered ila el-chalq against creatures
(men).")

He reminds them of this by asking further: or (ואם, as [Job
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003); [Job
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#017); [Job
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#009), not: and if it were so, as it is
explained by Nolde contrary to the usage of the language) why
(interrogative upon interrogative: an quare, as [Psa
94:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#009), אם הלא, an nonne) should not my
spirit (disposition of mind, θυμός) be short, i.e., why should I not be
short-tempered (comp. [Jdg 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#016); [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008), with Prov. 13:29) = impatient?
Drr, in his commentatio super voce רוּח, 1776, 4, explains the
expression habito simul halitus, qui iratis brevis esse solet, respectu,
but the signification breath is far from the nature of the language
here; רוח signifies emotional excitement (comp. [Job
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#013)), either long restrained (with
ארך), or not allowing itself to be restrained and breaking out after a
short time (קצר). That which causes his vexation to burst forth is such
that the three also, if they would attentively turn to him who thus
openly expresses himself, will be astonished and lay their hand on their
mouth (comp. [Job 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#009); [Job
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004)), i.e., they must become dumb in
recognition of the puzzle, - a puzzle insoluble to them, but which is
nevertheless not to be denied. השׁמו is found in Codd. and among
grammarians both as Hiph. השׁמּוּ hashammu (Kimchi) and as Hoph.
השּׁמּוּ, or what is the same, השּׁמּוּ hoshshammu (Abulwalid) with the
sharpening of the first radical, which also occurs elsewhere in the
Hoph. of this verb ([Lev 26:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#034).) and
of others (Olsh. 259, b, 260). The pointing as Hiph. (השׁמּוּ for
השׁמּוּ) in the signification obstupescite is the better attested. Job
himself has only to think of this mystery, and he is perplexed, and his
flesh lays hold on terror. The expression is like [Job
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#020). The emotion is conceived of as
a want arising from the subject of it, which that which produces it must
as of necessity satisfy.

In the following strophe the representation of that which thus excites
terror begins. The divine government does not harmonize with, but
contradicts, the law maintained by the friends.

[Job 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 21:7</span></span>

7 Wherefore do the wicked live,

Become old, yea, become mighty in power?

8 Their posterity is established before them about them,

And their offspring before their eyes.

9 Their houses have peace without fear,

And the rod of Eloah cometh not upon them.

10 His (the evil-doer's) bull gendereth and faileth not;

His cow calveth easily, and casteth not her calf.

11 They let their little ones run about as a flock,

And their children jump about.

The question in [Job 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#007) is the same
as that which Jeremiah also puts forth, [Job
12:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#001). It is the antithesis of
Zophar's thesis, [Job 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#005), and seeks
the reason of the fact established by experience which had also
well-nigh proved the ruin of Asaph (Ps 73: comp. [Mal
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#013)), viz., that the ungodly, far
from being overtaken by the punishment of their godlessness, continued
in the enjoyment of life, that they attain to old age, and also a
proportionately increasing power and wealth. The verb עתק, which in [Job
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#018); [Job
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#004) (comp. the Hiph. [Job
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#005); [Job
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#015)), we read in the signification
promoveri, has here, like the Arabic ‛ataqa, ‛atuqa, the signification
to become old, aetate provehi; and גּבר חיל, to become strong in
property, is a synonym of השׂגּה חיל, to acquire constantly increasing
possessions, used in a similar connection in [Psa
73:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#012). The first feature in the
picture of the prosperity of the wicked, which the pang of being bereft
of his own children brings home to Job, is that they are spared the same
kind of loss: their posterity is established (נכון, constitutus,
elsewhere standing in readiness, [Job
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#005); [Job
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#023); [Job
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012), here standing firm, as e.g.,
[Psa 93:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#002)) in their sight about them
(so that they have to mourn neither their loss by death nor by
separation from their home), and their offspring (צאצאים, a word common
only to the undisputed as well as to the disputed prophecies of Isaiah
and the book of Job) before their eyes; נכון must be carried over to
[Job 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#008) as predicate: they are,
without any loss, before their eyes. The description passes over from
the children, the corner-stones of the house (vid., Ges. Thes., s.v.
בנה), to the houses themselves. It is just as questionable here as in
[Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024); [Isa
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#003), and elsewhere, whether שׁלום is
a subst. (= בשׁלום) or an adj.; the substantival rendering is at least
equally admissible in such an elevated poetic speech, and the plur.
subject בּתּיהם, which, if the predicate were intended to be taken as an
adj., leads one to expect שׁלומים, decides in its favour. On מפּחד,
without (far from) terrifying misfortune, as [Isa
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#003), מקשׁת, without a bow, vid., on
[Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026). That which is expressed in
[Job 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009), according to external
appearance, is in [Job 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009) referred
to the final cause; Eloah's שׁבט, rod, with which He smites in
punishment ([Job 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#034); [Job
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#013), comp. [Isa
10:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024), where שׁוט, scourge,
interchanges with it), is not over them, i.e., threatens and smites them
not.

[Job 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#010) comes specially to the
state of the cattle, after the state of the household in general has
been treated of. Since שׁורו and פּרתו are interchangeable, and are
construed according to their genus, the former undoubtedly is intended
of the male, not also epikoi'noos of the female (lxx ἡ βοῦς, Jerome,
Saadia), as Rosenm., after Bochart, believes it must be taken, because
\`br is never said de mare feminam ineunte, but always de femina quae
concipit. In reality, however, it is with עבר otherwise than with עדה,
whose Pael and Aphel certainly signify concipere (prop. transmittere sc.
semen in a passive sense). On the other hand, עבר, even in Kal,
signifies to be impregnated (whence עובר, the embryo, and the biblical
אבוּר, like the extra-biblical עבּוּר, the produce of the land), the
Pael consequently to impregnate, whence מעבּרא (from the part. pass.
מעבּר) impregnated (pregnant), the Ithpa. to be impregnated, as Rabb.
Pual מעבּרת, impregnated (by which עברת also signifies pregnant, which
would be hardly possible if עבר in this sexual sense were not radically
distinct from עבר, περ-ᾶν). Accordingly the Targ. translates עבּר by
מבטין (impraegnans), and Gecatilia translates שׁורו by Arab. fḥlhm
(admissarius eorum), after which nearly all Jewish expositors explain.
This explanation also suits לא יגעל, which lxx translates οὐκ οὀμοτόκησε
(Jer. non abortivit), Symm. in a like sense οὐκ ἐξέτρωσε, Aq. οὐκ
εξέβαλε, Saad. la julziq. The reference of שׁורו to the female animal
everywhere assumed is incorrect; on the contrary, the bullock kept for
breeding is the subject; but proceeding from this, that which is
affirmed is certainly referred to the female animal. For גּעל signifies
to cast out, cast away; the Hiph. therefore: to cause to cast out; Rabb.
in the specified signification: so to heat what has sucked in that which
is unclean, that it gives it back or lets it go (לפלוט הבלוע).
Accordingly Raschi explains: "he injects not useless seed into her,
which might come back and be again separated (נפלט) from her inward
part, without impregnation taking place." What therefore עבּר says
positively, ולא יגעיל says negatively: neque efficit ut ejiciat.

(Note: The Aruch under גּעל, quotes a passage of the Tosefta: מוזרות
נפשׁ היפה תאכלם גיעולי ביצים מותרים באכילה, the cast away (Wrflinge)
eggs (i.e., such as have fallen away from the hen from a stroke on the
tail of some other cause, and which are not completely formed) are
allowed as food; he may eat them who does not loathe them.)

It is then further, in [Job 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009), said
of the female animal which has been impregnated that she does not allow
it to glide away, i.e., the fruit, therefore that she brings forth
(פּלּט as מלּט, המליט), and that she does not cause or suffer any
untimely birth.

At the end of the strophe, [Job 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#011),
the poet with delicate tact makes the sufferer, who is become childless,
return to the joy of the wicked in the abundance of children. שׁלּח
signifies here, as [Isa 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020), to
allow freedom for motion and exercise. On עויל, vid., on [Job
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#011); [Job
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#018). It has a similar root (Arab.
‛âl, alere) to the Arab. ‛ajjil (collect. ‛ijâl), servants, but not a
similar meaning. The subj. to [Job
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012) are not the children, but the
"wicked" themselves, the happy fathers of the flocks of children that
are let loose.

[Job 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 21:12</span></span>

12 They raise their voice with the playing of timbrel aud harp,

And rejoice at the sound of the pipe

13 They enjoy their days in prosperity,

And in a moment they go down to Sehol.

14 And yet they said to God: "Depart from us!

We desire not the knowledge of Thy ways.

15 What is the Almighty, that we should serve Him? -

And what doth it profit us that we should importune Him?" -

16 Lo! they have not their prosperity by their own hand,

The thought of the wicked be far from me!

קולם is to be supplied to ישׂאוּ in [Isa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#011), and instead of בּתף with בּ of
the musical accompaniment (as [Psa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001), [Psa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005)), it is to be read כּתף after the
Masora with Kimchi, Ramban, Ralbag, and Farisol,

(Note: The Masora observes לית כותיה (not occuring thus elsewhere), and
accordingly this כתף is distinguished in the Masoretic אב מן חד חד נסבין
כף ברישׁיה (alphabetic list of words which take at one time the prefix כ
and at another the prefix )ב, from בתף, which occurs elsewhere. The
Targ. has read בטף; the reading of Raschi and Aben-Ezra is
questionable.)

but not with Rosenm. to be explained: personaut velut tympano et
cythera, but: they raise their voice as the timbrel and harp sound forth
simultaneously; כּ, as [Isa 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004)
(which is to be transl.: during the clear warmth of the sunshine, during
the dew-clouds in the heat of harvest). תּף (Arabic duff, Spanish adufe)
is τύμπανον (τύπανον), כּנּור, (Arab. canare) κινύρα or κιθάρα) [Dan
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#005)), עוּגב or עגב, [Job
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#031) (from עגב, flare; vid., on [Gen
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021)), the Pan-pipe (Targ. from a
similar root אבּוּבא, whence the name of the ambubajae). In [Job
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#013) and Keri gives the more usual
יכלּוּ ([Job 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#011)) in place of the
Chethib יבלּוּ, though יבלּוּ occurs in [Isa
65:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#022) without this Keri; יכלו
signifies consument, and יבלו usu deterent: they use up their life,
enjoy it to the last drop. In connection with this one thinks of a coat
which is not laid aside until it is entirely worn out. It is therefore
not, as the friends say, that the ungodly is swept away before his time
([Job 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#032)), also a lingering
sickness does not hand him over to death ([Job
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013)), but בּרגע, in a moment (comp
[Job 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#020), not: in rest, i.e.,
freedom from pain, which רגע never signifies), they sink down to Hades
(acc. loci). The matter does not admit of one's deriving the fut. יהתּוּ
here, as [Job 39:22](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#022), [Job
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#034), from the Niph. of the verb חתת,
terrore percelli; it is to be referred to נחת or נחת (Aram. for ירד),
which is the only certain example of a Hebrew verb Pe Nun ending with ת,
whose fut. ינחת, [Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003), also יחת
([Pro 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#010), [Jer
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013)), instead of יחת, and in the
inflexion its ת sti (after the analogy of יצּתּוּ, [Isa
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#012)) is doubled; as an exception
(vid., Psalter, ii. 468), the lengthening of the short vowel (יחתוּ,
Olsh. 83 b) by Silluk does not take place, as e.g., by Athnach, [Job
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#005).

The fut. consec. ויּאמרוּ, in which [Job
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014) is continued, does not here
denote temporally that which follows upon and from something else, but
generally that which is inwardly connected with something else, and even
with that which is contradictory, and still occurring at the same time,
exactly as [Gen 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#009), [Sa2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008), comp Ew. 231, b: they sink down
after a life that is completely consumed away, without a death-struggle,
into Hades, and yet they denied God, would not concern themselves about
His sways (comp. the similar passage, [Isa
58:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002)), and accounted the service of
God and prayer (פּגע בּ, precibus adire) as useless. The words of the
ungodly extend to [Job 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#015);
according to Hirz., Hlgst., Welte, and Hahn, [Job
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016) resumes the description: behold,
is not their prosperity in their hand? i.e., is it not at their free
disposal? or do they not everywhere carry it away with them? But [Job
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016) is not favourable to this
interrogative rendering of לא (= הלא). Schlottm. explains more
correctly: behold, their prosperity is not in their power; but by taking
not only [Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016) (like Schnurrer),
but the whole of [Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016), as an
utterance of an opponent, which is indeed impossible, because the
declining of all fellowship with the godless would be entirely without
aim in the mouth of the opponent. For it is not the fnends who draw the
picture of the lot of the punishment of the godless with the most
terrible lines possible, who suggest the appearance of looking wishfully
towards the godless, but Job, who paints the prosperity of the godless
in such brilliant colours. On the other hand, both sides are agreed in
referring prosperity and misfortune to God as final cause. And for this
very reason Job thinks that בּרך את־האלהים, which he makes the godless,
in [Job 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014), [Job
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#015), express in their own words, so
horrible.

[Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016) is therefore to be taken as
Job's judgment, and [Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016) as the
moral effect which it produces upon him. הן introduces the true relation
of things, טוּבם signifies, as [Job
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021), their prosperity, and לא בידם
(the emphatic position of בידם is to be observed) that this is not in
their hand, i.e., arbitrary power, or perhaps better: that it is not by
their own hand, i.e.,that it is not their own work but a gift from
above, the gift even of the God whom they so shamelessly deny. That God
grants them such great and lasting prosperity, is just the mystery which
Job is not able to bring forth to view, without, however, his abhorrence
of this denying of God being in the slightest degree lessened thereby.
Not by their own hand, says he, do they possess such prosperity - the
counsel (עצת similar to [Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013),
[Job 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#003), [Job
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#007) : design, principle, and general
disposition, or way of thinking) of the wicked be far from me, i.e., be
it far from me that so I should speak according to their way of
thinking, with which, on the contrary, I disavow all fellowship. The
relation of the clauses is exactly like [Job
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#018), where this formula of
detesation is repeated. רחקה is, according to the meaning, optative or
precative (Ew. 223, b, and Ges. 126, 4\*), which Hahn and Schlottm.
think impossible, without assigning any reason. It is the perf. of
certainty, which expresses that which is wished as a fact, but with an
emotional exclamative accent. In ancient Arabic it is a rule to use the
perf. as optative; and also still in modem Arabic (which often makes use
of the fut. matead of the perf.), they say e.g., la cân, i.e., he must
never have been! The more detestable the conduct of the prosperous
towards Him to whom they owe their prosperity is, the sooner, one would
think, the justice of God would be called forth to recompense them
according to their deeds, but -

[Job 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 21:17</span></span>

17 How rarely is the light of the wicked put out,

And their calamity breaketh in upon them,

That He distributeth snares in his wrath,

18 That they become as straw before the wind,

And as chaff which the storm sweepeth away!?

19 "Eloah layeth up his iniquity for his children!"

May He recompense it to him that he may feel it.

20 May his own eyes see his ruin,

And let him drink of the glowing wrath of the Almighty.

21 For what careth he for his house after him,

When the number of his months is cut off?

The interrogative כּמּה has here the same signification as in [Psa
78:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#040) : how often (comp. [Job
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#019), how long? [Job
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#023), how many?), but in the sense of
"how seldom?!" How seldom does what the friends preach to him come to
pass, that the lamp of the wicked is put out (thus Bildad, [Job
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#005)), and their misfortune breaks in
upon them (יבא, ingruit; thus Bildad, [Job
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012) : misfortune, איד, prop.
pressure of suffering, stands ready for his fall), that He distributes
(comp. Zophar's "this is the portion of the wicked man," i.e., what is
allotted to him, [Job 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029)) snares in
His wrath. Hirz., Ew., Schlottm., and others, translate הבלים, after the
precedent of the Targ. (עדבין, sortes), "lots," since they understand
it, after [Psa 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#006), of visitations of
punishment allotted, and as it were measured out with a measuring-line;
but that passage is to be translated, "the measuring-lines have fallen
to me in pleasant places," and indeed חבל can signify the land that is
allotted to one ([Jos 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014), comp.
[Jos 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#005)); but the plural does not
occur in that tropical sense, and if it were so intended here, חבליהם or
חבלים להם might at least be expected. Rosenm., Ges., Vaih., and Carey
transl. with lxx and Jer. (ὠδῖνες, dolores) "pains," but הבלים is the
peculiar word for the writhings of those in travail ([Job
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#003)), which is not suited here.
Schnurr. and Umbr. are nearer to the correct interpretation when they
understand חבלים like פחים, [Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006),
of lightning, as it were fiery strings cast down from above. If we call
to mind in how many ways Bildad, [Job
18:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#008), has represented the end of
the godless as a divinely decreed seizure, it is certainly the most
natural, with Stick. and Hahn, to translate (as if it were Arabic
ḥabâ'ilin) "snares," to be understood after the idea, however, not of
lightning, but generally of ensnaring destinies (e.g., חבלי עני, [Job
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008)).

Both [Job 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#017) with its three members
and [Job 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#018) with two, are under the
control of כמה. The figure of straw, or rather chopped straw (Arab.
tibn, tabn), occurs only here. The figure of chaff is more frequent,
e.g., [Psa 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004). Job here puts in the
form of a question what [Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)
maintains, being urged on by Zophar's false application and superficial
comprehension of the truth expressed in the opening of the Psalter. What
next follows in [Job 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#019) is an
objection of the friends in vindication of their thesis, which he
anticipates and answers; perhaps the clause is to be spoken with an
interrogative accent: Eloah will - so ye object - reserve his evil for
his children? אונו, not from און, strength, wealth, as [Job
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#007), [Job
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012); [Job
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#010); [Job
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#016), but from און, wickedness ([Job
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#011)) and evil ([Job
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035)), here (without making it clear
which) of wickedness punishing itself by calamity, or of calamity which
must come forth from the wickedness as a moral necessity comp. on [Job
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#031). That this is really the opinion
of the friends: God punishes the guilt of the godless, if not in
himself, at least in his children, is seen from [Job
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#010); [Job
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#004). Job as little as Ezekiel, ch. 18,
disputes the doctrine of retribution in itself, but that imperfect
apprehension, which, in order that the necessary satisfaction may be
rendered to divine justice, maintains a transfer of the punishment which
is opposed to the very nature of personality and freedom: may He
recompense him himself, וידע, that he may feel it, i.e., repent (which
would be in Arab. in a similar sense, faja'lamu; ידע as [Isa
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008); [Hos
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007); [Eze
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014)).

[Job 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#020) continues in the same
jussive forms; the ἅπ. γεγρ. כּיד signifies destruction (prop. a thrust,
blow), in which sense the Arab. caid (commonly: cunning) is also
sometimes used. The primary signification of the root כד, Arab. kd, is
to strike, push; from this, in the stems Arab. kâd, med. Wau and med.
Je, Arab. kdd, kdkd, the most diversified turns and applications are
developed; from it the signif. of כּידוד, [Job
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#011), כּידון, [Job
39:23](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#023), and according to Fleischer
(vid., supra, pp. 388) also of כּידור, are explained. [Job
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#020), as [Psa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005); [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016), refers to the figure of the cup
of the wrath of God which is worked out by Asaph, [Psa
75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009), and then by the prophets, and by
the apocalyptic seer in the New Testament. The emphasis lies on the
signs of the person in עינו (עיניו) and ישׁתּה. The rather may his own
eyes see his ruin, may he himself have to drink of the divine wrath; for
what is his interest (what interest has he) in his house after him? מה
puts a question with a negative meaning (hence Arab. mâ is directly used
as non); חפץ, prop. inclination, corresponds exactly to the word
"interest" (quid ejus interest), as [Job
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#003), comp. [Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003), [Isa
58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013) (following his own interest),
without being weakened to the signification, affair, πραγμα, a meaning
which does not occur in our poet or in Isaiah. [Job
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#021) is added as a circumstantial
clause to the question in [Job 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#021):
while the number of his own months ... , and the predicate, as in [Job
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#020) (which see), is in the plur. per
attractionem. Schnurr., Hirz., Umbr., and others explain: if the number
of his months is drawn by lot, i.e., is run out; but חצץ as v. denom.
from חץ morf, in the signification to shake up arrows as sticks for
drawing lots (Arab. sahm, an arrow and a lot, just so Persian tı̂r) in
the helmet or elsewhere (comp. [Eze
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026)), is foreign to the usage of the
Hebrew language (for מחצצים, [Jdg
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#011), signifies not those drawing
lots, but the archers); besides, חצּץ (pass. חצּץ) would signify "to
draw lots," not "to dispose of by lot," and "disposed of by lot" is an
awkward metaphor for "run out." Cocceius also gives the choice of
returning to חצץ, ψῆφος, in connection with this derivation: calculati
sive ad calculum, i.e., pleno numero egressi, which has still less
ground. Better Ges., Ew., and others: if the number of his months is
distributed, i.e., to him, so that he (this is the meaning according to
Ew.) can at least enjoy his prosperity undisturbed within the limit of
life appointed to him. By this interpretation one misses the לו which is
wanting, and an interpretation which does not require it to be supplied
is therefore to be preferred. All the divers significations of the verbs
חצץ (to divide, whence [Pro 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#027),
חצץ, forming divisions, i.e., in rank and file, denom. to shoot with the
arrow, Talm. to distribute, to halve, to form a partition), חצה (to
divide, [Job 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#020); to divide in two
equal parts), Arab. hṣṣ (to divide, whence Arab. hṣṣah, portio), and
Arab. chṣṣ (to separate, particularize) - to which, however, Arab. chṭṭ
(to draw, write), which Ew. compares here, does not belong - are
referable to the primary signification scindere, to cut through, split
(whence חץ, an arrow, lxx [Sa1 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#020),
σχίζα); accordingly the present passage is to be explained: when the
number of his months is cut off (Hlgst., Hahn), or cut through, i.e.,
when a bound is set to the course of his life at which it ends (comp.
בּצּע, of the cutting off of the thread of life, [Job
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#009); [Job
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#008), Arab. ṣrm). [Job
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#021)., [Ecc
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022), are parallels to [Job
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#021). Death is the end of all clear
thought and perception. If therefore the godless receives the reward of
his deeds, he should receive it not in his children, but in his own body
during life. But this is the very thing that is too frequently found to
be wanting.

[Job 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 21:22</span></span>

22 Shall one teach God knowledge,

Who judgeth those who are in heaven?

23 One dieth in his full strength,

Being still cheerful and free from care.

24 His troughs are full of milk,

And the marrow of his bones is well watered.

25 And another dieth with a sorrowing spirit,

And hath not enjoyed wealth.

26 They lie beside one another in the dust,

And worms cover them both.

The question, [Job 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#022), concerns the
friends. Since they maintain that necessarily and constantly virtue is
rewarded by prosperity, and sin by misfortune, but without this law of
the divine order of the world which is maintained by them being
supported by experience: if they set themselves up as teachers of God,
they will teach Him the right understanding of the conduct which is to
be followed by Him as a ruler and judge of men, while nevertheless He is
the Absolute One, beneath whose judicial rule not merely man, but also
the heavenly spirits, are placed, and to which they must conform and
bow. The verb למּד, instead of being construed with two acc., as in the
dependent passage [Isa 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#014), is here
construed with the dat. of the person (which is not to be judged
according to [Job 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#002); [Job
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003), but according to διδάσκειν τινί
τι, to teach one anything, beside the other prevailing construction).
With והוא a circumstantial clause begins regularly: while He, however,
etc. Arnh. and Lwenth. translate: while, however, He exaltedly judges,
i.e., according to a law that infinitely transcends man; but that must
have been מרום (and even thus it would still be liable to be
misunderstood). Hahn (whom Olsh. is inclined to support): but He will
judge the proud, to which first the circumstantial clause, and secondly
the parallels, [Job 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#002); [Job
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#015); [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018) (comp. [Isa
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#021)), from which it is evident that
רמים signifies the heavenly beings (as [Psa
78:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#069), the heights of heaven), are
opposed: it is a fundamental thought of this book, which abounds in
allusions to the angels, that the angels, although exalted above men,
are nevertheless in contrast with God imperfect, and therefore are
removed neither from the possibility of sin nor the necessity of a
government which holds them together in unity, and exercises a judicial
authority over them. The rule of the all-exalted Judge is different from
that which the three presumptuously prescribe to Him.

The one (viz., the evil-doer) dies בּעצם תּמּו, in ipsa sua integritate,
like בעצם היום, ipso illo die; the Arabic would be fı̂ ‛yn, since there
the eye, here the bone (comp. Uhlemann, Syr. Gramm. 58), denote
corporeality, duration, existence, and therefore identity. תּם is
intended of perfect external health, as elsewhere מתם; comp. תּמימים,
[Pro 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#012). In [Job
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#023) the pointing שׁלאנן (adj.) and
שׁלאנן (3 praet.) are interchanged in the Codd.; the following verbal
adjective favours the form of writing with Kametz. As to the form,
however (which Rd. and Olsh. consider to be an error in writing), it is
either a mixed form from שׁאנן and שׁלו with the blended meaning of both
(Ew. 106, c), to which the comparison with שׁליו (= שׁלו) is not
altogether suitable, or it is formed from שׁאנן by means of an
epenthesis (as זלעף from זעף, aestuare, and בלסם, βάλσαμον, from בשׂם),
and of similar but intensified signification; we prefer the latter,
without however denying the real existence of such mixed forms (vid., on
[Job 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#009); [Job
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#025)). This fulness of health and
prosperity is depicted in [Job 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#024).
The ancient translators think, because the bones are mentioned in the
parallel line, עטיניו must also be understood of a part of the body: lxx
ἔγκατα, Jer. viscera; Targ. בּיזוי, his breasts, βυζία

(Note: Vid., Handschriftliche Funde, 2. S. V.)

(for Hebr. שׁדים, שׁד); Syr. version gabauh (= ganbauh), his sides in
regard to עטמא, Syr. ‛attmo = אטמא, side, hip; Saad. audâguhu, his
jugular veins, in connection with which (not, however, by this last
rendering) חלב is read instead of חלב: his bowels, etc., are full of
fat.

(Note: Gesenius in his Thes. corrects the אודאגה which was found in
Saadia's manuscript translation to אודאעה, Arab. awdâ‛uhu, which is
intended to mean repositoria ejus, but is really not Arabic; whereas
אודאגה is the correct plur. of Arab. wadaj: his jugular veins, which
occurs not merely of horses, but also of animals and men. Saadia, with
reference to the following מלאוּ חלב, has thought of the metaphorical
phrase Arab. ḥalaba awdâjahu: "he has milked his jugular vein," i.e., he
has, as it were, drawn the blood from his jugular veins = eum jugulavit,
vid., Bibliotheca Arabo-Sicula, p. 563: "and with the freshly milked
juice of the jugular veins, viz., of the enemy (Arab. w-mn ḥlb
'l-'wdâj), our infant ready to be weaned is nourished in the midst of
the tumult of battle, as soon as he is weaned." The meaning of Saadia's
translation is then: his jugular veins are filled with fresh blood
swollen with fulness of blood. - Fl.)

But the assumption that עטיניו must be a part of the body is without
satisfactory ground (comp. against it e.g., [Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017), and for it [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011)); and Schlottm. very correctly
observes, that in the contrast in connection with the representation of
the well-watered marrow one expects a reference to a rich nutritious
drink. To this expectation corresponds the translation: "his
resting-places (i.e., of his flocks) are full of milk," after the Arab.
‛aṭan or ma‛ṭin. which was not first compared by Schultens and Reiske
(epaulia), but even by Abul-walid, Aben-Ezra, and others.

But since the reference of what was intended to be said of the cattle at
the watering-places to the places where the water is, possesses no
poetic beauty, and the Hebrew language furnished the poet with an
abundance of other words for pastures and meadows, it is from the first
more probable that עטיניו are large troughs, - like Talm. מעטן, a
trough, in which the unripe olives were laid in order that they might
become tender and give forth oil, that they may then be ready for the
oil-press (בּד), and עטן denotes this laying in itself, - and indeed
either milk-tubs or milk-pails (שׁחולבין לתוכן), or with Kimchi (who
rightly characterizes this as more in accordance with the prosperous
condition which is intended to be described), the troughs for the store
of milk, which also accords better with the meaning of the verb עטן,
Arab. ‛aṭana, to lay in, confire.

(Note: The Arab. verb 'tn, compared by the Orientals themselves with
Arab. wtn, cognate in sound and meaning, has the primary signification
to lie secure and to lay secure, as Arab. 'atan, a resting-place of
camels, sheep, and goats about the watering-places, is only specifically
distinct from Arab. watan, a cow-shed, cow-stall. The common generic
notion is always a resting-place, wherefore the Kamus interprets 'attan
by wattan wa-mebrek, viz., round about the drinking-places. Arab. ma'tin
as n. loci, written m'atn by Barth in his Wanderungen durch die
Kstenlnder des Mittelmeeres, Bd. i. (vid., Deutsch. Morgenlnd.
Zeitschrift, iv. S. 275) S. 500, 517, is similar in meaning. The Arab.
verb 'atana, impf. j'attunu, also j'attina, n. act. 'uttn, a v.
instrans., signifies, viz., of camels, etc., to lay themselves down
around the drinking-troughs, after or even before drinking from them. On
the other hand, Arab. 'atana, impf. j'attinu, also j'attunu, n. act.
'attn, a v. trans. used by the dresser of skins: to lay the skins in the
tan or ooze (French, confire; low Latin, tanare, tannare, whence French,
tanner, to tan, tan, the bark) until they are ready for dressing, and
the hairs will easily scrape off. Hence Arab. 'atina, impf. j'attanu, n.
act. 'attan, a v. intrans. used of skins: to become tender by lying in
the ooze, and to smell musty, to stink, which is then transferred to men
and animals: to stink like a skin in the ooze, comp. situs, mould,
mildew, rest. - Fl. Starting from the latter signification, macerare
pellem, Lee explains: his bottles (viz., made of leather); and Carey:
his half-dressed skins (because the store of milk is so great that he
cannot wait for the preparation of the leather for the bottles); but the
former is impossible, the latter out of taste, and both are
far-fetched.)

From the abundance of nutriment in [Job
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#024), the description passes over in
[Job 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#024) to the well-nourished
condition of the rich man himself in consequence of this abundance. מח
(Arab. muchch, or even nuchch, as נף = מף, naurag = מורג) is the marrow
in the bones, e.g., the spinal marrow, but also the brain as the marrow
of the head (Psychol. S. 233). The bones ([Pro
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008)), or as it is here more exactly
expressed, their marrow, is watered, when the body is inwardly filled
with vigour, strength, and health; Isaiah, [Isa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011), fills up the picture more (as a
well-watered garden), and carries it still further in [Isa
66:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#014) (thy bones shall blossom like a
tender herb). The counterpart now follows with וזה (and the other, like
[Job 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#016)). The other (viz., the
righteous) dies with a sorrowful soul (comp. Job's lament, [Job
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#011); [Job
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001)), i.e., one which is called to
experience the bitterness of a suffering life; he dies and has not
enjoyed בּטּובה, any of the wealth (with partitive Beth, as [Psa
141:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#004), comp. supra, [Job
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#013)), has had no portion in the
enjoyment of it (comp. Job's lament, [Job
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#025)). In death they are then both,
unrighteous and righteous, alike, as the Preacher said: מקרה אחד comes
upon the wise as upon the fool, [Ecc
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#015), comp. [Job
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#002). They lie together in the dust,
i.e., the dust of the grave (vid., on [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)), and worms cover them. What
then is become of the law of retribution in the present world, which the
friends maintained with such rigid pertinacity, and so regardless of the
deep wound they were inflicting on Job?

[Job 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 21:27</span></span>

27 Behold I know your thoughts

And the stratagems, with which ye overpower me!

28 When ye say: Where is the house of the tyrant,

And where the pavilions of the wicked - :

29 Have ye not asked those who travel,

Their memorable things ye could surely not disown:

30 That the wicked was spared in the day of calamity,

In the day of the outburst of wrath they were led away.

31 Who liketh to declare to him his way to his face?

And hath he done aught, who will recompense it to him?

Their thoughts which he sees through, are their secret thoughts that he
is such an evil-doer reaping the reward of his deeds. מזמּות (which
occurs both of right measures, good wise designs, [Pro
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#002); [Pro
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#012), and of artful devices, malicious
intrigues, [Pro 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#002); [Pro
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#017), comp. the definition of בּעל
מזמּות, [Pro 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#008)) is the name he
gives to the delicately developed reasoning with which they attack him;
חמס (comp. Arab. taḥammasa, to act harshly, violently, and
overbearingly) is construed with על in the sense of forcing, apart from
the idea of overcoming. In [Job 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#028),
which is the antecedent to [Job 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#029),
beginning with כּי האמרוּ (as [Job
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028)), he refers to words of the
friends like [Job 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#022); [Job
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034); [Job
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#015), [Job
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#021). נדיב is prop. the noble man,
whose heart impels (נדב, Arab. nadaba) him to what is good, or who is
ready and willing, and does spontaneously that which is good (Arab.
naduba), vid., Psychol. S. 165; then, however, since the notion takes
the reverse way of generosus, the noble man (princely) by birth and
station, with which the secondary notion of pride and abuse of power,
therefore of a despot or tyrant, is easily as here (parall. רשׁעים,
comp. עשׁיר, [Isa 53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009), with the same
word in the parallel) combined (just so in [Isa
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#002), and similarly at least above,
[Job 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#021), - an anomaly of name and
conduct, which will be for the future put aside, according to [Isa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005)). It is not admissible to
understand the double question as antithetical, with Wolfson, after [Pro
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#011); for the interrogative איּה is
not appropriate to the house of the נדיב, in the proper sense of the
word. [Job 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#028), משׁכנות is not an
externally but internally multiplying plur.; perhaps the poet by byt
intends a palace in the city, and by אהל משׁכנות a tent among the
wandering tribes, rendered prominent by its spaciousness and the
splendour of the establishment.

(Note: Although the tents regularly consist of two divisions, one for
the men and another for the women, the translation "magnificent
pavilion" (Prachtgezelt), disputed by Hirz., is perfectly correct; for
even in the present day a Beduin, as he approaches an encampment, knows
the tent of the sheikh immediately: it is denoted by its size, often
also by the lances planted at the door, and also, as is easily imagined,
by the rich arrangement of cushions and carpets. Vid., Layard's New
Discoveries, pp. 261 and 171.)

Job thinks the friends reason a priori since they inquire thus; the
permanent fact of experience is quite different, as they can learn from
ערי דרך, travellers, i.e., here: people who have travelled much, and
therefore are well acquainted with the stories of human destinies. The
Piel נכּר, proceeding from the radical meaning to gaze fixedly, is an
enantio'seemon, since it signifies both to have regard to, [Job
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#019), and to disown, [Deu
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#027); here it is to be translated:
their אתת ye cannot nevertheless deny, ignore (as Arab. nakira and
ankara). אתת are tokens, here: remarkable things, and indeed the
remarkable histories related by them; Arab. âyatun (collective plur.
âyun), signs, is also similarly used in the signification of Arab.
‛ibrat, example, historical teaching.

That the כּי, [Job 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#030), as in [Job
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#028), introduces the view of the
friends, and is the antecedent clause to [Job
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#031) : quod (si) vos dicitis, in
tempora cladis per iram divinam immissae servari et nescium futuri velut
pecudem eo deduci improbum (Bttcher, de fin. 76), has in the double ל an
apparent support, which is not to be denied, especially in regard to
[Job 38:23](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#023); it is, however, on account
of the omission of the indispensable תאמרו in this instance, an
explanation which does violence to the words. The כּי, on the contrary,
introduces that which the accounts of the travellers affirm. Further,
the ל in ליום indicates here not the terminus ad quem, but as in לערב,
in the evening, the terminus quo. And the verb חשׂך, cohibere, signifies
here to hold back from danger, as [Job
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#018), therefore to preserve
uninjured. Ew. translates [Job 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#030)
erroneously: "in the day when the floods of wrath come on." How tame
would this הוּבל, "to be led near," be! This Hoph. signifies elsewhere
to be brought and conducted, and occurs in [Job
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#032), as in [Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012) and elsewhere, of an honourable
escort; here, in accordance with the connection: to be led away out of
the danger (somewhat as Lot and his family by the escort of angels). At
the time, when streams of wrath (עברה, the overflowing of vexation =
outburst of wrath, like the Arab. ‛abrt, the overflowing of the eye =
tears) go forth, they remain untouched: they escape them, as being under
a special, higher protection.

(Note: This interpretation, however, is unsatisfactory, because it does
not do justice to the twofold ל, which seems, according to [Job
38:23](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#023), to be intended to indicate the
terminus ad quem; perhaps [Job 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#029)
and [Job 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#030) are to be transposed.
If [Job 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#030) followed [Job
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#028), it would retain its natural
sense as belonging to the view of the friends: "For the wicked is
reserved for the day of calamity, and to a day of wrath they are led"
(יובלו as [Isa 53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007); [Jer
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019)). Then והוא לקברות יובל also
adds a suitable echo of the contradiction in Job's mouth. Bttch. rightly
calls attention to the consonance of יובל with יובלו, and of עברות with
קברות.)

[Job 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#031) is commonly taken as a
reflection on the exemption of the evil-doer: God's mode of action is
exalted above all human scrutiny, although it is not reconcilable with
the idea of justice, [Job 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#012); [Job
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#013). But the מי ישׁלּם־לו, who will
recompense it to him, which, used of man in relation to God, has no
suitable meaning, and must therefore mean: who, after God has left the
evil-doer unpunished - for which, however, הוּא עשׂה would be an
unsuitable expression - shall recompense him, the evil-doer? is opposed
to it. Therefore, against Ew., Hirz., and Hlgst., it must with most
expositors be supposed that [Job 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#031)
is a reflection referable not to God, but to the evil-doer: so powerful
is the wicked generally, that no one can oppose his pernicious doings
and call him to account for them, much less that any one would venture
to repay him according to his desert when he has brought anything to a
completion (הוּא עשׂה, intentionally thus seriously expressed, as
elsewhere of God, e.g., [Isa 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#015)).
In the next strophe, that which is gathered from the accounts of
travellers is continued, and is then followed by a declamatory summing
up.

[Job 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">job 21:32</span></span>

32 And he is brought to the grave,

And over the tomb he still keepeth watch.

33 The clods of the valley are sweet to him,

And all men draw after him,

As they preceded him without number.

. . . . . .

34 And how will ye comfort me so vainly!

Your replies are and remain perfidy.

During life removed at the time of dire calamity, this unapproachable
evil-doer is after his death carried to the grave with all honour
(יוּבל, comp. [Job 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#019)), and indeed
to a splendid tomb; for, like משׁכנות above, קברות is also an
amplificative plural. It is certainly the most natural to refer ישׁקד,
like יוּבל, to the deceased. The explanation: and over the tomb one
keeps watch (Bttch., Hahn, Rd., Olsh.), is indeed in itself admissible,
since that which serves as the efficient subject is often left
unexpressed ([Gen 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#002); [Kg2
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#021); [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009); comp. supra, on [Job
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#018)); but that, according to the
prevalent usage of the language, ישׁקד would denote only a guard of
honour at night, not also in the day, and that for clearness it would
have required גּדישׁו instead of גּדישׁ, are considerations which do not
favour this explanation, for שׁקד signifies to watch, to be active,
instead of sleeping or resting; and moreover, the placing of guards of
honour by graves is an assumed, but not proved, custom of antiquity.
Nevertheless, ישׁקד might also in general denote the watchful, careful
tending of the grave, and the maqâm (the tomb) of one who is highly
honoured has, according to Moslem custom, servants (châdimı̂n) who are
appointed for this duty. But though the translation "one watches" should
not be objected to on this ground, the preference is to be given to a
commendable rendering which makes the deceased the subject of ישׁקד.
Raschi's explanation does not, however, commend itself: "buried in his
own land, he also in death still keeps watch over the heaps of sheaves."
The lxx translates similarly, ἐπὶ σωρῶν, which Jerome improperly, but
according to a right sentiment, translates, in congerie mortuorum. For
after the preceding mention of the pomp of burial, גּדישׁ, which
certainly signifies a heap of sheaves in [Job
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026), is favoured by the assumption of
its signifying a sepulchral heap, with reference to which also in that
passage (where interment is likewise the subject of discourse) the
expression is chosen. Haji Gaon observes that the dome (קבּה, Arab.
qbbt, the dome and the sepulchral monument vaulted over by it)

(Note: Vid., Lane's Manners and Customs of the Modern Egyptians
(translated by Zenker).)

erected over graves according to Arab custom is intended; and Aben-Ezra
says, that not exactly this, but in general the grave-mound formed of
earth, etc., is to be understood. In reality, גדישׁ (from the verb גדשׁ,
cumulare, commonly used in the Talmud and Aramaic) signifies cumulus, in
the most diversified connections, which in Arabic are distributed among
the verbs jds, kds, and jdš, especially tumulus, Arab. jadatun (broader
pronunciation jadafun). If by grave-mound a mound with the grave upon it
can be understood, a beautiful explanation is presented which accords
with the preference of the Beduin for being buried on an eminence, in
order that even in death he may be surrounded by his relations, and as
it were be able still to overlook their encampment: the one who should
have had a better lot is buried in the best place of the plain, in an
insignificant grave; the rich man, however, is brought up to an eminence
and keeps watch on his elevated tomb, since from this eminence as from a
watch-tower he even in death, as it were, enjoys the wide prospect which
delighted him so while living.

(Note: "Take my bones," says an Arabian poem, "and carry them with you,
wherever you go; and if ye bury them, bury them opposite your
encampment! And bury me not under a vine, which would shade me, but upon
a hill, so that my eye can see you!" Vid., Ausland, 1863, Nr. 15 (Ein
Ritt nach Transjordanien).)

But the signification collis cannot be supported; גדישׁ signifies the
hill which is formed by the grave itself, and [Job
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033) indeed directs us to the wady as
the place of burial, not to the hill. But if גדישׁ is the grave-mound,
it is also not possible with Schlottm. to think of the pictures on the
wall and images of the deceased, as they are found in the Egyptian
vaults (although in [Job 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#014) we
recognised an allusion to the pyramids), for it cannot then be a גדישׁ
in the strict sense that is spoken of; the word ought, like the Arabic
jdṯ (which the Arab. translation of the New Testament in the London
Polyglott uses of the μνημεῖον of Jesus), with a mingling of its
original signification, to have been used in the general signification
sepulcrum. This would be possible, but it need not be supposed. Job's
words are the pictorial antithesis to Bildad's assertion, [Job
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017), that the godless man dies away
without trace or memorial; it is not so, but as may be heard from the
mouth of people who have experience in the world: he keeps watch over
his tomb, he continues to watch although asleep, since he is continually
brought to remembrance by the monument built over his tomb. A keeping
watch that no one approaches the tomb disrespectfully (Ew.), is not to
be thought of. שׁקד is a relative negation of the sleep of death: he is
dead, but in a certain manner he continues to live, viz., in the
monument planting forward his memory, which it remains for the
imagination to conceive of as a mausoleum, or weapons, or other votive
offerings hung upon the walls, etc. In connection with such honour,
which follows him even to and beyond death, the clods of the valley (est
ei terra levis) are sweet (מתקוּ is accentuated with Mercha, and לו
without Makkeph with little-Rebia) to him; and if death in itself ought
to be accounted an evil, he has shared the common fate which all men
after him will meet, and which all before him have met; it is the common
end of all made sweet to him by the pageantry of his burial and his
after-fame. Most modern expositors (Ew., Hirz., Umbr., Hlgst., Welte)
understand the ימשׁך, which is used, certainly, not in the transitive
signification: to draw after one's self, but in the intransitive: to
draw towards (lxx απελεύσεται), as [Jdg
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#006) (vid., Ges. Thes.), of an
imitative treading of the same way; but כּל־אדם would then be an untrue
hyperbole, by which Job would expose himself to the attack of his
adversaries.

In [Job 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#034) Job concludes his
speech; the Waw of ואיך, according to the idea (as e.g., the Waw in
ואני, [Isa 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#012)), is an inferential
ergo. Their consolation, which is only available on condition of
penitence, is useless; and their replies, which are intended to make him
an evil-doer against the testimony of his conscience, remain מעל. It is
not necessary to construe: and as to your answers, only מעל remains. The
predicate stands per attractionem in the sing.: their answers, reduced
to their true value, leave nothing behind but מעל, end in מעל, viz.,
באלהים, [Jos 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#022), perfidious sinning
against God, i.e., on account of the sanctimonious injustice and
uncharitableness with which they look suspiciously on him.

Job has hitherto answered the accusations of the friends, which they
express in ever-increasingly terrible representations of the end of the
godless, presenting only the terrible side of their dogma of the justice
of God, with a stedfast attestation of his innocence, and with the
ever-increasing hope of divine vindication against human accusation. In
him was manifest that faith which, being thrust back by men, clings to
God, and, thrust back by God, even soars aloft from the present wrath of
God to His faithfulness and mercy. The friends, however, instead of
learning in Job's spiritual condition to distinguish between the
appearance and the reality in this confidence, which comes back to
itself, see in it only a constant wilful hardening of himself against
their exhortations to penitence. It does not confound them, that he over
whom, according to their firm opinion, the sword of God's vengeance
hangs, warns them of that same sword, but only confirms them still more
in their conviction, that they have to do with one who is grievously
self-deluded.

Zophar has painted anew the end of the evil-doer in the most hideous
colours, in order that Job might behold himself in this mirror, and be
astonished at himself. We see also, from the answer of Job to Zophar's
speech, that the passionate excitement which Job displayed at first in
opposition to the friends has given place to a calmer tone; he has
already got over the first impression of disappointed expectation, and
the more confidently certain of the infallibility of divine justice he
becomes, the more does he feel raised above his accusers. He now expects
no further comfort; careful attention to what he has to say shall
henceforth be his consolation. He will also complain against and of men
no more, for he has long since ceased to hope for anything for himself
from men; his vexation concerns the objective indefensibility of that
which his opponents maintain as a primeval law of the divine government
in the world. The maxim that godlessness always works its own punishment
by a calamitous issue, is by no means supported by experience. One sees
godless persons who are determined to know nothing of God, and are at
the same time prosperous. It is not to be said that God treasures up the
punishment they have deserved for their children. The godless ought
rather to bear the punishment themselves, since the destiny of their
children no longer concerns them after they have enjoyed their fill of
life. That law is therefore a precept which human short-sightedness has
laid down for God, but one by which, however, He is not guided. The
godless who have lived prosperously all their days, and the righteous
who have experienced only sorrow, share the common lot of death. One has
only to ask persons who have had experience of the world: they can
relate instances of notorious sinners who maintained their high position
until death, and who, without being overtaken by divine judgments, and
without human opposition and contradiction, were carried in honour to
the grave, and their memory is immortalized by the monuments erected
over their tomb. From this Job infers that the connection into which the
friends bring his suffering with supposed guilt, is a false one, and
that all their answers are, after all, reducible to an unjust and
uncharitable judgment, by which they attack (מעל) God.

Job has more than once given expression to the thought, that a just
distribution of prosperity and misfortune is not to be found in the
world, [Job 9:22-24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#022); [Job
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006). But now for the first time he
designedly brings it forward in reply to the friends, after he has found
every form of assertion of his innocence unavailing, and their behaviour
towards him with their dogma is become still more and more inconsiderate
and rash. Job sins in this speech; but in order to form a correct
judgment of this sinning, two things must be attended to. Job does not
revel in the contradiction in which this lasting fact of experience
stands to the justice of divine retribution, he had rather be ignorant
of it; for he has no need of it in order, in spite of his affliction, to
be able to hold fast the consciousness of his innocence. No indeed! if
he thinks of this mystery he is perplexed, and shuddering comes over
him, [Job 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#006). And when he depicts
the prosperity of sinners, he expresses his horror of the sins of such
prosperous men in the words: The counsel of the ungodly be far from me!
([Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016)), in order that it may not
be erroneously imagined that he lusts after such prosperity.

If we compare Zophar's and Job's speeches one with another, we are
obliged to say, that relatively the greater right is on the side of Job.
True, the Scriptures confirm what Zophar says of the destruction of the
evil-doer in innumerable passages; and this calamitous end of one who
has long been prosperous and defiant, is the solution by which the Old
Testament Scriptures (Ps. 37, 73; [Jer
12:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001); Hab. 1:13-2:1) remove the
stumbling-block of the mysterious phenomenon of the prosperity of the
evil-doer. But if we bear in mind that this solution is insufficient, so
long as that calamitous end is regarded only outwardly, and with
reference to the present world, - that the solution only becomes
satisfactory when, as in the book of Ecclesiastes, in reply to a similar
doubt to that which Job expresses ([Ecc
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#015); [Ecc
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#014)), the end is regarded as the end
of all, and as the decision of a final judgment which sets all
contradictions right, - that, however, neither Zophar nor Job know
anything of a decision beyond death, but regard death as the end whither
human destiny and divine retribution tend, without being capable of any
further distinction: we cannot deny that Job is most in the right in
placing the prosperous life and death of the godless as based upon the
incontrovertible facts of experience, in opposition to Zophar's primeval
exceptionless law of the terrible end of the godless. The speeches of
Zophar and of Job are both true and false, - both one-sided, and
therefore mutually supplementary. The real final end of the evil-doer is
indeed none other than Zophar describes; and the temporal prosperity of
the evil-doer, lasting often until death, is really a frequent
phenomenon. If, however, we consider further, that Job is not able to
deny the occurrence of such examples of punishment, such revelations of
the retributive justice of God, as those which Zophar represents as
occurring regularly and without exception; that, however, on the other
hand, exceptional instances undeniably do exist, and the friends are
obliged to be blind to them, because otherwise the whole structure of
their opposition would fall in, - it is manifest that Job is nearer to
the truth than Zophar. For it is truer that the retributive justice of
God is often, but by far not always, revealed in the present world and
outwardly, than that it never becomes manifest.

Wherein, then, does Job's sin in this speech consist? Herein, that he
altogether ignores the palpably just distribution of human destinies,
which does occur frequently enough. In this he becomes unjust towards
his opponent, and incapable of convincing him. From it, it appears as
though in the divine government there is not merely a preponderance of
what is mysterious, of what is irreconcilable with divine justice, but
as though justice were altogether contradicted. The reproach with which
he reproaches his opponents: Shall one teach God understanding? is one
which also applies to himself; for when he says that God, if He
punishes, must visit punishment upon the evil-doer himself, and not on
his children, it is an unbecoming dictation with regard to God's doing.
We should be mistaken in supposing that the poet, in [Job
21:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#019), brings forward a concealed
contradiction to the Mosaic doctrine of retribution; nowhere in the Old
Testament, not even in the Mosaic law, is it taught, that God visits the
sins of the fathers on the children, while He allows them themselves to
go free, [Exo 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005), comp. [Deu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016); [Eze
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#001); [Jer
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029). What Job asserts, that the
sinner himself must endure the punishment of his sins, not his children
instead of him, is true; but the thought lying in the background, that
God does not punish where He ought to punish, is sinful. Thus here Job
again falls into error, which he must by and by penitently acknowledge
and confess, by speaking unbecomingly of God: the God of the future is
again vanished from him behind the clouds of temptation, and he is
unable to understand and love the God of the present; He is a mystery to
him, the incomprehensibility of which causes him pain. "The joyous
thought of the future, which a little before struggled forth, again
vanishes, because the present, into the abyss of which he is again drawn
down, has remained perfectly dark the whole time, and as yet no bridge
has been revealed crossing from this side to that."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 22](job022)

</div>
