<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job016)  [Next](job018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

[Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 17:1</span></span>

1 My breath is corrupt,

My days are extinct,

The graves are ready for me.

2 Truly mockery surrounds me,

And mine eye shall loiter over their disputings.

Hirz., Hlgst., and others, wrongly consider the division of the chapter
here to be incorrect. The thought in [Job
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#022) is really a concluding thought,
like [Job 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#020)., [Job
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#021). Then in [Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001) another strain is taken up; and
as [Job 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#022) is related, as a
confirmation, to the request expressed in [Job
16:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019), so [Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001), [Job
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002) are related to that expressed in
[Job 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003). The connection with the
conclusion of Job 16 is none the less close: the thoughts move on
somewhat crosswise (chiastisch). We do not translate with Ewald: "My
spirit is destroyed," because חבּל (here and [Isa
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#027)) signifies not, to be destroyed,
but, to be corrupted, disturbed, troubled; not the spirit (after Arab.
chbl, usually of disturbance of spirit), but the breath is generally
meant, which is become short ([Job
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#015)) and offensive ([Job
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017)), announcing suffocation and
decay as no longer far distant. In [Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001) the ἅπ. γεγρ. נזעכוׁ is
equivalent to נדעכו, found elsewhere. In [Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001) קברים is used as if the dead were
called, Arab. ssâchib el-kubûr, grave-companions. He is indeed one who
is dying, from whom the grave is but a step distant, and still the
friends promise him long life if he will only repent! This is the
mockery which is with him, i.e., surrounds him, as he affirms, [Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001). A secondary verb, התל, is formed
from the Hiph. התל (of which we had the non-syncopated form of the fut.
in [Job 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#009)), the Piel of which
occurs in [Kg1 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#027) of Elijah's
derision of the priests of Baal, and from this is formed the pluralet.
התלים (or, according to another reading, התלּים, with the same doubling
of the ל as in מהתלּות, deceitful things, [Isa
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#010); comp. the same thing in [Job
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#007), אראלּם, their lions of God =
heroes), which has the meaning foolery, - a meaning questioned by Hirz.
without right, - in which the idea of deceit and mockery are united.
Gecatilia and Ralbag take it as a part.: mockers; Stick., Wolfson, Hahn:
deluded; but the analogy of שׁעשׁעים, תעלולים, and the like, speaks in
favour of taking it as a substantive. אם־לא is affirmative (Ges. 155, 2,
f). Ewald renders it as expressive of desire: if only not (Hlgst.:
dummodo ne); but this signification (Ew. 329, b) cannot be supported. On
the other hand, it might be intended interrogatively (as [Job
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025)): annon illusiones mecum
(Rosenm.); but this אם־לא, corresponding to the second member of a
disjunctive question, has no right connection in the preceding. We
therefore prefer the affirmative meaning, and explain it like [Job
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#020); [Job
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#036), comp. [Job
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005). Truly what he continually hears,
i.e., from the side of the friends, is only false and delusive
utterances, which consequently sound to him like jesting and mockery.
The suff. in [Job 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002) refers to them.
המּרות (with Dag. dirimens, which renders the sound of the word more
pathetic, as [Job 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#018); [Joe
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#017), and in the Hiph. form כנּלתך,
[Isa 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#001)), elsewhere generally ([Jos
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#018) only excepted) of rebellion
against God, denotes here the contradictory, quarrelsome bearing of the
friends, not the dispute in itself (comp. Arab. mry, III. to attack, VI.
to contend with another), but coming forward controversially; only to
this is תּלן עיני suitable. הלין must not be taken as = הלּין here;
Ewald's translation, "only let not mine eye come against their
irritation," forces upon this verb, which always signifies to murmur,
γογγύζειν, a meaning foreign to it, and one that does not well suit it
here. The voluntative form תּלן = תּלן (here not the pausal form, as
[Jdg 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020), comp. [Sa2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016)) quite accords with the sense:
mine eye shall linger on their janglings; it shall not look on anything
that is cheering, but be held fast by this cheerless spectacle, which
increases his bodily suffering and his inward pain. From these
comforters, who are become his adversaries, Job turns in supplication to
God.

[Job 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 17:3</span></span>

3 Lay down now, be bondsman for me with Thyself;

Who else should furnish surety to me?!

4 For Thou hast closed their heart from understanding,

Therefore wilt Thou not give authority to them.

5 He who giveth his friends for spoil,

The eyes of his children shall languish.

It is unnecessary, with Reiske and Olsh., to read ערבני (pone quaeso
arrhabonem meum = pro me) in order that שׂימה may not stand without an
object; שׂימה has this meaning included in it, and the ארבני which
follows shows that neither לבך (Ralbag) nor ידך (Carey) is to be
supplied; accordingly שׂים here, like Arab. wḍ‛ (wâḍ‛), and in the
classics both τιθέναι and ponere, signifies alone the laying down of a
pledge. Treated by the friends as a criminal justly undergoing
punishment, he seeks his refuge in God, who has set the mark of a
horrible disease upon him contrary to his desert, as though he were
guilty, and implores Him to confirm the reality of his innocence in some
way or other by laying down a pledge for him (ὑποθήκη). The further
prayer is ערבני, as word of entreaty which occurs also in Hezekiah's
psalm, [Isa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014), and [Psa
119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122); ערב seq. acc. signifies, as
noted on the latter passage, to furnish surety for any one, and gen. to
take the place of a mediator (comp. also on [Heb
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022), where ἔγγυος is a synon. of
μεσίτης). Here, however, the significant עמּך is added: furnish security
for me with Thyself; elsewhere the form is ל ערב, to furnish security
for ([Pro 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)), or לפני before, any
one, here with עם of the person by whom the security is to be accepted.
The thought already expressed in [Job
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#021) receives a still stronger
expression here: God is conceived of as two persons, on the one side as
a judge who treats Job as one deserving of punishment, on the other side
as a bondsman who pledges himself for the innocence of the sufferer
before the judge, and stands as it were as surety against the future. In
the question, [Job 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003), the
representation is again somewhat changed: Job appears here as the one to
whom surety is given. נתקע, described by expositors as reciprocal, is
rather reflexive: to give one's hand (the only instance of the med. form
of כּף תּקע) = to give surety by striking hands, dextera data sponsionem
in se recipere (Hlgst.). And לידי is not to be explained after the
analogy of the passive, as the usual ל of the agents: who would allow
himself to be struck by my hand, i.e., who would accept the surety from
me (Wolfson), which is unnatural both in representation and expression;
but it is, according to [Pro 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#001)
(vid., Bertheau), intended of the hand of him who receives the stroke of
the hand of him who gives the pledge. This is therefore the meaning of
the question: who else (הוּא מי), if not God himself, should strike (his
hand) to my hand, i.e., should furnish to me a pledge (viz., of my
innocence) by joining hands? There is none but God alone who can
intercede for him, as a guarantee of his innocence before himself and
others. This negative answer: None but Thou alone, is established in
[Job 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#004). God has closed the heart of
the friends against understanding, prop. concealed, i.e., He has fixed a
curtain, a wall of partition, between their hearts and the right
understanding of the matter; He has smitten them with blindness,
therefore He will not (since they are suffering from a want of
perception which He has ordained, and which is consequently known to
Him) allow them to be exalted, i.e., to conquer and triumph. "The
exaltation of the friends," observes Hirzel rightly, "would be, that God
should openly justify their assertion of Job's guilt." Lwenthal
translates: therefore art thou not honoured; but it is not pointed תּרמם
= תּתרמם, but תּרמם, whether it be that אתם is to be supplied, or that
it is equivalent to תּרממם (Ew. 62, a, who, however, prefers to take is
as n. Hithpa. like תּקמם in the unimproved signification: improvement,
since he maintains this affords no right idea), according to the analogy
of similar verb-forms ([Job 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#015);
[Isa 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006)), by a resolving of the two
similar consonants which occur together.

The hope thus expressed Job establishes ([Job
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005)) by a principle from general
experience, that he who offers his friends as spoil for distribution
will be punished most severely for the same upon his children: he shall
not escape the divine retribution which visits him, upon his own
children, for the wrong done to his friends. Almost all modern
expositors are agreed in this rendering of לחלק as regards [Job
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005); but חלק must not be translated
"lot" (Ewald), which it never means; it signifies a share of spoil, as
e.g., [Num 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#036) (Jerome praedam), or
even with a verbal force: plundering (from חלק, [Ch2
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#021)), or even in antithesis to
entering into bond for a friend with all that one possesses (Stick.,
Schlottm.), a dividing (of one's property) = distraining, as a result of
the surrender to the creditor, to which the verb הגּיד is appropriate,
which would then denote denouncing before a court of justice, as [Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010), not merely proclaiming openly,
as [Isa 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#009). We have translated
"spoil," which admits of all these modifications and excludes none; the
general meaning is certainly: one deserts (instead of shielding as an
intercessor) his friends and delivers them up; יגּיד with a general
subj., as [Job 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#002) (if any one
attempts), [Job 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#003); [Job
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#023). With respect to the other half
of the verse, [Job 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005), the optative
rendering: may they languish (Vaih.), to the adoption of which the old
expositors have been misled by parallels like [Psa
109:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009)., is to be rejected; it is
contrary to the character of Job ([Job
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#030)). We agree with Mercerus:
Nequaquam hoc per imprecationem, sed ut consequentis justissimae poenae
denunciationem ab Iobo dictum putamus. For v. 5b is also not to be taken
as a circumstantial clause: even if the eyes of his children languish
(Ew., Hlgst. Stick., Hahn, Schl.). It is not רעהוּ, but רעים; and before
supposing here a Synallage num. so liable to be misunderstood, one must
try to get over the difficulty without it, which is here easy enough.
Hence Job is made, in the intended application of the general principle,
to allude to his own children, and Ewald really considers him the father
of infant children, which, however, as may be seen from the prologue, is
nothing but an invention unsupported by the history. Since it is בניו
and not בניהם, we refer the suff. to the subj. of יגיד. The Waw of ועיני
Mich. calls Waw consecutivum; it, however, rather combines things that
are inseparable (certainly as cause and effect, sin and punishment). And
it is יגיד, not הגיד, because the perf. would describe the fact as past,
while the fut. places us in the midst of this faithless conduct. Job
says God cannot possibly allow these, his three friends, the upper hand.
One proclaims his friends as spoil (comp. [Job
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#027)), and the eyes of his children
languish (comp. [Job 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020)), i.e., he
who so faithlessly disowns the claims of affection, is punished for it
on that which he holds most dear. But this uncharitableness which he
experiences is also a visitation of God. In the next strophe he refers
all that he meets with from man to Him as the final cause, but not
without a presage of the purpose for which it is designed.

[Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 17:6</span></span>

6 And He hath made me a proverb to the world,

And I became as one in whose face they spit.

7 Then mine eye became dim with grief,

And all my members were like a shadow.

8 The upright were astonished at it,

And the innocent is stirred up over the godless;

9 Nevertheless the righteous holdeth fast on his way,

And he that hath clean hands waxeth stronger and stronger.

Without a question, the subj. of [Job
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006) is God. It is the same thing
whether משׁל is taken as inf. followed by the subject in the nominative
(Ges. 133, 2), or as a subst. (lxx θρύλλημα; Aq., Symm., Theod.,
παραβολήν), like שׂחוק, [Job 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#004),
followed by the gen. subjectivus. משׁל is the usual word for ridicule,
expressed in parables of a satirical character, e.g., [Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017) (according to which, if משׁל were
intended as inf., משׁל־בּי עמּים might have been expected); עמּים
signifies both nations and races, and tribes or people, i.e., members of
this and that nation, or in gen. of mankind ([Job
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#002)). We have intentionally chosen an
ambiguous expression in the translation, for what Job says can be meant
of a wide range of people (comp. on [Job
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011) ad fin.), as well as of those in
the immediate neighbourhood; the friends themselves represent different
tribes; and a perishable gipsy-like troglodyte race, to whom Job is
become a derision, is specially described further on (Job 24, 30).

[Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006)

By תּפת (translated by Jer. exemplum, and consequently mistaken for
מופת) the older expositors are reminded of the name of the place where
the sacrifices were offered to Moloch in the valley of the sons of
Hinnom (whence גּיהנּם, γέεννα, hell), since they explain it by "the
fire of hell," but only from want of a right perception; the לפנים
standing with it, which nowhere signifies palam, and cannot here (where
אהיה, although in the signification ἐγενόμην, follows) signify a multo
tempore, shows that תפת here is to be derived from תּוּף, to spit out
(as נפת, gum, from נוּף). This verb certainly cannot be supported in
Hebr. and Aram. (since רקק is the commoner word), except two passages in
the Talmud (Nidda 42a, comp. Sabbath 99b, and Chethuboth 61b); but it is
confirmed by the Aethiopic and Coptic and an onomatopoetic origin, as
the words πτύειν, ψύειν, spuere, Germ. speien, etc., show.

(Note: תוף is related to the Sanskrit root shttı̂v, as τέγη, τρύχους,
τρύζω, and the like, to στέγη, στρύχνος, στρύζω,, vid., Kuhn's
Zeitschrift, Bd. iv. Abh. i. (the falling away of s before mutes).)

Cognate is the Arabic taffafa, to treat with contempt, and the
interjection tuffan, fie upon thee,

(Note: Almost all modern expositors repeat the remark here, that this
tuffan is similar in meaning to ῥακά, [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022), while they might learn from
Lightfoot that it has nothing to do with רק, to spit, but is equivalent
to ריקא, κενέ.)

e.g., in the proverb (quoted by Umbreit): ‛aini fihi watuffan ‛aleihi,
my eye rests on it wishfully, and yet I feel disgust at it. Therefore
לפנים (spitting upon the face) is equivalent to בפנים, [Num
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#014); [Deu
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#009) (to spit in the face). In
consequence of this deep debasement of the object of scorn and spitting,
the brightness and vision of his eye (sense of sight) are become dim
(comp. [Psa 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008); [Psa
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010)) מכּעשׂ (always written with שׂ,
not ס, in the book of Job), from grief, and his frames, i.e., bodily
frame = members (Jer. membra, Targ. incorrectly: features), are become
like a shadow all of them, as fleshless and powerless as a shadow, which
is only appearance without substance. His suffering, his miserable form
(זאת), is of such a kind that the upright are astonished (שׁמם, to
become desolate, silent), and the guiltless (like himself and other
innocent sufferers) become excited (here with vexation as in [Psa
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#001), as in [Job
31:29](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#029) with joy) over the godless (who
is none the less prosperous); but the righteous holds firm (without
allowing himself to be disconcerted by this anomalous condition of
things, though impenetrably mysterious) on his way (the way of good to
which he has pledged himself), and the pure of hands (וּטהר־ as [Pro
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#011), according to another mode of
writing וּטהר־ with Chateph-Kametz under the ט and Gaja under the ו;
comp. [Isa 54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009), where the form of
writing וּמגּער־ umiggoor is well authorized) increases (יוסיף, of
inward increase, as [Ecc 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#018)) in
strength (אמץ only here in the book of Job); i.e., far from allowing
suffering to draw him from God to the side of the godless, he gathers
strength thereby only still more perseveringly to pursue righteousness
of life and purity of conduct, since suffering, especially in connection
with such experiences as Job now has with the three friends, drives him
to God and makes his communion with Him closer and firmer. These words
of Job (if we may be allowed the figure) are like a rocket which shoots
above the tragic darkness of the book, lighting it up suddenly, although
only for a short time. The confession which breaks through in lyric form
in Ps 73 here finds expression of a more brief, sententious kind. The
point of Eliphaz' reproach ([Job
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#004)), that Job makes void the fear of
God, and depreciates communion with God, is destroyed by this
confession, and the assurance of Satan ([Job
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#005)) is confronted by a fact of
experience, which, if it should also become manifest in the case of Job,
puts to shame and makes void the hope of the evil spirit.

[Job 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 17:10</span></span>

10 But only come again all of you!

I shall not find a wise man among you. -

11 My days are past, My purposes cut off,

The cherished thoughts of my heart, -

12 Ye explain night as day,

Light is near when darkness sets in.

The truly righteous man, even if in the midst of his affliction he
should see destruction before him, does not however forsake God. But
(nevertheless) ye - he exclaims to the friends, who promise him a long
and prosperous life if he will only humble himself as a sinner who is
receiving punishment - repeat again and again your hortatory words on
penitence! a wise man who might be able to see into my real condition, I
shall not find among you. He means that they deceive themselves
concerning the actual state of the case before them; for in reality he
is meeting death without being deceived, or allowing himself to be
deceived, about the matter. His appeal is similar to [Job
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#029). Carey translates correctly:
Attack me again with another round of arguments, etc. Instead of ואוּלם,
as it is written everywhere else (generally when the speech is drawing
to a close), we find ואלּם (as the form of writing אלם, אלּם occurs also
in the subst. אוּלם), perh. in order to harmonize with כּלּם, which is
here according to rule instead of כּלּכם, which corresponds more to our
form of a vocative clause, just as in [Kg1
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028); [Mic
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002) (Ewald, 327, a).

(Note: Comp. my Anekdota zur Gesch. der mittelalterlichen Scholastik
unter Juden und Moslemen (1841), S. 380.)

In וּבאוּ תּשׁוּבוּ the jussive and imper. (for the Chethib יבאי, which
occurs in some Codd. and editions, is meaningless) are united, the
former being occasioned by the arrangement of the words, which is
unfavourable to the imper. (comp. Ew. 229); moreover, the first verb
gives the adverbial notion iterum, denuo to the second, according to
Ges. 142, 3, a.

What follows, [Job 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011), is the
confirmation of the fact that there is no wise man among them who might
be able to give him efficient solace by a right estimate of the
magnitude and undeservedness of his suffering. His life is indeed run
out; and the most cherished plans and hopes which he had hedged in and
fostered for the future in his heart, he has utterly and long since
given up. The plur. (occurring only here) of זמּה, which occurs also
sensu malo, signifies projects, as מזמות, [Job
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#027); [Job
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#002), from זמם, to tie; Aben-Ezra
refers to the Arab. zamâm (a thread, band, esp. a rein). These plans
which are now become useless, these cherished thoughts, he calls מורשׁי,
peculia (from ירשׁ, to take possession of) of his heart. Thus, after
Obad. [Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017), Gecatilia (in
Aben-Ezra) also explains, while, according to Ewald, Beitrge, S. 98, he
understands the heart-strings, i.e., the trunks of the arteries (for
thus is Arab. n't to be explained), and consequently, as Ewald himself,
and even Farisol, most improbably combines מורשׁ with מותר (יתר).
Similarly the lxx τὰ ἄρθρα τῆς καρδίας, as though the joints (instead of
the valves) of the heart were intended; probably with Middeldorpf, after
the Syriac Hexapla, ἄκρα is to be read instead of ἄρθρα; this, however,
rests upon a mistaking of מורשׁי for ראשׁי. While he is now almost dead,
and his life-plans of the future are torn away (נתּקוּ), the friends
turn night into day (שׂים, as [Isa
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#020)); light is (i.e., according to
their opinion) nearer than the face of darkness, i.e., than the darkness
which is in reality turned to him, and which is as though it stared at
him from the immediate future. Thus Nolde explains it as comparative,
but connecting [Job 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#012) with ישׂימו,
and considering פני (which is impossible by this compar. rendering) as
meaningless: lucem magis propinquam quam tenebras. It is however
possible that מפני is used the same as in [Job
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#017) : light is, as they think near
before darkness, i.e., while darkness sets in (ingruentibus tenebris),
according to which we have translated. If we understand [Job
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#012) from Job's standpoint, and not
from that of the friends, מן קרוב is to be explained according to the
Arab. qrı̂b mn, prope abest ab, as the lxx even translatesφῶς ἐγγὺς ἀπὸ
προσώπου σκότους, which Olympiodorus interprets by ου ̓ μακρὰν σκότους.
But by this rendering פני makes the expression, which really needs
investigation, only still lamer. Renderings, however, like Renan's Ah!
votre lumire resemble aux tenbres, are removed from all criticism. The
subjective rendering, by which [Job
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#012) is under the government of
ישׂימו, is after all the most natural. That he has darkness before him,
while the friends present to him the approach of light on condition of
penitence, is the thought that is developed in the next strophe.

[Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 17:13</span></span>

13 If I hope, it is for Shel as my house,

In darkness I make my bed.

14 I cry to corruption: Thou art my father! -

To the worm: Thou art my mother and sister!

15 Where now therefore is my hope?

And my hope, who seeth it?

16 To the bars of Shel it descends,

When at the same time there is rest in the dust.

All modern expositors transl.: If I hope (wait) for Shel as my house,
etc., since they regard [Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013). as
a hypothetical antecedent clause to [Job
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015), consisting of four members,
where the conclusion should begin with ואיּה, and should be indicated by
Waw apodosis. There is no objection to this explanation so far as the
syntax is concerned, but there will then be weighty thoughts which are
also expressed in the form of fresh thoughts, for which independent
clauses seem more appropriate, under the government of אם, as if they
were presuppositions. The transition from the preceding strophe to this
becomes also easier, if we take [Job
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013). as independent clauses from
which, in [Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015), an inference is
drawn, with Waw indicative of the train of thought (Ew. 348).
Accordingly, we regard אם־אקוה in [Job
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013) as antecedent (denoted by Dech,
i.e., Tiphcha anterius, just as [Psa
139:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#008)) and ביתי שׁאול as conclusion;
the Waw apod. is wanting, as e.g., [Job
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#027)., and the structure of the
sentence is similar to [Job 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#019). If I
hope, says Job, "Shel is my house" = this is the substance of my hope,
that Shel will be my house. In darkness he has (i.e., in his
consciousness, which anticipates that which is before him as near and
inevitable) fixed his resting-place (poet. strata, as [Psa
132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003)). To corruption and the worm he
already cries, father! and, mother! sister! It is, as it seems, that
bold figure which is indicated in the Job-like Ps. 88:19 ("my
acquaintances are the realms of darkness"), which is here (comp. [Job
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029)) worked out; and, differently
applied, perhaps [Pro 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#004) echoes it.
Since the fem. רמּה is used as the object addressed by אמי and אחותי,
which is besides, on account of its always collective meaning (in
distinction from תילעת), well suited for this double apostrophe, we may
assume that the poet will have used a masc. object for אבי; and there is
really no reason against שׁחת here being, with Ramban, Rosenm.,
Schlottm., Bttcher (de inferis, 179), derived not from שׁוּח (as נחת,
[Job 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016), from נוח), but from שׁחת
(as נחת, [Isa 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030), from נחת),
especially since the old versions transl. שׁחת also elsewhere διαφθορά
(putredo), and thereby prove that both derivations accord with the
structure of the language. Now already conscious of his belonging to
corruption and the worm as by the closest ties of relationship, he asks:
Itaque ubi tandem spes mea?

The accentuation connects אפו to the following word, instead of uniting
it with איּה, just as in [Isa 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#012);
Luzzatto (on [Isa 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#012)) considers
this as a mistake in the Codd., and certainly the accentuation [Jdg
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#038) (איה Kadma, אפוא Mercha) is not
according to our model, and even in this passage another arrangement of
the accents is found, e.g., in the edition of Brescia.

(Note: This accentuates ואיה with Munach, אפו with Munach, which accords
with the matter, instead of which, according to Luzz., since the
Athnach-word תקותי consists of three syllables, it should be more
correctly accentuated ואיה with Munach, אפו with Dech. Both, also Munach
Munach, are admissible; vid., Br, Thorath Emeth, S. 43, 7, comp. S. 71,
not.)

No other hope, in Job's opinion, but speedy death is before him; no
human eye is capable of seeing, i.e., of discovering (so e.g., Hahn),
any other hope than just this. Somewhat differently Hirz. and others:
and my hope, viz., of my recovery, who will it see in process of
fulfilment? Certainly תקותי is in both instances equivalent to a hope
which he dared to harbour; and the meaning is, that beside the one hope
which he has, and which is a hope only per antiphrasin, there is no room
for another hope; there is none such ([Job
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015)), and no one will attain a sight
of such, be it visible in the distance or experienced as near at hand
([Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015)). The subj. of [Job
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016) is not the hope of recovery
which the friends present to him (so e.g., Ew.), but his only real hope:
this, avoiding human ken, descends to the lower world, for it is the
hope of death, and consequently the death of hope. בּדּי signifies bars,
bolts, which Hahn denies, although he says himself that בדים signifies
beams of wood among other things; "bolts" is not here intended to imply
such as are now used in locks, but the cross bars and beams of wood of
any size that serve as a fastening to a door; vectis in exactly the same
manner combines the meanings, a carrying-pole and a bar, in which
signification בּד is the synon. of בּריח.

(Note: Accordingly we also explain [Hos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#006) after [Lam
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#009), and transl.: The sword moveth
round in his (Ephraim's) cities, and destroyeth his (Ephraim's) bars
(i.e., the bars of his gates), and devoureth round about, because of
their counsels.)

The meanings assigned to the word, wastes (Schnurrer and others), bounds
(Hahn), clefts (Bttch.), and the like, are fanciful and superfluous. On
תּרדנה, instead of תּרד, vid., Caspari on Obad. [Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013), Ges. 47, rem. 3. It is sing.,
not plur. (Bttch.), for [Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015)
does not speak of two hopes, not even if, as it seems according to the
ancient versions, another word of cognate meaning had stood in the place
of the second תקותי originally. His hope goes down to the regions of the
dead, when altogether there is rest in the dust. This "together, יחד,"
Hahn explains: to me and it, to this hope; but that would be pursuing
the figure to an inadmissible length, extending far beyond [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011), and must then be expressed יחד
לנוּ. Others (e.g., Hirz., Ew.) explain: if at the same time, i.e.,
simultaneously with this descent of my hope, there is rest to me in the
dust. Considering the use of יחד in itself, it might be explained: if
altogether entirely there is rest in the dust; but this meaning integer,
totus quantus, the word has elsewhere always in connection with a subj.
or obj. to which it is referable, e.g., [Job
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008); [Psa
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#015); and, moreover, it may be
rendered also in the like passages by "all together," as [Job
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#018); [Job
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#026); [Job
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#013), instead of "altogether,
entirely." Since, on the other hand, the signification "at the same
time" can at least with probability be supported by [Psa
141:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#010), and since אם, which is
certainly used temporally, brings contemporary things together, we
prefer the translation: "when at the same time in the dust there is
rest." The descent of his hope to the bars of Hades is at the same time
his own, who hopes for nothing but this. When the death of his hope
becomes a reality, then at the same time his turmoil of suffering will
pass over to the rest of the grave.

As from the first speech of Eliphaz, so also from this first speech of
Job, it may be seen that the controversy takes a fresh turn, which
brings it nearer to the maturity of decision. From Eliphaz' speech Job
has seen that no assertion of his innocence can avail to convince the
friends, and that the more strongly he maintains his innocence, even
before God, he only confirms them in the opinion that he is suffering
the punishment of his godlessness, which now comes to light, like a
wrong that has been hitherto concealed. Job thus perceives that he is
incapable of convincing the friends; for whatever he may say only tends
to confirm them in the false judgment, which they first of all inferred
from their false premises, but now from his own words and conduct. He is
accounted by them as one who is punished of God, whom they address as
the preachers of repentance; now, however, they address him so that the
chief point of their sermon is no longer bright promises descriptive of
the glorious future of the penitent, but fearful descriptions of the
desolating judgment which comes upon the impenitent sinner. This zealous
solicitude for his welfare seems to be clever and to the point,
according to their view; it is, however, only a vexatious method of
treating their friend's case; it is only roughly and superficially
moulded according to the order of redemption, but without an insight
into the spiritual experience and condition of him with whom they have
here to do. Their prudentia pastoralis is carnal and legal; they know
nothing of a righteousness which avails before God, and nothing of a
state of grace which frees from the divine vengeance; they know not how
to deal with one who is passing through the fierce conflict of
temptation, and understand not the mystery of the cross.

Can we wonder, then, that Job is compelled to regard their words as
nothing more than רוח דברי, as they regarded his? In the words of Job
they miss their certainly compact dogma, in which they believe they
possess the philosopher's stone, by means of which all earthly suffering
is to be changed into earthly prosperity. Job, however, can find nothing
in their words that reminds him of anything he ought to know in his
present position, or that teaches him anything respecting it. He is
compelled to regard them as מנחמי עמל, who make the burden of his
suffering only more grievous, instead of lightening it for him. For
their consolation rests upon an unjust judgment of himself, against
which his moral consciousness rebels, and upon a one-sided notion of
God, which is contradicted by his experience. Their speeches exhibit
skill as to their form, but the sympathy of the heart is wanting.
Instead of plunging with Job into the profound mystery of God's
providence, which appoints such a hard lot for the righteous man to
endure, they shake their heads, and think: What a great sinner Job must
be, that God should visit him with so severe a punishment! It is the
same shaking of the head of which David complains [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008) and [Psa
109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025), and which the incomparably
righteous One experienced from those who passed by His cross, [Mat
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039); [Mar
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#029). These comparisons give us the
opportunity of noting the remarkable coincidence of these pictures of
suffering, in outline and expression; the agreement of [Job
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008) with [Psa
109:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#024), comp. [Psa
109:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023) with [Job
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007), puts it beyond a doubt, that
there is a mutual relation between [Job
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#004) and [Psa
109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025) which is not merely accidental.

By such unjust and uncharitable treatment from the friends, Job's
sufferings stand forth before him in increased magnitude. He exceeds
himself in the most terrible figures, in order to depict the sudden
change which the divine dispensation of suffering has brought upon him.
The figures are so terrible, for Job sees behind his sufferings a
hostile hideous God as their author; they are the outburst of His anger,
His quivering looks, His piercing darts, His shattering missiles. His
sufferings are a witness de facto against him, the sufferer; but they
are this not merely in themselves, but also in the eyes of the people
around him. To the sufferings which he has directly to endure in body
and soul there is added, as it were, as their other equally painful
part, misconstruction and scorn, which he has to suffer from without.
Not only does he experience the wrath of God contrary to the testimony
to his righteousness which is consciousness gives him, but also the
scoff of the ungodly, who now deridingly triumph over him. Therefore he
clothes himself in mourning, and lies with his former majesty in the
dust; his face is red with weeping, and his eyes are become almost
blind, although there is no wrong in his hand, and his prayer is free
from hypocrisy. Who does not here think of the servant of Jehovah, of
whom Isaiah, [Isa 53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009) (in similar
words to those which Job uses of himself, [Job
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#016)), says, that he is buried among
the godless על לא־חמס עשׂה ולא מרמה בפיו? All that Job says here of the
scorn that he has to endure by being regarded as one who is punished of
God and tormented, agrees exactly with the description of the sufferings
of the servant of Jehovah in the Psalms and the second part of Isaiah.
Job says: they gape at me with their mouth; and in [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008) (comp. [Psa
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#021)) it is: all they that see me
laugh me to scorn, they open wide the lips, they shake the head. Job
says: they smite my cheeks in contempt; and the servant of Jehovah, [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006), is compelled to confess: I gave
my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that pluck off the hair; I
hid not my face from shame and spitting. Like Job, the servant of
Jehovah in the Psalms and in Isaiah II. is delivered over into the hands
of the unrighteous, and reckoned among evil-doers, although he is the
servant of Jehovah, and knows himself to be Jehovah's servant. The same
hope that he expresses in [Isa 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008).
in the words: he is near who justifieth me, who will condemn me! - the
same hope in Job breaks through the night of conflict, with which his
direct and indirect suffering has surrounded him.

Just when Job becomes conscious of his doubled affliction in all its
heaviness, when he feels himself equally rejected of men as of God, must
this hope break forth. For there is only a twofold possibility for a man
who thinks God has become his enemy, and that he has not a friend among
men: either he sinks into the abyss of despair; or if faith still
exists, he struggles upwards through his desertion by God and man to the
love that lies deep in the heart of God, which in spite of hostile
manifestation cannot abandon the righteous. Whither shall Job turn when
God seems to him as an enemy, and when he nevertheless will not renounce
God? He can only turn from the hostile God to the God who is differently
disposed towards him, and that is equivalent to saying from the
imaginary to the real God, to whom faith clings throughout every outward
manifestation of wrath and wrathful feeling.

(Note: Compare the prayer of Juda ha-Levi, אברח ממך אליך (Arab. mn-k
''ud l-k), in Kmpf's Nichtandalusische Poesien andalusischer Dichter
(1858), ii. 206.)

Since both, however, is one God, who only seems to be other than He is,
that bold grasp of faith is the exchange of the phantom-god of the
conflict of temptation for the true God. Faith, which in its essence is
a perception capable of taking root, seizes the real existence behind
the appearance, the heart behind the countenance, that which remains the
same behind the change, and defies a thousand contradictions with the
saintly Nevertheless: God nevertheless does not belie himself.

Job challenges the earth not to hide his blood; unceasingly without
restraint shall the cry of his blood rise up. What he says in [Job
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#018) is to be taken not so much as
the expression of a desire as of a demand, and better still as a
command; for even in case he should succumb to his sufferings, and
consequently in the eyes of men die the death of a sinner, his clear
consciousness of innocence does not allow him to renounce his claim to a
public declaration that he has died guiltless. But to whom shall the
blood of the slain cry out? To whom else but God; and yet it is God who
has slain him? We see distinctly here how Job's idea of God is lighted
up by the prospect of a decisive trial of his cause. The God who
abandons Job to death as guilty, and the God who cannot (and though it
should be even after death) leave him unvindicated, come forth distinct
and separate as darkness from light from the chaos of the conflict of
temptation. Since, however, the thought of a vindication after death for
Job, which knows only of a seeming life after death, according to the
notion that rules him, and which is here not yet broken through, is only
the extreme demanded by his moral consciousness, he is compelled to
believe in a vindication in this world; and he expresses this faith
([Job 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019)) in these words: "Even
now, behold, my Witness is in heaven, and One who acknowledgeth me is in
the heights." He pours forth tears to this God that He would decide
between God and him, between his friends and him. He longs for this
decision now, for he will now soon be gone beyond return. Thus Job
becomes here the prophet of the issue of his own course of suffering;
and over his relation to Eloah and to the friends, of whom the former
abandons him to the sinner's death, and the latter declare him to be
guilty, hovers the form of the God of the future, which now breaks
through the darkness, from whom Job believingly awaits and implores what
the God of the present withholds from him.

(Note: Ewald very truly says: "This is the true turn of the human
controversy, which is favoured by the whole course of Job's life, that
he, though in the present utterly despairing of all, even God, still
holds fast to the eternal hidden God of the future, and with this faith
rises wondrously, when to all human appearance it seemed that he must
succumb.")

What Job ([Job 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#020).), by reason of
that confident "Behold, my Witness is in heaven," had expressed as the
end of his longing, - that God would vindicate him both before Himself,
and before the friends and the world, - urges him onward, when he
reflects upon his twofold affliction, that he is sick unto death and one
who is misjudged even to mockery, to the importunate request: Lay down
now (a pledge), be surety for me with Thyself; for who else should
strike his hand into mine, i.e., in order to become bondsman to me, that
Thou dost not regard me as an unrighteous person? The friends are far
from furnishing a guarantee of this; for they, on the contrary, are
desirous of persuading him, that, if he would only let his conscience
speak, he must regard himself as an unrighteous one, and that he is
regarded as such by God. Therefore God cannot give them the victory; on
the contrary, he who so uncompassionately abandons his friends, must on
his own children experience similar suffering to that which he made
heavier for his friend, instead of making it lighter to him. The three
have no insight into the affliction of the righteous one; they dispose
of him mercilessly, as of spoil or property that has fallen into the
hands of the creditor; therefore he cannot hope to obtain justice unless
God become surety for him with himself, - a thought so extraordinary and
bold, that one cannot wonder that the old expositors were misled by it:
God was in Christ, and reconciled the world with Himself, [Co2
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019). The God of holy love has
reconciled the world with himself, the God of righteous anger, as Job
here prays that the God of truth may become surety for him with the God
of absolute sovereignty.

When Job then complains of the misconstruction of his character, and
tracing it to God, says: He hath made me למשׁל עמים, one is reminded, in
connection with this extravagant expression, of complaints of a like
tone in the mouth of the true people of Israel, [Psa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015), and of the great sufferer, [Psa
69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012). When we further read, that,
according to Job's affirmation, the godly are scared at his affliction,
the parallel [Isa 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014) forces itself
upon us, where it is said of the servant of Jehovah, "How were many
astonied at thee." And when, with reference to himself, Job says that
the suffering of the righteous must at length prove a gain to him that
hath clean hands, who does not call to mind the fact that the glorious
issue of the suffering of the servant of Jehovah which the Old Testament
evangelist sets before us, - that servant of Jehovah who, once himself a
prey to oppression and mocking, now divides the spoil among the mighty,
- tends to the reviving, strengthening, and exaltation of Israel? All
these parallels cannot and are not intended to prove that the book of
Job is an allegorical poem; but they prove that the book of Job stands
in the closest connection, both retrospective and prospective, with the
literature of Israel; that the poet, by the relation to the
passion-psalms stamped on the picture of the affliction of Job, has
marked Job, whether consciously or unconsciously, as a typical person;
that, by taking up, probably not unintentionally, many national traits,
he has made it natural to interpret Job as a Mashal of Israel; and that
Isaiah himself confirms this typical relation, by borrowing some
Job-like expressions in the figure of the עבד יהוה, who is a
personification of the true Israel. The book of Job has proved itself a
mirror of consolation for the people, faithful to God, who had cause to
complain, as in Ps 44, and a mirror of warning to their scoffers and
persecutors, who had neither true sympathy with the miserable state of
God's people, nor a true perception of God's dealings. At the same time,
however, Job appears in the light which the New Testament history, by
the fulfilment of the prophecies of suffering in the Psalms, Isaiah, and
also Zechariah, throws upon him, as a type of Him who suffers in like
manner, in order that Satan may have his deserts, and thereby by
confounded; who also has an affliction to bear which in itself has the
nature and form of wrath, but has its motive and end in the love of God;
who is just so misjudged and scorned of men, in order at length to be
exalted, and to enter in as intercessor for those who despised and
rejected Him. At the same time, it must not be forgotten that there
remains an infinite distance between the type and antitype, which,
however, must be in the very nature of a type, and does not annul the
typical relation, which exists only exceptis excipiendis. Who could fail
to recognise the involuntary picture of the three friends in the
penitent ones of [Isa 53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), who
esteemed the servant of Jehovah as one smitten of God, for whom,
however, at last His sacrifice and intercession avail?

Job at last considers his friends as devoid of wisdom, because they try
to comfort him with the nearness of light, while darkness is before him;
because they give him the hope of a bodily restoration, while he has
nothing to expect but death, and earnestly longs for the rest of death.
It is surprising that the speech of Job plunges again into complete
hopelessness, after he has risen to the prospect of being vindicated in
this life. He certainly does not again put forth that prospect, but he
does not even venture to hope that it can be realized by a blessing in
this life after a seeming curse. It is in this hopelessness that the
true greatness of Job's faith becomes manifest. He meets death, and to
every appearance so overwhelmed by death, as a sinner, while he is still
conscious that he is righteous. Is it not faith in and fidelity to God,
then, that, without praying for recovery, he is satisfied with this one
thing, that God acknowledges him? The promises of the friends ought to
have rested on a different foundation, if he was to have the joy of
appropriating them to himself. He feels himself to be inevitably given
up as a prey to death, and as from the depth of Hades, into which he is
sinking, he stretches out his hands to God, not that He would sustain
him in life, but that He would acknowledge him before the world as His.
If he is to die even, he desires only that he may not die the death of a
criminal. And is this intended at the same time for the rescue of his
honour? No, after all, for the honour of God, who cannot possibly
destroy as an evil-doer one who is in everything faithful to Him. When,
then, the issue of the history is that God acknowledges Job as His
servant, and after he is proved and refined by the temptation, preserves
to him a doubly rich and prosperous life, Job receives beyond his prayer
and comprehension; and after he has learned from his own experience that
God brings to Hades and out again, he has for ever conquered all fear of
death, and the germs of a hope of a future life, which in the midst of
his affliction have broken through his consciousness, can joyously
expand. For Job appears to himself as one who is risen from the dead,
and is a pledge to himself of the resurrection from the dead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 18](job018)

</div>
