<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job029)  [Next](job031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)

[Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 30:1</span></span>

1 And now they who are younger than I have me in derision,

Those whose fathers I disdained To set with the dogs of my flock.

2 Yea, the strength of their hands, what should it profit me?

They have lost vigour and strength.

3 They are benumbed from want and hunger,

They who gnaw the steppe,

The darkness of the wilderness and waste;

4 They who pluck mallows in the thicket,

And the root of the broom is their bread.

With ועתּה, which also elsewhere expresses the turning-point from the
premises to the conclusion, from accusation to the threat of punishment,
and such like, Job here begins to bewail the sad turn which his former
prosperity has taken. The first line of the verse, which is marked off
by Mercha-Mahpach, is intentionally so disproportionately long, to form
a deep and long breathed beginning to the lamentation which is now
begun. Formerly, as he has related in the first part of the monologue,
an object of reverential fear to the respectable youth of the city ([Job
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#008)), he is now an object of derision
(שׂחק על, to laugh at, distinct from שׂחק אל, [Job
29:24](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#024), to laugh to, smile upon) to the
young good-for-nothing vagabonds of a miserable class of men. They are
just the same עניּי ארץ, whose sorrowful lot he reckons among the
mysteries of divine providence, so difficulty of solution ([Job
24:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#004)). The less he belongs to the
merciless ones, who take advantage of the calamities of the poor for
their own selfish ends, instead of relieving their distress as far as is
in their power, the more unjustifiable is the rude treatment which he
now experiences from them, when they who meanly hated him before because
he was rich, now rejoice at the destruction of his prosperity. Younger
than he in days (לימים as [Job 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#004),
with ל of closer definition, instead of which the simple acc. was
inadmissible here, comp. on [Job 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#009))
laugh at him, sons of those fathers who were so useless and abandoned
that he scorned (מאס ל, comp. מאס מן, [Sa1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#026)) to entrust to them even a
service so menial as that of the shepherd dogs. Schult., Rosenm., and
Schlottm. take שׁית עם for שׁית על, praeficere, but that ought to be
just simply שׁית על; שׁית עם signifies to range beside, i.e., to place
alike, to associate; moreover, the oversight of the shepherd dogs is no
such menial post, while Job intends to say that he did not once consider
them fit to render such a subordinate service as is that of the dogs
which help the shepherds.

And even the strength of their (these youths') hands (גּם is referable
to the suff. of ידיהם: even; not: now entirely, completely, as Hahn
translates), of what use should it be to him: (למּה not cur, but ad
quid, quorsum, as [Gen 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#032); [Gen
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#046).) They are enervated,
good-for-nothing fellows: כּלח is lost to them (עלימו trebly emphatic:
it is placed in a prominent position, has a pathetic suff., and is על
for ל, [Sa1 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#003)). The signif.
senectus, which suits [Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026), is
here inapplicable, since it is not the aged that are spoken of, but the
young; for that "old age is lost to them" would be a forced expression
for the thought - which, moreover, does not accord with the connection -
that they die off early. One does not here expect the idea of senectus
or senectus vegeta, but vigor, as the Syriac (‛ushino) and Arabic also
translate it. May not כּלח perhaps be related to כּח, as שׁלאנן to
שׁאנן, the latter being a mixed form from שׁאנן and שׁלו, the former
from כּח and לח, fresh juicy vigour, or as we say: pith and marrow (Saft
and Kraft)? At all events, if this is somewhat the idea of the word, it
may be derived from כּלח = כּלה (lxx συντέλεια), or some other way
(vid., on [Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026)): it signifies
full strength or maturity.

(Note: From the root Arab. kl (on its primary notion, vid., my review of
Bernstein's edition of Kirsch's Syr. Chrestomathie, Ergnzungsblatt der
A.L.Z. 1843, Nr. 16 and 17) other derivatives, as Arab. kl', klb, klt,
klṯ, klj, kld, klz, etc., develop in general the significations to
bring, take, or hold together, enclose, and the like; but Arab. lkḥ in
particular the signification to draw together, distort violently, viz.,
the muscles of the face in grinning and showing the teeth, or even
sardonic laughing, and drawing the lips apart. The general signification
of drawing together, Arab. šdd, resolves itself, however, from that
special reference to the muscles of the face, and is manifest in the IV
form Arab. kâlaḥa, to show one's self strict and firm (against any one);
also more sensuously: to remain firm in one's place; of the moon, which
remains as though motionless in one of its twenty-eight halting-places.
Hence Arab. dahrun kâliḥun, a hard season, zmân šdı̂d and kulâḥun, kalâḥi
(the latter as a kind of n. propr. invariably ending in i, and always
without the article), a hard year, i.e., a year of failure of the crops,
and of scarcity and want. If it is possible to apply this to כּלח
without the hazardous comparison of Arab. qḥl, qlḥm, etc. so supra, p.
300\], the primary signification might perhaps be that of hardness,
unbroken strength; [Job 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026), "Thou
wilt go to the grave with unbroken strength," i.e., full of days indeed,
but without having thyself experienced the infirmities and burdens of
the aetas decrepita, as also a shock brought in "in its season" is at
the highest point of ripeness; [Job
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#002) : "What (should) the strength of
their hands profit me? as for them, their vigour is departed." - Fl.)

With [Job 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003) begins a new clause. It
is גּלמוּד, not גּלמוּדים, because the book of Job does not inflect this
Hebraeo-Arabic word, which is peculiar to it (besides only [Isa
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021), גּלמוּדה). It is also in Arab.
more a substantive (stone, a mass) than an adj. (hard as stone, massive,
e.g., Hist. Tamerlani in Schultens: Arab. 'l-ṣchr 'l-jlmûd, the hardest
rock); and, similar to the Greek χέρσος (vid., Passow), it denotes the
condition or attribute of rigidity, i.e., sterility, [Job
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#007); or stiff as death, [Job
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#034); or, as here, extreme weakness
and incapability of working. The subj.: such are they, is wanting; it is
ranged line upon line in the manner of a mere sketch, participles with
the demonstrative article follow the elliptical substantival clause. The
part. הערקים is explained by lxx, Targ., Saad. (Arab. fârrı̂n), and most
of the old expositors, after ערק, Arab. ‛araqa, fut. ya‛riq, fugere,
abire, which, however, gives a tame and - since the desert is to be
thought of as the proper habitation of these people, be they the Seir
remnant of the displaced Horites, or the Hauran "races of the clefts" -
even an inappropriate sense. On the contrary, ‛rq in Arab. (also Pael
‛arreq in Syriac) signifies to gnaw; and this Arabic signification of a
word exclusively peculiar to the book of Job (here and [Job
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017)) is perfectly suitable. We do
not, however, with Jerome, translate: qui rodebant in solitudine (which
is doubly false), but qui rodunt solitudinem, they gnaw the sunburnt
parched ground of the steppe, stretched out there more like beasts than
men (what Gecatilia also means by his Arab. lâzmû, adhaerent), and
derive from it their scanty food. אמשׁ שׁואה וּמשׁאה is added as an
explanatory, or rather further descriptive, permutative to ציּה. The
same alliterative union of substantives of the same root occurs in [Job
38:27](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#027); [Zep
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015), and a similar one in [Nah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011) (בוקה ומבוקה), [Eze
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014); [Eze
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#029) (שׁמה ומשׁמה); on this
expression of the superlative by heaping up similar words, comp. Ew.
313, c. The verb שׁאה has the primary notion of wild confused din (e.g.,
[Isa 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#012).), which does not pass over
to the idea of desolation and destruction by means of the intermediate
notion of ruins that come together with a crash, but by the transfer of
what is confusing to the ear to confusing impressions and conditions of
all kinds; the desert is accordingly called also תּהוּ, [Deu
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010), from תּהה = שׁאה (vid.,
Genesis, S. 93).

The noun אמשׁ nuon signifies elsewhere adverbially, in the past night,
to grow night-like, and in general yesterday, according to which it is
translated: the yesterday of waste and desolation; or, retaining the
adverbial form: waste and desolation are of yesterday = long since. It
is undeniable that מאתמוּל and אתמוּל, [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033); [Mic
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#008), are used in the sense pridem (not
only to-day, but even yesterday); but our poet uses תּמול, [Job
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#009), in the opposite sense, non pridem
(not long since, but only of yesterday); and it is more natural to ask
whether אמשׁ then has not here the substantival signification from which
it has become an adverb, in the signification nightly or yesterday.
Since it originally signifies yesterday evening or night, then
yesterday, it must have the primary signification darkness, as the Arab.
ams is also traceable to the primary notion of the sinking of the sun
towards the horizon; so that, consequently, although the usage of Arabic
does not allow this sense,

(Note: Arab. ams is manifestly connected with Arab. ms', msy, first by
means of the IV form Arab. 'msy; it has, however, like this, nothing to
do with "darkness." Arab. mas'â' is, according to the original sources
of information, properly the whole afternoon until sunset; and this time
is so called, because in it the sun Arab. tamsû or tamsı̂, touches, i.e.,
sinks towards the horizon (from the root Arab. ms with the primary
notion stringere, terere, tergere, trahere, prehendere, capere). Just so
they say Arab. 'l-šmsu tadluk, properly the sun rubs; Arab. taṣı̂f,
connects itself; Arab. tušaffir, goes to the brink (Arab. šufr, šafı̂r),
all in the same signification. Used as a substantive, Arab. amsu
followed by the genitive is la veille de..., the evening before ... ,
and then generally, the day before ... , the opposite of Arab. gadu with
the same construction, le lendemain de - . It is absolutely impossible
that it should refer to a far distant past. On the contrary, it is
always used like our "yesterday," in a general sense, for a
comparatively near past, or a past time thought of as near, as Arab. gd
is used of a comparatively near future, or a future time thought of as
near. Zamachschari in the Kesschf on Sur. xvii. 25: It is a duty of
children to take care of their aged parents, "because they are so aged,
and to-day (el-jauma) require those who even yesterday (bi-l-emsi) were
the most dependent on them of all God's creatures." It never means
absolutely evening or night. What Gesenius, Thes., cites as a proof for
it from Vita Timuri, ii. 428 - a supposed Arab. amsı̂y, vespertinus - is
falsely read and explained (as in general Manger's translation of those
verses abounds in mistakes); - both line 1 and line 9, Arab. 'msy, IV
form of ms', is rhetorically and poetically (as "sister of Arab. kân")
of like signification with the general Arab. kân or ṣâr. An Arab would
not be able to understand that אמשׁ שׁואה וּמשׁאה otherwise than: "on
the eve of destruction and ruin," i.e., at the breaking in of
destruction and ruin which is just at hand or has actually followed
rapidly upon something else. - Fl.)

it can be translated (comp. צלמות, [Jer
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006)), "the evening darkness
(gloominess) of the waste and wilderness" (אמשׁ as regens, Ew. 286, a).
The Targ. also translated similarly, but take אמשׁ as a special
attribute: חשׁוכא היך רוּמשׁא, "darkness like the late evening."
Olshausen's conjecture of ארץ makes it easier, but puts a word that
affirms nothing in the place of an expressive one.

[Job 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004) tells what the scanty
nourishment is which the chill, desolate, and gloomy desert, with its
steppes and gorges, furnishes them. מלּוּח (also Talmudic, Syriac, and
Arabic) is the orach, and indeed the tall shrubby orach, the so-called
sea-purslain, the buds and young leaves of which are gathered and eaten
by the poor. That it is not merely a coast plant, but grows also in the
desert, is manifest from the narrative b. Kidduschin, 66a: "King Jannai
approached כוחלית in the desert, and conquered sixty towns there Ges.
translates wrongly, captis LX talentis; and on his return with great
joy, he called all the orphans of Israel to him, and said: Our fathers
ate מלוחים in their time when they were engaged with the building of the
temple (according to Raschi: the second temple; according to Aruch: the
tabernacle in the wilderness); we will also eat מלוחים in remembrance of
our fathers! And מלוחים were served up on golden tables, and they ate."
The lxx translates, ἅλιμα (not: ἄλιμα); as in Athenaeus, poor
Pythagoreans are once called ἅλιμα τρώγοντες καὶ κακὰ τοιαῦτα
συλλέγοντες.

(Note: Huldrich Zwingli, in the Greek Aldine of 1518 (edited by Andrea
of Asola), which he has annotated throughout in the margin, one of the
choicest treasures of the Zurich town library, explains ἅλιμα by
θαλάσσια, which was natural by the side of the preceding περικυκλοῦντες.
We shall mention these marginal notes of Zwingli now and again.)

The place where they seek for and find this kind of edible plant is
indicated by עלי־שׂיח. שׂיח is a shrub in general, but certainly
pre-eminently the Arab. šı̂h, that perennial, branchy, woody plant of
uncultivated ground, about two-thirds of a yard high, and the same in
diameter, which is one of the greatest blessings of Syria and of the
steppe, since, with the exception of cow and camel's dung, it is often
the only fuel of the peasants and nomads, - the principal, and often in
a day's journey the only, vegetation of the steppe, in the shade of
which, then everything else is parched, a scanty vegetation is still
preserved.

(Note: Thus Wetzstein in his Reise in den beiden Trachonon und um das
Haurangebirge.)

The poor in search of the purslain surround this Arab. šı̂ḥ (shı̂h), and
as [Job 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004) continues: the broom-root
is their bread. Ges. understands לחמם according to [Isa
47:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#014), where it is certainly the
pausal form for לחמם ("there is not a coal to warm one's self"), and
that because the broom-root is not eatable. But why should broom-root
and not broom brushwood be mentioned as fuel? The root of the steppe
that serves as fuel, together with the shı̂h, is called gizl (from גזל,
to tear out), not retem, which is the broom (and is extraordinarily
frequent in the Belka). The Arabs, however, not only call Genista
monosperma so, but also Chamaerops humilis, a degenerate kind of which
produces a kind of arrow-root which the Indians in Florida use.

(Note: The description of these eaters of the steppe plants corresponds
exactly to the reality, especially if that race, bodily so inferior, is
contrasted with the agricultural peasant, and some allowance is made for
the figure of speech Arab. mubâlagat (i.e., a description in colours,
strongly brought out), without which poetic diction would be flat and
devoid of vividness in the eye of an Oriental. The peasant is large and
strong, with a magnificent beard and an expressive countenance, while
e.g., the Trachonites of the present day (i.e., the race of the W'ar,
יער), both men and women, are a small, unpleasant-looking, weakly race.
It is certain that bodily perfection is a plant that only thrives in a
comfortable house, and needs good nourishment, viz., bread, which the
Trachonite of the present day very rarely obtains, although he levies
heavy contributions on the harvest of the villagers. Therefore the roots
of plants often serve as food. Two such plants, the gahh (גח) and the
rubbe halı̂le (רבּה חלילה), are described by my Reisebericht. A Beduin
once told me that it should be properly called rubh lêle (רבח לילה),
"the gain of a supper," inasmuch as it often takes the place of this,
the chief meal of the day. To the genus rubbe belongs also the holêwâ
(חליוא); in like manner they eat the bulbous plant, qotên (קטין); of
another, the mesha‛ (משׁע), they eat leaves, stem, and root. I often saw
the poor villagers (never Beduins) eat the broad thick fleshy leaves of
a kind of thistle (the thistle is called Arab. šûk, shôk), the name of
which is ‛aqqub (עקּוּב); these leaves are a handbreadth and a half in
length, and half a handbreadth in width. They gather them before the
thorns on the innumerable points of the serrated leaves become strong
and woody; they boil them in salt and water, and serve them up with a
little butter. Whole tribes of the people of the Ruwala live upon the
small brown seed (resembling mustard-seed) of the semh (שׂמח). The seeds
are boiled up a pulp. - Wetzst.)

לחמם in the signification cibus eorum is consequently not
incomprehensible. lxx (which throws [Job
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004) into sad confusion): οἳ καὶ ῥΊζας
ξύλων ἐμασσῶντο.

(Note: Zwingli observes here: Sigma only once. Codd. Anex. and Sinait.
have the reading εμασωντο, which he prefers.)

All the ancient versions translate similarly. One is here reminded of
what Agatharchides says in Strabo concerning the Egyptio-Ethiopian
eaters of the rush root and herb.

(Note: Vid., Meyer, Botanische Erluterungen zu Strabons Geographie, S.
108ff.)

[Job 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 30:5</span></span>

5 They are driven forth from society,

They cry after them as after a thief.

6 In the most dismal valleys they must dwell,

In holes of the earth and in rocks.

7 Among the bushes they croak,

Under nettles are they poured forth,

8 Sons of fools, yea sons of base men:

They are driven forth out of the land! -

If, coming forth from their lurking-places, they allow themselves to be
seen in the villages of the plain or in the towns, they are driven forth
from among men, e medio pelluntur (to use a Ciceronian phrase). גּו
(Syr. gau, Arab. gaww, guww) is that which is internal, here the circle
of social life, the organized human community. This expression also is
Hebraeo-Arabic; for if one contrasts a house of district with what is
outside, he says in Arabic, jûwâ wa-barrâ, guwwâ wa-berrâ, within and
without, or Arab. 'l-jûwâ-nı̂ wa-'l-brrâ-nı̂, el-guwwâni wa'l-berrâni, the
inside and the outside. In [Job 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#005),
כּגּנּב, like the thief, is equivalent to, as after the thief, or since
this generic Art. is not usual with us Germ. and Engl.: after a thief;
French, on crie aprs eux comme aprs le voleur. In [Job
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#006), לשׁכּן is, according to Ges.
132, rem. 1 (comp. on [Hab 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017)),
equivalent to היוּ לשׁכּן, "they are to dwell" = they must dwell; it
might also signify, according to the still more frequent usage of the
language, habitaturi sunt; it here, however, signifies habitandum est
eis, as לבלום, [Psa 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009), obturanda
sunt. Instead of בּערוּץ with Shurek, the reading בּערוץ with Cholem
(after the form סגור, [Hos 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#008)) is
also found, but without support. ארוּץ is either a substantive after the
form גּבוּל (Ges., as Kimchi), or the construct of ערוּץ = נערץ, feared
= fearful, so that the connection of the words, which we prefer, is a
superlative one: in horridissima vallium, in the most terrible valleys,
as [Job 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#022), acutissimae testarum
(Ew., according to 313, c). The further description of the habitation of
this race of men: in holes (חרי = בּחרי) of the earth (עפר, earth with
respect to its constituent parts) and rocks (lxx τρῶγλαι πετρῶν), may
seem to indicate the aborigines of the mountains of the district of
Seir, who are called החרים, τρωγλοδύνται (vid., Genesis, S. 507); but
why not, which is equally natural, חורן, [Eze
47:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#016), [Eze
47:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#018), the "district of caverns," the
broad country about Bosra, with the two Trachnes (τράχωνες), of which
the smaller western, the Leg, is the ancient Trachonitis, and with
Ituraea (the mountains of the Druses)?

(Note: Wetzstein also inclines to refer the description to the
Ituraeans, who, according to Apuleius, were frugum pauperes, and
according to others, freebooters, and are perhaps distinguished from the
Arabes Trachonitae (if they were not these themselves), as the
troglodytes are from the Arabs who dwell in tents (on the troglodytes in
Eastern Hauran, vid., Reisebericht, S. 44, 126). "The troglodyte was
very often able to go without nourishment and the necessaries of life.
Their habitations are not unfrequently found where no cultivation of the
land was possible, e.g., in Safa. They were therefore the rearers of
cattle or marauders. The cattle-rearing troglodyte, because he cannot
wander about from one pasture to another like the nomads who dwell in
tents, often loses his herds by a failure of pasture, heavy falls of
snow (which often produce great devastation, e.g., in Hauran),
epidemics, etc. Losses may also arise from marauding attacks from the
nomads. Still less is this marauding, which is at enmity with all the
world, likely to make a race prosperous, which, like the troglodyte,
being bound to a fixed habitation, cannot escape the revenge of those
whom it has injured." - Wetzst.)

As [Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005) shows, there underlies
[Job 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007) a comparison of this people
with the wild ass. The פּרא, fer, goes about in herds under the guidance
of a so-called leader (vid., on [Job
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005)), with which the poet in [Job
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#005) compares the bands that go forth
for forage; here the point of comparison, according to [Job
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005), is their bitter want, which urges
from them the cry of pain; for ינהקוּ, although not too strong, would
nevertheless be an inadequate expression for their sermo barbarus
(Pineda), in favour of which Schlottmann calls to mind Herodotus' (iv.
183) comparison of the language of the Troglodyte Ethiopians with the
screech of the night-owl (τετρίγασι κατάπερ αι ̓ νυκτερίδες). Among
bushes (especially the bushes of the shih, which affords them some
nourishment and shade, and a green resting-place) one hears them, and
hears from their words, although he cannot understand them more closely,
discontent and lamentation over their desperate condition: there, under
nettles (חרוּל, root חר, Arab. ḥrr, as urtica from urere), i.e., useless
weeds of the desert, they are poured forth, i.e., spread about in
disorder. Thus most moderns take ספח = שׁפך, Arab. sfḥ, comp. סרוּח,
profusus, [Amo 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004), [Amo
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#007), although one might also abide by
the usual Hebrew meaning of the verb ספח (hardened from ספה), adjungere,
associare (vid., Habak. S. 88), and with Hahn explain: under nettles
they are united together, i.e., they huddle together. But neither the
fut. nor the Pual (instead of which one would expect the Niph. or
Hithpa.) is favourable to the latter interpretation; wherefore we decide
in favour of the former, and find sufficient support for a Hebr.-Arabic
ספח in the signification effundere from a comparison of [Job
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#019) and the present passage. [Job
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008), by dividing the hitherto latent
subject, tells what sort of people they are: sons of fools, profane,
insane persons (vid., on [Psa 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001));
moreover, or of the like kind (גּם, not אף), sons of the nameless,
ignobilium or infamium, since בלי־שׁם is here an adj. which stands in
dependence, not filii infamiae = infames (Hirz. and others), by which
the second בני is rendered unlike the first. The assertion [Job
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008) may be taken as an attributive
clause: who are driven forth ... ; but the shortness of the line and the
prominence of the verb are in favour of the independence of the clause
like an exclamation in its abrupt and halting form. נכּאוּ is Niph. of
נכא = נכה (נכי), root נך, to hew, pierce, strike.

(Note: The root Arab. nk is developed in Hebr. נכה, הכּה, in Arab.
naka'a and nakâ, first to the idea of outward injury by striking,
hewing, etc.; but it is then also transferred to other modes of
inflicting injury, and in Arab. nawika, to being injured in mind. The
root shows itself in its most sensuous development in the reduplicated
form Arab. naknaka, to strike one with repeated blows, fig. for: to
press any one hard with claims. According to another phase, the obscene
Arab. nâka, fut. i, and the decent Arab. nakaḥa, signify properly to
pierce. - Fl.)

On הארץ, of arable land in opposition to the steppe, vid., on [Job
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#017).

[Job 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 30:9</span></span>

9 And now I am become their song,

And a by-word to them.

10 They avoid me, they flee far from me,

And spare not my face with spitting.

11 For my cord of life He hath loosed, and afflicted me,

Therefore they let loose the bridle recklessly.

12 The rabble presses upon my right hand,

They thrust my feet away,

And cast up against me their destructive ways.

The men of whom Job complains in this strophe are none other than those
in the preceding strophe, described from the side of their coarse and
degenerate behaviour, as [Job 24:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#004)
described them from the side of the wrong which was practised against
them. This rabble, constitutionally as well as morally degraded, when it
comes upon Job's domain in its marauding expeditions, makes sport of the
sufferer, whose former earnest admonitions, given from sympathizing
anxiety for them, seemed to them as insults for which they revenge
themselves. He is become their song of derision (נגינתם to be understood
according to the dependent passage, [Lam
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014), and [Psa
69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013)), and is למלּה to them, their
θρύλλημα (lxx), the subject of their foolish talk (מלּה - Arab. mille,
not = melle, according to which Schultens interprets it, sum iis
fastidio). Avoiding him, and standing at a distance from him, they make
their remarks upon him; and if they come up to him, it is only for the
sake of showing him still deeper scorn: a facie ejus non cohibent
sputam. The expositors who explain that, contrary to all decent bearing,
they spit in his presence (Eichh., Justi, Hirz., Vaih., Hlgst.), or with
Fie! spit out before him (Umbr., Hahn, Schlottm.), overlook the fact of
its being מפּני, not לפני. The expression as it stands can only affirm
that they do not spare his face with spitting (Jer. correctly: conspuere
non veruntur), so that consequently he is become, as he has complained
in [Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006), a תּפת, an object of
spitting (comp. also the declaration of the servant of Jehovah, [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006), which stands in close connection
with this declaration of Job, according to previous explanations).

It now becomes a question, Who is the subj. in [Job
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011)? The Chethib יתרו demands an
attempt to retain the previous subj. Accordingly, most moderns explain:
solvit unusquisque eorum funem suum, i.e., frenum suum, quo continebatur
antea a me (Rosenm., Umbr., Stick., Vaih., Hlgst., and others), but it
is to be doubted whether יתר can mean frenum; it signifies a cord, the
string of a bow, and of a harp. The reconciliation of the signification
redundantia, [Job 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#020), and funis,
is, in the idea of the root, to be stretched tight and long.

(Note: The Arab. verb watara shows its sensuous primary signification in
Arab. watarun, יתר, cord, bow-string, harp-string (Engl. string): to
stretch tight, to extend, so that the thing continues in one line. Hence
then Arab. watrun, witrun, separate, unequal, singulus, impar, opp.
Arab. šaf‛un, bini, par, just as fard, single, separate, unequal (opp.
zaug, a pair, equal number), is derived from farada, properly, so to
strain or stretch out, that the thing has no bends or folds; Greek
εξαπλοῦν (as in the Shepherd of Hermas: ἐπάνω λεντίου ἐξηπλωμένον λίνον
καρπάσινον), an original transitive signification still retained in low
Arabic (vid., Bocthor under tendre and Dployer). Then from Arab. watara
spring the secondary roots Arab. tatara and tarâ, which proceed from the
VIII form (ittatara). The former (tatara) appears only in the Arab.
adverb tatran and tatrâ, sigillatim, alii post alios, singly one after
another, so that several persons or things form a row interrupted by
intervals of space of time; the latter (tara) and its IV form (atra) are
equivalent to wâtara, to be active at intervals, with pauses between, as
the Arabs explain: "We say Arab. atrâ of a man when he so performs
several acts which do not directly follow one another, that there is
always a \[Arab.\] fatrat, intermissio, between two acts." Hence also
תּרין, תּרתּין, duals of an assumed sing. תּר, singulus (um), תּרתּ
singula, therefore prop. duo singuli (a), duae singulae, altogether
parallel to the like meaning thinâni (ithnâni', thinaini (ithnaini),
שׁנים; fem. thintâni (ithnatâni), thintaini (ithnataini), שׁתּים instead
of שׁנתּים, from an assumed sing. thin-un (ithn-un), thint-un
(ithnat-un), from Arab. tanâ, שׁנה, like bin (ibn), bint (ibnat), בּן,
בּת (= בּנת, hence בּתּי) from Arab. banâ, בּנה.

The significations of watara which Freytag arranges under 1, 2, 3, 4,
proceed from the transitive application of יתר, as the Italian
soperchiare, soverchiare, from supra, to offend, insult; oltraggiare,
outrager, from ultra; ὑβρίζειν from ὑπέρ. Similarly, Arab. tṭâwl ‛lı̂h
and ‛stṭâl ‛lı̂h (form VI and X from ṭâl), to act haughtily towards any
one, to make him feel one's superiority, properly to stretch one's self
out over or against any one.

But in another direction the signif. to be stretched out goes into:
overhanging, surpassing, projecting, to be superfluous, and to be left
over, περιττὸν εἶναι, to exceed a number or bulk, superare (comp.
Italian soperchiare as intrans.), περιεῖναι, ὑπερεῖναι; to prove, as
result, gain, etc., περιεῖναι, etc. Similar is the development of the
meaning of Arab. faḍala and of ṭâ'l, gain, use, from Arab. ṭâl, to be
stretched out. In like manner, the German reich, reichlich rich,
abundant, comes from the root reichen, recken to stretch, extend. - Fl.)

Hirz. therefore imagines the loosing of the cord round the body, which
served them as a girdle, in order to strike Job with it. But whether one
decides in favour of the Chethib יתרו or of the Keri יתרי, the persons
who insult Job cannot in any case be intended. The isolated sing. form
of the assertion, while the rabble is everywhere spoken of in the plur.,
is against it; and also the כּי, which introduces it, and after which
Job here allows the reason to come in, why he is abandoned without any
means of defence to such brutal misconduct. The subj. of [Job
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011) is God. If יתרו is read, it may
not be interpreted: He hath opened = taken off the covering of His
string (= bow) (Ew., Hahn, and similarly even lxx, Jer.), for יתר does
not dignify the bow, but the string (Arab. muwattar‛, stretched, of a
bow); and while פּתח, Ezek. 21:33 (usually שׁלף or הריק), can certainly
be said of drawing a sword from its sheath, ערה is the appropriate and
usual word (vid., Hab. S. 164) for making bare the bow and shield. Used
of the bow-string, פּתּח signifies to loose what is strained, by sending
the arrow swiftly forth from it, according to which, e.g., Elizabeth
Smith translates: Because He hath let go His bow-string and afflicted
me. One cannot, however, avoid feeling that ויּענּני is not a right
description of the effect of shooting with arrows, whereas an idea is
easily gained from the Keri יתרי, to which the description of the effect
corresponds. It has been interpreted: He has loosed my rein or bridle,
by means of which I hitherto bound them and held them in check; but יתר
in the signification rein or bridle, is as already observed, not
practicable. Better Capellus: metaphora ducta est ab exarmato milite,
cujus arcs solvitur nervus sicque inermis redditur; but it is more
secure, and still more appropriate to the ויענני which follows, when it
is interpreted according to [Job 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#021)
: He has untied (loosened) my cord of life, i.e., the cord which
stretched out and held up my tent (the body) (Targ. similarly: my chain
and the threads of my cord, i.e., surely: my outward and inward stay of
life), and bowled me down, i.e., deprived me of strength (comp. [Psa
102:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#024)); or also: humbled me. Even in
this his feebleness he is the butt of unbridled arrogance: and they let
go the bridle before me (not לפני, in my presence, but מפּני, before me,
before whom previously they had respect; מפני the same as [Lev
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032)), they cast or shake it off
(שׁלּח as [Job 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#003), synon. of השׁליך;
comp. [Kg1 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#007) with [Ch2
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#020)).

Is it now possible that in this connection פּרחח can denote any else but
the rabble of these good-for-nothing fellows? Ewald nevertheless
understands by it Job's sufferings, which as a rank evil swarm rise up
out of the ground to seize upon him; Hahn follows Ew., and makes these
sufferings the subj., as even in [Job
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011). But if we consider how Ew.
translates: "they hung a bridle from my head;" and Hahn: "they have cast
a bit before my face," this might make us tired of all taste for this
allegorical mode of interpretation. The stump over which they must
stumble is [Job 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#013), where all
climax must be abandoned in order to make the words לא עזר למו
intelligible in this allegorical connection. No indeed; פּרחח (instead
of which פרחח might be expected, as supra, [Job
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005), כמרירי for כמרירי) is the
offspring or rabble of those fathers devoid of morals and honour, those
צעירים of [Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001), whose
laughing-stock Job is now, as the children of priests are called in
Talmudic פּרחי כהנּה, and in Arabic farch denotes not only the young of
animals, but also a rascal or vagabond. This young rabble rises על־ימין,
on Job's right hand, which is the place of an accuser ([Psa
109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006)), and generally one who follows
him up closely and oppresses him, and they press him continually further
and further, contending one foot's-breadth after another with him: רגלי
שׁלּחוּ, my feet thrust them forth, protrudunt (שׁלּח the same as [Job
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#020)). By this pressing from one
place to another, a way is prepared for the description of their hostile
conduct, which begins in [Job 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#012)
under the figure of a siege. The fut. consec. ויּסלּוּ, [Job
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#012), is not meant retrospectively
like ויענני, but places present with present in the connection of cause
and effect (comp. Ew. 343, a). We must be misled by the fact that ויסלו,
[Job 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012) (which see), was said of
the host of sufferings which come against Job; here it is those young
people who cast up the ramparts of misfortune or burdensome suffering
(איד) against Job, which they wish to make him feel. The tradition,
supported by the lxx, that Job had his seat outside his domain ἐπὶ τῆς
κοπρίας, i.e., upon the mezbele, is excellently suited to this and the
following figures. Before each village in Hauran there is a place where
the households heap up the sweepings of their stalls, and it gradually
reaches a great circumference, and a height which rises above the
highest buildings of the village.

(Note: One ought to have a correct idea of a Hauranitish mezbele. The
dung which is heaped up there is not mixed with straw, because in warm,
dry countries no litter is required for the cattle, and comes mostly
from single-hoofed animals, since small cattle and oxen often pass the
nights on the pastures. It is brought in a dry state in baskets to the
place before the village, and is generally burnt once every month.
Moreover, they choose days on which the wind if favourable, i.e., does
not cast the smoke over the village. The ashes remain. The fertile
volcanic ground does not need manure, for it would make the seed in
rainy years too luxuriant at the expense of the grain, and when rain
fails, burnt it up. If a village has been inhabited for a century, the
mezbele reaches a height which far surpasses it. The winter rains make
the ash-heaps into a compact mass, and gradually change the mezbele into
a firm mound of earth in the interior of which those remarkable
granaries, biâr el-ghalle, are laid out, in which the wheat can be
completely preserved against heat and mice, garnered up for years. The
mezbele serves the inhabitants of the district as a watch-tower, and on
close oppressive evenings as a place of assembly, because there is a
current of air on the height. There the children play about the whole
day long; there the forsaken one lies, how, having been seized by some
horrible malady, is not allowed to enter the dwellings of men, by day
asking alms of the passers-by, and at night hiding himself among the
ashes which the sun has warmed. There the dogs of the village lie,
perhaps gnawing at a decaying carcase that is frequently thrown there.
Many a village of Hauran has lost its original name, and is called umm
el-mezâbil from the greatness and number of these mounds, which always
indicate a primitive and extensive cultivation for the villages. And
many a more modern village is built upon an ancient mezbele, because
there is then a stronger current of air, which renders the position more
healthy. The Arabic signification of the root זבל seems to be similarly
related to the Hebrew as that of the old Beduin seken (שכן), "ashes," to
the Hebrew and Arabic משכן, "a dwelling." - Wetzst.)

Notwithstanding, everything is intelligible without this thoroughly
Hauranitish conception of the scene of the history. Bereft of the
protection of his children and servants, become an object of disgust to
his wife, and an abhorrence to his brethren, forsaken by every attention
of true affection, [Job 19:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013), Job
lies out of doors; and in this condition, shelterless and defenceless,
he is abandoned to the hideous malignant joy of those gipsy hordes which
wander hither and thither.

[Job 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 30:13</span></span>

13 They tear down my path,

They minister to my overthrow,

They who themselves are helpless.

14 As through a wide breach they approach,

Under the crash they roll onwards.

15 Terrors are turned against me,

They pursue my nobility like the wind,

And like a cloud my prosperity passed away. -

They make all freedom of motion and any escape impossible to him, by
pulling down, diruunt, the way which he might go. Thus is נתסוּ (cogn.
form of נתץ, נתע, נתשׁ) to be translated, not: they tear open
(proscindunt), which is contrary to the primary signification and the
usage of the language. They, who have no helper, who themselves are so
miserable and despised, and yet so feelingless and overbearing,
contribute to his ruin. הועיל, to be useful, to do any good,to furnish
anything effective (e.g., [Isa 47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012)),
is here united with ל of the purpose; comp. עזר ל, to help towards
anything, [Zac 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015). היה (for which
the Keri substitutes the primary form הוּה), as was already said on [Job
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#002), is prop. hiatus, and then
barathrum, pernicies, like הוּה in the signification cupiditas, prop.
inhiatio. The verb הוה, Arab. hwy, also signifies delabi, whence it may
be extended (vid., on [Job 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#006)) in
like manner to the signification abyss (rapid downfall); but a suitable
medium for the two significations, strong passion (Arab. hawa) and abyss
(Arab. hâwije, huwwe, mahwa), is offered only by the signification of
the root flare (whence hawâ, air). לא עזר למו is a genuine Arabic
description of these Idumaean or Hauranite pariahs. Schultens compares a
passage of the Hamsa: "We behold you ignoble, poor, laisa lakum min
sâir-in-nâsi nasirun, i.e., without a helper among the rest of men." The
interpretations of those who take למו for לו, and this again for לי
(Eichh., Justi), condemn themselves. It might more readily be explained,
with Stick.: without any one helping them, i.e., with their own strong
hand; but the thought thus obtained is not only aimless and tame, but
also halting and even untrue (vid., [Job
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013)).

[Job 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#014)

The figure of a siege, which is begun with [Job
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#012) and continued in [Job
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#013), leaves us in no doubt
concerning פּרץ רחב and שׁאה. The Targ. translates: like the force of
the far-extending waves of the sea, not as though פּרץ could in itself
signify a stream of water, but taking it as = פרץ מים, [Sa2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020) (synon. diffusio aquarum).
Hitzig's translation:

(Note: Vid., Deutsche Morgenlnd. Zeitschr. ix. (1855), S. 741, and
Proverbs, S. 11.)

"like a broad forest stream they come, like a rapid brook they roll on,"
gives unheard-of significations to the doubtful words. In [Job
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#014) we heard Job complain: He
(Eloah) brake through me על־פני־פרץ פרץ, breach upon breach, - by the
divine decrees of sufferings, which are completed in this ill-treatment
which he receives from good-for-nothing fellows, he is become as a wall
with a wide-gaping breach, through which they rush in upon him (instar
rupturae, a concise mode of comparison instead of tanquam per rupt.), in
order to get him entirely into their power as a plaything for their
coarse passions. שׁאה is the crash of the wall with the wide breaches,
and תּחת שׁאה signifies sub fragore in a local sense: through the wall
which is broken through and crashes above the assailants. There is no
ground in [Job 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015) for dividing,
with Umbreit, thus: He hath turned against me! Terrors drove away, etc.,
although this would not be impossible according to the syntax (comp.
[Gen 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022), בּנות צעדה). It is
translated: terrors are turned against me; so that the predicate stands
first in the most natural, but still indefinite, personal form, Ges.
147, a, although בּלּהות might also be taken as the accus. of the object
after a passive, Ges. 143, 1. The subj. of [Job
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015) remains the same: they (these
terrors) drive away my dignity like the wind; the construction is like
[Job 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#020); [Job
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#019); on the matter, comp. [Job
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#011). Hirz. makes כּרוּח the subj.:
quasi ventus aufert nobilitatem meam, in which case the subj. would be
not so much ventus as similitudo venti, as when one says in Arabic,
'gani kazeidin, there came to me one of Zeid's equals, for in the
Semitic languages כּ has the manner of an indeclinable noun in the
signification instar. But the reference to בלהות is more natural; and
Hahn's objection, that calamity does not first, if it is there, drive
away prosperity, but takes the place of that which is driven away, is
sophisticated and inadequate, since the object of the driving away here
is not Job's prosperity, but Job's נדיבה, appearance and dignity, by
which he hitherto commanded the respect of others (Targ. רבּנוּתי). The
storms of suffering which pass over him take this nobility away to the
last fragment, and his salvation - or rather, since this word in the
mouth of an extra-Israelitish hero has not the meaning it usually
otherwise has, his prosperous condition (from Arab. wasi‛a, amplum esse)
- is as a cloud, so rapidly and without trace ([Job
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#009); [Isa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022)), passed away and vanished.
Observe the music of the expression כּעב עברה, which cannot be
reproduced in translation.

[Job 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 30:16</span></span>

16 And now my soul is poured out within me,

Days of suffering hold me fast.

17 The night rendeth my bones from me,

And my gnawers sleep not.

18 By great force my garment is distorted,

As the collar of my shirt it encompasseth me.

19 He hath cast me into the mire,

And I am in appearance as dust and ashes.

With this third ועתּה ([Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001), [Job
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009)) the elegiac lament over the
harsh contrast between the present and the past begins for the third
time. The dash after our translation of the second and fourth strophes
will indicate that a division of the elegy ends there, after which it
begins as it were anew. The soul is poured out within a man (עלי as [Job
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#001), Psychol. S. 152), when,
"yielding itself without resistance to sadness, it is dejected to the
very bottom, and all its organization flows together, and it is
dissolved in the one condition of sorrow" - a figure which is not,
however, come about by water being regarded as the symbol of the soul
(thus Hitzig on [Psa 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005)), but rather
by the intimate resemblance of the representation of a flood of tears
([Lam 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019)): the life of the soul
flows in the blood, and the anguish of the soul in tears and
lamentations; and since the outward man is as it were dissolved in the
gently flowing tears ([Isa 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#003)), his
soul flows away as it were in itself, for the outward incident is but
the manifestation and result of an inward action. ימי־עני we have
translated days of suffering, for עני, with its verb and the rest of its
derivatives, is the proper word for suffering, and especially the
passion of the Servant of Jehovah. Days of suffering - Job complains -
hold him fast; עחז unites in itself, like החזיק, the significations
prehendere and prehensum tenere. In [Job
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017) we must not, with Arnh. and
others, translate: by night it (affliction) pierces ... , for עני does
not stand sufficiently in the foreground to be the subject of what
follows; it might sooner be rendered: by night it is pierced through
(Targ., Rosenm., Hahn); but why is not לילה to be the subject, and נקּר
consequently Piel (not Niph.)? The night has been personified already,
[Job 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#002); and in general, as Herder
once said, Job is the brother of Ossian for personifications: Night (the
restless night, [Job 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#003), in which
every malady, or at least the painful feeling of it, increases) pierces
his bones from him, i.e., roots out his limbs (synon. בּדּים, [Job
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013)) so inwardly and completely. The
lepra Arabica (Arab. 'l-brṣ, el-baras) terminates, like syphilis, with
an eating away of the limbs, and the disease has its name Arab. juḏâm
from jḏm, truncare, mutilare: it feeds on the bones, and destroys the
body in such a manner that single limbs are completely detached.

In [Job 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017), lxx (νεῦρα), Parchon,
Kimchi, and others translate ערקי according to the Targum. ערקין (=
גּידים), and the Arab. ‛rûq, veins, after which Blumenf.: my veins are
in constant motion. But ערקי in the sense of [Job
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003) : my gnawers (Jer. qui me
comedunt, Targ. דּמעסּן יתי, qui me conculcant, conterunt), is far more
in accordance with the predicate and the parallelism, whether it be
gnawing pains that are thought of - pains are unnatural to man, they
come upon him against his will, he separates them from himself as wild
beasts - or, which we prefer, those worms (רמּה, [Job
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#005)) which were formed in Job's ulcers
(comp. Aruch, ערקא, a leech, plur. ערקתא, worms, e.g., in the liver),
and which in the extra-biblical tradition of Job's decease are such a
standing feature, that the pilgrims to Job's monastery even now-a-days
take away with them thence these supposedly petrified worms of Job.

(Note: In Mugir ed-dn's large history of Jerusalem and Hebron (kitâb
el-ins el-gelı̂l), in an article on Job, we read: God had so visited him
in his body, that he got the disease that devours the limbs
(tegedhdhem), and worms were produced (dawwad) in the wounds, while he
lay on a dunghill (mezbele), and except his wife, who tended him, no one
ventured to come too near him. In a beautiful Kurdic ballad "on the
basket dealer" (zembilfrosh), which I have obtained from the Kurds in
Salihje, are these words:

Veki Gergis beshara beri

Jusuf veki abdan keri

Bikesr' Ejub kurman deri

toh anin ser sultaneti

to men chalaski 'j zahmeti.

"When they divided Gergs with a saw

And sold Joseph like a slave,

When worms fed themselves in Job's body,

Then Thou didst guide them by a sure way:

Thou wilt also deliver me from need."

More concerning these worms of Job in the description of the monastery
of Job. - Wetzst.)

[Job 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018) would be closely and
naturally connected with what precedes if לבוּשׁי could be understood of
the skin and explained: By omnipotence (viz., divine, as [Job
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#006), Ew. 270a) the covering of my
body is distorted, as even Raschi: משׁתנה גלד אחר גלד, it is changed, by
one skin or crust being formed after another. But even Schultens rightly
thinks it remarkable that לבושׁ, [Job
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018), is not meant to signify the
proper upper garment but the covering of the skin, but כּתּנת, [Job
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018), the under garment in a proper
sense. The astonishment is increased by the fact that התהפּשׂ signifies
to disguise one's self, and thereby render one's self unrecognisable,
which leads to the proper idea of לבושׁ, to a clothing which looks like
a disguise. It cannot be cited in favour of this unusual meaning that
לבושׁ is used in [Job 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005) of the
scaly skin of the crocodile: an animal has no other לבושׁ but its skin.
Therefore, with Ew., Hirz., and Hlgst., we take לבושׁ strictly: "by
(divine) omnipotence my garment is distorted (becomes unlike itself),
like the collar of my shirt it fits close to me." It is unnecessary to
take כּפי as a compound praep.: according to (comp. [Zac
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#004); [Mal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#009) : "according as"), in the sense of
כּמו, as [Job 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006), since פּי כּתּנת
is, according to the nature of the thing mentioned, a designation of the
upper opening, by means of which the shirt, otherwise only provided with
armholes (distinct from the Beduin shirt thôb, which has wide and long
sleeves), is put on. Also, [Psa 133:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#002),
פּי מדּותיו signifies not the lower edge, but the opening at the head
פּי הראשׁע, [Exo 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#032)) or the collar
of the high priest's vestment (vid., the passage cited). Thus even lxx
ὥσπερ τὸ περιστόμιον τοῦ χιτῶνός μου, and Jer.: velut capitio tunicae
meae. True, Schlottm. observes against this rendering of [Job
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018), that it is unnatural according
to substance, since on a wasted body it is not the outer garment that
assumes the appearance of a narrow under one, but on the contrary the
under garment assumes the appearance of a wide outer one. But this
objection is not to the point. If the body is wasted away to a skeleton,
there is an end to the rich appearance and beautiful flow which the
outer garment gains by the full and rounded forms of the limbs: it falls
down straight and in perpendicular folds upon the wasted body, and
contributes in no small degree to make him whom one formerly saw in all
the fulness of health still less recognisable than he otherwise is.
יאזרני, cingit me, is not merely the falling together of the outer
garment which was formerly filled out by the members of the body, but
its appearance when the sick man wraps himself in it: then it girds him,
fits close to him like his shirt-collar, lying round about the
shrivelled figure like the other about a thin neck. On the terrible
wasting away which is combined with hypertrophical formations in
elephantiasis, vid., [Job 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#015), and
especially [Job 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020). The subject of
[Job 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019) is God, whom [Job
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018) also describes as efficient
cause: He has cast me into, or daubed

(Note: The reading wavers between הרני and הרני, for the latter form of
writing is sometimes found even out of pause by conjunctive accents,
e.g., [Sa1 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015); [Psa
118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005).)

me with, mud, and I am become as (כּ instead of the dat., Ew. 221, a)
dust and ashes. This is also intended pathologically: the skin of the
sufferer with elephantiasis becomes first an intense red, then assumes a
black colour; scales like fishes' scales are formed upon it, and the
brittle, dark-coloured surface of the body is like a lump of earth.

[Job 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 30:20</span></span>

20 I cry to Thee for help, and Thou answerest not;

I stand there, and Thou lookest fixedly at me.

21 Thou changest Thyself to a cruel being towards me,

With the strength of Thy hand Thou makest war upon me.

22 Thou raisest me upon the stormy wind,

Thou causest me to drive along And vanish in the roaring of the storm.

23 For I know: Thou wilt bring me back to death,

Into the house of assembly for all living.

If he cries for help, his cry remains unanswered; if he stands there
looking up reverentially to God (perhaps עמד, with משּׁוּע to be
supplied, has the sense of desisting or restraining, as [Gen
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#035); [Gen
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#009)), the troubling, fixed look of
God, who looks fixedly and hostilely upon him, anything but ready to
help (comp. [Job 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020); [Job
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009)), meets his upturned eye. התבּנן,
to look consideringly upon anything, is elsewhere joined with אל, על,
עד, or even with the acc; here, where a motionless fixed look is
intended, with בּ (= fi). It is impossible to draw the לא, [Job
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020), over to ותּתבּנן (Jer., Saad.,
Umbr., Welte, and others), both on account of the Waw consec. (Ew.
351a), and on account of the separation by the new antecedent עמדתּי. On
the reading of two Codd. ותתכנן ("Thou settest Thyself against me"),
which Houbigant and Ew. prefer, Rosenm. has correctly pronounced
judgment: est potius pro mendo habenda. Instead of consolingly answering
his prayer, and instead of showing Himself willing to help, God, who was
formerly so kind towards him, changes towards him, His creature, into a
cruel being, saevum (אכזר in the book of Job only here and [Job
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#002), where it signifies "foolhardy;"
comp. לאויב in the dependent passage, [Isa
63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010)), and makes war upon him (שׂטם
as [Job 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#009)) by causing him to feel
the strength of His omnipotent hand (עצם יד as [Deu
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#017), synon. חזק).

It is not necessary in [Job 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022) to
forsake the accentuation, and to translate: Thou raisest me up, Thou
causest me go in the wind (Ew., Hirz., and others); the accentuation of
רוח is indeed not a disjunctive Dech, but a conjunctive Tarcha, but
preceded by Munach, which, according to the rule, Psalter ii. 500, 5,
here, where two conjunctives come together, has a smaller conjunctive
value. Therefore: elevas me in ventum, equitare facis me, viz., super
ventum (Dachselt), for one does not only say הרכּיב על, [Ch1
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#007), or ל, [Psa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012), but also אל, [Sa2
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#003); and accordingly תּשּׂאני אל־רוּח
is also not to be translated: Thou snatchest me into the wind or storm
(Hahn, Schlottm.), but: Thou raisest me up to the wind or storm, as upon
an animal for riding (Umbr., Olsh.). According to Oriental tradition,
Solomon rode upon the east wind, and in Arabic they say of one who
hurried rapidly by, racab al-genâhai er-rih, he rides upon the wings of
the wind; in the present passage, the point of comparison is the being
absolutely passively hurried forth from the enjoyment of a healthy and
happy life to a dizzy height, whence a sudden overthrow threatens him
who is unwillingly removed (comp. [Psa
102:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#011), Thou hast lifted me up and
hurled me forth).

The lot which threatens him from this painful suspense Job expresses
([Job 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022)) in the puzzling words:
וּתמגגני תשׁיּה. Thus the Keri, after which lxx transl. (if it has not
read מישׁוּעה), καὶ ἀπέῤῥηιψάς με ἀπὸ σωτηρίας. The modern expositors
who follow the Keri, by taking ותמגגני for ותמגג לי (according to Ges.
121, 4), translate: Thou causest counsel and understanding (Welte),
happiness (Blumenf.), and the like, to vanish from me; continuance,
existence, duration would be better (vid., [Job
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013), and especially on [Job
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#003)). The thought it appropriate, but
the expression is halting. Jerome, who translates valide, points to the
correct thing, and Buxtorf (Lex. col. 2342f.) by interpreting the not
less puzzling Targum translation in fundamento = funditus or in essentia
= essentialiter, has, without intending it, hit upon the idea of the
Hebr. Keri; תשׁיּה is intended as a closer defining, or adverbial,
accusative: Thou causest me to vanish as to existence, ita ut tota
essentia pereat h.e. totaliter et omnino. Perhaps this was really the
meaning of the poet: most completely, most thoroughly, altogether, like
the Arab. ḥaqqan. But it is unfavourable to this Keri, that תושׁיה (from
the verb ושׁי), as might be expected, is always written plene elsewhere;
the correction of the תשׁוה is violent, and moreover this form,
correctly read, gives a sense far more consistent with the figure, [Job
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022). Ges., Umbr., and Carey falsely
read תּשׁוּה, terres me; this verb is unknown in Hebr., and even in
Chaldee is only used in Ithpeal, אשׁתּוי (= Hebr. חרד); for a similar
reason Bttcher's תּשׁוה (which is intended to mean: in despair) is also
not to be used. Even Stuhlmann perceived that תשׁוה is equivalent to
תּשׁוּאה; it is, with Ew. and Olsh., to be read תּשׁוּה (not with Pareau
and Hirz. תּשׁוה without the Dag.), and this form signifies, as תשׁואה,
[Job 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#029), from שׁוא = שׁאה, from
which it is derived by change of consonants, the crash of thunder, or
even the rumbling or roar as of a storm or a falling in (procellae sive
ruinae). The meaning is hardly, that he who rides away upon the stormy
wind melts and trickles down like drops of rain among the pealing of the
thunder, when the thunder-storm, whose harbinger is the stormy wind,
gathers; but that in the storm itself, which increases in fury to the
howling of a tempest, he dissolves away. תּשׁוּה for בּתּשׁוּה, comp.
[Psa 107:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#026) : their soul melted away
(dissolved) בּרעה. The compulsory journey in the air, therefore, passes
into nothing or nearly nothing, as Job is well aware, [Job
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023) : "for I know: (without כּי, as
[Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025); Ps. 9:21) Thou wilt bring
me back to death" (acc. of the goal, or locative without any sign). If
תּשׁיבני is taken in its most natural signification reduces, death is
represented as essentially one with the dust of death (comp. [Job
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021) with [Gen
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)), or even with non-existence, out
of which man is come into being; nevertheless השׁיב can also, by
obliterating the notion of return, like redigere, have only the
signification of the turn of destiny and change of condition that is
effected. The assertion that שׁוּב always includes an "again," and
retains it inexorably (vid., Khler on [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007), S. 239), is untenable. In
post-biblical Hebrew, at least, it is certain that שׁוּב signifies not
only "to become again," but also "to become," as Arab. ‛âd is used as
synon. of jâ'in, devenir.

(Note: Vid., my Anekdota der mittelalterlichen Scholastik unter Juden
und Moslemen, S. 347.)

With מות, the designation of the condition, is coupled the designation
of the place: Hades (under the notion of which that of the grave is
included) is the great involuntary rendezvous of all who live in this
world.

[Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 30:24</span></span>

24 Doth one not, however, stretch out the hand in falling,

Doth he not raise a cry for help on that account in his ruin?

25 Or have I not wept for him that was in trouble,

Hath not my soul grieved for the needy? -

26 For I hoped for good, then evil came;

I waited for light, and darkness came.

27 My bowels boiled without ceasing,

Days of misery met me.

Most of the ancient versions indulge themselves in strange fancies
respecting [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) to make a
translatable text, or find their fancies in the text before them. The
translation of the Targum follows the fancies of the Midrash, and places
itself beyond the range of criticism. The lxx reads בי instead of בעי,
and finds in [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) a longing for
suicide, or death by the hand of another. The Syriac likewise reads בי,
although it avoids this absurdity. Jerome makes an address of the
assertion, and, moreover, also moulds the text under the influence of
the Midrash. Aq., Symm., and Theod. strive after a better rendering than
the lxx, but (to judge from the fragment in the Hexapla) without
success. Saadia and Gecatilia wring a sense out of [Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024), but at the expense of the
syntax, and by dragging [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024)
after it, contrary to the tenor of the words. The old expositors also
advance nothing available. They mostly interpret it as though it were
not להן, but להם (a reading which has been forced into the Midrash texts
and some Codd. instead of the reading of the text that is handed down to
us). Even Rosenm. thinks להן might, like the Ara. להון, be equivalent to
להם; and Carey explains the enallage generis from the perhaps existing
secondary idea of womanly fear, as [Sa2
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#006), הנּה instead of המּה is used of
the two assassins to describe them as cowards. But the Hebr. להן is
fem.; and often as the enallage masc. pro fem. occurs, the enallage fem.
pro masc. is unknown; הנּה, [Sa2 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#006),
is an adv. of place (vid., moreover, Thenius in loc.). It is just as
absolutely inadmissible when the old expositors combine שׁוּע with ושׁע
(ושׁע), or as e.g., Raschi with שׁעשׁע, and translate, "welfare" or
"exhilaration" (refreshing). The signif. "wealth" would be more readily
admissible, so that שׁוּע, as Aben-Ezra observes, would be the subst. to
שׁוע, [Job 34:19](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#019); but in [Job
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#019) (which see), שׁוּע (as שׁוע [Isa
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#005)) signifies a cry of distress (=
שׁוע), and an attempt must be made here with this meaning before every
other.

On the other hand comes the question whether בעי is not perhaps to be
referred to the verb בּעה, whether it be as subst. after the form מרי
(Ralbag after the Targ.) or as part. pass. (Saad. Arab. gı̂r ‛nnh lı̂s
'l-mbtgan, "only that it is not desired"). The verb does not, indeed,
occur elsewhere in the book of Job, but is very consistent with its
style, which so abounds in Aramaisms, and is at the same time so
coloured with Arabic that we should almost say, its Hauranitish style.

(Note: The Arab. verb bg' is still extensively used in Syria, and that
in two forms: Arab. bg' ybgy and bg' ybg'. In Damascus the fut. i is
alone used; whereas in Hauran and the steppe I have only found fut. a.
Thus e.g., the Hauranite poet Ksim el-Chinn says: "The gracious God
encompass thee with His favour and whatever thy soul desires (wa-l-nefsu
ma tebghâ), it must obtain its desire" (tanûlu munâhû, in connection
with which it is to be observed that Arab. bâl, fut. u is used here in
the signification adipisci, comp. Fleischer on [Job
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#029) \[supra i. 270, note\]). -
Wetzst.)

Thus taking בעי as one word, Ralbag transl.: prayer stretched not forth
the hand, which is intended to mean: is not able to do anything, cannot
cause the will of God to miscarry. This meaning is only obtained by
great violence; but when Renan (together with Bckel and Carey, after
Rosenm.) translates: Vaines prires!..il tend sa main; quoi bon protester
contre ses coups? the one may be measured with the other. If בעי is to
be derived from בעי, it must be translated either: shall He, however,
without prayer (sine imploratione), or: shall He, however, unimplored
(non imploratus), stretch out His hand? The thought remains the same by
both renderings of בעי, and suits as a vindication of the cry for help
in the context. But בּעה, in the specific signification implorare,
deprecari, is indeed the usage of the Targum, although strange to the
Hebr., which is here so rich in synonyms; then, in the former case, לא
for בלא is harsh, and in the other, בעי as part. pass. is too strong an
Aramaism. We must therefore consider whether בעי as עי with the praep.
בּ gives a suitable sense. Since שׁלח יד בּ, e.g., [Job
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#009) and elsewhere, most commonly
means "to lay the hand on anything, stretch out the hand to anything,"
it is most natural to take בעי in dependence upon ישׁלח ידו, and we
really gain an impressive thought, if we translate: Only may He not
stretch out His hand (to continue His work of destruction) to a heap of
rubbish (which I am already become); but by this translation of [Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024), [Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) remains a glaring puzzle,
insoluble in itself and in respect of the further course of the thought,
for Schlottmann's interpretation, "Only one does not touch ruins, or the
ruin of one is the salvation of another," which is itself puzzling, is
no solution. The reproach against the friends which is said to lie in
[Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) is contrary to the
character of this monologue, which is turned away from his human
opponents; then שׁוּע does not signify salvation, and there is no "one"
and "another" to be found in the text. We must therefore, against our
inclination, give up this dependent relation of בעי, so that בעי
signifies either, upon a heap of rubbish, or, since this ought to be
על־עי: by the falling in; עי (from עוה = ‛iwj) can mean both: a falling
in or overthrow (bouleversement) as an event, and ruins or rubbish as
its result.

Accordingly Hirz. translates: Only upon the ruins (more correctly at
least: upon ruins) one will not stretch out his hand, and Ew.: Only -
does not one stretch out one's hand by one's overthrow? But this "only"
is awkward. Hahn is of opinion that אך לא may be taken in the
signification not once, and translates: may one not for once raise one's
hand by one's downfall; but even this is lame, because then all
connection with what precedes is wanting; besides, אך לא does not
signify ne quidem. The originally affirmative אך has certainly for the
most part a restrictive signification, which, as we observed on [Job
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#021), is blended with the affirmative
in Hebr., but it is also, as more frequently אכן, used adversatively,
e.g., [Job 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#007), and in the
combination אך לא this adversative signification coincides with the
restrictive, for this double particle signifies everywhere else: only
not, however not, [Gen 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012); [Kg1
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#039); [Kg2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#014); [Kg2
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#006); [Kg2
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#009), [Kg2
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#026). It would be more natural to
translate, as we have stated above: only may be not, etc., but [Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) puts in its veto against this.
If, as Hirz., Ew., and Hahn also suppose, לא, [Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024), is equivalent to הלא, so that
the sentence is to be spoken with an interrogative accent, we must
translate אך as Jer. has done, by verumtamen. He knows that he is being
hurried forth to meet death; he knows it, and has also already made
himself so familiar with this thought, that the sooner he sees an end
put to this his sorrowful life the better - nevertheless does one not
stretch out one's hand when one is falling? This involuntary reaction
against destruction is the inevitable result of man's instinct of
self-preservation. It needs no proof that שׁלח יד can signify "to
stretch out one's hand for help;" ישׁלח is used with a general subj.:
one stretches out, as [Job 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005); [Job
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#022). With this determination of the
idea of [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024), [Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) is now also naturally connected
with what precedes. It is not, however, to be translated, as Ew. and
Hirz.: if one is in distress, is not a cry for help heard on account of
it? If אם were intended hypothetically, a continuation of the power of
the interrogative לא from [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024)
would be altogether impossible. Hahn and Loch-Reischl rightly take אם in
the sense of an. It introduces another turn of the question: Does one,
however, not stretch out one's hand to hasten the fall, or in his
downfall (raise) a cry for help, or a wail, on that account? Dderlein's
conjecture, לחן for להן (praying "for favour"), deserves respectful
mention, but it is not needed: להן signifies neutrally: in (under) such
circumstances (comp. בּהם, [Job 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021);
[Isa 64:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#005)), or is directly equivalent
to להן, which ([Rut 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#013)) signifies
propterea, and even in biblical Chaldee, beside the Chaldee signif. sed,
nisi, retains this Hebrew signif. ([Dan
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#006), [Dan
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#009); [Dan
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#024)). פּיד, which signifies dying and
destruction (Talmud. in the peculiar signif.: that which is hewn or
pecked open), synon. of איד, has been already discussed on [Job
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#005).

[Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025)

The further progress of the thoughts seems to be well carried out only
by our rendering of [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024). The
manifestation of feeling - Job means to say - which he himself felt at
the misfortune of others, will be still permitted to him in his own
misfortune, the seeking of compassion from the sympathising: or have I
not wept for the hard of day? i.e., him whose lot in life is hard (comp.
Arab. qası̂y, durus, miser); did not my soul grieve for the needy? Here,
also, לא from [Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025) continues its
effect (comp. [Job 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010); [Job
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#017)); עגם is ἅπ. γεγρ., of like
signification with אגם, whence אגם [Isa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#010), אגמה (sadness) b. Mod katan
14b, Arab. agima, to feel disgust. If the relation of [Job
30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025) to [Job
30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) is confirmatory, [Job
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#026) and what follows refers directly
to [Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024) : he who felt sympathy
with the sufferings of others will nevertheless dare in his own
affliction to stretch out his hand for help in the face of certain ruin,
and pour forth his pain in lamentation; for his affliction is in reality
inexpressibly great: he hoped for good (for the future from his
prosperous condition, in which he rejoiced),

(Note: lxx Aldina: ἐγὼ δὲ ἀπέχων ἀγαθοῖς, which Zwingli rightly corrects
ἐπέχων (Codd. Vat., Alex., and Sinait.).)

then came evil; and if I waited for light, deep darkness came. Ewald
(232, h) regards ואיחלה as contracted from ואיחלה, but this shortening
of the vowel is a pure impossibility. The former signifies rather καὶ
ἤλπιζον or ἐβουλόμην ἐλπίζειν, the latter καὶ ἤλπισα, and that
cohortative fut. logically forms a hypothetical antecedent, exactly like
[Job 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#018), if I desire to rise
(אקומה), they speak against me (vid., Ew. 357, b). In feverish heat and
anxiety his bowels were set boiling (רתח as [Job
41:23](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#023), comp. Talmud. רתחן, a
hot-headed fellow), and rested not (from this boiling). The accentuation
Tarcha, Mercha, and Athnach is here incorrect; instead of Athnach, Rebia
mugrasch is required. Days of affliction came upon him (קדּם as [Psa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006)), viz., as a hostile power
cutting off the previous way of his prosperity.

[Job 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 30:28</span></span>

28 I wandered about in mourning without the sun;

I rose in the assembly, I gave free course to my complaint.

29 I am become a brother of the jackals

And a companion of ostriches.

30 My skin having become black, peels off from me,

And my bones are parched with dryness.

31 My harp was turned to mourning,

And my pipe to tones of sorrow.

Several expositors (Umbr., Vaih., Hlgst.) understand קדר of the
dirty-black skin of the leper, but contrary to the usage of the
language, according to which, in similar utterances ([Psa
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014); [Psa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007); [Psa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010); [Psa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002), comp. supra, [Job
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#011)), it rather denotes the
dirty-black dress of mourners (comp. Arab. qḏḏr, conspurcare vestem); to
understand it of the dirty-black skin as quasi sordida veste (Welte) is
inadmissible, since this distortion of the skin which Job bewails in
[Job 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030) would hardly be spoken of
thus tautologically. קדר therefore means in the black of the שׂק, or
mourning-linen, [Job 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#015), by which,
however, also the interpretation of בּלא חמּה, "without sunburn" (Ew.,
Hirz.), which has gained ground since Raschi's day (לא שׁשׁזפתני
השׁמשׁ), is disposed of; for "one can perhaps say of the blackness of
the skin that it does not proceed from the sun, but not of the blackness
of mourning attire" (Hahn). קדר also refutes the reading בלא חמה in lxx
Complut. (ἄνευ θυμοῦ),

(Note: Whereas Codd. Alex., Vat., and Sinait., ἄνευ φιμοῦ, which is
correctly explained by κημοῦ in Zwingli's Aldine, but gives no sense.)

Syr., Jer. (sine furore), which ought to be understood of the deposition
of the gall-pigment on the skin, and therefore of jaundice, which turns
it (especially in tropical regions) not merely yellow, but a dark-brown.
Hahn and a few others render בלא חמה correctly in the sense of בחשׁך,
"without the sun having shone on him." Bereft of all his possessions,
and finally also of his children, he wanders about in mourning (הלּך as
[Job 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#010); [Psa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)), and even the sun had clothed
itself in black to him (which is what קדר השׁמשׁ means, [Joe
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010) and freq.); the celestial light,
which otherwise brightened his path, [Job
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#003), was become invisible. We must
not forget that Job here reviews the whole chain of afflictions which
have come upon him, so that by [Job
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028) we have not to think
exclusively, and also not prominently, of the leprosy, since הלכתי
indeed represents him as still able to move about freely.

In [Job 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028) the accentuation wavers
between Dech, Munach, Silluk, according to which בּקּהל אשׁוּע belong
together, which is favoured by the Dagesh in the Beth, and Tarcha,
Munach, Silluk, according to which (because Munach, according to Psalter
ii. 503, 2, is a transformation of Rebia mugrasch) קמתּי בּקּהל belong
together. The latter mode of accentuation, according to which בקהל must
be written without the Dag. instead of בּקהל (vid., Norzi), is the only
correct one (because Dech cannot come in the last member of the sentence
before Silluk), and is also more pleasing as to matter: I rose (and
stood) in the assembly, crying for help, or more generally: wailing. The
assembly is not to be thought of as an assembly of the people, or even
tribunal (Ew.: "before the tribunal seeking a judge, with
lamentations"), but as the public; for the thought that Job sought help
against his unmerited sufferings before a human tribunal is absurd; and,
moreover, the thought that he cried for help before an assembly of the
people called together to take counsel and pronounce decisions is
equally absurd. Welte, however, who interprets: I was as one who, before
an assembled tribunal, etc., introduces a quasi of which there is no
trace in the text. בּקּהל must therefore, without pressing it further,
be taken in the sense of publice, before all the world (Hirz.: comp.
בקהל, ἐν φανερῷ, [Pro 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#026)); אשׁוּע,
however, is a circumstantial clause declaring the purpose (Ew. 337, b;
comp. De Sacy, Gramm. Arabe ii. 357), as is frequently the case after
קום, [Job 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008); [Psa
88:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#011); [Psa
102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014) : surrexi in publico ut
lamentarer, or lamentaturus, or lamentando. In this lament, extorted by
the most intense pain, which he cannot hold back, however many may
surround him, he is become a brother of those תּנּים, jackals (canes
aurei), whose dolorous howling produces dejection and shuddering in all
who hear it, and a companion of בּנות יענה, whose shrill cry is varied
by wailing tones of deep melancholy.

(Note: It is worth while to cite a passage from Shaw's Travels in
Barbary, ii. 348 (transl.), here: "When the ostriches are running and
fighting, they sometimes make a wild, hideous, hissing noise with their
throats distended and beaks open; at another time, if they meet with a
slight opposition, they have a clucking or cackling voice like our
domestic fowls: they seem to rejoice and laugh at the terror of their
adversary. During the loneliness of the night however, as if their voice
had a totally different tone, they often set up a dolorous, hideous
moan, which at one time resembles the roar of the lion, and at another
is more like the hoarser voice of other quadrupeds, especially the bull
and cow. I have often heard them groan as if they were in the greatest
agonies." In General Doumas' book on the Horse of the Sahara, I have
read that the male ostrich (delı̂m), when it is killed, especially if its
young ones are near, sends forth a dolorous note, wile the female
(remda), on the other hand, does not utter a sound; and so, when the
ostrich digs out its nest, one hears a languishing and dolorous tone all
day long, and when it has laid its egg, its usual cry is again heard,
only about three o'clock in the afternoon.)

The point of comparison is not the insensibility of the hearers
(Sforno), but the fellowship of wailing and howling together with the
accompanying idea of the desert in which it is heard, which is connected
with the idea itself (comp. [Mic 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008)).

[Job 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030)

Now for the first time he speaks of his disfigurement by leprosy in
particular: my skin (עורי, masc., as it is also used in [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026), only apparently as fem.) is
become black (nigruit) from me, i.e., being become black, has peeled
from me, and my bones (עצמי, construed as fem. like [Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020); [Psa
102:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006)) are consumed, or put in a glow
(חרה, Milel, from חרר, as [Eze 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#011))
by a parching heat. Thus, then, his harp became mournful, and his pipe
(ועגבי with ג raphatum) the cry of the weepers; the cheerful music
(comp. [Job 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012)) has been turned
into gloomy weeping and sobbing (comp. [Lam
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#015)). Thus the second part of the
monologue closes. It is somewhat lengthened and tedious; it is Job's
last sorrowful lament before the catastrophe. What a delicate touch of
the poet is it that he makes this lament, [Job
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#031), die away so melodiously! One
hears the prolonged vibration of its elegiac strains. The festive and
joyous music is hushed; the only tones are tones of sadness and lament,
mesto, flebile.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 31](job031)

</div>
