<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job040)  [Next](job042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001)

[Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 41:1</span></span>

1 Dost thou draw the crocodile by a hoop-net,

And dost thou sink his tongue into the line?!

2 Canst thou put a rush-ring into his nose,

And pierce his cheeks with a hook?

3 Will he make many supplications to thee,

Or speak flatteries to thee?

4 Will he make a covenant with thee,

To take him as a perpetual slave?

5 Wilt thou play with him as a little bird,

And bind him for thy maidens?

In [Job 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#008), לויתן signified the
celestial dragon, that causes the eclipses of the sun (according to the
Indian mythology, râhu the black serpent, and ketu the red serpent); in
[Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026) it does not denote some
great sea-saurian after the kind of the hydrarchus of the primeval
world,

(Note: Vid., Grsse, Beitrge, S. 94ff.)

but directly the whale, as in the Talmud (Lewysohn, Zoologie des Talm.
178f.). Elsewhere, however, the crocodile is thus named, and in fact as
תּנּין also, another appellation of this natural wonder of Egypt, as an
emblem of the mightiness of Pharaoh (vid., on [Psa
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013).), as once again the crocodile
itself is called in Arab. el-fir‛annu. The Old Testament language
possesses no proper name for the crocodile; even the Talmudic makes use
of קרוקתא = κροκόδειλος (Lewysohn, 271). לויתן is the generic name of
twisted, and תנין long-extended monsters. Since the Egyptian name of the
crocodile has not been Hebraized, the poet contents himself in תּמשׁך
with making a play upon its Egyptian, and in Arab. tmsâḥ, timsâḥ,

(Note: Herodotus was acquainted with this name (χάμψαι = κροκόδειλοι);
thus is the crocodile called also in Palestine, where (as Tobler and
Joh. Roth have shown) it occurs, especially in the river Damr near
Tantra.)

Arabized name (Ew. 324, a). To wit, it is called in Coptic temsah,
Hierogl. (without the art.) msuh (emsuh), as an animal that creeps "out
of the egg (suh)."

(Note: Les naturalistes - says Chabas in his Papyr. magique, p. 190 -
comptent cinq espces de crocodiles vivant dans le Nil, mais les
hieroglyphes rapportent un plus grand nombre de noms dtermins par le
signe du crocodile. Such is really the case, apart from the so-called
land crocodile or σκίγκος (Arab. isqanqûr), the Coptic name of which,
hankelf (according to Lauth ha. n. kelf, ruler of the bank), is not as
yet indicated on the monuments. Among the many old Egyptian names for
the crocodile, Kircher's charuki is, however, not found, which reminds
one of the Coptic karus, as κροκόδειλος of κρόκος, for κροκόδειλος is
the proper name of the Lacerta viridis (Herod. ii. 69). Lauth is
inclined to regard charuki as a fiction of Kircher, as also the name of
the phoenix, αλλοη (vid., p. 562). The number of names of the crocodile
which remain even without charuki, leads one to infer a great variety of
species, and crocodiles, which differ from all living species, have also
actually been found in Egyptian tombs; vid., Schmarda, Verbreitung der
Thiere, i. 89.)

In [Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001), Ges. and others falsely
translate: Canst thou press its tongue down with a cord; השׁקיע does not
signify demergere = deprimere, but immergere: canst thou sink its tongue
into the line, i.e., make it bite into the hook on the line, and canst
thou thus draw it up? [Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001) then
refers to what must happen in order that the משׁך of the msuh may take
place. Herodotus (and after him Aristotle) says, indeed, ii. 68, the
crocodile has no tongue; but it has one, only it cannot stretch it out,
because the protruding part has grown to the bottom of the mouth, while
otherwise the saurians have a long tongue, that can be stretched out to
some length. In [Job 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#002) the order of
thought is the same: for first the Nile fishermen put a ring through the
gills or nose of valuable fish; then they draw a cord made of rushes
(σχοῖνον) through it, in order to put them thus bound into the river.
"As a perpetual slave," [Job 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#004) is
intended to say: like one of the domestic animals. By צפּור, [Job
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005), can hardly be meant צפּרת
הכּרמים, the little bird of the vineyard, i.e., according to a Talmud.
usage of the language, the golden beetle (Jesurun, p. 222), or a pretty
eatable grasshopper (Lewysohn, 374), but, according to the words of
Catullus, Passer deliciae meae puellae, the sparrow, Arab. ‛asfûr - an
example of a harmless living plaything (שׂחק בּ, to play with anything,
different from [Psa 104:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#026), where it
is not, with Ew., to be translated: to play with it, but: therein).

[Job 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 41:6</span></span>

6 Do fishermen trade with him,

Do they divide him among the Canaanites?

7 Canst thou fill his skin with darts,

And his head with fish-spears?

8 Only lay thy hand upon him

Remember the battle, thou wilt not do it again!

9 Behold, every hope becometh disappointment:

Is not one cast down even at the sight of him?

The fishermen form a guild (Arab. ṣunf, sunf), the associated members of
which are called חבּרים (distinct from חברים). On כּרה על, vid., on [Job
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#027). "When I came to the towns of the
coast," says R. Akiba, b. Rosch ha-Schana, 26b, "they called selling,
which we call מכירה, כירה, there," according to which, then, [Gen
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#005) is understood, as by the Syriac;
the word is Sanscrito-Semitic, Sanscr. kri, Persic chirı̂den (Jesurun, p.
178). lxx ἐνσιτούνται, according to [Kg2
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#023), to which, however, עליו is not
suitable. כּנענים are Phoenicians; and then, because they were the
merchant race of the ancient world, directly traders or merchants. The
meaning of the question is, whether one sells the crocodile among them,
perhaps halved, or in general divided up. Further, [Job
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#007) : whether one can kill it
בּשׂכּות, with pointed missiles (Arab. shauke, a thorn, sting, dart), or
with fish-spears (צלצל, so called from its whizzing, צלל, ). In [Job
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#008) the accentuation is the right
indication: only seize upon him - remember the battle, i.e., thou wilt
be obliged to remember it, and thou wilt have no wish to repeat it. זכר
.ti t is a so-called imperat. consec.: if thou doest it, thou wilt ... ,
Ges. 130, 2. תּוסף is the pausal form of תּוסף (once ͂, [Pro
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#006)), of which it is the original
form.

The suff. of תּוהלתּו refers to the assailant, not objectively to the
beast (the hope which he indulges concerning it). נכזבה, [Job
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#009), is 3 praet., like נאלמה, [Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007) (where also the participial
accenting as Milra, occurs in Codd.); Frst's Concord. treats it as
part., but the participial form נקטלה, to be assumed in connection with
it, along with נקטלה and נקטלת, does not exist. הגם, [Job
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#009), is, according to the sense,
equivalent to הלא גם, vid., on [Job
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004). מראיו (according to Ges., Ew.,
and Olsh., sing., with the plural suff., without a plur. meaning, which
is natural in connection with the primary form מראי; or what is more
probable, from the plur. מראים with a sing. meaning, as פּנים) refers to
the crocodile, and יטּל (according to a more accredited reading, יטּל =
יוּטל) to the hunter to whom it is visible.

What is said in [Job 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#006) is perfectly
true; although the crocodile was held sacred in some parts of Egypt, in
Elephantine and Apollonopolis, on the contrary, it was salted and eaten
as food. Moreover, that there is a small species of crocodile, with
which children can play, does not militate against [Job
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#005). Everywhere here it is the
creature in its primitive strength and vigour that is spoken of. But if
they also knew how to catch it in very early times, by fastening a bait,
perhaps a duck, on a barb with a line attached, and drew the animal to
land, where they put an end to its life with a lance-thrust in the neck
(Uhlemann, Thoth, S. 241): this was angling on the largest scale, as is
not meant in [Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001). If, on the
other hand, in very early times they harpooned the crocodile, this would
certainly be more difficult of reconcilement with v. 31, than that mode
of catching it by means of a fishing-hook of the greatest calibre with
[Job 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#001). But harpooning is generally
only of use when the animal can be hit between the neck and head, or in
the flank; and it is very questionable whether, in the ancient times,
when the race was without doubt of an unmanageable size, that has now
died out, the crocodile hunt ([Job
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#012)) was effected with harpoons. On
the whole subject we have too little information for distinguishing
between the different periods. So far as the questions of Jehovah have
reference to man's relation to the two monsters, they concern the men of
the present, and are shaped according to the measure of power which they
have attained over nature. The strophe which follows shows what Jehovah
intends by these questions.

[Job 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 41:10</span></span>

10 None is so foolhardy that he dare excite him!

And who is it who could stand before Me?

11 Who hath given Me anything first of all, that I must requite it?

Whatsoever is under the whole heaven is Mine.

One sees from these concluding inferences, thus applied, what is the
design, in the connection of this second speech of Jehovah, of the
reference to behmoth and leviathan, which somewhat abruptly began in
[Job 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#015). If even the strength of
one of God's creatures admits no thought of being able to attack it, how
much more should the greatness of the Creator deter man from all
resistance! For no one has any claim on God, so that he should have the
right of appearing before Him with a rude challenge. Every creature
under heaven is God's; man, therefore, possesses nothing that was not
God's property and gift, and he must humbly yield, whether God gives or
takes away. לא, [Job 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#010), is not
directly equivalent to אין, but the clause is exclamatory. יעורנו
Chethb, יעירנו Ker, is the Palestine reading, the reverse the
Babylonian; the authorized text (chiefly without a Ker) is יעוּרנּוּ
from עוּר in a transitive signification (ἐγείρειν), as שׁוּב, [Job
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#012), comp. [Job
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#010). The meaning of הקדּימני is
determined according to ואשׁלּם: to anticipate, viz., by gifts presented
as a person is approaching the giver (Arab. aqdama). הוּא, [Job
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#011), is neutral, as [Job
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#016); [Job
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#009); [Job
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#011), [Job
31:28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#028). תּחת is virtually a subj.: that
which is under ... . After these apparently epiphonematic verses (2 and
3), one might now look for Job's answer. But the description of the
leviathan is again taken up, and in fact hitherto it was only the
invincibility of the animal that was spoken of; and yet it is not so
described that this picture might form the exact pendent of the
preceding.

[Job 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 41:12</span></span>

12 I will not keep silence about his members,

The proportion of his power and the comeliness of his structure.

13 Who could raise the front of his coat of mail?

Into his double teeth-who cometh therein?

14 The doors of his face-who openeth them?

Round about his teeth is terror.

The Ker לו authorized by the Masora assumes an interrogative rendering:
as to it, should I be silent about its members (לו at the head of the
clause, as [Lev 7:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#007); [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)), - what perhaps might appear more
poetic to many. החרישׁ (once, [Job
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#003), to cause to keep silence) here,
as usually: to be silent. בּדּיו, as [Job
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013). דּבר signifies the relation of
the matter, a matter of fact, as דּברי, facts, [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004); [Psa
105:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#027); [Psa
145:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#005). חין (compared by Ew. with הין,
a measure) signifies grace, χάρις (as synon. חסד), here delicate
regularity, and is made easy of pronunciation from חנן, just as the more
usual חן; the language has avoided the form חנן, as observed above.
לבוּשׁ . clothing, we have translated "coat of mail," which the Arab.
libâs usually signifies; פּני לבוּשׁו is not its face's covering
(Schlottm.), which ought to be לבוּשׁ פּניו; but פּני is the upper or
front side turned to the observer (comp. [Isa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007)), as Arab. wjh, (wag'h), si rem
desuper spectes, summa ejus pars, si ex adverso, prima (Fleischer,
Glossae, i. 57). That which is the "doubled of its mouth" (רסן, prop. a
bit in the mouth, then the mouth itself) is its upper and lower jaws
armed with powerful teeth. The "doors of the face" are the jaws; the
jaws are divided back to the ears, the teeth are not covered by lips;
the impression of the teeth is therefore the more terrible, which the
substantival clause, [Job 41:14](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#014) (comp.
[Job 39:20](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#020)), affirms. שׁנּיו gen.
subjecti: the circle, ἓρκος, which is formed by its teeth (Hahn).

[Job 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 41:15</span></span>

15 A pride are the furrows of the shields,

Shut by a rigid seal.

16 One joineth on to the other,

And no air entereth between them.

17 One upon another they are arranged,

They hold fast together, inseparably.

Since the writer uses אפיק both in the signif. robustus, [Job
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#012), and canalis, [Job
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#018), it is doubtful whether it must
be explained robusta (robora) scutorum (as e.g., Ges.), or canales
scutorum (Hirz., Schlottm., and others). We now prefer the latter, but
so that "furrows of the shields" signifies the square shields themselves
bounded by these channels; for only thus is the סגוּר, which refers to
these shields, considered, each one for itself, suitably attached to
what precedes. חותם צר is an acc. of closer definition belonging to it:
closed is (each single one) by a firmly attached, and therefore firmly
closed, seal. lxx remarkably ὥσπερ σμυρίτης λίθος, i.e., (emery (vid.,
Krause's Pyrogeteles, 1859, S. 228). Six rows of knotty scales and four
scales of the neck cover the upper part of the animal's body, in
themselves firm, and attached to one another in almost impenetrable
layers, as is described in [Job 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#007)
in constantly-varying forms of expression (where יגּשׁוּ with Pathach
beside Athnach is the correct reading), - a גּאוה, i.e., an equipment of
which the animal may be proud. Umbr. takes גאוה, with Bochart, = גּוה,
the back; but although in the language much is possible, yet not
everything.

[Job 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 41:18</span></span>

18 His sneezing sendeth forth light,

And his eyes are like the eyelids of the dawn;

19 Out of his mouth proceed flames,

Sparks of fire escape from him;

20 Out of his nostrils goeth forth smoke

Like a seething pot and caldron;

21 His breath kindleth coals,

And flames go forth out of his mouth.

That the crocodile delights to sun itself on the land, and then turns
its open jaws to the sunny side, most Nile travellers since Herodotus
have had an opportunity of observing;

(Note: Dieterici, Reisebilder, i. 194: "We very often saw the animal
lying in the sand, its jaws wide open and turned towards the warm
sunbeams, while little birds, like the slender white water-wagtail,
march quietly about in the deadly abyss, and pick out worms from the
watery jaws." Herodotus, ii. 68, tells exactly the same story; as the
special friend of the crocodile among little birds, he mentions τὸν
τροχῖλον (the sand-piper, Pluvianus Aegyptius).)

and in connection therewith the reflex action of sneezing may occur,
since the light of the sun produces an irritation on the retina, and
thence on the vagus; and since the sun shines upon the fine particles of
watery slime cast forth in the act of sneezing, a meteoric appearance
may be produced. This delicate observation of nature is here compressed
into three words; in this concentration of whole, grand thoughts and
pictures, we recognise the older poet. עטשׁ is the usual Semitic word
for "sneezing" (Synon. זרר [Kg2 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#035)).
תּהל shortened from תּהל, [Job 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026),
Hiph. of הלל. The comparison of the crocodile's eyes with עפעפּי־שׁחר
(as [Job 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#009), from עפעף, to move with
quick vibrations, to wink, i.e., tremble), or the rendering of the same
as εἶδος ἑωσφόρου (lxx), is the more remarkable, as, according to Horus,
i. 68, two crocodile's eyes are the hieroglyph

(Note: The eyes of the crocodile alone by themselves are no hieroglyph:
how could they have been represented by themselves as crocodile's eyes?
But in the Ramesseum and elsewhere the crocodile appears with a head
pointing upwards in company with couching lions, and the eyes of the
crocodile are rendered specially prominent. Near this group it appears
again in a curved position, and quite small, but this time in company
with a scorpion which bears a disc of the sun. The former (κροκοδείλου
δύο ὀφθαλμοί) seems to me to be a figure of the longest night, the
latter (κροκόδειλος κεκυφώς in Horapollo) of the shortest, so that
consequently ἀνατολή and δύσις do not refer to the rising and setting of
the sun, but to the night as prevailing against or succumbing to the day
(communicated by Lauth from his researches on the astronomical
monuments). But since the growth of the day begins with the longest
night, and vice vers, the notions ἀνατολή and δύσις can, as it seems to
me, retain their most natural signification; and the crocodile's eyes
are, notwithstanding, a figure of the light shining forth from the
darkness, as the crocodile's tail signifies black darkness (and Egypt as
the black land).)

for dawn, ἀνατολή: ἐπειδ́περ (probably to be read ἐπειδὴ πρὸ) παντὸς
σώματος ζώου οἱ ὀφθαλμοὶ ἐκ τοῦ βυθοῦ ἀναφαίνονται. There it is the
peculiar brilliancy of the eyes of certain animals that is intended,
which is occasioned either by the iris being furnished with a so-called
lustrous substance, or there being in the pupil of the eye (as e.g., in
the ostrich) that spot which, shining like metal, is called tapetum
lucidum. For ἀναφαίνεσθαι of the eyes ἐκ τοῦ βυθοῦ, is the lustre of the
pupil in the depth of the eye. The eyes of the crocodile, which are near
together, and slanting, glimmer through the water, when it is only a few
feet under water, with a red glow.

Nevertheless the comparison in [Job
41:18](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#018) might also be intended
differently. The inner (third) eyelid

(Note: Prof. Will refers the figure not to the third eyelid or the
membrana nictitans, but to that spot on the choroidea, glistening with a
metallic lustre, which the crocodile has in common with most animals of
the night or the twilight, therefore to the brilliancy of its eye, which
shines by virtue of its lustrous coating; vid., the magnificent head of
a crocodile in Schlegel's Amphibien-Abbildungen (1837-44).)

of the crocodile is itself a rose red; and therefore, considered in
themselves, its eyes may also be compared with the "eyelids of the
dawn." What is then said, [Job 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#019),
of the crocodile, Achilles Tatius, iv. 2, says of the hippopotamus:
μυκτὴρ ἐπὶ μέγα κεχῃνὼς καὶ πνέων πυρώδη καπνὸν ὡς ἀπὸ πηγῆς πυρός.
Bartram has observed on the alligator, that as it comes on the land a
thick smoke issues from its distended nostrils with a thundering sound.
This thick, hot steam, according to the credible description which is
presented here, produces the impression of a fire existing beneath, and
bursting forth. The subjective truth of this impression is faithfully
but poetically reproduced by the poet. On כּידוד (root כד, escudere).
התמלּט signifies no more than to disentangle one's self, here therefore:
to fly out in small particles. אגמון, [Job
41:19](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#019), is rendered by Saad., Gecat.,
and others, by qumqum (קומקום), a caldron; the modern expositors derive
it from אגם = agama, to glow, and understand it of a "heated caldron."
But the word signifies either heat or caldron; the latter signification,
however, cannot be linguistically established; one would look for אגּן
(Arab. iggâne, a copper Germ. Waschkessel). The noun אגמון signifies,
[Job 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#002), the reed σχοῖνος, and in
the Jerusalem Talmud, Sota ix. 12, some menial service (comp. Arab.
ugum); Ew. rightly retains the former signification, like a pot blown
upon, i.e., fired, heated, and beside it (in combination with it) reeds
as fuel, which in themselves, and especially together with the steaming
water, produce a thick smoke. The Waw is to be compared to the Arabic
Waw concomitantiae (which governs the acc.).

[Job 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 41:22</span></span>

22 Great strength resteth upon his neck,

And despair danceth hence before him.

23 The flanks of his flesh are thickly set,

Fitting tightly to him, immoveable.

24 His heart is firm like stone,

And firm like the nether millstone.

25 The mighty are afraid of his rising up;

From alarm they miss their aim.

Overpowering strength lodges on its neck, i.e., has its abiding place
there, and before it despair, prop. melting away, dissolution (דּאבה
from דּאב, Arab. ḏ'b = דּוּב Hiph., Arab. ḍ'b II, to bring into a loose
condition, synon. חמס), dances hence, i.e., spring up and away (ידוּץ,
Arab. jadisu, to run away), i.e., it spreads before it a despondency
which produces terror, and deprives of strength. Even the pendulous
fleshy parts (מפּלי), especially of its belly, hang close together,
דבקוּ, i.e., they are not flabby, but fit to it, like a metal casting,
without moving, for the skin is very thick and covered with thick
scales; and because the digestive apparatus of the animal occupies but
little space, and the scales of the back are continued towards the
belly, the tender parts appear smaller, narrower, and closer together
than in other animals. יצוּק here is not, as [Job
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#002); [Job
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006), the fut. of צוּק, but the part.
of יצק, as also [Job 41:24](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#024): its heart
is firm and obdurate, as though it were of cast brass, hard as stone,
and in fact as the nether millstone (פלח from פלח, falacha, to split,
crush in pieces), which, because it has to bear the weight and friction
of the upper, must be particularly hard. It is not intended of actual
stone-like hardness, but only of its indomitable spirit and great
tenacity of life: the activity of its heart is not so easily disturbed,
and even fatal wounds do not so quickly bring it to a stand. משּׂמו from
שׂת = שׂאת = שׂאת), primary form שׂאתּ, is better understood in the
active sense: afraid of its rising, than the passive: of its
exaltedness. אילים (according to another reading אלים) is not, with Ew.,
to be derived from איל (Arab. ı̂jal), a ram; but אילים [Exo
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#015); [Eze
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#013) (comp. גּירים [Ch2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#016), נירי [Sa2
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#029)), אלים [Eze
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#011); [Eze
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#021), and אוּלים Cheth. [Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015), are only alternating forms and
modes of writing of the participial adject., derived from אוּל (איל)
first of all in the primary form awil (as גּר = gawir). The signif.
assigned to the verb אול: to be thick = fleshy, which is said then to go
over into the signif. to be stupid and strong (Ges. Handwrterb.), rests
upon a misconception: âla is said of fluids "to become thick," because
they are condensed, since they go back, i.e., sink in or settle (Ges.
correctly in Thes.: notio crassitiei a retrocendendo). The verb âla,
ja'ûlu, unites in itself the significations to go backward, to be
forward, and to rule; the last two: anteriorem and superiorem esse,
probably belong together, and אל signifies, therefore, a possessor of
power, who is before and over others. התחטּא, [Job
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025), has the signif., which does not
otherwise occur, to miss the mark (from חטא, Arab. chaṭiya, to miss,
opp. Arab. ṣâb, to hit the mark), viz., (which is most natural where
אילים is the subject spoken of) since they had designed the slaughter
and capture of the monster. שׁברים is intended subjectively, as תּבירא =
פּחד [Exo 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016), Targ. II, and also as
the Arab. thubûr, employed more in reference to the mind, can be used of
pain.

[Job 41:26](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 41:26</span></span>

26 If one reacheth him with the sword-it doth not hold;

Neither spear, nor dart, nor harpoon.

27 He esteemeth iron as straw,

Brass as rotten wood.

28 The son of the bow doth not cause him to flee,

Sling stones are turned to stubble with him.

29 Clubs are counted as stubble,

And he laugheth at the shaking of the spear.

משּׂיגהוּ, which stands first as nom. abs., "one reaching him," is
equivalent to, if one or whoever reaches him, Ew. 357, c, to which בּלי
תקוּם, it does not hold fast (בּלי with v. fin., as [Hos
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#007); [Hos
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#016), Chethb), is the conclusion. חרב
is instrumental, as [Psa 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013). מסּע,
from נסע, Arab. nz‛, to move on, hasten on, signifies a missile, as
Arab. minz‛a, an arrow, manz‛a, a sling. The Targ. supports this latter
signification here (funda quae projicit lapidem); but since קלא, the
handling, is mentioned separately, the word appears to men missiles in
general, or the catapult. In this combination of weapons of attack it is
very questionable whether שׁריה is a cognate form of שׁריון (שׁרין), a
coat of mail; probably it is equivalent to Arab. sirwe (surwe), an arrow
with a long broad edge (comp. serı̂je, a short, round, as it seems,
pear-shaped arrow-head), therefore either a harpoon or a peculiarly
formed dart.

(Note: On the various kinds of Egyptian arrows, vid., Klemm.
Culturgeschichte, v. 371f.)

"The son of the bow" (and of the אשׁפּה, pharetra) is the arrow. That
the ἁπ. γεγρ. תותח signifies a club (war-club), is supported by the
Arab. watacha, to beat. כּידון, in distinction from חנית (a long lance),
is a short spear, or rather, since רעשׁ implies a whistling motion, a
javelin. Iron the crocodile esteems as תּבן, tibn, chopped straw; sling
stones are turned with him into קשׁ. Such is the name here at least, not
for stumps of cut stubble that remain standing, but the straw itself,
threshed and easily driven before the wind ([Job
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#025)), which is cut up for provender
([Exo 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#012)), generally dried (and for
that reason light) stalks (e.g., of grass), or even any remains of
plants (e.g., splinters of wood).

(Note: The Egyptio-Arabic usage has here more faithfully preserved the
ancient signification of the word (vid., Fleischer, Glossae, p. 37) than
the Syro-Arabic; for in Syria cut but still unthreshed corn, whether
lying in swaths out in the field and weighted with stones to protect it
against the whirlwinds that are frequent about noon, or corn already
brought to the threshing-floors but not yet threshed, is called qashsh.
- Wetzst.)

The plur. נחשׁבוּ, [Job 41:29](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#029), does
not seem to be occasioned by תותח being conceived collectively, but by
the fact that, instead of saying תותח וכידון, the poet has formed וכידון
into a separate clause. Parchon's (and Kimchi's) reading תוחח is founded
upon an error.

[Job 41:30](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 41:30</span></span>

30 His under parts are the sharpest shards,

He spreadeth a threshing sledge upon the mire.

31 He maketh the deep foam like a caldron,

He maketh the sea like a pot of ointment.

32 He lighteth up the path behind him,

One taketh the water-flood for hoary hair.

33 Upon earth there is not his equal,

That is created without fear.

34 He looketh upon everything high,

He is the king over every proud beast.

Under it, or, תּחתּיו taken like תּחת, [Job
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#011), as a virtual subject (vid.,
[Job 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#005)): its under parts are the
most pointed or sharpest shards, i.e., it is furnished with exceedingly
pointed scales. חדּוּד is the intensive form of חד (Arab. hadı̂d,
sharpened = iron, p. 542, note), as חלּוּק, [Sa1
17:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#040), of חלק (smooth),

(Note: In Arabic also this substantival form is intensive, e.g., lebbûn,
an exceedingly large kind of tile, dried in the open air, of which
farm-yards are built, nearly eight times larger than the common tile,
which is called libne (לבנח).)

and the combination חדּוּדי חרשׂ (equal the combination חדודי החרשׂים,
comp. [Job 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#006)) is moreover
superlative: in the domain of shards standing prominent as sharp ones,
as Arab. chairu ummatin, the best people, prop. bon en fait de peuple
(Ew. 313, c. Gramm. Arab. 532). lxx ἡ στρωμνὴ αὐτοῦ ὀβελίσκοι ὀξεῖς, by
drawing ירפּד to [Job 41:30](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#030), and so
translating as though it were רפידתו (Arab. rifâde, stratum). The verb
רפד (rafada), cogn. רבד, signifies sternere ([Job
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013)), and then also culcire; what is
predicated cannot be referred to the belly of the crocodile, the scales
of which are smooth, but to the tail with its scales, which more or less
strongly protrude, are edged round by a shallow cavity, and therefore
are easily and sharply separated when pressed; and the meaning is, that
when it presses its under side in the morass, it appears as though a
threshing-sledge with its iron teeth had been driven across it.

The pictures in [Job 41:31](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#031) are true to
nature; Bartram, who saw two alligators fighting, says that their rapid
passage was marked by the surface of the water as it were boiling. With
מצוּלה, a whirlpool, abyss, depth (from צוּל = צלל, to hiss, clash; to
whirl, surge), ים alternates; the Nile even in the present day is called
bahr (sea) by the Beduins, and also compared, when it overflows its
banks, to a sea. The observation that the animal diffuses a strong odour
of musk, has perhaps its share in the figure of the pot of ointment (lxx
ὥσπερ ἐξάλειπτρον, which Zwingli falsely translates spongia); a double
gland in the tail furnishes the Egyptians and Americans their (pseudo)
musk. In [Job 41:32](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#032) the bright white
trail that the crocodile leaves behind it on the surface of the water is
intended; in [Job 41:32](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#032) the figure is
expressed which underlies the descriptions of the foaming sea with
πολιός, canus, in the classic poets. שׂיבה, hoary hair, was to the
ancients the most beautiful, most awe-inspiring whiteness. משׁלו, [Job
41:33](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#033), understood by the Targ., Syr.,
Arab. version, and most moderns (e.g., Hahn: there is not on earth any
mastery over it), according to [Zac
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#010), is certainly, with lxx, Jer.,
and Umbr., not to be understood differently from the Arab. mithlahu (its
equal); whether it be an inflexion of משׁל, or what is more probable, of
משׁל (comp. [Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006), where this
nomen actionis signifies a proverb = word of derision, and התמשּׁל, to
compare one's self, be equal, [Job
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019)). על־עפר is also Hebr.-Arab.;
the Arabic uses turbe, formed from turâb (vid., on [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)), of the surface of the earth,
and et-tarbâ-u as the name of the earth itself. העשׂוּ (for העשׂוּי, as
צפוּ, [Job 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022), Cheth. = צפוּי,
resolved from עשׂוּו, ‛asûw, [Sa1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#018), Cheth.) is the confirmatory
predicate of the logical subj. described in [Job
41:33](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#033) as incomparable; and לבלי־חת
(from חת, the a of which becomes i in inflexion), absque terrore (comp.
[Job 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004)), is virtually a nom. of the
predicate: the created one (becomes) a terrorless one (a being that is
terrified by nothing). Everything high, as the לבלי־חת, [Job
41:33](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#033), is more exactly explained, it
looketh upon, i.e., remains standing before it, without turning away
affrighted; in short, it (the leviathan) is king over all the sons of
pride, i.e., every beast of prey that proudly roams about (vid., on [Job
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#008)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 42](job042)

</div>
