<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job010)  [Next](job012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#001)

[Job 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 11:1</span></span>

1 Then began Zophar the Naamathite, and said:

2 Shall the torrent of words remain unanswered,

And shall the prater be in the right?

3 Shall thy vain talking silence the people,

So that thou mockest without any one putting thee to shame,

4 And sayest: my doctrine is pure,

And I am guiltless in Thine eyes?

5 But oh that Eloah would speak,

And open His lips against thee,

6 And make known to thee the secrets of wisdom,

That she is twofold in her nature -

Know then that Eloah forgetteth much of thy guilt.

When Job has concluded his long speech, Zophar, the third and most
impetuous of the friends, begins. His name, if it is to be explained
according to the Arabic Esauitish name el-assfar,

(Note: Vid., Abulfeda's Historia anteislamica ed. Fleischer, p. 168.)

signifies the yellow one (flavedo), and the name of the place whence he
comes, pleasantness (amaenitas). The very beginning of his speech is
impassioned. He calls Job's speech דברים רב, a multitude of words
(besides here, [Pro 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#019); [Ecc
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002)), and asks whether he is to remain
unanswered; יענה לא, responsum non feret, from נענה, not the sense of
being humbled, but: to be answered (of the suppliant: to be heard = to
receive an answer). He calls Job שׂפתים אישׁ, a prater (distinct from
דברים איש, a ready speaker, [Exo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#010)), who is not in the right, whom
one must not allow to have the last word. The questions, [Job
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#002), are followed by another which is
not denoted by the sign of a question, but is only known by the accent:
Shall not thy בּדּים, meaningless speeches (from בדד = בטא,
βαττολογεῖν), put men (מתים, like other archaisms, e.g., תּבל, always
without the article) to silence, so that thou darest mock without any
one making thee ashamed, i.e., leading thee on ad absurdum? Thou darest
mock God (Hirzel); better Rosenmller: nos et Deum. The mockery here
meant is that which Zophar has heard in Job's long speech; mockery at
his opponents, in the belief that he is right because they remain
silent. The futt. consec., [Job 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#003).,
describe the conduct of Job which results from this absence of
contradiction. Zophar, in v. 4, does not take up Job's own words, but
means, that one had better have nothing more to do with Job, as he would
some day say and think so and so, he would consider his doctrine
blameless, and himself in relation to God pure. לקח occurs only here in
this book; it is a word peculiar to the book of Proverbs (also only [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002); [Isa
29:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#024)), and properly signifies the act
of appropriating, then that which is presented for appropriation, i.e.,
for learning: the doctrine (similar to שׁמועה, the hearing, ἀκοή, and
then the discourse); we see from the words "my doctrine is pure," which
Zophar puts into the mouth of Job, that the controversy becomes more and
more a controversy respecting known principles.

[Job 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#005)

With ואולם, verum enim vero, Zophar introduces his wish that God himself
would instruct Job; this would most thoroughly refute his utterances.
יתן מי is followed by the infin., then by futt., vid., Ges. 136, 1;
כּפלים (only here and [Isa 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002))
denotes not only that which is twice as great, but generally that which
far surpasses something else. The subject of the clause beginning with
כּי is היא understood, i.e., divine wisdom: that she is the double with
respect to (ל( ot, as e.g., [Kg1
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#023)) reality (תושׁיה, as [Job
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#012); [Job
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013), essentia, substantia), i.e., in
comparison with Job's specious wisdom and philosophism. Instead of
saying: then thou wouldst perceive, Zophar, realizing in his mind that
which he has just wished, says imperiously ודע (an imper. consec., or,
as Ewald, 345, b, calls it, imper. futuri, similar to [Gen
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007); [Sa2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#003)): thou must then perceive that
God has dealt far more leniently with thee than thou hast deserved. The
causative השּׁה (in Old Testament only this passage, and [Job
39:17](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#017)) denotes here oblivioni dare,
and the מן of מעונך is partitive.

[Job 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 11:7</span></span>

7 Canst thou find out the nature of Eloah,

And penetrate to the foundation of the existence of the Almighty?

8 It is as the heights of heaven-what wilt thou do?

Deeper than Hades-what canst thou know?

9 The measure thereof is longer than the earth,

And broader than the sea.

The majority of modern commentators erroneously translate חקר searching
= comprehension, and תּכלית perfection, a meaning which this word never
has. The former, indeed, signifies first in an active sense: finding out
by search; and then also objectively: the object sought after: "the
hidden ground" (Ewald), the depth (here and [Job
38:16](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#016); also, according to Ew., [Job
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#008), of the deep innermost thought).
The latter denotes penetrating to the extreme, and then the extreme,
πέρας, itself ([Job 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#010); [Job
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#003)). In other words: the nature that
underlies that which is visible as an object of search is called חקר;
and the extreme of a thing, i.e., the end, without which the beginning
and middle cannot be understood, is called תכלית. The nature of God may
be sought after, but cannot be found out; and the end of God is
unattainable, for He is both: the Perfect One, absolutus; and the
Endless One, infinitus.

[Job 11:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#008)

The feminine form of expression has reference to the divine wisdom
(Chokma, [Job 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#006)), and amplifies
what is there said of its transcendent reality. Its absoluteness is
described by four dimensions, like the absoluteness of the love which
devised the plan for man's redemption ([Eph
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#018)). The pronoun היא, with reference
to this subject of the sentence, must be supplied. She is as "the
heights of heaven" (comp. on subst. pro adj. [Job
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#012)); what wilt or canst thou do in
order to scale that which is high as heaven? In [Job
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#009) we have translated according to
the reading מדּה with He mappic. This feminine construction is a
contraction for מדּתהּ, as [Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013),
ערמם for ערמתם; [Zac 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002), גלה for
גלתה, and more syncopated forms of a like kind (vid., Comm. ber den
Psalter, i. 225, ii. 172). The reading recorded by the Masora is,
however, מדּה with He raph., according to which the word seems to be the
accusative used adverbially; nevertheless the separation of this acc.
relativus from its regens by the insertion of a word between them (comp.
[Job 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010)) would make a difficulty
here where היא is wanting, and consequently מדה seems to signify mensura
ejus whichever way it may be written (since ah raphe is also sometimes a
softened form of the suffix, [Job
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#022); Ewald, 94, b). The wisdom of
God is in its height altogether inaccessible, in its depth fathomless
and beyond research, in its length unbounded, in its breadth
incomprehensible, stretching out far beyond all human thought.

[Job 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 11:10</span></span>

10 When He passes by and arrests

And calls to judgment, who will oppose Him?

11 For He knoweth the men devoid of principle,

And seeth wickedness without observing it.

12 But before an empty head gaineth understanding,

A wild ass would become a man.

In יחלף God is conceived as one who manifests himself by passing to and
fro in the powers of nature (in the whirlwind, [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)). Should He meet with one who is
guilty, and seize and bring him to judgment, who then (waw apod.) will
turn Him back, i.e., restrain Him? הקהיל is used of bringing to
judgment, with reference to the ancient form of trial which was in
public, and in which the carrying out of the sentence was partly
incumbent on the people ([Kg1 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#009);
[Eze 16:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#040); [Eze
23:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#046)). One might almost imagine that
Zophar looks upon himself and the other two friends as forming such an
"assembly:" they cannot justify him in opposition to God, since He
accounts him guilty. God's mode of trial is summary, because infallible:
He knows altogether שׁוא מתי, people who hypocritically disguise their
moral nothingness (on this idea, vid., on [Psa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)); and sees (looks through) און
(from the root n, to breathe), otherwise grief, with which one pants, in
a moral sense worthlessness, without any trace whatever of worth or
substance. He knows and sees this moral wretchedness at once, and need
not first of all reflect upon it: non opus habet, as Abenezra has
correctly explained, ut diu consideret (comp. the like thought, [Job
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#023)).

[Job 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012) has been variously
misinterpreted. Gesenius in his Handwrterbuch

(Note: Vid., Lexicon, Engl. edition, s.v. לבב Niphal. - Tr.)

translates: but man is empty and void of understanding; but this is
contrary to the accentuation, according to which נבוב אישׁ together form
the subject. Olshausen translates better: an empty man, on the other
hand, is without heart; but the fut. cannot be exactly so used, and if
we consider that Piel has never properly a privative meaning, though
sometimes a privative idea (as e.g., סקּל, operam consumere in lapidos,
scil. ejiciendos), we must regard a privative Niphal as likewise
inadmissible. Stickel translates peculiarly: the man devoid of
understanding is enraged against God; but this is opposed to the
manifest correlation of נבוב and ילּבב, which does not indicate the
antithesis of an empty and sulky person (Bttcher): the former rather
signifies empty, and the latter to acquire heart or marrow (Heidenheim,
לב יקנה), so that לב fills up the hollow space. Hirzel's rendering
partly bears out the requirement of this correlation: man has
understanding like a hollow pate; but this explanation, like that of
Gesenius, violates the accentuation, and produces an affected witticism.
The explanation which regards [Job
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012) as descriptive of the wholesome
effect of the discipline of the divine judgments (comp. [Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009)) is far better; it does not
violate the accent, and moreover is more in accordance with the future
form: the empty one becomes discerning thereby, the rough, humane (thus
recently Ewald, Heiligst., Schlottm.); but according to this
explanation, [Job 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012) is not
connected with what immediately precedes, nor is the peculiarity of the
expression fully brought out. Hupfeld opens up another way of
interpreting the passage when he remarks, nil dicto facilius et
simplicius; he understands [Job 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012)
according to [Job 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012): But man is
furnished with an empty heart, i.e., receives at his birth an empty
undiscerning heart, and man is born as a wild ass's colt, i.e., as
stupid and obstinate. This thought is satisfactorily connected with the
preceding; but here also נבוב is taken as predicate in violation of the
accentuation, nor is justice done to the correlation above referred to,
and the whole sentence is referred to the portion of man at his birth,
in opposition to the impression conveyed by the use of the fut. Oehler
appears to us to have recognised the right sense: But an empty man is as
little endowed with sense, as that a wild ass should ever be born as man
- be, so to speak, born again and become a man.

(Note: Wetzstein explains: "But a man that barks like a dog (i.e., rages
shamelessly) can become sensible, and a young wild ass (i.e., the
wildest and roughest creature) be born again as a man (i.e., become
gentle and civilised)," from נבב = נבח, since נבח is the commoner word
for "barking" in the Syrian towns and villages, and נבב, on the other
hand, is used among those who dwelt in tents. But we must then point it
נבּוּב, and the antithesis ילּבב is more favourable the Hebrew meaning,
"hollowed out, empty.")

The waw in ועיר is just like [Job 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007);
[Job 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#011), and brings into close
connection the things that are to be compared, as in the form of
emblematic proverbs (vid., Herzog's Real Encyklopdie, xiv. 696): the one
will happen not earlier than, and as little as, the other. The Niphal
נולד, which in [Pro 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#017) signifies to
become manifest, here borders on the notion of regenerari; a
regeneration would be necessary if the wild ass should become human, - a
regeneration which is inconceivable. It is by nature refractory, and
especially when young (ועיר from Arab. ‛âr, fut. i in the signification
vagari, huc illuc discurrere, of a young, restless, wild, frisking
animal). Just so, says Zophar, the vacuum in an empty man is incapable
of being filled up, - a side hit at Job, which rebounds on Zophar
himself; for the dogma of the friends, which forms the sole contents of
their hollowness, can indeed not fill with brightness and peace a heart
that is passing through conflict. The peculiarity of the expression is
no longer unintelligible; Zophar is the most impassioned of the three
friends.

[Job 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 11:13</span></span>

13 But if thou wilt direct thy heart,

And spread out thy hands to Him -

14 If there is evil in thy hand, put it far away,

And let not wickedness dwell in thy tents -

15 Then indeed canst thou lift up thy face without spot,

And shalt be firm without fearing.

The phrase הכין לב signifies neither to raise the heart (Ewald), nor to
establish it (Hirz.), but to direct it, i.e., give it the right
direction ([Psa 78:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#008)) towards God,
[Sa1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003); [Ch2
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#033); it has an independent meaning,
so that there is no need to supply אל־אל, nor take וּפרשׂתּ to be for
לפרושׂ (after the construction in [Ch2
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#019)). To spread out the hands in
prayer is כּפּים (פּרשׂ) פּרשׂ; ידים is seldom used instead of the more
artistic כפים, palmas, h.e. manus supinas. The conditional antecedent
clause is immediately followed, [Job
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#014), by a similarly conditional
parenthetical clause, which inserts the indispensable condition of
acceptable prayer; the conclusion might begin with הרהיקהוּ: when thou
sendest forth thy heart and spreadest out thy hands to Him, if there is
wickedness in thy hand, put it far away; but the antecedent requires a
promise for its conclusion, and the more so since the praet. and fut.
which follow אם, [Job 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013), have the
force of futt. exact.: si disposueris et extenderis, to which the
conclusion: put it far away, is not suited, which rather expresses a
preliminary condition of acceptable prayer. The conclusion then begins
with כּי־אז, then indeed, like [Job
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006); [Job
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#019), comp. [Job
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#003), with עתּה כּי, now indeed; the
causal signification of כי has in both instances passed into the
confirmatory (comp. [Sa1 14:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#044); [Psa
118:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#010); [Psa
128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002), and on [Gen
26:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#022)): then verily wilt thou be able
to raise thy countenance (without being forced to make any more bitter
complaints, as [Job 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015).), without
spot, i.e., not: without bodily infirmity, but: without spot of
punishable guilt, sceleris et paenae (Rosenmller). מן here signifies
without (Targ. דּלא), properly: far from, as [Job
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009); [Sa2
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#022); [Pro
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#003). Faultless will he then be able
to look up and be firm (מצּק from יצק, according to Ges. 71), quasi ex
aere fusus ([Kg1 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#016)), one whom God
can no longer get the better of.

[Job 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 11:16</span></span>

16 For thou shalt forget thy grief,

Shalt remember it as waters that flow by.

17 And thy path of life shall be brighter than mid-day;

If it be dark, it shall become as morning.

18 And thou shalt take courage, for now there is hope;

And thou shalt search, thou shalt lie down in safety.

19 And thou liest down without any one making thee afraid;

And many shall caress thy cheeks.

20 But the eyes of the wicked languish,

And refuge vanisheth from them,

And their hope is the breathing forth of the soul.

The grief that has been surmounted will then leave no trace in the
memory, like water that flows by (not: water that flows away, as
Olshausen explains it, which would be differently expressed; comp. [Job
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#028) with [Sa2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014)). It is not necessary to change
אתּה כּי into עתּה כּי (Hirzel); אתה, as in [Job
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#013), strengthens the force of the
application of this conclusion of his speech. Life (חלד, from חלד to
glide away, slip, i.e., pass away unnoticed,

(Note: Vid., Hupfeld on [Psa 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014),
and on the other hand Bttcher, infer. 275 s., who, taking חלד in the
sense of rooting into, translates: "the mildew springs up more brilliant
than mid-day." But whatever judgment one may form of the primary idea of
חלד, this meaning of חלד is too imaginary.)

as αἰών, both life-time, [Psa 39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006),
and the world, [Psa 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#002), here in the
former sense), at the end of which thou thoughtest thou wert already,
and which seemed to thee to run on into dismal darkness, shall be
restored to thee (יקום with Munach on the ult. as [Job
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#014), not on the penult.) brighter
than noon-day (מן, more than, i.e., here: brighter than, as e.g., [Mic
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#004), more thorny than); and be it ever
so dark, it shall become like morning. Such must be the interpretation
of תּעפה. It cannot be a substantive, for it has the accent on the
penult.; as a substantive it must have been pointed תּעוּפה (after the
form תּקוּדה, תּקוּמה, and the like). It is one of the few examples of
the paragogic strengthened voluntative in the third pers., like [Psa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004); [Isa
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019)

(Note: In other instances, as תּרנּה, [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); [Pro
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#003), and ותּעגּבה, [Eze
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#020), the ah is not the cohortative
form, but either paragogic without special meaning or (so that the fut.
has a double feminine form) as feminine termination, as is evident in
[Job 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021), where the ah is combined
with the inflection.)

(Ges. 48, 3); the cohortative form of the future is used with or without
אם (vid., on [Psa 73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016)) in
hypothetical antecedent clauses (Ges. 128, 1). Translate therefore:
should it become dark (accordingly correctly accented with Rebia
mugrasch), from עוּף, to envelope one's self, to darken (whence עפתה,
[Job 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#022)), not: shouldst thou become
dark (Schlottm.). The feminine forms are instead of the neuter, like
תּמטיר, it rains, [Amo 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007); חשׁכה, it
becomes dark, [Mic 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#006) (Ges. 137, 2).

The fut. is followed by perff. consecutiva in [Job
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#018) : And thou shalt take
confidence, for there is ground for hope for thee; ישׁ, with the force
of real and lasting existence. וחפרתּ is also perf. consec., and is
rightly accented as such. If it were to be interpreted et si erubueris
pudore tranquille cubabis, it would require the accent on the penult.,
since it would be a perf. hypotheticum. But although the seeming
antithesis of וחפרת and לבטח (comp. [Job
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#020)) appears to favour this
interpretation, it is nevertheless inadmissible, since it introduces a
sadness into the promise: granted that thou shouldest be put to shame at
this or that prospect; whereas, if חפר be taken in the sense of
scrutari, as it is used by our poet ([Job
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#021); [Job
39:29](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#029)) (not with Bttch., who comp.
[Ecc 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011), in the signification fodere
= to labour in the field, in which meaning it is not common), the tone
of sadness is removed, and the accentuation is duly observed: and thou
shalt search about (i.e., examine the state of thy household, which is
expressed by וּפקדתּ in [Job 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024)),
thou shalt lay thyself down in peace (i.e., because thou findest
everything in a prosperous condition, and hast no anxiety). This felling
of security against every harm that may befall one's person or property,
gained from trust in God, is expressed ([Job
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#019)) under the figure of the
peaceful situation of a herd when removed from danger, - a figure which
is borrowed from [Lev 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006), and is
frequently repeated in the prophets ([Isa
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#002); [Zep
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#013)). The promises of Zophar
culminate in a future exaltation which shall command reverence and
inspire trust: et mulcebunt faciem tuam multi. פּני חלּה, to approach
any one in humble entreaty, generally used in reference to God; less
frequently, as here and [Psa 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013);
[Pro 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#006), in reference to men in high
positions. The end of the wicked, on the other hand, is told in [Job
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#020). Zophar here makes use of the
choicest expressions of the style of the prophetic psalms: כּלה,
otherwise frequently used of those who pine away with longing, here and
[Job 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005) of eyes that languish with
unsatisfied longing; מנּהם (Aram. מנּהוןּ), poetic for מהם; נפשׁ מפּח,
after the phrase נפשׁ נפח, he breathes forth his soul ([Jer
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#009), comp. [Job
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#039)). The meaning is not that death
is their only hope, but that every expectation remains unfulfilled;
giving up the ghost is that whither all their disappointed hopes tend.

That Zophar, in the mind of the poet, is the youngest of the three
speakers, may be concluded from his introducing him last of all,
although he is the most impetuous. Zophar manifests a still greater
inability than the other two to bring Job to a right state of mind. His
standpoint is the same as that of the others; like them, he regards the
retributive justice of God as the principle on which alone the divine
government in the world is exercised, and to which every act of this
government is to be attributed, and it may indeed be assumed to be at
work even when the relation of circumstances is mysterious and
impenetrably dark to us. This limited view which the friends take of the
matter readily accounts for the brevity of their speeches in comparison
with Job's. This one locus communis is their only theme, which they
reiterate constantly in some new and modified form; while the mind of
Job is an exhaustless fountain of thought, suggested by the direct
experiences of the past. Before the present dispensation of suffering
came upon Job, he enjoyed the peace of true godliness, and all his
thoughts and feelings were under the control of a consciousness, made
certain by his experience, that God makes himself known to those who
fear Him. Now, however, his nature, hitherto kept in subjection by
divine grace, is let loose in him; the powers of doubt, mistrust,
impatience, and despondency have risen up; his inner life is fallen into
the anarchy of conflict; his mind, hitherto peaceful and
well-disciplined, is become a wild chaotic confusion; and hence his
speeches, in comparison with those of the friends, are as roaring
cataracts to small confined streams. But in this chaos lie the elements
of a new creation; the harsh pertinacity with which the friends maintain
their one dogma only tends to give an impulse to it. The new truth, the
solution of the mystery, springs from this spiritual battle Job has to
fight, from which, although not scathless, he still shall come forth as
conqueror.

Is the dogma of the friends, then, so pure a doctrine (זך לקח) as that
which, according to Zophar's words, Job claims for himself? On Zophar's
side it is maintained that God always acts in accordance with justice,
and Job maintains that God does not always so act. The maxim of the
friends is false in the exclusiveness with which they maintain it; the
conclusion to which they are urged gives evidence of the fallacy of the
premises: they must condemn Job, and consequently become unjust, in
order to rescue the justice of God. Job's maxim, on the other hand, is
true; but it is so unconnected as it stands, that it may be turned over
any moment and changed into a falsehood. For that God does not act
everywhere as the Just One is a truth, but that He sometimes acts
unjustly is blasphemy. Between these two Job hangs in suspense. For the
stedfast consciousness of his innocence proves to him that God does not
always act as the Just One; shall he therefore suppose that God deals
unjustly with him? From this blasphemous inversion of his maxim, Job
seeks refuge in the absolute power of God, which makes that just which
is unjust according to the clearest human consciousness. This is the
feeble thread on which Job's piety hangs. Should this be cut, it would
be all over with him. The friends do their best to cut it in twain.
Zophar's speech is like a sword-thrust at it.

For while Eliphaz and Bildad with cautious gentleness describe suffering
more as chastisement than as punishment, Zophar proceeds more boldly,
and demands of Job that he should humble himself, as one who has
incurred punishment from God. Of sin on Job's part which may have called
down the divine judgment, Zophar knows as little as Job himself. But he
wishes that God would grant Job some revelation of His infinite wisdom,
since he refuses to humble himself. Then he would confess his folly, and
see that God not only does not punish him unjustly, but even allows much
of his guilt to go unpunished. Job is therefore to turn penitently to
God, and to put away that evil which is the cause of his suffering, in
order that he may be heard. Then shall his hopeless condition become
bright with hope; whereas, on the other hand, the downfall of the wicked
is beyond recovery. Ewald aptly remarks that thus even the concluding
words of the speeches of the friends are always somewhat equivocal.
"Eliphaz just adds a slight caution, Bildad introduces the contrast in a
few words, and Zophar adds but a word; all these seem to be as the
forerunners of a multitude of similar harsh threatenings, ch. 15, 18,
20."

What impression will this harsh treatment of Zophar's produce on Job?
Job is to humble himself as a sinner who is undergoing the punishment of
his sin, though the measure of it is far below the degree of his guilt;
and while he does not deny his sinful weaknesses, he is nevertheless
convinced that he is righteous, and having as such experienced the
favour of God, cannot become an object of punishment. Brentius
discriminatingly observes here: Videntur et Sophar et reliqui amici Hiob
prorsus ignorare quid sit aut efficiat Evangelion et fides in
promissionem Dei; sic argumentantur contra Hiobem, quasi nullus unquam
possit coram Deo fide justificari. The language is rather too much in
accordance with the light of the New Testament; but it is true that the
friends know nothing whatever of the condition of a truly righteous man,
over whom the law with its curse, or the retributive justice of God, has
no power. The interpretation of affliction in accordance with the
recognition of this principle is strange to them; and this is just the
issue which is developed by the drama in the case of Job - the idea
which comes to light in the working out of the plot. Even Job does not
perceive the solution of the mystery, but, in the midst of the conflict,
is in a state of ignorance which excites compassion; the ignorance of
the friends arising from their shallowness of understanding, on the
contrary, creates aversion. When Zophar, therefore, wishes that God
would grant Job some revelation of His infinite wisdom, it is indeed
true that Job is greatly in need of it; but it is self-deceiving pride
which leads Zophar to imagine that he has no need of it himself. For
this Wisdom which has decreed the suffering of Job is hidden from his
also; and yet he does not treat the suffering of his friend as a divine
mystery. He explains it as the working of the retributive justice of
God; but since he endeavours thus to explain the mystery, he injures his
cause, and if possible injures also the slender thread by which Job's
faith hangs. For should Job regard his sufferings as a just divine
retribution, he could then no longer believe on God as the Just One.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 12](job012)

</div>
