<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job018)  [Next](job020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001)

[Job 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 19:1</span></span>

1 Then began Job, and said:

2 How long will ye vex my soul,

And crush me with your words?

3 These ten times have ye reproached me;

Without being ashamed ye astound me.

4 And if I have really erred,

My error rests with myself.

5 If ye will really magnify yourselves against me,

And prove my reproach to me:

6 Know then that Eloah hath wronged me,

And hath compassed me with His net.

This controversy is torture to Job's spirit; enduring in himself
unutterable agony, both bodily and spiritually, and in addition
stretched upon the rack by the three friends with their united strength,
he begins his answer with a well-justified quousque tandem. תּגיוּן
(Norzi: תּוגיוּן) is fut. energicum from הוּגה (יגה), with the retention
of the third radical., Ges. 75, rem. 16. And in וּתדכּאוּנני (Norzi:
וּתדכּוּנני with quiescent Aleph) the suff. is attached to the n of the
fut. energicum, Ges. 60, rem. 3; the connecting vowel is a, and the
suff. is ani, without epenthesis, not anni or aneni, Ges. 58, 5. In [Job
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003) Job establishes his How long? Ten
times is not to be taken strictly (Saad.), but it is a round number;
ten, from being the number of the fingers on the human hand, is the
number of human possibility, and from its position at the end of the row
of numbers (in the decimal system) is the number of that which is
perfected (vid., Genesis, S. 640f.); as not only the Sanskrit daan is
traceable to the radical notion "to seize, embrace," but also the
Semitic עשר is traceable to the radical notion "to bind, gather
together" (cogn. קשׁר). They have already exhausted what is possible in
reproaches, they have done their utmost. Renan, in accordance with the
Hebr. expression, transl.: Voil (זה, as e.g., [Gen
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#036)) la dixime fois que vous
m'insultez. The ἅπ. γεγρ. תּהכּרוּ is connected by the Targ. with הכּיר
(of respect of persons = partiality), by the Syr. with כּרא (to pain, of
crvecoeur), by Raschi and Parchon with נכּר (to mistake) or התנכּר (to
alienate one's self), by Saadia (vid., Ewald's Beitr. S. 99) with עכר
(to dim, grieve);

(Note: Reiske interprets according to the Arabic ‛kr, denso et turbido
agmine cum impetu ruitis in me.)

he, however, compares the Arab. hkr, stupere (which he erroneously
regards as differing only in sound from Arab. qhr, to overpower,
oppress); and Abulwalid (vid., Rdiger in Thes. p. 84 suppl.) explains
Arab. thkrûn mn-nı̂, ye gaze at me, since at the same time he mentions as
possible that הכר may be = Arab. khr, to treat indignantly, insultingly
(which is only a different shade in sound of Arab. hkr,

(Note: In Sur. 93, 9 (oppress not the orphan), the reading Arab. tkhr is
found alternating with Arab. tqhr.)

and therefore refers to Saadia's interpretation). David Kimchi
interprets according to Abulwalid, תתמהו לו; he however remarks at the
same time, that his father Jos. Kimchi interprets after the Arab. הכר,
which also signifies "shamelessness," תעיזו פניכם לי. Since the idea of
dark wild looks is connected with Arab. hkr, he has undoubtedly this
verb in his mind, not that compared by Ewald (who translates, "ye are
devoid of feeling towards me"), and especially Arab. hkr, to deal
unfairly, used of usurious trade in corn (which may also have been
thought of by the lxx ἐπίκεισθέ μοι, and Jerome opprimentes), which
signifies as intrans. to be obstinate about anything, pertinacious.
Gesenius also, Thes. p. 84, suppl., suggests whether תּחכּרוּ may not
perhaps be the reading. But the comparison with Arab. hkr is certainly
safer, and gives a perfectly satisfactory meaning, only תּהכּרוּ must
not be regarded as fut. Kal (as יהלם, [Psa
74:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#006), according to the received text),
but as fut. Hiph. for תּהכּירוּ, according to Ges. 53, rem. 4, 5, after
which Schultens transl.: quod me ad stuporem redigatis. The connection
of the two verbs in [Job 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003) is to be
judged of according to Ges. 142, 3, a: ye shamelessly cause me
astonishment (by the assurance of your accusations). One need not
hesitate because it is תהכרו־לי instead of תהכרוני; this indication of
the obj. by ל, which is become a rule in Arabic with the inf. and part.)
whence e.g., it would here be muhkerina li), and is still more extended
in Aramaic, is also frequent in Hebrew (e.g., [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011); [Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016); [Psa
129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003), and [Ch2
32:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#017), cheereep, after which Olsh.
proposes to read תחרפו־לי in the passage before us).

Much depends upon the correct perception of the structure of the clauses
in [Job 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#004). The rendering, e.g., of
Olshausen, gained by taking the two halves of the verse as independent
clauses, "yea certainly I have erred, I am fully conscious of my error,"
puts a confession into Job's mouth, which is at present neither mature
nor valid. Hirz., Hahn, Schlottm., rightly take [Job
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#004) as a hypothetical antecedent
clause (comp. [Job 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020); [Job
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#018)): and if I have really erred
(אף־אמנם, as [Job 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#012), yea truly;
[Gen 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#013), and if I should really),
my error remains with me, i.e., I shall have to expiate it, without your
having on this account any right to take upon yourselves the office of
God and to treat me uncharitably; or what still better corresponds with
תּלין אתּי: my transgression remains with me, without being communicated
to another, i.e., without having any influence over you or others to
lead you astray or involve you in participation of the guilt. [Job
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#006) stands in a similar relation to
[Job 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005). Hirz., Ew., and Hahn take
[Job 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005) as a double question: "or
will ye really boast against me, and prove to me my fault?" Schlottm.,
on the contrary, takes אם conditionally, and begins the conclusion with
[Job 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005): "if ye will really look
proudly down upon me, it rests with you at least, to prove to me by
valid reasons, the contempt which ye attach to me." But by both of these
interpretations, especially by the latter, [Job
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#006) comes in abruptly. Even אפו
(written thus in three other passages besides this) indicates in [Job
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005) the conditional antecedent clause
(comp. [Job 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#024); [Job
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#025)) of the expressive γνῶστε οὖν
(δή): if ye really boast yourselves against me (vid., [Psa
55:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#013)., comp. [Psa
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#026); [Psa
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)), and prove upon me, i.e., in a
way of punishment (as ye think), my shame, i.e., the sins which put me
to shame (not: the right of shame, which has come upon me on account of
my sins, an interpretation which the conclusion does not justify),
therefore: if ye really continue (which is implied by the futt.) to do
this, then know, etc. If they really maintain that he is suffering on
account of flagrant sins, he meets them on the ground of this assumption
with the assertion that God has wronged him (עוּתני short for עוּת
משׁפּטי, [Job 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#003); [Job
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#012), as [Lam
3:36](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#036)), and has cast His net (מצוּדו,
with the change of the of מצוד from צוּד, to search, hunt, into the
deeper in inflexion, as מנוּסי from מנוס, מצוּרך, [Eze
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#008), from מצור) over him, together
with his right and his freedom, so that he is indeed obliged to endure
punishment. In other words: if his suffering is really not to be
regarded otherwise than as the punishment of sin, as they would
uncharitably and censoriously persuade him, it urges on his
self-consciousness, which rebels against it, to the conclusion which he
hurls into their face as one which they themselves have provoked.

[Job 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 19:7</span></span>

7 Behold I cry violence, and I am not heard;

I cry for help, and there is no justice.

8 My way He hath fenced round, that I cannot pass over,

And He hath set darkness on my paths.

9 He hath stripped me of mine honour,

And taken away the crown from my head.

10 He destroyed me on every side, then I perished,

And lifted out as a tree my hope.

11 He kindled His wrath against me,

And He regarded me as one of His foes.

He cries aloud חמס (that which is called out regarded as accusa. or as
an interjection, vid., on [Hab 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002)),
i.e., that illegal force is exercised over him. He finds, however,
neither with God nor among men any response of sympathy and help; he
cries for help (which שׁוּע, perhaps connected with ישׁע, Arab. s‛t,
from ישׁע, Arab. ws‛, seems to signify), without justice, i.e., the
right of an impartial hearing and verdict, being attainable by him. He
is like a prisoner who is confined to a narrow space (comp. [Job
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#023); [Job
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#027)) and has no way out, since
darkness is laid upon him wherever he may go. One is here reminded of
[Lam 3:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#007); and, in fact, this speech
generally stands in no accidental mutual relation to the lamentations of
Jeremiah. The "crown of my head" has also its parallel in [Lam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#016); that which was Job's greatest
ornament and most costly jewel is meant. According to [Job
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#014), צדק and משׁפט were his robe and
diadem. These robes of honour God has stripped from him, this adornment
more precious than a regal diadem He has taken from him since, i.e., his
affliction puts him down as a transgressor, and abandons him to the
insult of those around him. God destroyed him roundabout (destruxit), as
a house that is broken down on all sides, and lifted out as a tree his
hope. הסּיע does not in itself signify to root out, but only to lift out
([Job 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#021), of the tent-cord, and with
it the tent-pin) of a plant: to remove it from the ground in which it
has grown, either to plant it elsewhere, as [Psa
80:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009), or as here, to put it aside. The
ground was taken away from his hope, so that its greenness faded away
like that of a tree that is rooted up. The fut. consec. is here to be
translated: then I perished (different from [Job
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#020) : and consequently he perishes);
he is now already one who is passed away, his existence is only the
shadow of life. God has caused, fut. Hiph. apoc. ויּחר, His wrath to
kindle against him, and regarded him in relation to Himself as His
opponents, therefore as one of them. Perhaps, however, the expression is
intentionally intensified here, in contrast with [Job
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#024) : he, the one, is accounted by
God as the host of His foes; He treats him as if all hostility to God
were concentrated in him.

[Job 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 19:12</span></span>

12 His troops came together,

And threw up their way against me,

And encamped round about my tent.

13 My brethren hath He removed far from me,

And my acquaintance are quite estranged from me.

14 My kinsfolk fail,

And those that knew me have forgotten me.

15 The slaves of my house and my maidens,

They regard me as a stranger,

I am become a perfect stranger in their eyes.

It may seem strange that we do not connect [Job
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012) with the preceding strophe or
group of verses; but between [Job 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#007)
and [Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021) there are thirty
στίχοι, which, in connection with the arrangement of the rest of this
speech in decastichs (accidentally coinciding remarkably with the
prominence given to the number ten in [Job
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#003)), seem intended to be divided
into three decastichs, and can be so divided without doing violence to
the connection. While in [Job 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012),
in connection with [Job 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011), Job
describes the course of the wrath, which he has to withstand as if he
were an enemy of God, in [Job 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013).
he refers back to the degradation complained of in [Job
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#009). In [Job
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012) he compares himself to a
besieged (perhaps on account of revolt) city. God's גדוּדים (not: bands
of marauders, as Dietr. interprets, but: troops, i.e., of regular
soldiers, synon. of צבא, [Job 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#017),
comp. [Job 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#003); [Job
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#025), from the root גד, to unite,
join, therefore prop. the assembled, a heap; vid., Frst's Handwrterbuch)
are the bands of outwards and inward sufferings sent forth against him
for a combined attack (יחד). Heaping up a way, i.e., by filling up the
ramparts, is for the purpose of making the attack upon the city with
battering-rams ([Job 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#014)) and
javelins, and then the storm, more effective (on this erection of
offensive ramparts (approches), called elsewhere שׁפך סללה, vid., Keil's
Archologie, 159). One result of this condition of siege in which God's
wrath has placed him is that he is avoided and despised as one smitten
of God: neither love and fidelity, nor obedience and dependence, meet
him from any quarter. What he has said in [Job
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006), that he is become a byword and
an abomination (an object to spit upon), he here describes in detail.
There is no ground for understanding אחי in the wider sense of
relations; brethren is meant here, as in [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009). He calls his relations קרובי, as
[Psa 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012). ידעי are (in accordance
with the pregnant biblical use of this word in the sense of nosse cum
affectu et effectu) those who know him intimately (with objective suff.
as [Psa 87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004)), and מידּעי, as [Psa
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012), and freq., those intimately
known to him; both, therefore, so-called heart-or bosom-friends. בּיתי
גּרי Jer. well translates inquilinin domus meae; they are, in
distinction from those who by birth belong to the nearer and wider
circle of the family, persons who are received into this circle as
servants, as vassals (comp. [Exo 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022),
and Arabic jâr, an associate, one sojourning in a strange country under
the protection of its government, a neighbour), here espec. the
domestics. The verb תּחשׁבוּני (Ges. 60) is construed with the nearest
feminine subject. These people, who ought to thank him for taking them
into his house, regard him as one who does not belong to it (זר); he is
looked upon by them as a perfect stranger (נכרי), as an intruder from
another country.

[Job 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 19:16</span></span>

16 I call to my servant and he answereth not,

I am obliged to entreat him with my mouth.

17 My breath is offensive to my wife,

And my stench to my own brethren.

18 Even boys act contemptuously towards me;

If I will rise up, they speak against me.

19 All my confidential friends abhor me,

And those whom I loved have turned against me.

20 My bone cleaveth to my skin and flesh,

And I am escaped only with the skin of my teeth.

His servant, who otherwise saw every command in his eyes, and was attent
upon his wink, now not only does not come at his call, but does not
return him any answer. The one of the home-born slaves (vid., on [Gen
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)),

(Note: The (black) slaves born within the tribe itself are in the
present day, from their dependence and bravery, accounted as the stay of
the tribe, and are called fadwje, as those who are ready to sacrifice
their life for its interest. The body-slave of Job is thought of as such
as יליד בית.)

who stood in the same near connection to Job as Eliezer to Abraham, is
intended here, in distinction from גרי ביתי, [Job
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#015). If he, his master, now in such
need of assistance, desires any service from him, he is obliged (fut.
with the sense of being compelled, as e.g., [Job
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030), [Job
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002)) to entreat him with his mouth.
התחנּן, to beg חן of any one for one's self (vid., supra, p. 365),
therefore to implore, supplicare; and בּמו־פּי here (as [Psa
89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002); [Psa
109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030)) as a more significant
expression of that which is loud and intentional (not as [Job
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#005), in contrast to that which
proceeds from the heart). In [Job
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017), רוּחי signifies neither my
vexation (Hirz.) nor my spirit = I (Umbr., Hahn, with the Syr.), for רוח
in the sense of angry humour (as [Job
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#013)) does not properly suit the
predicate, and Arab. rûḥy in the signification ipse may certainly be
used in Arabic, where rûḥ (perhaps under the influence of the
philosophical usage of the language) signifies the animal spirit-life
(Psychol. S. 154), not however in Hebrew, where נפשׁי is the stereotype
form in that sense. If one considers that the elephantiasis, although
its proper pathological symptom consists in an enormous hypertrophy of
the cellular tissue of single distinct portions of the body, still
easily, if the bronchia are drawn into sympathy, or if (what is still
more natural) putrefaction of the blood with a scorbutic ulcerous
formation in the mouth comes on, has difficulty of breathing ([Job
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#015)) and stinking breath as its
result, as also a stinking exhalation and the discharge of a stinking
fluid from the decaying limbs is connected with it (vid., the testimony
of the Arabian physicians in Stickel, S. 169f.), it cannot be doubted
that Jer. has lighted upon the correct thing when he transl. halitum
meum exhorruit uxor mea. רוחי is intended as in [Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001), and it is unnecessary to derive
זרה from a special verb זיר, although in Arab. the notions which are
united in the Hebr. זוּר .r, deflectere and abhorrere (to turn one's
self away from what is disgusting or horrible), are divided between
Arab. zâr med. Wau and Arab. ḏâr med. Je (vid., Frst's Handwrterbuch).

In [Job 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017) the meaning of חנּותי is
specially questionable. In [Psa 77:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010),
חנּות is, like שׁמּות, [Eze 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#003), an
infinitive from חנן, formed after the manner of the Lamed He verbs. Ges.
and Olsh. indeed prefer to regard these forms as plurals of substantives
(חנּה, שׁמּה), but the respective passages, regarded syntactically and
logically, require infinitives. As regards the accentuation, according
to which וחנותי is accented by Rebia mugrasch on the ultima, this does
not necessarily decide in favour of its being infin., since in the 1
praet. סבּתי, which, according to rule, has the tone on the penultima,
the ultima is also sometimes (apart from the perf. consec.) found
accented (on this, vid., on [Psa 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#003),
and Ew. 197, a), as סבּוּ, קוּמה, קוּמי, also admit of both
accentuations.

(Note: The ultima-accentuation of the form סבּותי is regular, is the Waw
conv. praet. in fut. is added, as [Exo
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019), [Exo
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#022); [Kg2
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034); [Isa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007); [Eze
20:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#038); [Mal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002); [Psa
89:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#024). Besides, the penultima has the
tone regularly, e.g., [Jos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009); [Sa1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003); [Sa1
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#022); [Jer
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#028); [Psa
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014); [Psa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007); [Job
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004); [Ecc
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#020). There are, however, exceptions,
[Deu 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041) (שׁנותי), [Isa
44:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016) (חמותי), [Psa
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#003) (זמתי), [Psa
92:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#011) (בלתי), [Psa
116:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#006) (דלותי). Perhaps the
ultima-accentuation in these exceptional instances is intended to
protect the indistinct pronunciation of the consonants Beth, Waw, or
even Resh, at the beginning of the following words, which might easily
become blended with the final syllable תי; certainly the reason lies in
the pronunciation or in the rhythm (vid., on [Psa
116:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#006), and comp. the retreating of the
tone in the infin. חלותי ([Psa 77:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011)).
Looking at this last exception, which has not yet been cleared up, חנותי
in the present passage will always be able to be regarded on internal
grounds either as infin. or as 1 praet. The ultima-accentuation makes
the word at first sight appear to be infin., whereas in comparison with
זרה, which is accented on the penult., and therefore as 3 praet., וחנותי
seems also to be intended as praet. The accentuation, therefore, leaves
the question in uncertainty.)

If וחנותי is infin., the clause is a nominal clause, or a verbal one,
that is to be supplemented by the v. fin. זרה; if it is first pers.
praet., we have a verbal clause. It must be determined from the matter
and the connection which of these explanations, both of which are in
form and syntax possible, is the correct one.

The translation, "I entreat (groan to) the sons of my body," is not a
thought that accords with the context, as would be obtained by the
infin. explanation: my entreating (is offensive); this signif. (prop. to
Hithp. as above) assigned to Kal by von Hofmann (Schriftbew. ii. 2, 612)
is at least not to be derived from the derivative חן; it might be more
easily deduced from נחנתּ, [Jer 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#023),
which appears to be a Niph. like נחם, נאנח, from חנן, but might also be
derived from ננחתּ = נאנחתּ by means of a transposition (vid., Hitz.).
In the present passage one might certainly compare Arab. ḥnn, the usual
word for the utterance and emotion of longing and sympathy, or also
Arab. chnn, fut. i (with the infin. noun chanı̂n), which occurs in the
signifn. of weeping, and transl.: my imploring, groaning, weeping, is
offensive, etc. Since, however, the X. form of the Arab. chnn
(istachanna) signifies to give forth an offensive smell (esp. of the
stinking refuse of a well that is dried up); and besides, since the
significatn. foetere is supported for the root חן (comp. צחן) by the
Syriac chanı̂no (e.g., meshcho chanı̂no, rancid oil), we may also
translate: "My stinking is offensive," etc., or: "I stink to the
children of my body" (Rosenm., Ew., Hahn, Schlottm.); and this
translation is not only not hazardous in a book that so abounds in
derivations from the dialects, but it furnishes a thought that is as
closely as possible connected with [Job
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017).

(Note: Supplementary: Instead of istachanna (of the stinking of a well,
perhaps denom. from Arab. chnn, prop. to smell like a hen-house), the
verb hhannana (with Arab. ḥ) = ‛affana, "to be corrupt, to have a mouldy
smell," can, with Wetzstein, be better compared with חנּותי; thence
comes zêt mohhannin = mo‛affin, corrupt rancid oil, corresponding to the
Syriac חנינא. Thus ambiguously to the sellers of walnuts in Damascus cry
out their wares with the words: el-mohhannin maugûd, "the merciful One
liveth," i.e., I do not guarantee the quality of my wares. In like
manner, not only can Arab. dâr inf. dheir (dhêr), to be offensive, be
compared with זרה, but, with Wetzstein, also the very common steppe word
for "to be bad, worthless," Arab. zrâ, whence adj. zarı̂ (with nunation
zarı̂jun).)

The further question now arises, who are meant by בטני לבני. Perhaps his
children? But in the prologue these have utterly perished. Are we to
suppose, with Eichhorn and Olshausen, that the poet, in the heat of
discourse, forgets what he has laid down in the prologue? When we
consider that this poet, within the compass of his work, - a work into
which he has thrown his whole soul, - has allowed no anachronism, and no
reference to anything Israelitish that is contradictory to its
extra-Israelitish character, to escape him, such forgetfulness is very
improbable; and when we, moreover, bear in mind that he often makes the
friends refer to the destruction of Job's children (as [Job
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#004); [Job
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#030); [Job
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#016)), it is altogether
inconceivable. Hence Schrring has proposed the following explanation:
"My soul a substitution of which Hahn is also guilty is strange to my
wife; my entreaty does not even penetrate to the sons of my body, it
cannot reach their ear, for they are long since in Shel." But he himself
thinks this interpretation very hazardous and insecure; and, in fact, it
is improbable that in the division, [Job
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013), where Job complains of the
neglect and indifference which he now experiences from those around him,
בטני בני should be the only dead ones among the living, in which case it
would moreover be better, after the Arabic version, to translate: "My
longing is for, or: I yearn after, the children of my body."
Grandchildren (Hirz., Ew., Hlgst. Hahn) might be more readily thought
of; but it is not even probable, that after having introduced the ruin
of all of Job's children, the poet would represent their children as
still living, some mention of whom might then at least be expected in
the epilogue. Others, again (Rosenm. Justi, Gleiss), after the precedent
of the lxx (υἱοὶ παλλακίδων μου), understand the sons of concubines
(slaves). Where, however, should a trace be found of the poet having
conceived of his hero as a polygamist, - a hero who is even a model of
chastity and continence ([Job 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#001))?

But must בטני בני really signify his sons or grandsons? Children
certainly are frequently called, in relation to the father, בטנו פרי
(e.g., [Deu 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#013)), and the father
himself can call them בטני פרי ([Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007)); but בטן in this reference is not
the body of the father, but the mother's womb, whence, begotten by him,
the children issue forth. Hence "son of my body" occurs only once ([Pro
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#002)) in the mother's mouth. In the
mouth of Job even (where the first origin of man is spoken of), בטני
signifies not Job's body, but the womb that conceived him (vid., [Job
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010)); and thus, therefore, it is not
merely possible, but it is natural, with Stuhlm., Ges., Umbr., and
Schlottm., to understand בטני בני of the sons of his mother's womb,
i.e., of her who bare him; consequently, as אמּי בני, [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009), of natural brethren (brothers
and sisters, sorores uterinae), in which sense, regarding וחנותי
according to the most natural influence of the tone as infin., we
transl.: "and my stinking is offensive (supply זרה) to the children of
my mother's womb." It is also possible that the expression, as the words
seem to be taken by Symmachus (υἱοὺς παιδῶν μου, my slaves' children),
and as they are taken by Kosegarten, in comparison with the Arab. btn in
the signification race, subdivision (in the downward gradation, the
third) of a greater tribe, may denote those who with him belong in a
wider sense to one mother's bosom, i.e., to the same clan, although the
mention of בטני בני in close connection with אשׁתי is not favourable to
this extension of the idea. The circle of observation is certainly
widened in [Job 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#018), where עוילים
are not Job's grandchildren (Hahn), but the children of neighbouring
families and tribes; עויל (vid., [Job
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#011)) is a boy, and especially (perh.
on account of the similarity in sound between מעוּל and עוּל) a rude,
frolicsome, mischievous boy. Even such make him feel their contempt; and
if with difficulty, and under the influence of pain which distorts his
countenance, he attempts to raise himself (אקוּמה, lxx ὅταν ἀναστῶ,
hypothetical cohortative, as [Job
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#017); [Job
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#006)), they make him the butt of their
jesting talk (דּבּר בּ, as [Psa
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020)).

[Job 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#019)

מתי סודי is the name he gives those to whom he confides his most secret
affairs; סוד (vid., on [Psa 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014))
signifies either with a verbal notion, secret speaking (Arab. sâwada,
III. form from sâda, to press one's self close upon, esp. as sârra, to
speak in secret with any one), or what is made firm, i.e., what is
impenetrable, therefore a secret (from sâda, to be or make close, firm,
compact; cognate root, יסד, wasada, cognate in signification, sirr, a
secret, from sarra, שׁרר, which likewise signifies to make firm). Those
to whom he has made known his most secret plans (comp. [Psa
55:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#013)) now abhor him; and those
whom he has thus (זה, as [Job 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#017))
become attached to, and to whom he has shown his affection, - he says
this with an allusion to the three, - have turned against him. They gave
tokens of their love and honour to him, when he was in the height of his
happiness and prosperity, but they have not even shown any sympathy with
him in his present form of distress.

(Note: The disease which maims or devours the limbs, dâ'u el-gudhâm
\[vid. supra, p. 281\], which generically includes Arabian leprosy,
cancer, and syphilis, and is called the "first-born of death" in [Job
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#013), is still in Arabia the most
dreaded disease, in the face of which all human sympathy ceases. In the
steppe, even the greatest personage who is seized with this disease is
removed at least a mile or two from the encampment, where a charbûsh,
i.e., a small black hair-tent, is put up for him, and an old woman, who
has no relations living, is given him as an attendant until he dies. No
one visits him, not even his nearest relations. He is cast off as
muqâtal ollah. - Wetzst. The prejudice combated by the book of Job, that
the leper is, as such, one who is smitten by the wrath of God, has
therefore as firm hold of the Arabian mind in the present day as it had
centuries ago.)

His bones cleave (דבקה, Aq. ἐκολλήθη, lxx erroneously ἐσάπησαν, i.e.,
רקבה) to his skin, i.e., the bones may be felt and seen through the
skin, and the little flesh that remains is wasted away almost to a
skeleton (vid., [Job 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#015)). This is
not contradictory to the primary characteristic symptom of the lepra
nodosa; for the wasting away of the rest of the body may attain an
extraordinarily high degree in connection with the hypertrophy of single
parts. He can indeed say of himself, that he is only escaped (se soit
chapp) with the skin of his teeth. By the "skin of his teeth" the gums
are generally understood. But (1) the gum is not skin, and can therefore
not be called "skin of the teeth" in any language; (2) Job complains in
[Job 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017) of his offensive breath,
which in itself does not admit of the idea of healthy gums, and
especially if it be the result of a scorbutic ulceration of the mouth,
presupposes an ulcerous destruction of the gums. The current
translation, "with my gums," is therefore to be rejected on account both
of the language and the matter. For this reason Stickel (whom Hahn
follows) takes עור as inf. from ערר, and translates: "I am escaped from
it with my teeth naked" lit. with the being naked of my teeth, i.e.,
with teeth that are no longer covered, standing forward uncovered. This
explanation is pathologically satisfactory; but it has against it (1)
the translation of עור, which is wide of the most natural interpretation
of the word; (2) that in close connection with ואתמלטה one expects the
mention of a part of the body that has remained whole. Is there not,
then, really a skin of the teeth in the proper sense? The gum is not
skin, but the teeth are surrounded with a skin in the jaw, the so-called
periosteum. If we suppose, what is natural enough, that his offensive
breath, [Job 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017), arises from ulcers
in the mouth (in connection with scorbutus, as is known, the breath has
a terribly offensive smell), we obtain the following picture of Job's
disease: his flesh is in part hypertrophically swollen, in part
fearfully wasted away; the gums especially are destroyed and wasted away
from the teeth, only the periosteum round about the teeth is still left
to him, and single remnants of the covering of his loose and projecting
teeth.

Thus we interpret עזר שׁנּי in the first signification of the words, and
have also no need for supposing that [Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020) is a proverbial phrase for "I
have with great care and difficulty escaped the extreme." The
declaration perfectly corresponds to the description of the disease; and
it is altogether needless with Hupfeld, after [Job
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#014), to read עור בשׁני, vitam solam
et nudam vix reportavi, which is moreover inappropriate, since Job
regards himself as one who is dying. Symm. alters the position of the בּ
similarly, since he translates after the Syriac Hexapla: καὶ ἐξέτιλλον
(ותלשׁת) τὸ δέρμα τοῖς ὀδοῦσιν μου, from מלט = מרט, Arab. mllṭ, nudare
pilis, which J. D. Michaelis also compares; the sense, however, which is
thereby gained, is beneath all criticism. On the aoristic ואתמלּטה,
vid., on [Job 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#015). Stickel has on
this passage an excursus on this ah, to which he also attributes, in
this addition to the historic tense, the idea of striving after a goal:
"I slip away, I escape;" it certainly gives vividness to the notion of
the action, if it may not always have the force of direction towards
anything. Therefore: with a destroyed flesh, and indeed so completely
destroyed that there is even nothing left to him of sound skin except
the skin of his teeth, wasted away to a skeleton, and become both to
sight and smell a loathsome object; - such is the sufferer the friends
have before them, - one who is tortured, besides, by a dark conflict
which they only make more severe, - one who now implores them for pity,
and because he has no pity to expect from man, presses forward to a hope
which reaches beyond the grave.

[Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 19:21</span></span>

21 Have pity upon me, have pity upon me,

O ye my friends, For the hand of Eloah hath touched me.

22 Wherefore do ye persecute me as God,

And are never satisfied with my flesh?

23 Oh that my words were but written,

That they were recorded in a book,

24 With an iron pen, filled in with lead,

Graven in the rock for ever!

25 And I know: my Redeemer liveth,

And as the last One will He arise from the dust.

In [Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021) Job takes up a strain we
have not heard previously. His natural strength becomes more and more
feeble, and his voice weaker and weaker. It is a feeling of sadness that
prevails in the preceding description of suffering, and now even stamps
the address to the friends with a tone of importunate entreaty which
shall, if possible, affect their heart. They are indeed his friends, as
the emphatic רעי אתּם affirms; impelled towards him by sympathy they are
come, and at least stand by him while all other men flee from him. They
are therefore to grant him favour (חנן, prop. to incline to) in the
place of right; it is enough that the hand of Eloah has touched him (in
connection with this, one is reminded that leprosy is called נגע, and is
pre-eminently accounted as plaga divina; wherefore the suffering Messiah
also bears the significant name חוּרא דבי רבּי, "the leprous one from
the school of Rabbi," in the Talmud, after [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004), [Isa
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008)), they are not to make the divine
decree heavier to him by their uncharitableness. Wherefore do ye
persecute me - he asks them in [Job
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#022) - like as God (כּמו־אל,
according to Saad. and Ralbag = כמו־אלּה, which would be very tame); by
which he means not merely that they add their persecution to God's, but
that they take upon themselves God's work, that they usurp to themselves
a judicial divine authority, they act towards him as if they were
superhuman (vid., [Isa 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003)), and
therefore inhumanly, since they, who are but his equals, look down upon
him from an assumed and false elevation. The other half of the question:
wherefore are ye not full of my flesh (de ma chair, with מן, as [Job
31:31](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#031)), but still continue to devour
it? is founded upon a common Semitic figurative expression, with which
may be compared our Germ. expression, "to gnaw with the tooth of
slander" comp. Engl. "backbiting". In Chaldee, אכל קרצוהי די, to eat the
pieces of (any one), is equivalent to, to slander him; in Syriac,
ochelqarsso is the name of Satan, like διάβολος. The Arabic here, as
almost everywhere in the book of Job, presents a still closer parallel;
for Arab. 'kl lḥm signifies to eat any one's flesh, then (different from
אכל בשׂר, [Psa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002)) equivalent to, to
slander,

(Note: Vid., Schultens' ad Prov. Meidanii, p. 7 (where "to eat his own
flesh," equivalent to "himself," without allowing others to do it,
signifies to censure his kinsmen), and comp. the phrase Arab.
aclu-l-a‛râdhi in the signification arrodere existimationem hominum in
Makkari, i. 541, 13.)

since an evil report is conceived of as a wild beast, which delights in
tearing a neighbour to pieces, as the friends do not refrain from doing,
since, from the love of their assumption that his suffering must be the
retributive punishment of heinous sins, they lay sins to his charge of
which he is not conscious, and which he never committed. Against these
uncharitable and groundless accusations he wishes ([Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023)) that the testimony of his
innocence, to which they will not listen, might be recorded in a book
for posterity, or because a book may easily perish, graven in a rock
(therefore not on leaden plates) with an iron style, and the addition of
lead, with which to fill up the engraved letters, and render them still
more imperishable. In connection with the remarkable fidelity with which
the poet throws himself back into the pre-Israelitish patriarchal time
of his hero, it is of no small importance that he ascribes to him an
acquaintance not only with monumental writing, but also with book and
documentary writing (comp. [Job
31:35](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#035)).

The fut., which also elsewhere ([Job
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#008); [Job
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#005); [Job
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013), once the praet., [Job
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#003), noverim) follows מי־יתּן, quis
dabat = utinam, has Waw consec. here (as [Deu
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#026) the praet.); the arrangement of
the words is extremely elegant, בּסּפר stands per hyperbaton
emphatically prominent. כּתב and חקק (whence fut. Hoph. יחקוּ with Dag.
implicitum in the ח, comp. [Job 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#020),
and the Dag. of the ק omitted, for יוּחקּוּ, according to Ges. 67, rem.
8) interchange also elsewhere, [Isa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008). ספר, according to its etymon, is
a book formed of the skin of an animal, as Arab. sufre, the leathern
table-mat spread on the ground instead of a table. It is as unnecessary
to read לעד (comp. [Job 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#008), lxx, εἰς
μαρτύριον) instead of לעד here, as in [Isa
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008). He wishes that his own
declaration, in opposition to his accusers, may be inscribed as on a
monument, that it may be immortalized,

(Note: לעד is differently interpreted by Jerome: evermore hewn in the
rock; for so it seems his vel certe (instead of which celte is also
read, which is an old northern name for a chisel) sculpantur in siliece
must be explained.)

in order that posterity may behold it, and, it is to be hoped, judge him
more justly than his contemporaries. He wishes this, and is certain that
his wish is not vain. His testimony to his innocence will not descend to
posterity without being justified to it by God, the living God.

Thus is ואני ידעתּי connected with what precedes. yd\`ty is followed, as
in [Job 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023), Ps. 9:21, by the oratio
directa. The monosyllable tone-word חי (on account of which go'aliy has
the accent drawn back to the penult.) is 3 praet.: I know: my redeemer
liveth; in connection with this we recall the name of God, חי העולם,
[Dan 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007), after which the Jewish oath
per Anchialum in Martial is to be explained. גּאל might (with Umbr. and
others), in comparison with [Job
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#018), as [Num
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012), be equivalent to גּאל הדּם: he
who will redeem, demand back, avenge the shedding of his blood and
maintain his honour as of blood that has been innocently shed; in
general, however, g'l signifies to procure compensation for the
down-trodden and unjustly oppressed, [Pro
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#011); [Lam
3:58](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#058); [Psa
119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154). This Rescuer of his honour
lives and will rise up as the last One, as one who holds out over
everything, and therefore as one who will speak the final decisive word.
To אחרון have been given the significations Afterman in the sense of
vindex (Hirz., Ewald), or Rearman in the sense of a second \[lit. in a
duel,\] (Hahn), but contrary to the usage of the language: the word
signifies postremus, novissimus, and is to be understood according to
[Isa 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006); [Isa
48:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#012), comp. [Job
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#004). But what is the meaning of
על־עפר? Is it: upon the dust of the earth, having descended from heaven?
The words may, according to [Job 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#025)
\[Hebr., Engl. [Job 41:33](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#033)\], be
understood thus (without the accompanying notion, formerly supposed by
Umbreit, of pulvis or arena = palaestra, which is Classic, not Hebraic);
but looking to the process of destruction going on in his body, which
has been previously the subject of his words, and is so further on, it
is far more probable that על־עפר is to be interpreted according to [Job
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016); [Job
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011); [Job
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#026); [Psa
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010). Moreover, an Arab would think
of nothing else but the dust of the grave if he read Arab. ‛alâ turâbin
in this connection.

(Note: In Arabic ‛fr belongs only to the ancient language (whence
‛afarahu, he has cast him into the dust, placed him upon the sand, inf.
‛afr); Arab. gbâr (whence the Ghobar, a peculiar secret-writing, has its
name) signifies the dry, flying dust; Arab. trâb, however, is dust in
gen., and particularly the dust of the grave, as e.g., in the forcible
proverb: nothing but the turâb fills the eyes of man. So common is this
signification, that a tomb is therefore called turbe.)

Besides, it is unnecessary to connect קום על, as perhaps [Ch2
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#004), and the Arab. qâm ‛alâ (to stand
by, help): על־עפר is first of all nothing more than a defining of
locality. To affirm that if it refer to Job it ought to be עפרי, is
unfounded. Upon the dust in which he is now soon to be laid, into which
he is now soon to be changed, will He, the Rescuer of his honour, arise
(קוּם, as in [Deu 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015); [Psa
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#012); [Psa
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011), of the rising up of a witness,
and as e.g., [Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006), comp. [Psa
94:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#016), [Isa
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#010), of the rising up and
interposing of a rescuer and help) and set His divine seal to Job's own
testimony thus made permanent in the monumental inscription. Oetinger's
interpretation is substantially the same: "I know that He will at last
come, place himself over the dust in which I have mouldered away,
pronounce my cause just, and place upon me the crown of victory."

A somewhat different connection of the thought is obtained, if ואני is
taken not progressively, but adversatively: "Yet I know," etc. The
thought is then, that his testimony of his innocence need not at all be
inscribed in the rock; on the contrary, God, the ever living One, will
verify it. It is difficult to decide between them; still the progressive
rendering seems to be preferable, because the human vindication after
death, which is the object of the wish expressed in [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023), is still not essentially
different from the divine vindication hoped for in [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025), which must not be regarded as
an antithesis, but rather as a perfecting of the other designed for
posterity. [Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025) is, however,
certainly a higher hope, to which the wish in [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023). forms the stepping-stone. God
himself will avenge Job's blood, i.e., against his accusers, who say
that it is the blood of one who is guilty; over the dust of the departed
He will arise, and by His majestic testimony put to silence those who
regard this dust of decay as the dust of a sinner, who has received the
reward of his deeds.

But is it perhaps this his hope of God's vindication, expressed in [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025), which (as Schlottmann and Hahn,

(Note: Hahn, after having in his pamphlet, de spe immortalitatis sub
V.T. gradatim exculta, 1845, understood Job's confession distinctly of a
future beholding in this world, goes further in his Commentary, and
entirely deprives this confession of the character of hope, and takes
all as an expression of what is present. We withhold our further
assent.)

though in other respects giving very different interpretations, think)
is, according to Job's wish, to be permanently inscribed on the
monument, in order to testify to posterity with what a stedfast and
undismayed conviction he had died? The high-toned introitus, [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023), would be worthy of the
important inscription it introduces. But (1) it is improbable that the
inscription would begin with ואני, consequently with Waw, - a difficulty
which is not removed by the translation, "Yea, I know," but only covered
up; the appeal to [Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006); [Isa
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#014), is inadmissible, since there the
divine utterance, which begins with Waw, per aposiopesin continues a
suppressed clause; כי אני would be more admissible, but that which is to
be written down does not even begin with כי in either [Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003) or [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003). (2.) According to the whole of
Job's previous conduct and habitual state of mind, it is to be supposed
that the contents of the inscription would be the expression of the
stedfast consciousness of his innocence, not the hope of his
vindication, which only here and there flashes through the darkness of
the conflict and temptation, but is always again swallowed up by this
darkness, so that the thought of a perpetual preservation, as on a
monument, of this hope can by no means have its origin in Job; it forms
everywhere only, so to speak, the golden weft of the tragic warp, which
in itself even resists the tension of the two opposites: Job's
consciousness of innocence, and the dogmatic postulate of the friends;
and their intensity gradually increases with the intensity of this very
tension. So also here, where the strongest expression is given both to
the confession of his innocence as a confession which does not shun, but
even desires, to be recorded in a permanent form for posterity, and also
at the same time in connection with this to the confidence that to him,
who is misunderstood by men, the vindication from the side of God,
although it may be so long delayed that he even dies, can nevertheless
not be wanting. Accordingly, by מלּי we understand not what immediately
follows, but the words concerning his innocence which have already been
often repeated by him, and which remain unalterably the same; and we are
authorized in closing one strophe with [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025), and in beginning a new one with
[Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026), which indeed is commended
by the prevalence of the decastich in this speech, although we do not
allow to this observance of the strophe division any influence in
determining the exposition. It is, however, of use in our exposition.
The strophe which now follows develops the chief reason of believing
hope which is expressed in [Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025);
comp. the hexastich [Job 12:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#011),
also there in [Job 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#014) is the
expansion of [Job 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#013), which
expresses the chief thought as in the form of a thema.

[Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 19:26</span></span>

26 And after my skin, thus torn to pieces,

And without my flesh shall I behold Eloah,

27 Whom I shall behold for my good,

And mine eyes shall see Him and no other -

My veins languish in my bosom.

28 Ye think: "How shall we persecute him?"

Since the root of the matter is found in me -

29 Therefore be ye afraid of the sword,

For wrath meeteth the transgressions of the sword,

That ye may know there is a judgment!

If we have correctly understood על־עפר,[Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025), we cannot in this speech find
that the hope of a bodily recovery is expressed. In connection with this
rendering, the oldest representative of which is Chrysostom, מבּשׂרי is
translated either: free from my flesh = having become a skeleton (Umbr.,
Hirz., and Stickel, in comm. in Iobi loc. de Gole, 1832, and in the
transl., Gleiss, Hlgst., Renan), but this מבשׂרי, if the מן is taken as
privative, can signify nothing else but fleshless = bodiless; or: from
my flesh, i.e., the flesh when made whole again (viz., Eichhorn in the
Essay, which has exercised considerable influence, to his Allg. Bibl. d.
bibl. Lit. i. 3, 1787, von Clln, BCr., Knapp, von Hofm.,

(Note: Von Hofmann (Schriftbeweis, ii. 2, 503) translates: "I know,
however, my Redeemer is living, and hereafter He will stand forth which
must have been יעמד instead of יקום\] upon the earth and after my skin,
this surrounding (נקּפוּ, Chaldaism, instead of נקּפוּת after the form
עקּשׁוּת), and from my flesh shall I behold God, whom I shall behold for
myself, and my eyes see \[Him\], and He is not strange.")

and others), but hereby the relation of [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026) to [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026) becomes a contrast, without
there being anything to indicate it. Moreover, this rendering, as מבשׂרי
may also be explained, is in itself contrary to the spirit and plan of
the book; for the character of Job's present state of mind is, that he
looks for certain death, and will hear nothing of the consolation of
recovery ([Job 17:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010)), which sounds
to him as mere mockery; that he, however, notwithstanding, does not
despair of God, but, by the consciousness of his innocence and the
uncharitableness of the friends, is more and more impelled from the God
of wrath and caprice to the God of love, his future Redeemer; and that
then, when at the end of the course of suffering the actual proof of
God's love breaks through the seeming manifestation of wrath, even that
which Job had not ventured to hope is realized: a return of temporal
prosperity beyond his entreaty and comprehension.

On the other hand, the mode of interpretation of the older translators
and expositors, who find an expression of the hope of a resurrection at
the end of the preceding strophe or the beginning of this, cannot be
accepted. The lxx, by reading יקים instead of יקום, and connecting יקים
עורי נקפו זאת, translates: ἀναστήσει δὲ (Cod. Vat. only ἀναστῆσαι) μου
τὸ σῶμα (Cod. Vat. τὸ δέρμα μου) τὸ ἀναντλοῦν μοι (Cod. Vat. om. μοι)
ταῦτα, - but how can any one's skin be said to awake (Italic: super
terram resurget cutis mea),

(Note: Stickel therefore maintains that this ἀνιστάναι of the lxx is to
be understood not of being raised from the dead, but of being restored
to health; vid., on the contrary, Umbreit in Stud. u. Krit. 1840, i.,
and Ewald in d. Theol. Jahrbb., 1843, iv.)

and whence does the verb נקף obtain the signification exhaurire or
exantlare? Jerome's translation is not less bold: Scio enim quod
redemptor meus vivit et in novissimo die de terra surrecturus sum, as
though it were אקום, not יקום, and as though אחרון could signify in
novissimo die (in favour of which [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001) can only seemingly be quoted)! The
Targ. translates: "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and hereafter His
redemption will arise (become a reality) over the dust (into which I
shall be dissolved), and after my skin is again made whole (thus

(Note: In this signification, to recover, prop. to recover one's self,
אתּפח is used in Talmudic; vid., Buxtorf, פוח and תפח. The rabbinical
expositors ignore this Targum, and in general furnish but little that is
useful here.)

אתּפח seems to require to be translated, not intumuit) this will happen;
and from my flesh I shall again behold God." It is evident that this is
intended of a future restoration of the corporeal nature that has become
dust, but the idea assigned to נקפו ot is without foundation. Luther
also cuts the knot by translating: (But I know that my Redeemer liveth),
and He will hereafter raise me up out of the ground, which is an
impossible sense that is word for word forced upon the text. There is
just as little ground for translating [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026) with Jerome: et rursum
circumdabor pelle mea (after which Luther: and shall then be surrounded
with this my skin); for נקּפוּ can as Niph. not signify circumdabor, and
as Piel does not give the meaning cutis mea circumdabit (scil. me),
since נקפו cannot be predicate to the sing. עורי. In general, נקפו
cannot be understood as Niph., but only as Piel; the Piel niqap,
however, signifies not: to surround, but: to strike down, e.g., olives
from the tree, [Isa 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006), or the trees
themselves, so that they lie felled on the ground, [Isa
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#034), comp. Arab. nqf, to strike into
the skull and injure the soft brain, then: to strike forcibly on the
head (gen. on the upper part), or also: to deal a blow with a lance or
stick.

(Note: Thus, according to the Turkish Kamus: to sever the skull from
(Arab. ‛n) the brain, i.e., so that the brain is laid bare, or also
e.g., to split the coloquintida or bitter cucumber, so that the seeds
are laid bare, or: to crack the bones and take out the marrow, cognate
with Arab. nqb, for the act of piercing an egg is called both naqaba and
naqafa-l-beidha. In Hebrew נקף coincides with נגף, not with נקב.)

Therefore [Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026), according to the
usage of the Semitic languages, can only be intended of the complete
destruction of the skin, which is become cracked and broken by the
leprosy; and this was, moreover, the subject spoken of above ([Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020), comp. [Job
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019)). For the present we leave it
undecided whether Job here confesses the hope of the resurrection, and
only repel those forced misconstructions of his words which arbitrarily
discern this hope in the text. Free from such violence is the
translation: and after this my skin is destroyed, i.e., after I shall
have put off this my body, from my flesh (i.e., restored and
transfigured), I shall behold God. Thus is מבשׂרי understood by Rosenm.,
Kosegarten (diss. in Iob, xix. 1815), Umbreit (Stud. u. Krit. 1840, i.),
Welte, Carey, and others. But this interpretation is also untenable.
For, 1. In this explanation [Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026)
is taken as an antecedent; a praepos., however, like אחר or עד, used as
a conj., has, according to Hirzel's correct remark, the verb always
immediately after it, as [Job 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007);
[Lev 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#043); whereas [Sa1
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041), the single exception, is
critically doubtful. 2. It is not probable that the poet by עורי should
have thought of the body, which disease is rapidly hurrying on to death,
and by בשׂרי, on the other hand, of a body raised up and glorified. 3.
Still more improbable is it that בשׂר should be so used here as in the
church's term, resurrectio carnis, which is certainly an allowable
expression, but one which exceeds the meaning of the language of
Scripture. בשׂר, σάρξ, is in general, and especially in the Old
Testament, a notion which has grown up in almost inseparable connection
with the marks of frailty and sinfulness. And 4. The hope of a
resurrection as a settled principle in the creed of Israel is certainly
more recent than the Salomonic period. Therefore by far the majority of
modern expositors have decided that Job does not indeed here avow the
hope of the resurrection, but the hope of a future spiritual beholding
of God, and therefore of a future life; and thus the popular idea of
Hades, which elsewhere has sway over him, breaks out. Thus, of a future
spiritual beholding of God, are Job's words understood by Ewald, Umbreit
(who at first explained them differently), Vaihinger, Von Gerlach,
Schlottmann, Hlemann (Schs. Kirchen- u. Schulbl. 1853, Nos. 48, 50, 62),
Knig (Die Unsterblichkeitsidee im B. Iob, 1855), and others, also by the
Jewish expositors Arnheim and Lwenthal. This rendering, which is also
adopted in the Art. Hiob in Herzog's Real-Encyclopdie, does not
necessitate any impossible misconstruction of the language, but, as we
shall see further on, it does not exhaust the meaning of Job's
confession.

First of all, we will continue the explanation of each expression אחר is
a praepos., and used in the same way as the Arabic ba‛da is sometimes
used: after my skin, i.e., after the loss of it (comp. [Job
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#021), אחריו, after he is dead).
נקּפוּ is to be understood relatively: which they have torn in pieces,
i.e., which has been torn in pieces (comp. the same use of the 3 pers.,
[Job 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019); [Job
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#018)); and זאת, which, according to
Targ., Koseg., Stickel de Gole, and Ges. Thes., ought to be taken
inferentially, equivalent to hoc erit (this, however, cannot be
accepted, because it must have been וזאת אחר וגו, Arab. w-ḏlk b‛d 'n,
idque postquam, and moreover would require the words to be arranged אחר
נקפו עורי), commonly however taken together with עורי (which is
nevertheless masc.), is understood as pointing to his decayed body,
seems better to be taken adverbially: in this manner (Arnheim, Stickel
in his translation, von Gerl., Hahn); it is the acc. of reference, as
[Job 33:12](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#012). The מן of מבּשׂרי is the
negative מן: free from my flesh (prop. away, far from, [Num
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#025); [Pro
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#003)), - a rather frequent way of
using this preposition (vid., [Job
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#015); [Job
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#009); [Gen
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039); [Sa2
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#022); [Jer
48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045)). Accordingly, we translate:
"and after my skin, which they tear to pieces thus, and free from my
flesh, shall I behold Eloah." That Job, after all, is permitted to
behold God in this life, and also in this life receives the testimony of
his justification, does not, as already observed, form any objection to
this rendering of [Job 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026) : it is
the reward of his faith, which, even in the face of certain death, has
not despaired of God, that he does not fall into the power of death at
all, and that God forthwith condescends to him in love. And that Job
here holds firm, even beyond death, to the hope of beholding God in the
future as a witness to his innocence, does not, after [Job
14:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013); [Job
16:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#018), come unexpectedly; and it is
entirely in accordance with the inner progress of the drama, that the
thought of a redemption from Hades, expressed in the former passage, and
the demand expressed in the latter passage, for the rescue of the honour
of his blood, which is even now guaranteed him by his witness in heaven,
are here comprehended, in the confident certainty that his blood and his
dust will not be declared by God the Redeemer as innocent, without his
being in some way conscious of it, though freed from this his decaying
body. In [Job 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#027) he declares how he
will behold God: whom I shall behold to me, i.e., I, the deceased one,
as being for me (לי, like [Psa 62:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002);
[Psa 118:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#006)), and my eyes see Him, and
not a stranger. Thus (neque alius) lxx, Targ., Jerome, and most others
translate; on the other hand, Ges. Thes., Umbr., Vaih., Stick., Hahn,
and von Hofm. translate: my eyes see Him, and indeed not as an enemy;
but זר signifies alienus and alius, not however adversarius, which
latter meaning it in general obtains only in a national connection; here
(used as in [Pro 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#002)) it excludes the
three: none other but Job, by which he means his opponents, will see God
rising up for him, taking up his cause. ראוּ is praet. of the future,
therefore praet. propheticum, or praet. confidentiae (as frequently in
the Psalms). His reins within him pine after this vision of God. Hahn,
referring to [Job 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#013), translates
incorrectly: "If even my reins within me perish," which is impossible,
according to the syntax; for [Psa
73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026) has כלה in the sense of licet
defecerit as hypothetical antecedent. The Syriac version is altogether
wrong: my reins (culjot) vanish completely away by reason of my lot
(בּחקּי). It would be expressed in Arabic exactly as it is here: culâja
(or, dual, culatâja) tadhûbu, my reins melt; for in Arab. also, as in
the Semitic languages generally, the reins are considered as the seat of
the tenderest and deepest affections (Psychol. S. 268, f), especially of
love, desire, longing, as here, where כּלה, as in [Psa
119:123](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#123) and freq., is intended of
wasting away in earnest longing for salvation.

Having now ended the exposition of the single expressions, we inquire
whether those do justice to the text who understand it of an absolutely
bodiless future beholding of God. We doubt it. Job says not merely that
he, but that his eyes, shall behold God. He therefore imagines the
spirit as clothed with a new spiritual body instead of the old decayed
one; not so, however, that this spiritual body, these eyes which shall
behold in the future world, are brought into combination with the
present decaying body of flesh. But his faith is here on the direct road
to the hope of a resurrection; we see it germinating and struggling
towards the light. Among the three pearls which become visible in the
book of Job above the waves of conflict, viz., [Job
14:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#013); [Job
16:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#018); [Job
19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025), there is none more costly
than this third. As in the second part of Isaiah, the fifty-third
chapter is outwardly and inwardly the middle and highest point of the 3
x 9 prophetic utterances, so the poet of the book of Job has adorned the
middle of his work with this confession of his hero, wherein he himself
plants the flag of victory above his own grave.

Now in [Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028) Job turns towards
the friends. He who comes forth on his side as his advocate, will make
Himself felt by them to be a judge, if they continue to persecute the
suffering servant of God (comp. [Job
13:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#010)). It is not to be translated:
for then ye will say, or: forsooth then will ye say. This would be כי אז
תאמרו, and certainly imply that the opponents will experience just the
same theophany, that therefore it will be on the earth. Oehler (in his
Veteris Test. sententia de rebus post mortem futuris, 1846) maintains
this instance against the interpretation of this confession of Job of a
future beholding; it has, however, no place in the text, and Oehler
rightly gives no decisive conclusion.

(Note: He remains undecided between a future spiritual and a present
beholding of God: harum interpretationum utra rectior sit, vix erit
dijudicandum, nam in utramque partem facile potest disputari.)

For [Job 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#028), as is rightly observed
by C. W. G. Kstlin (in his Essay, de immortalitatis spe, quae in l. Iobi
apparere dicitur, 1846) against Oehler, and is even explained by
Oetinger, is the antecedent to [Job
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029) (comp. [Job
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#028).): if ye say: how, i.e., under
what pretence of right, shall we prosecute him (נרדּף־לו, prop. pursue
him, comp. [Jdg 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#025)), and (so that)
the root of the matter (treated of) is found in me (בי, not בּו, since
the oratio directa, as in [Job 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#017),
passes into the oratio obliqua, Ew. 338, a); in other words: if ye
continue to seek the cause of my suffering in my guilt, fear ye the
sword, i.e., God's sword of vengeance (as [Job
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#022), and perhaps as [Isa
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008) : a sword, without the art. in
order to combine the idea of what is boundless, endless, and terrific
with the indefinite - the indetermination ad amplificandum described on
[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012)). The confirmatory
substantival clause which follows has been very variously interpreted.
It is inadmissible to understand חמה of the rage of the friends against
Job (Umbr., Schlottm., and others), or חרב עונות of their murderous
sinning respecting Job; both expressions are too strong to be referred
to the friends. We must explain either: the glow, i.e., the glow of the
wrath of God, are the expiations which the sword enjoins (Hirz., Ew.,
and others); but apart from עון not signifying directly the punishment
of sin, this thought is strained; or, which we with Rosenm. and others
prefer: glow, i.e., the glow of the wrath of God, are the sword's
crimes, i.e., they carry glowing anger as their reward in themselves,
wrath overtakes them. Crimes of the sword are not such as are committed
with the sword - for such are not treated of here, and, with Arnh. and
Hahn, to understand חרב of the sword "of hostilely mocking words," is
arbitrary and artificial - but such as have incurred the sword. Job
thinks of slander and blasphemy. These are even before a human tribunal
capital offences (comp. [Job 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#011),
[Job 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#028)). He warns the friends of a
higher sword and a higher power, which they will not escape: "that ye
may know it." שׁדּין, for which the Keri is שׁדּוּן. An ancient various
reading (in Pinkster) is ידעוּן (instead of תּדעוּן). The lxx shows how
it is to be interpreted: θυμὸς γὰρ ἐπ ̓ ἀνόμους (Cod. Alex. - οις)
ἐπελεύσεται, καὶ τότε γνώσονται. According to Cod. Vat. the translation
continues ποῦ ἔστιν αὐτῶν ἡ ὕλη (שׂדין, comp. [Job
29:5](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#005), where שׁדי is translated by
ὑλώδης); according to Cod. Alex. ὅτι οὐδαμοῦ αὐτῶν ἡ ἴσχυς ἐστίν (שׁדין
from שׁדד). Ewald in the first edition, which Hahn follows, considers,
as Eichhorn already had, שׁדּין as a secondary form of שׁדּי; Hlgst.
wishes to read שׁדּי at once. It might sooner, with Raschi, be
explained: that ye might only know the powers of justice, i.e., the
manifold power of destruction which the judge has at his disposal. But
all these explanations are unsupported by the usage of the language, and
Ewald's conjecture in his second edition: אי שׁדּכם (where is your
violence), has nothing to commend it; it goes too far from the received
text, calls the error of the friends by an unsuitable name, and gives no
impressive termination to the speech.

On the other hand, the speech could not end more suitably than by Job's
bringing home to the friends the fact that there is a judgment;
accordingly it is translated by Aq. ὅτι κρίσις; by Symm., Theod., ὅτι
ἔστι κρίσις. שׁ is = אשׁר once in the book of Job, as probably also once
in the Pentateuch, [Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003). דּין or
דּוּן are infinitive forms; the latter from the Kal, which occurs only
in [Gen 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003), with Cholem, which being
made a substantive (as e.g., בּוּז), signifies the judging, the
judgment. Why the Keri substitutes דון, which does not occur elsewhere
in the signification judicium, for the more common דין, is certainly
lost to view, and it shows only that the reading shdwn was regarded in
the synagogue as the traditional. דּין has everywhere else the
signification judicium, e.g., by Elihu, [Job
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#017), and also often in the book of
Proverbs, e.g., [Job 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#008) (comp. in
the Arabizing supplement, ch. 31:8). The final judgment is in Aramaic
רבּא דּינא; the last day in Hebrew and Arabic, הדּין יום, jaum ed-dı̂n.
To give to "שׁדין, that there is a judgment," this dogmatically definite
meaning, is indeed, from its connection with the historical recognition
of the plan of redemption, inadmissible; but there is nothing against
understanding the conclusion of Job's speech according to the conclusion
of the book of Ecclesiastes, which belongs to the same age of
literature.

The speech of Job, now explained, most clearly shows us how Job's
affliction, interpreted by the friends as a divine retribution, becomes
for Job's nature a wholesome refining crucible. We see also from this
speech of Job, that he can only regard his affliction as a kindling of
divine wrath, and God's meeting him as an enemy ([Job
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#011)). But the more decidedly the
friends affirm this, and describe the root of the manifestation as lying
in himself, in his own transgression; and the more uncharitably, as we
have seen it at last in Bildad's speech, they go to an excess in their
terrible representations of the fate of the ungodly with unmistakeable
reference to him: the more clearly is it seen that this indirect
affliction of misconstruction must tend to help him in his suffering
generally to the right relation towards God. For since the consolation
expected from man is changed into still more cutting accusation, no
other consolation remains to him in all the world but the consolation of
God; and if the friends are to be in the right when they persist
unceasingly in demonstrating to him that he must be a heinous sinner,
because he is suffering so severely, the conclusion is forced upon him
in connection with his consciousness of innocence, that the divine
decree is an unjust one ([Job 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005)).
From such a conclusion, however, he shrinks back; and this produces a
twofold result. The crushing anguish of soul which the friends inflict
on him, by forcing upon him a view of his suffering which is as strongly
opposed to his self-consciousness as to his idea of God, and must
therefore bring him into the extremest difficulty of conscience, drives
him to the mournful request, "Have pity upon, have pity upon me, O ye my
friends" ([Job 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#021)); they shall not
also pursue him whom God's hand has touched, as if they were a second
divine power in authority over him, that could dispose of him at its
will and pleasures; they shall, moreover, cease from satisfying the
insatiable greed of their nature upon him. He treats the friends in the
right manner; so that if their heart were not encrusted by their dogma,
they would be obliged to change their opinion. This in Job's conduct is
an unmistakeable step forward to a more spiritual state of mind. But the
stern inference of the friends has a beneficial influence not merely on
his relation to them, but also on his relation to God. To the wrathful
God, whom they compel him to regard also as unjust, he cannot in itself
cling. He is so much the less able to do this, as he is compelled the
more earnestly to long for vindication, the more confidently he is
accused.

When he now wishes that the testimony which he has laid down concerning
his innocence, and which is contemporaries do not credit, might be
graven in the rock with an iron pen, and filled in with lead, the
memorial in words of stone is but a dead witness; and he cannot even for
the future rely on men, since he is so contemptuously misunderstood and
deceived by them in the present. This impels his longing after
vindication forward from a lifeless thing to a living person, and turns
his longing from man below to God above. He has One who will acknowledge
his misjudged cause, and set it right, - a Gol, who will not first come
into being in a later generation, but liveth - who has not to come into
being, but is. There can be no doubt that by the words chy n'l he means
the same person of whom in [Job 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019)
he says: "Behold, even now in heaven is my Witness, and One who
acknowledges me is in the heights." The חי here corresponds to the גם
עתה in that passage; and from this - that the heights of heaven is the
place where this witness dwells - is to be explained the manner in which
Job ([Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)) expresses his
confident belief in the realization of that which he ([Job
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#020)) at first only importunately
implores: as the Last One, whose word shall avail in the ages of
eternity, when the strife of human voices shall have long been silent,
He shall stand forth as finally decisive witness over the dust, in which
Job passed away as one who in the eye of man was regarded as an object
of divine punishment. And after his skin, in such a manner destroyed,
and free from his flesh, which is even now already so fallen in that the
bones may be seen through it ([Job
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#020)), he will behold Eloah; and he
who, according to human judgment, has died the death of the unrighteous,
shall behold Eloah on his side, his eyes shall see and not a stranger;
for entirely for his profit, in order that he may bask in the light of
His countenance, will He reveal himself.

This is the picture of the future, for the realization of which Job
longs so exceedingly, that his reins within him pine away with longing.
Whence we see, that Job does not here give utterance to a transient
emotional feeling, a merely momentary flight of faith; but his hidden
faith, which during the whole controversy rests at the bottom of his
soul, and over which the waves of despair roll away, here comes forth to
view. He knows, that although his outward man may decay, God cannot,
however, fail to acknowledge his inner man. But does this confidence of
faith of Job really extend to the future life? It has, on the contrary,
been observed, that if the hope expressed with such confidence were a
hope respecting the future life, Job's despondency would be trifling,
and to be rejected; further, that this hope stands in contradiction to
his own assertion, [Job 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014) : "If
man dies, shall he live again? All the days of my warfare would I wait,
till my change should come;" thirdly, that Job's character would be
altogether wrongly drawn, and would be a psychological caricature, if
the thought slumbering in Job's mind, which finds utterance in [Job
19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025), were the thought of a future
vision of God; and finally, that the unravelling of the knot of the
puzzle, which continually increases in entanglement by the controversy
with the friends, at the close of the drama, is effected by a theophany,
which issues in favour of one still living, not, as ought to be expected
by that rendering, a celestial scene unveiled over the grave of Job. But
such a conclusion was impossible in an Old Testament book. The Old
Testament as yet knew nothing of a heaven peopled with happy human
spirits, arrayed in white robes (the stola prima). And at the time when
the book of Job was composed, there was also neither a positive
revelation nor a dogmatic confession of the resurrection of the dead,
which forms the boundary of the course of this world, in existence. The
book of Job, however, shows us how, from the conflict concerning the
mystery of this present life, faith struggled forth towards a future
solution. The hope which Job expresses is not one prevailing in his age
- not one that has come to him from tradition - not one embracing
mankind, or even only the righteous in general. All the above objections
would be really applicable, if it were evident here that Job was
acquainted with the doctrine of a beholding of God after death, which
should recompense the pious for the sufferings of this present time. But
such is not the case. The hope expressed is not a finished and
believingly appropriating hope; on the contrary, it is a hope which is
first conceived and begotten under the pressure of divinely decreed
sufferings, which make him appear to be a transgressor, and of human
accusations which charge him with transgression. It is impossible for
him to suppose that God should remain, as now, so hostilely turned from
him, without ever again acknowledging him. The truth must at last break
through the false appearance, and wrath again give place to love. That
it should take place after his death, is only the extreme which his
faith assigns to it.

If we place ourselves on the standpoint of the poet, he certainly here
gives utterance to a confession, to which, as the book of Proverbs also
shows, the Salomonic Chokma began to rise in the course of believing
thought; but also on the part of the Chokma, this confession was
primarily only a theologoumenon, and was first in the course of
centuries made sure under the combined agency of the progressive
perception of the revelation and facts connected with redemption; and it
is first of all in the New Testament, by the descent to Hades and the
ascension to heaven of the Prince of Life, that it became a fully
decided and well-defined element of the church's creed. If, however, we
place ourselves on the standpoint of the hero of the drama, this hope of
future vindication which flashes through the fierceness of the conflict,
far from making it a caricature,

(Note: If Job could say, like Tobia, [Job
2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001) :17f., Vulg.: filii sanctorum
sumus et vitam illam exspectamus, quam Deus daturus est his qui fidem
suam nunquam mutant ab eo, his conduct would certainly be different; but
what he expresses in [Job 19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025) is
very far removed from this confession of faith of Tobia.)

gives to the delineation of his faith, which does not forsake God, the
final perfecting stroke. Job is, as he thinks, meeting certain death.
Why then should not the poet allow him to give utterance to that demand
of faith, that he, even if God should permit him apparently to die the
sinner's death, nevertheless cannot remain unvindicated? Why should he
not allow him here, in the middle of the drama, to rise from the
thought, that the cry of his blood should not ascend in vain, to the
thought that this vindication of his blood, as of one who is innocent,
should not take place without his being consciously present, and
beholding with his own eyes the God by whose judicial wrath he is
overwhelmed, as his Redeemer? This hope, regarded in the light of the
later perception of the plan of redemption, is none other than the hope
of a resurrection; but it appears here only in the germ, and comes
forward as purely personal: Job rises from the dust, and, after the
storm of wrath is passed, sees Eloah, as one who acknowledges him in
love, while his surviving opponents fall before the tribunal of this
very God. It is therefore not a share in the resurrection of the
righteous (in Isa 26, which is uttered prophetically, but first of all
nationally), and not a share in the general resurrection of the dead
(first expressed in [Dan 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)), with
which Job consoled himself; he does not speak of what shall happen at
the end of the days, but of a purely personal matter after his death.
Considering himself as one who must die, and thinking of himself as
deceased, and indeed, according to appearance, overwhelmed by the
punishment of his misdeeds, he would be compelled to despair of God, if
he were not willing to regard even the incredible as unfailing, this,
viz., that God will not permit this mark of wrath and of false
accusation to attach to his blood and dust. That the conclusion of the
drama should be shaped in accordance with this future hope, is, as we
have already observed, not possible, because the poet (apart from his
transferring himself to the position and consciousness of his
patriarchal hero) was not yet in possession, as a dogma, of that hope
which Job gives utterance to as an aspiration of his faith, and which
even he himself only at first, like the psalmists (vid., on [Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015); [Psa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015), [Psa
73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026)), had as an aspiration of faith;

(Note: The view of Bttcher, de inferis, p. 149, is false, that the poet
by the conclusion of his book disapproves the hope expressed, as
dementis somnium.)

it was, however, also entirely unnecessary, since it is indeed not the
idea of the drama that there is a life after death, which adjusts the
mystery of the present, but that there is a suffering of the righteous
which bears the disguise of wrath, but nevertheless, as is finally
manifest, is a dispensation of love.

If, however, it is a germinating hope, which in this speech of Job is
urged forth by the strength of his faith, we can, without
anachronistically confusing the different periods of the development of
the knowledge of redemption, regard it as a full, but certainly only
developing, preformation of the later belief in the resurrection. When
Job says that with his own eyes he shall behold Eloah, it is indeed
possible by these eyes to understand the eyes of the spirit;

(Note: Job's wish, [Job 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023), is
accomplished, as e.g., [Jam 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001) shows,
and his hope is realized, since he has beheld God the Redeemer enter
Hades, and is by Him led up on high to behold God in heaven. We assume
the historical reality of Job and the consistence of his history with
the rest of Scripture, which we have treated in Bibl Psychol. ch. 6 3,
on the future life and redemption. Accordingly, one might, with the
majority of modern expositors, limit Job's hope to the beholding of God
in the intermediate state; but, as is further said above, such
particularizing is unauthorized.)

but it is just as possible to understand him to mean the eyes of his
renewed body (which the old theologians describe as stola secunda, in
distinction from the stola prima of the intermediate state); and when
Job thinks of himself ([Job 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025)) as
a mouldering corpse, should he not by his eyes, which shall behold
Eloah, mean those which have been dimmed in death, and are now again
become capable of seeing? While, if we wish to expound
grammatical-historically, not practically, not homiletically, we also
dare not introduce the definiteness of the later dogma into the
affirmation of Job. It is related to eschatology as the protevangelium
is to soteriology; it presents only the first lines of the picture,
which is worked up in detail later on, but also an outline, sketched in
such a way that every later perception may be added to it. Hence
Schlottmann is perfectly correct when he considers that it is
justifiable to understand these grand and powerful words, in hymns, and
compositions, and liturgies, and monumental inscriptions, of the
God-man, and to use them in the sense which "the more richly developed
conception of the last things might so easily put upon them." It must
not surprise us that this sublime hope is not again expressed further
on. On the one hand, what Sanctius remarks is not untrue: ab hoc loco ad
finem usque libri aliter se habet Iobus quam prius; on the other hand,
Job here, indeed in the middle of the book, soars triumphantly over his
opponents to the height of a believing consciousness of victory, but as
yet he is not in that state of mind in which he can attain to the
beholding of God on his behalf, be it in this world or in the world to
come. He has still further to learn submission in relation to God,
gentleness in relation to the friends. Hence, inexhaustibly rich in
thought and variations of thought, the poet allows the controversy to
become more and more involved, and the fire in which Job is to be
proved, but also purified, to burn still longer.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 20](job020)

</div>
