<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](est010)  [Next](job001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 0:0</span></span>

The Book of Job

Introduction

1\. The Problem of the Book of Job

Why do afflictions upon afflictions befall the righteous man? This is
the question, the answering of which is made the theme of the book of
Job. Looking to the conclusion of the book, the answer stands: that
afflictions are for the righteous man the way to a twofold blessedness.
But in itself, this answer cannot satisfy; so much the less, as the
twofold blessedness to which Job finally attains is just as earthly and
of this world as that which he has lost by affliction. This answer is
inadequate, since on the one hand such losses as those of beloved
children cannot, as the loss of sheep and camels, really be made good by
double the number of other children; on the other hand, it may be
objected that many a righteous man deprived of his former prosperity
dies in outward poverty. There are numerous deathbeds which protest
against this answer. There are many pious sufferers to whom this present
material issue of the book of Job could not yield any solace; whom, when
in conflict at least, it might the rather bring into danger of despair.
With reference to this conclusion, the book of Job is an insufficient
theodicy, as in general the truth taught in the Old Testament, that the
end, אהרית, of the righteous, as of the unrighteous, would reveal the
hidden divine recompense, could afford no true consolation so long as
this אהרית flowed on with death into the night of Hades, שׁאול, and had
no prospect of eternal life.

But the issue of the history, regarded externally, is by no means the
proper answer to the great question of the book. The principal thing is
not that Job is doubly blessed, but that God acknowledges him as His
servant, which He is able to do, after Job in all his afflictions has
remained true to God. Therein lies the important truth, that there is a
suffering of the righteous which is not a decree of wrath, into which
the love of God has been changed, but a dispensation of that love
itself. In fact, this truth is the heart of the book of Job. It has
therefore been said - particularly by Hirzel, and recently by Renan -
that it aims at destroying the old Mosaic doctrine of retribution. But
this old Mosaic doctrine of retribution is a modern phantom. That all
suffering is a divine retribution, the Mosaic Thora does not teach.
Renan calls this doctrine la vielle conception patriarcale. But the
patriarchal history, and especially the history of Joseph, gives decided
proof against it. The distinction between the suffering of the righteous
and the retributive justice of God, brought out in the book of Job, is
nothing new. The history before the time of Israel, and the history of
Israel even, exhibit it in facts; and the words of the law, as [Deu
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#016.md), expressly show that there are
sufferings which are the result of God's love; though the book of Job
certainly presents this truth, which otherwise had but a scattered and
presageful utterance, in a unique manner, and causes it to come forth
before us from a calamitous and terrible conflict, as pure gold from a
fierce furnace. It comes forth as the result of the controversy with the
false doctrine of retribution advanced by the friends; a doctrine which
is indeed not Mosaic, for the Mosaic Thora in the whole course of the
history of revelation is nowhere impugned and corrected, but ever only
augmented, and, consistently with its inherent character, rendered more
complete.

To this question the book furnishes, as it appears to us, two answers:
(1.) The afflictions of the righteous are a means of discipline and
purification; they certainly arise from the sins of the righteous man,
but still are not the workings of God's wrath, but of His love, which is
directed to his purifying and advancement. Such is the view Elihu in the
book of Job represents. The writer of the introductory portion of
Proverbs has expressed this briefly but beautifully [Pro
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011); cf. Heb 12.md). Oehler, in order
that one may perceive its distinction from the view of the three
friends, rightly refers to the various theories of punishment.
Discipline designed for improvement is properly no punishment, since
punishment, according to its true idea, is only satisfaction rendered
for the violation of moral order. In how far the speeches of Elihu
succeed in conveying this view clear and distinct from the original
standpoint of the friends, especially of Eliphaz, matters not to us
here; at all events, it is in the mind of the poet as the characteristic
of these speeches. (2.) The afflictions of the righteous man are means
of proving and testing, which, like chastisements, come from the love of
God. Their object is not, however, the purging away of sin which may
still cling to the righteous man, but, on the contrary, the
manifestation and testing of his righteousness. This is the point of
view from which, apart from Elihu's speeches, the book of Job presents
Job's afflictions. Only by this relation of things is the chagrin with
which Job takes up the words of Eliphaz, and so begins the controversy,
explained and justified or excused. And, indeed, if it should be even
impossible for the Christian, especially with regard to his own
sufferings, to draw the line between disciplinary and testing sufferings
so clearly as it is drawn in the book of Job, there is also for the
deeper and more acute New Testament perception of sin, a suffering of
the righteous which exists without any causal connection with his sin,
viz., confession by suffering, or martyrdom, which the righteous man
undergoes, not for his own sake, but for the sake of God.

If we, then, keep in mind these two further answers which the book of
Job gives us to the question, "Why through suffering to blessedness?" it
is not to be denied that practically they are perfectly sufficient. If I
know that God sends afflictions to me because, since sin and evil are
come into the world, they are the indispensable means of purifying and
testing me, and by both purifying and testing of perfecting me, - these
are explanations with which I can and must console myself. But this is
still not the final answer of the book of Job to its great question. And
its unparalleled magnitude, its high significance in the historical
development of revelation, its typical character already recognised in
the Old Testament, consists just in its going beyond this answer, and
giving us an answer which, going back to the extreme roots of evil, and
being deduced from the most intimate connections of the individual life
of man with the history and plan of the world in the most comprehensive
sense, not only practically, but speculatively, satisfies.

2\. The Chokma-Character of the Book

But before we go so far into this final and highest answer as the
province of the Introduction permits and requires, in order to assign to
the reader the position necessary to be taken for understanding the
book, we ask, How comes it that the book of Job presents such a
universal and absolute solution of the problem, otherwise unheard of in
the Old Testament Scriptures? The reason of it is in the peculiar mental
tendency (Geistesrichtung) of the Israelitish race from which it
proceeded. There was in Israel a bias of a universalistic, humanic,
philosophical kind, which, starting from the fear or worship (religion)
of Jehovah, was turned to the final causes of things, - the cosmical
connections of the earthly, the common human foundations of the
Israelitish, the invisible roots of the visible, the universal actual
truth of the individual and national historical. The common character of
the few works of his Chokma which have been preserved to us is the
humanic standpoint, stripped of everything peculiarly Israelitish. In
the whole book of Proverbs, which treats of the relations of human life
in its most general aspects, the name of the covenant people, ישׁראל,
does not once occur. In Ecclesiastes, which treats of the nothingness of
all earthly things, and with greater right than the book of Job may be
called the canticle of Inquiry,

(Note: The book of Job, says H. Heine, in his Vermischte Schriften,
1854, i., is the canticle of Inquiry (das Hodhelied der Skepsis), and
horrid serpents hiss therein their eternal Wherefore? As man when he
suffers must weep his fill, so must he cease to doubt. This poison of
doubt must not be wanting in the Bible, that great storehouse of
mankind.)

even the covenant name of God, יהוה, does not occur. In the Son of
Songs, the groundwork of the picture certainly, but not the picture
itself, is Israelitish: it represents a common human primary relation,
the love of man and woman; and that if not with allegorical, yet
mystical meaning, similar to the Indian Gitagovinda, and also the third
part of the Tamul Kural, translated by Graul.

So the book of Job treats a fundamental question of our common humanity;
and the poet has studiously taken his hero not from Israelitish history,
but from extra-Israelitish tradition. From beginning to end he is
conscious of relating an extra-Israelitish history, - a history handed
down among the Arab tribes to the east of Palestine, which has come to
his ears; for none of the proper names contain even a trace of
symbolically intended meaning; and romantic historical poems were
moreover not common among the ancients. This extra-Israelitish history
from the patriarchal period excited the purpose of his poem, because the
thought therein presented lay also in his own mind. The Thora from Sinai
and prophecy, the history and worship of Israel, are nowhere introduced;
even indirect reference to them nowhere escape him. He throws himself
with wonderful truthfulness, effect, and vividness, into the
extra-Israelitish position. His own Israelitish standpoint he certainly
does not disavow, as we see from his calling God יהוה everywhere in the
prologue and epilogue; but the non-Israelitish character of his hero and
of his locality he maintains with strict consistency. Only twice is יהוה
found in the mouth of Job ([Job 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md),
[Job 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#009).md), which is not to be
wondered at, since this name of God, as the names Morija and Jochebed
show, is not absolutely post-Mosaic, and therefore may have been known
among the Hebrew people beyond Israel. But with this exception, Job and
his friends everywhere call God אלוהּ, which is more poetic, and for
non-Israelitish speakers (vid., [Pro
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005).md) more appropriate than אלהים,
which occurs only three times ([Job
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029.md); [Job
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002.md); [Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007).md); or they call Him שׁדּי, which
is the proper name of God in the patriarchal time, as it appears
everywhere in Genesis, where in the Elohistic portions the high and
turning-points of the self-manifestation of God occur ([Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001.md), [Job
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#011.md), cf. [Exo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#003).md), and when the patriarchs, at
special seasons, pronounce the promise which they have received upon
their children ([Gen 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003.md), [Gen
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#003.md), [Gen
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025.md); cf. [Gen
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014).md). Even many of the designations
of the divine attributes which have become fixed in the Thora, as אפּים
ארך, חנּוּן, רחוּם, which one might well expect in the book of Job, are
not found in it; nor טוב, often used of Jehovah in Psalms; nor generally
the too (so to speak) dogmatic terminology of the Israelitish religion;

(Note: קרושׁ, of God, only occurs once ([Job
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#010).md); חסד but twice ([Job
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#012.md), and with Elihu, [Job
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#013).md); אהב with its derivatives not
at all (Gen. only [Gen 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#019).md). In the
speeches of the three, צדיק (only with Elihu, [Job
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#017).md), משׁפט, and שׁלּם, as
expressions of the divine justitia recompensativa, are not to be found;
נסּה and בחן become nowhere synonymous to designate Job's sufferings by
the right name; מסּה appears ([Job
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023).md) only in the general
signification of misfortune.)

besides which also this characteristic, that only the oldest mode of
heathen worship, star-worship ([Job
31:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026).md), is mentioned, without even
the name of God (צבאות יהוה or צבאות אלהים) occurring, which designates
God as Lord of the heavens, which the heathen deified. The writer has
also intentionally avoided this name, which is the star of the time of
the Israelitish kings; for he is never unmindful that his subject is an
ante-and extra-Israelitish one.

Hengstenberg, in his Lecture on the Book of Job, 1856, goes so far as to
maintain, that a character like Job cannot possibly have existed in the
heathen world, and that revelation would have been unnecessary if
heathendom could produce such characters for itself. The poet, however,
without doubt, presupposes the opposite; and if he did not presuppose
it, he should have refrained from using all his skill to produce the
appearance of the opposite. That he has nevertheless done it, cannot
mislead us: for, on the one hand, Job belongs to the patriarchal period,
therefore the period before the giving of the law, - a period in which
the early revelation was still at work, and the revelation of God, which
had not remained unknown in the side branches of the patriarchal family.
On the other hand, it is quite consistent with the standpoint of the
Chokma, that it presupposes a preparatory self-manifestation of God even
in the extra-Israelitish world; just as John's Gospel, which aims at
proving in Christianity the absolute religion which shall satisfy every
longing of all mankind, acknowledges τέκνα τοῦ Θεοῦ διεσκορπισμένα also
beyond the people of God, [Joh 11:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#052.md),
without on this account finding the incarnation of the Logos, and the
possibility of regeneration by it, to be superfluous.

This parallel between the book of Job and the Gospel by John is fully
authorized; for the important disclosure which the prologue of John
gives to us of the Logos, is already in being in the book of Job and the
introduction to the book of Proverbs, especially ch. 8, without
requiring the intervening element of the Alexandrine religious
philosophy, which, however, after it is once there, may not be put aside
or disavowed. The Alexandrine doctrine of the Logos is really the
genuine more developed form, though with many imperfections, of that
which is taught of the Chokma in the book of Job and in Proverbs. Both
notions have a universalistic comprehensiveness, referring not only to
Israel, but to mankind. The חכמה certainly took up its abode in Israel,
as it itself proves in the book Σοφια Σειραχ, ch. 24; but there is also
a share of it attainable by and allotted to all mankind. This is the
view of the writer even beyond Israel fellowship is possible with the
one living God, who has revealed himself in Israel; that He also there
continually reveals himself, ordinarily in the conscience, and
extraordinarily in dreams and visions; that there is also found there a
longing and struggling after that redemption of which Israel has the
clear words of promise. His wonderous book soars high above the Old
Testament limit; it is the Melchizedek among the Old Testament books.
The final and highest solution of the problem with which it grapples,
has a quarry extending out even beyond the patriarchal history. The
Wisdom of the book of Job originates, as we shall see, from paradise.
For this turning also to the primeval histories of Genesis, which are
earlier than the rise of the nations, and the investigation of the
hieroglyphs in the prelude to the Thora, which are otherwise almost
passed over in the Old Testament, belong to the peculiarities of the
Chokma.

3\. Position in the Canon

As a work of the Chokma, the book of Job stands, with the three other
works belonging to this class of the Israelitish literature, among the
Hagiographa, which are called in Hebrew simply כתובים. Thus, by the side
of תורה and נביאים, the third division of the canon is styled, in which
are included all those writings belonging neither to the province of
prophetic history nor prophetic declaration. Among the Hagiographa are
writings even of a prophetic character, as Psalms and Daniel; but their
writers were not properly נביאים. At present Lamentations stands among
them; but this is not its original place, as also Ruth appears to have
stood originally between Judges and Samuel. Both Lamentations and Ruth
are placed among the Hagiographa, that there the five so-called מגלות or
scrolls may stand together: Schir ha-Schirim the feast-book of the eight
passover-day, Ruth that of the second Schabuoth-day, Kinoth that of the
ninth of Ab, Koheleth that of the eight Succoth-day, Esther that of
Purim. The book of Job, which is written neither in
prophetico-historical style, nor in the style of prophetic preaching,
but is a didactic poem, could stand nowhere else but in the third
division of the canon. The position which it occupies is moreover a very
shifting one. In the Alexandrine canon, Chronicles, Ezra, Nehemiah,
Tobit, Judith, Esther, follow the four books of the Kings. The
historical books therefore stand, from the earliest to the latest, side
by side; then begins with Job, Psalms, Proverbs, a new row, opened with
these three in stricter sense poetical books. Then Melito of Sardis, in
the second century, places Chronicles with the books of the Kings, but
arranges immediately after them the non-historical Hagiographa in the
following order: Psalms, Proverbs, Ecclesiastes, Canticles, Job; here
the Salomonic writings are joined to the Davidic Psalter, and the
anonymous book of Job stands last. In our editions of the Bible, the
Hagiographa division begins with Psalms, Proverbs, Job (the succession
peculiar to MSS of the German class); in the Talmud (Bathra, 14b), with
Ruth, Psalms, Job, Proverbs; in the Masora, and in MSS of the Spanish
class, with Chronicles, Psalms, Job, Proverbs. All these modes of
arrangement are well considered. The Masora connects with the אחרונים
נביאים the homogeneous book, the Chronicles; the Talmud places the book
of Ruth before the Psalter as an historical prologue, or as a connection
between the prophetico-historical books and the Hagiographa.

(Note: That Job stands after the Psalms is explained by his being
contemporary with the Queen of Sheba, or, accepting Moses as the writer
of the book (in which case it should stand at the head of the
Chethubim), by its not being placed foremost, on account of its terrible
contents (according to the maxim בפרענותא מתחילינן לא).)

The practice in our editions is to put the Psalms as the first book of
the division, which agrees with [Luk
24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md), and with Philo, who places
ὕμνους next to the prophetical books. Job stands only in the lxx at the
head of the three so-called poetic books, perhaps as a work by its
patriarchal contents referring back to the earliest times. Everywhere
else the Psalter stands first among the three books. These three are
commonly denoted by the vox memoralis מתספרי א; but this succession,
Job, Proverbs, Psalms, is nowhere found. The Masora styles them after
its own, and the Talmudic order אםספרי ת.

4\. The System of Accentuation

Manner of Writing in Verses, and Structure of the Strophe

The so-ciphered three books have, as is known, this in common, that they
are (with the exception of the prologue and epilogue in the book of Job)
punctuated according to a special system, which has been fully discussed
in my Commentary on the Psalms, and in Baer's edition of the Psalter.
This accent system, like the prosaic, is constructed on the fundamental
law of dichotomy; but it is determined by better organization, more
expressive and melodious utterance. Only the so-called prose accents,
however, not the metrical or poetic (with the exception of a few
detached fragments), have been preserved in transmission. Nevertheless,
we are always still able to discern from these accents how the reading
in the synagogue divided the thoughts collected into the form of
Masoretic verses, into two chief divisions, and within these again into
lesser divisions, and connected or separated the single words; while the
musical rhythm accommodated itself as much as possible to the logical,
so that the accentuation is on this account an important source for
ascertaining the traditional exegesis, and contains an abundance of most
valuable hints for the interpreter. Tradition, moreover, requires for
the three books a verse-like short line stich-manner of writing; and
פסוק, versus, meant originally, not the Masoretic verse, but the
separate sentence, στίχος, denoted in the accent system by a great
distinctive; as e.g., [Job 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003.md) :

Let the day perish wherein I was born,

And the night, which said, There is a man-child conceived,

is a Masoretic verse divided into two parts by Athnach, and therefore,
according to the old order, is to be written as two στίχοι.

(Note: The meaning of this old order, and the aptness of its execution,
has been lost in later copyists, because they break off not according to
the sense, but only according to the space, as the στίχοι in numbering
the lines, e.g., of the Greek orators, are mere lines according to the
space (Raumzeile), at least according to Ritschl's view (Die alex.
Bibliotheken, 1838, S. 92-136), which, however, has been disputed by
Vmel. The old soferish order intends lines according to the sense, and
so also the Greek distinction by πέντε στιχηραὶ (στιχήρεις) βίβλοι,
i.e., Job, Psalms, Proverbs, Canticles, Ecclesiastes.)

This also is important. In order to recognise the strophe-structure of
Hebrew poems, one must attend to the στίχοι, in which the poetic
thoughts follow one another in well-measured flow. Parallelism, which we
must likewise acknowledge as the fundamental law of the rhythm of Hebrew
poetry, forms the evolutions of thought not always of two members, but
often - as e.g., [Job 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#004.md), [Job
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005.md), [Job
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006.md), [Job
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#009.md) - also of three. The poetic
formation is not, however, confined to this, but even further combines
(as is most unmistakeably manifest in the alphabetical psalms,

(Note: That from these we may proceed, the ancients here and there
conjectures; as e.g., Serpilius says, "It may perhaps occur to some,
whether now and then a slight judgment of the Davidic species of verse
and poesy may not be in some way formed from his, so to speak,
alphabetical psalms.")

and as recently also Ewald inclines to acknowledge)

(Note: On strophes in the book of Job, Jahrb. iii. 118: "That the
Masoretic division of the verses is not always correct, follows also
from a more exact consideration of the strophes. Here comes a further
question, whether one must determine the limit of such a strophe only
according to the verses, which are often in themselves very irregular,
or rather, strictly according to the members of the verse? The latter
seems to me, at least in some parts, certainly to be the case, as I have
already had opportunity to remark." Nevertheless, he reckons the
strophes in Neue Bemerkungen zum B. Ijob, Job 9:35-37, according to
lines = Masoretic verses.)

such distichs and tristichs into a greater whole, forming a complete
circle of thought; in other words, into strophes of four, eight, or some
higher number of lines, in themselves paragraphs, which, however, show
themselves as strophes, inasmuch as they recur and change symmetrically.
Hupfeld has objected that these strophes, as an aggregate formed of a
symmetrical number of stichs, are opposed to the nature of the rhythm =
parallelism, which cannot stand on one leg, but needs two; but this
objection is as invalid as if one should say, Because every soldier has
two legs, therefore soldiers can only march singly, and not in a row and
company. It may be seen, e.g., from [Job
36:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#022.md), [Job
36:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#026.md), [Job
36:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#030.md), where the poet begins three
times with הן, and three times the sentences so beginning are formed of
eight lines. Shall we not say there are three eight-line strophes
beginning with הן? Nevertheless, we are far from maintaining that the
book of Job consists absolutely of speeches in the strophe and poetic
form. It breaks up, however, into paragraphs, which not unfrequently
become symmetrical strophes. That neither the symmetrical nor mixed
strophe-schema is throughout with strict unexceptional regularity
carried out, arises from the artistic freedom which the poet was obliged
to maintain in order not to sacrifice the truth as well as the beauty of
the dialogue. Our translation, arranged in paragraphs, and the schemata
of the number of stichs in the paragraph placed above each speech, will
show that the arrangement of the whole is, after all, far more strophic
than its dramatic character allows, according to classic and modern
poetic art.

(Note: What Gottfr. Hermann, in his diss. de arte poesis Graecorum
bucolicae, says respecting the strophe-division in Theocritus, is
nevertheless to be attentively considered: Verendum est ne ipsi nobis
somnia fingamus perdamusque operam, si artificiosas stropharum
comparationes comminiscamur, de quibus ipsi poetae ne cogitaverint
quidem. Viderique potest id eo probabilius esse, quod saepenumero
dubitari potest, sic an aliter constituendae sint strophae. Nam poesis,
qualis haec bucolicorum est, quae maximam partem ex brevibus dictis est
composita, ipsa natura sua talis est ut in partes fere vel pares vel
similes dividi possit. Nihilo tamen minus illam strophicam rationem non
negligendam arbitror, ut quae apud poetas bucolicos in consuetudinem
vertisse videatur, etc.)

It is similar in Canticles, with the melodramatic character of which it
better agrees. In both cases it is explained from the Hebrew poesy being
in its fundamental peculiarity lyric, and from the drama not having
freed itself from the lyric element, and attained to complete
independence. The book of Job is, moreover, not a drama grown to
complete development. Prologue and epilogue are treated as history, and
the separate speeches are introduce din the narrative style. In the
latter respect (with the exception of [Job
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#010).md), Canticles is more directly
dramatic than the book of Job.

(Note: Hence there are Greek MSS, in which the names of the speakers
(e.g., ἡ νύμφη, αἱ νεανίδες, ὁ νυμφίος) are prefixed to the separate
parts of Canticles (vid., Repertorium fr bibl. u. morgenl. Lit. viii.
1781, S. 180). The Archimandrite Porphyrios, who in his Travels, 1856,
described the Codex Sinaiticus before Tischendorf, though
unsatisfactorily, describes there also such διαλογικῶς written MSS of
Canticles.)

The drama is here in reference to the strophic form in the garb of
Canticles, and in respect of the narrative form in the garb of history
or epopee. Also the book of Job cannot be regarded as drama, if we
consider, with G. Baur,

(Note: Das B. Hiob und Dante's Gttliche Camdie, Studien u. Krit. 1856,
iii.)

dramatic and scenic to be inseparable ideas; for the Jews first became
acquainted with the theatre from the Greeks and Romans.

(Note: See my Geschichte der jdischen Dramatik in my edition of the
Migdal Oz1 (hebr. handling of the Pastor fido of Guarini) by Mose Chajim
Luzzatto, Leipz. 1837.)

Nevertheless, it is questionable whether the drama everywhere
presupposes the existence of the stage, as e.g., A. W. v. Schlegel, in
his Lectures on Dramatic Art and Literature, maintains. Gthe, at least,
more than once asserts, that "drama and a composition for the stage may
be separate," and admits a "dramatic plot and execution" in Canticles.

(Note: Werke (neue Ausg. in 30 Bden.), xiii. 596; xxvi. 513f.)

5\. The Dramatic Art of the Plot and Execution

On the whole, we have as little hesitation as Hupfeld in calling the
book of Job a drama; and it is characteristic of the Israelitish Chokma,
that by Canticles and the book of Job, its two generic manifestations,
it has enriched the national poesy with this new form of poetic
composition. The book of Job is, though not altogether, yet
substantially, a drama, and one consisting of seven divisions: (1) ch.
1-3, the opening; (2) ch. 4-14, the first course of the controversy, or
the beginning entanglement; (3) ch. 15-21, the second course of the
controversy, or the increasing entanglement; (4) ch. 22-26, the third
course of the controversy, or the increasing entanglement at its
highest; (5) ch. 27-31, the transition from the entanglement (δέσις) to
the unravelling (λύσις): Job's monologues; (6) ch. 38-42:6, the
consciousness of the unravelling; (7) [Job
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007.md)., the unravelling in outward
reality. In this we have left Elihu'a speeches (ch. 32-37) out of
consideration, because it is very questionable whether they are a part
of the original form of the book, and not, on the contrary, the
introduction of another poet. If we include them, the drama has eight
divisions. The speeches of Elihu form an interlude in the transition
from the δέσις to the λύσις. The book of Job is an audience-chamber, and
one can readily suppose that a contemporary or later poet may have mixed
himself up with the speakers. Whether, however, this is really the case,
may remain here undecided. The prologue is narrative, but still partly
in dialogue style, and so far not altogether undramatical. In form it
corresponds most to the Euripidean, which also are a kind of epic
introduction to the pieces, and it accomplishes what Sophocles in his
prologues so thoroughly understands. At the very beginning he excites
interest in the occurrences to be brought forward, and makes us
acquainted with that which remains concealed from the actors. After the
knot of the puzzle is tied in the prologue, it becomes more and more
deeply entangled in the three courses of the controversy. In the
monologues of Job it begins to be disentangled, and in the sixth part
the unravelling follows, well prepared for, and therefore not ἀπὸ
μηχανῆς, and is perfected in the epilogue or exodus: the servant of God,
being so far as necessary cleared by penitence, is justified in
opposition to his friends; and the victor, tried in accordance with the
divine utterance, is crowned. It is therefore a continually progressing
history. The remark of Herder,

(Note: Geist der Ebrischen Poesi, 1805, i. S. 137.)

"Here all is stationary in long conversations," is superficial. It is
from beginning to end a stream of the most active life, with external
incident only in the opening and in the unravelling; what Shlegel says
of Gthe's Iphigenie holds good of the middle of the book, that the ideas
are worked into incidents, and brought, as it were, before the eye.
Moreover, as in Gthe's Tasso, the deficiency of external action is
compensated by the richness and precision with which the characters are
drawn. Satan, Job's wife, the hero himself, the three friends, -
everywhere diversified and minute description. The poet manifests, also,
dramatic skill in other directions. He has laid out the controversy with
a masterly hand, making the heart of the reader gradually averse to the
friends, and in the same degree winning it towards Job. He makes the
friends all through give utterance to the most glorious truths, which,
however, in the application to the case before them, turn out to be
untrue. And although the whole of the representation serves one great
idea, it is still not represented by any of the persons brought forward,
and is by no one expressly uttered. Every person is, as it were, the
consonant letter to the word of this idea; it is throughout the whole
book taken up with the realization of itself; at the end it first comes
forth as the resulting product of the whole. Job himself is not less a
tragic hero than the Oedipus of both Sophicles' tragedies.

(Note: Schultens says: Quidquid tragoedia vetus unquam Sophocleo vel
Aeschyleo molita est cothurno, infra magnitudinem, gravitatem, ardorem,
animositatem horum affectuum infinitum quantum subsidet. Similarly Ewald
(Jahrb. ix. 27): Neither the Hindoos, nor the Greek sand Romans, have
such a lofty and purely perfected poem to produce. One would perhaps
compare it with one of Aeschylus or Sophocles' tragedies as the nearest,
but we cannot easily find a single one among these approaching its
unblemished height and perfection in the midst of the greatest
simplicity.)

What is there an inevitable fate, expressed by the oracle, is in the
book of Job the decree of Jehovah, over whom is no controlling power,
decreed in the assembly of angels. As a painful puzzle the lot of
affliction comes down on Job. At the beginning he is the victor of an
easy battle, until the friends' exhortations to repentance are added to
suffering, which in itself is incomprehensible, and make it still harder
to be understood. He is thereby involved in a hard conflict, in which at
one time, full of arrogant self-confidence, he exalts himself
heavenward; at another time, sinks to the ground in desponding sadness.

The God, however, against which he fights is but a phantom, which the
temptation has presented to his saddened eye instead of the true God;
and this phantom is in no way different from the inexorable fate of the
Greek tragedy. As in that the hero seeks to maintain his inward freedom
against the secret power which crushes him with an iron arm; so Job
maintains his innocence against this God, which has devoted him to
destruction as an offender. But in the midst of this terrific conflict
with the God of the present, this creation of the temptation, Job's
faith gropes after the God of the future, to whom he is ever driven
nearer the more mercilessly the enemies pursue him. At length Jehovah
really appears, but not at Job's impetuous summons. He appears first
after Job has made a beginning of humble self-concession, in order to
complete the work begun, by condescendingly going forth to meet him.
Jehovah appears, and the fury vanishes. The dualism, which the Greek
tragedy leaves unabolished, is here reconciled. Human freedom does not
succumb; but it becomes evident that not an absolute arbitrary power,
but divine wisdom, whose inmost impulse is love, moulds human destiny.

6\. Time of Composition

That this masterpiece of religious reflection and systematic creative
art - this, to use Luther's expression, lofty and grand book, in which,
as the mountains round an Alpine valley, all the terribly sublime that
nature and human history present is ranged one above another - belongs
to no other than the Salomonic period, we might almost assume, even if
it were not confirmed on all sides. The opinion that Moses wrote the
book of Job before the giving of the law, is found in the Talmuds (jer.
Sota V. 8; b. Bathra, 15a). This view has been recently revived by
Ebrard (1858). But how improbable, all but impossible, that the poetical
literature of Israel should have taken its rise with such a non plus
ultra of reflective poetry, and that this poem should have had Moses the
lawgiver for its author? "Moses certainly is not the composer of the
book of Job," says Herder rightly,

(Note: Geist der Ebr. Poesie, 1805, i. S. 130.)

"or Solon might have written the Iliad and the Eumenides of Aeschylus."
This opinion, which is also found in Origen, Jerome, Polychronius, and
Julian of Halicarnassus, would surely never have suggested itself to any
one, had not the studious avoidance in the book of all reference to the
law, prophecy, history, religious worship, and even of the religious
terminology of Israel, consequent on its design, produced the appearance
of a pre-Sinaitic origin. But, first, this absence of such reference is,
as we have already seen, the result of the genius and aim which belong
to the book; secondly, the writer distinctly enough betrays his
acquaintance with the Thora: for as the Chokma for the most part
necessarily presupposes the revelation of God deposited in the Thora,
and is even at pains to show its universal and eternal ideas, and its
imperishable nature full of meaning for all men, so a book like the book
of Job could only have been written by an Israelitish author, only have
sprung from the spiritual knowledge and experience rendered possible by
the Thora.

(Note: Reggio indeed maintains (Kerem Chemed, vi. 53-60) in favour of
the Mosaic pre-Sinaitic composition: "God is only represented as the
Almighty, the Ruler of the universe: His love, mercy, forbearance -
attributes which the Thora first revealed - are nowhere mentioned;" and
S. D. Luzzatto concludes from this even the non-Israelitish origin of
the book: "The God of Job is not the God of Israel, the gracious One: He
is the almighty and just, but not the kind and true One;" but although
the book does not once use the words goodness, love, forbearance,
compassion of God, it is nevertheless a bright example of them all; and
it is the love of God which it manifests as a bright ray in the dark
mystery of the affliction of the righteous.)

For as insight into the groping of the heathen world after divine truth
is only possible in the light of Christianity, so also such a
spiritually bold and accurate reproduction of an old patriarchal
tradition was only possible in the light of the revelation of Jehovah:
not to mention that the middle part of the book is written in the style
of the book of Proverbs, the surrounding parts in evident imitation of
the style of the primitive histories of the Pentateuch.

But as the supposition of a pre-Salomonic composition is proved invalid,
so also are all the grounds on which it has been sought to prove a
post-Salomonic. Ewald, whom Heiligstedt and Renan follow, is of opinion
that it shows very unsettled and unfortunate times in the background,
and from this and other indications was written under Manasseh; Hirzel,
that the writer who is so well acquainted with Egypt, seems to have been
carried into Egypt with King Jehoahaz; Stickel, that the book
presupposes the invasion of the Asiatic conqueror as begun, but not yet
so far advanced as the destruction of Jerusalem; Bleek, that it must
belong to the post-Salomonic period, because it seems to refer to a
previous comprehensive diversified literature. But all this rests on
invalid grounds, false observation, and deceptive conclusions. Indeed,
the assumption that a book which sets forth such a fearful conflict in
the depths of affliction must have sprung from a time of gloomy national
distress, is untenable: it is sufficient to suppose that the writer
himself has experienced the like, and experienced it at a time when all
around him were living in great luxury, which must have greatly
aggravated his trial. It would be preferable to suppose that the book of
Job belongs to the time of the exile (Umbreit and others), and that Job,
though not exactly a personification of Israel, is still לרשׂראל משׁל,

(Note: Vid., c. 90 of Ez chajim, by Ahron b. Elias of Nicomedia, edited
by Delitzsch, 1841, which corresponds to More Nebuchim, iii. 22-24. The
view that the poet himself, by Job intended the Israel of the exile
(according to Warburton, the Israel of the restoration after the exile;
according to Grotius, the Edomites carried into exile by the
Babylonians), is about the same as the view that the guilty Pericles may
be intended by King Oedipus, or the Sophists by the Odysseus of the
Philoctetes.)

a pattern for the people of the exile (Bernstein); for this view,
interesting indeed in itself, has the similarity of several passages of
the second part of the book of Isaiah in its favour: comp. [Isa
40:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#014.md) with [Job
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#022.md); [Isa
40:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#023.md) with [Job
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#024.md); [Isa
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025.md) with [Job
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#017.md), [Job
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#020.md); [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024.md) with [Job
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008.md); [Isa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#004.md) with [Job
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035.md); [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015.md). These, however, only prove that
the severely tried ecclesia pressa of the exiles might certainly
recognise itself again in the example of Job, and make it seem far more
probable that the book of Job is older than that period of Israel's
suffering.

The literature of the Chokma began with Solomon. First in the time of
Solomon, whose peculiar gift was worldly wisdom, a time which bears the
character of peaceful contemplation resulting from the conflicts of
belief of David's time,

(Note: Thus far Gaupp, Praktische Theol. ii. 1, 488, is in some degree
right, when he considers the book of Job a living testimony of the new
spirit of belief which was bursting forth in David's time.)

the external and internal preliminary conditions for it existed. The
chief part of Proverbs and Canticles is by Solomon himself; the
introductory passages (Prov 1-9) represent a later period of the Chokma,
probably the time of Jehoshaphat; the book of Ecclesiastes, which is
rightly assigned by H. G. Bernstein in his Questiones Kohelethanae to
the time between Artaxerxes I Longimanus, and Darius Codomannus, and
perhaps belongs to the time of Artaxerxes II Mnemon, represents the
latest period. The book of Job is indicated as a work of the first of
these three periods, by its classic, grand, and noble form. It bears
throughout the stamp of that creative, beginning-period of the Chokma, -
of that Salomonic age of knowledge and art, of deeper thought respecting
revealed religion, and of intelligent, progressive culture of the
traditional forms of art, - that unprecedented age, in which the
literature corresponded to the summit of glorious magnificence to which
the kingdom of the promise had then attained. The heart of Solomon
(according to [Kg1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#009.md)., Hebrew
version; [Kg1 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#029), English version.md)
enclosed within itself a fulness of knowledge, "even as the sand that is
on the seashore:" his wisdom was greater than the קרם בני, from whom the
traditional matter of the book of Job is borrowed; greater than the
wisdom of the מצרים, with whose country and natural marvels the author
of the book of Job is intimately acquainted. The extensive knowledge of
natural history and general science displayed in the book of Job, is the
result of the wide circle of observation which Israel had reached. It
was a time when the chasm between Israel and the nations was more than
ever bridged over. The entire education of Israel at that time took a so
to speak cosmopolitan direction. It was a time introductory to the
extension of redemption, and the triumph of the religion of Israel, and
the union of all nations in belief on the God of love.

7\. Signs from the Doctrinal Contents

That the book of Job belongs to this period and no other, is confirmed
also by the relation of its doctrinal contents to the other canonical
writings. If we compare the doctrine respecting Wisdom - her
super-eminence, applicability to worldly matters, and co-operation in
the creation of the world - in Prov 1-9, especially ch. 8, with Job 28,
it is there manifestly more advanced, and further developed. If we
compare the pointing to the judgment of God, [Job
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#029.md), with the hint of a future
general judgment, which shall decide and adjust all things, in [Ecc
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014.md), we see at once that what comes
forward in the former passage only at first as an expression of personal
belief, is in the latter already become a settled element of general
religious consciousness.

And however we may interpret that brilliant passage of the book of Job,
[Job 19:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025.md), - whether it be the
beholding of God in the present bodily, future spiritual, or future
glorified state, - it is by no means an echo of an already existing
revelation of the resurrection of the dead, that acknowledgment of
revelation which we see breaking forth and expanding throughout [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019.md), comp. [Isa
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#008.md), and Ezek 37 comp. [Hos
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002.md), until [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002.md). The prevailing representations
of the future in the book of Job are exactly the same as those in the
Psalms of the time of David and Solomon, and in the Proverbs of Solomon.
The writer speaks as one of the same age in which Heman sighed, [Psa
88:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#011.md)., "Wilt Thou show wonders to the
dead? or shall the shades arise and praise Thee? Shall Thy
loving-kindness be declared in the grave, Thy faithfulness in the
abyss?" Besides, the greatest conceivable fulness of allusion to the
book of Job, including Elihu's speeches, is found in Ps 88 and 89, whose
authors, Heman and Ethan, the Ezrahites, are not the same as the chief
singers of David and of the same name, but the contemporaries of Solomon
mentioned in [Kg1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011.md). These two
psalms coincide with the book of Job, both in expressions with which
remarkable representations are united, as קרושׁים of the celestial
spirits, רפאים of the shades in Hades, אבדון of Hades itself, and also
in expressions which do not occur elsewhere in the Old Testament, as
אמים and בּעתים; and the agreement is manifest, moreover, in the
agreement of whole verses either in thought or in expression: comp. [Psa
89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038.md) with [Job
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#019.md); [Psa
89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048.md) with [Job
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#007.md); [Psa
89:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#049.md) with [Job
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014.md); [Psa
88:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005.md) with [Job
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#010.md); [Psa
88:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#009.md) with [Job
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010.md); [Psa
89:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#008.md) with [Job
31:34](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#034.md). In all these passages, however,
there is no such similarity as suggests a borrowing, but an agreement
which, since it cannot possibly be accidental, may be most easily
explained by supposing that the book of Job proceeds from just the same
Chokma-fellowship to which, according to [Kg1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011.md), the two Ezrahites, the writers
of Ps 88 and 89, belong.

One might go further, and conjecture that the same Heman who composed Ps
88, the gloomiest of all the Psalms, and written under circumstances of
suffering similar to Job's, may be the author of the book of Job - for
which many probable reasons might be advanced; by which also what G.
Baur rightly assumes would be confirmed, that the writer of the book of
Job has himself passed through the inward spiritual conflict which he
describes, and accordingly gives a page from his own religious history.
But we are satisfied with the admission, that the book of Job is the
work of one of the wise men whose rendezvous was the court of Solomon.
Gregory of Nazianzen and Luther have already admitted the origin of the
book in Solomon's time; and among later critics, Rosenmller, Hvernick,
Vaihinger, Hahn, Schlottmann, Keil, and Hofmann (though in his
Weissagung und Erfllung he expressed the opinion that it belongs to the
Mosaic period), are agreed in this.

(Note: Also Professor Barnwell, in the Carolina Times, 1857, No. 785,
calls the book of Job "the most brilliant flower of this brighter than
Elizabethan and nobler than Augustan era.")

8\. Echoes in the Later Sacred Writings

It may be readily supposed, that a book like this, which is occupied
with a question of such vital import to every thinking and pious man, -
which treats it in such a lively manner, riveting the attention, and
bespeaking sympathy, - which, apart from its central subject, is so
many-sided, so majestically beautiful in language, and so inexhaustible
in imagery, - will have been one of the most generally read of the
national books of Israel. Such is found to be the case; and also hereby
its origin in the time of Solomon is confirmed: for at this very period
it is to Ps 88-89 only that it stands in the mutual relation already
mentioned. But the echoes appear as early as in the חכמים דברי, which
are appended to the Salomonic משׁלי in the book of Proverbs: comp. the
teaching from an example in the writer's own experience, [Pro
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#030.md). with [Job
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003.md). The book of Job, however, next to
the Proverbs of Solomon, was the favourite source of information for the
author of the introductory proverbs (Prov 1-9). Here (apart from the
doctrine of wisdom) we find whole passages similar to the book of Job:
comp. [Pro 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#011.md) with [Job
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#017.md); [Pro
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025.md) with [Job
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007.md); [Pro
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#015.md) with [Job
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#018.md).

Then, in the prophets of the flourishing period of prophetic literature,
which begins with Obadiah and Joel, we find distinct traces of
familiarity with the book of Job. Amos describes the glory of God the
Creator in words taken from it ([Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013.md); [Amo
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008.md), after [Job
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#008.md); cf. [Job
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#022.md); [Job
38:31](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#031).md). Isaiah has introduced a whole
verse of the book of Job, almost verbatim, into his prophecy against
Egypt ([Isa 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#005.md) = [Job
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#011).md): in the same prophecy, [Isa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013.md). refer to [Job
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#024.md)., so also [Isa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003.md) to [Job
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#004.md). These reminiscences of the book
of Job are frequent in Isaiah (Isa 40-66). This book of solace for the
exiles corresponds to the book of Job not only in words, which
exclusively belong in common to the two (as גּזע and צאצאים), and in
surprising similarity of expression (as [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009.md), comp. [Job
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#017.md); [Isa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006.md), comp. [Job
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#011).md), but also in numerous passages
of similar thought and form (comp. [Isa
40:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#023.md) with [Job
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#024).md); and in the description of the
Servant of Jehovah, one is here and there involuntarily reminded of the
book of Job (as [Isa 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006.md), comp. with
[Job 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#010).md). In Jeremiah, the short
lyric passage, [Jer 20:14-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#014.md), in which
he curses the day of his birth, falls back on Job 3: the form in which
the despondency of the prophet breaks forth is determined by the book of
Job, with which he was familiar. It requires no proof that the same
prophet follows the book of Job in many passages of Lamentations, and
especially the first part of Lam 3: he makes use of confessions,
complaints, and imagery from the affliction of Job, to represent the
affliction of Israel.

By the end of the time of the kings, Job was a person generally known in
Israel, a recognised saint: for Ezekiel, in the year 593-2 b.c. ([Eze
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#014)..md), complains that the measure of
Israel's sin is so great, that if Noah, Daniel, and Job were in the
midst of Israel, though they might save themselves, they would not be
able to hold back the arm of divine justice. The prophet mentions first
Noah, a righteous man of the old world; then Daniel, a righteous man of
contemporary Israel; and last of all Job, a righteous man beyond the
line of the promise.

(Note: Hengstenberg (Beitrge, i. 72) thinks Job is mentioned last
because less suited to Ezekiel's purpose than Noah and Daniel. Carpzov
(Introd. in ll. poet. p. 35) is more ingenious, but too artificial, when
he finds an anti-climax in the order: Noachus in clade primi mundi
aecumenica, Daniel in clade patriae ac gentis suae, Iobus in clade
familiae servatus est.)

He would not, however, have been able to mention him, if he had not, by
means of the written narrative, been a person well known among the
people to whom the prophetical discourse was addressed. The literature
of the Old Testament has no further reference to the question of the
time of the composition of the book of Job; for, on a comparison of [Ecc
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#014.md) with [Job
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021.md), it scarcely remains a question
to which the priority belongs.

9\. The Chief Critical Questions

Whether, however, the whole book, as we now have it, comes from the time
of Solomon, as the work of one poet, or of one chief poet,

(Note: Compare Bttcher, Aehrenlese, S. 68: "Respecting the mode of
composition, we think there was one chief poet, with several
contemporary associates, incited by a conversation on the then (i.e.,
according to Bttcher's view, in the reign of Manasseh) frequent
afflictions of the innocent.")

is a question which can be better determined in the course of the
exposition. More or less important doubts have been entertained whether
some constituent parts of the whole belong to the original setting. By
far the most important question of criticism respects the six chapters
of Elihu's speeches (ch. 32-37), respecting which the suspicion
entertained by the fathers, and first decidedly expressed by Stuhlmann
(1804), that not only in form are they inferior to the artistic
execution of the rest of the work, but also in contents are opposed to
its original plan, is not yet set aside, and perhaps never will be
altogether satisfactorily settled. Besides this, Kennicot also has
suspected the speech of Job, Job 27:11-28:28, because there Job seems to
yield to the friends' controverted doctrine of retribution. De Wette is
more inclined here to suppose a want of connection on the part of the
writer than an interpolation. We shall have to prove whether this speech
of Job really encroaches upon the province of the unravelling, or
renders the transition more complete.

The whole description of Behemoth and Leviathan, Job 40:15-41:26, is
regarded by Ewald as a later addition: De Wette extends this judgment
only to Job 41:4-26: Eichhorn was satisfied at first with changing the
order of Jehovah's speeches; but in the last edition of his Einleitung
ascribed the passage about the two monsters to a later poet. The
exposition will have to bring the form of expression of the supposed
interpolation, and its relation to the purpose of the second speech of
Jehovah, in comparison with the first, under consideration. But we need
not defer our judgment of the prologue and epilogue. All the doubts
raised by Stuhlmann, Bernstein, Knobel (diss. de carminis Iobi
argumento, fine ac dispositione, and Studien u. Kritiken, 1842, ii.),
and others, respecting both these essential parts, are put an end to by
the consideration, that the middle part of the book, without them, is a
torso without head and feet.

10\. The Satan of the Prologue

But the Satan in the prologue is a stumbling-block to many, which, if it
does not lead them to doubt the authenticity of the prologue, still
causes them to question whether the composition of the book belongs to
the time of Solomon. For Satan is first definitely named, [Zac
3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md), and [Ch1
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#001.md); consequently in writings of the
period after the exile. On the other hand, שׁטן, [Num
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#022.md), appellatively describes one who
comes forward hostilely, or as a hindrance; and [Psa
109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md) is at least open to question
whether the prince of evil spirits may not be meant, which, according to
[Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md), seems to be intended.
However, in Micaiah's vision, [Kg1
22:19-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#019.md), where one might expect
השׂטן, הרוח is used. It is even maintained in the present day, that the
idea of Satan was first obtained by the Israelitish race from contact
with the East-Asiatic nations, which began with Israel in the time of
Menahem, with Judah in the time of Ahaz; the view of Diestel, that it is
the copy of the Egyptian Set-Typhon, stands at present alone. When we
consider that the redemptive work of Jesus Christ is regarded by Him and
His apostles from one side as the overthrow of Satan, it were a
miserable thing for the divine truth of Christianity that this Satan
should be nothing more than a copy of the Persian Ahriman, and
consequently a mere phantom. However, supposing there were some such
connection, we should then have only two periods at which the book of
Job could possibly have been composed, - the time after the exile, and
the time of Solomon; for these are the only periods at which not only
collision, but also an interchange of ideas, between Israel and the
profane nations could have taken place. It is also just as possible for
the conception of Satan to have taken possession of the Israelitish mind
under Solomon as during the exile, especially as it is very questionable
whether the religion of Cyrus, as found in the Zend books, may not have
been far more influenced by Israel, than, contrariwise, have influenced
Israel.

But the conception of Satan is indeed much older in its existence than
the time of Solomon: the serpent of paradise must surely have appeared
to the inquiring mind of Israel as the disguise of an evil spirit; and
nothing further can be maintained, than that this evil spirit, which in
the Mosaic worship of the great day of atonement is called עזאזל (called
later זבוב בעל, a name borrowed from the god of Ekron), appears first in
the later literature of Israel under the name השׂטן. If now, moreover,
the Chokma of the Salomonic period was specially conversant with the
pre-Israelitish histories of Genesis, whence indeed even the chief
thought of Canticles and the figure of חיים עץ, e.g., frequently
occurring in Proverbs are drawn, it is difficulty to conceive why the
evil spirit, that in its guise of a serpent aimed its malice against
man, could not have been called השׂטן so early as the Salomonic period.

The wisdom of the author of the book of Job, we have said above, springs
from paradise. Thence he obtains the highest and ultimate solution of
his problem. It is now time to give expression to this. At present we
need only do so in outline, since it is simply of use to place us from
the commencement at the right standpoint for understanding the book of
Job.

11\. The Ultimate Solution of the Problem

The nature of sin is two-sided. It consists in the creature's setting up
himself in opposition to God, who is the essence of the personality of
the creature. It consists also, on the other side, in the stirring up of
the depth of the nature of the creature, whose essential consistence has
its harmony in God; and by this stirring up, falls into a wild
confusion. In other words, evil has a personal side and a natural side.
And just so, also, is God's wrath which it excites, and which operates
against it. For God's wrath is, on the one hand, the personal
displeasure or aversion into which His love is changed, since the will
of the creature and the will of God are in opposition; on the other
hand, an excited condition of the contrary forces of the divine nature,
or, as Scripture expresses it, the kindling of the fire of the divine
glory, in which sense it is often said of wrath, that God sends it
forth, that He pours it forth, and that man has to drink of it ([Job
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#020.md), comp. [Job
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#004).md).

(Note: Vid., my Proleg. to Weber's book on the Wrath of God.)

In reference to the creature, we call evil according to its personal
side ἔχηθρα, and according to its natural side ἀταξία, turba.

(Note: Vid., Biblische Psychologie, S. 128, 160.)

Both personal evil and natural evil have originated in the spirit world:
first of all, in a spirit nearest to God, which as fallen is called
השׂטן. It has sought its own selfish ends, and thereby deranged its
nature, so that it has become in every respect the object of the divine
wrath, and the material for the burning of the divine wrath: for the
echthra and turba have the intention and the burning of the wrath of God
in themselves as divine correlata; but Satan, after that he has become
entirely possessed of these divine powers (Energien), is also their
instrument. The spirit of light and love is altogether become the spirit
of fire and wrath; the whole sphere of wrath is centred in him. After
having given up his high position in the realm of light, he is become
lord of the realm of wrath.

He has, from the commencement of his fall, the hell within himself, but
is first cast into the lake of fire at the end of the present
dispensation ([Mat 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041.md); [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010.md) : comp. [Dan
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011).md). In the meantime, he is being
deprived of his power by the Son of man, who, in the midst of His own
and His disciples' victories over the demons, beholds him fall as
lightning from heaven ([Luk 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018).md),
and by His death gives him his deathblow, - a final judgment, which,
later on, becomes fully manifest in the continuous degradation of the
vanquished (comp. [Rev 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009.md); [Rev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003.md), [Rev
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010).md). Accordingly, when Satan, in
the book of Job, still appears among the angles of God in heaven, and
indeed as κατήγωρ, it is quite in accordance with the disclosures which
the New Testament Scriptures give us respecting the invisible angelic
side of the present dispensation.

Thus Job's suffering is a dispensation of love, but brought about by the
wrath-spirit, and with every appearance of wrath. It is so with every
trial and chastisement of the righteous. And it cannot be otherwise; for
trial is designed to be for man a means of overcoming the evil that is
external to him, and chastisement of overcoming the evil that is within
him. There is a conflict between evil and good in the world, which can
issue in victory to the good only so, that the good proves itself in
distinction from the evil, withstands the assault of evil, and destroys
the evil that exists bound up with itself: only so, that the good as far
as it is still mixed with the evil is refined as by fire, and more and
more freed from it.

This is the twofold point of view from which the suffering of Job is to
be regarded. It was designed, first of all, that Job should prove
himself in opposition to Satan, in order to overcome him; and since Job
does not pass through the trial entirely without sinning, it has the
effect at the same time of purifying and perfecting him. In both
respects, the history of Job is a passage from the history of God's own
conflict with the evil one, which is the substance of the history of
redemption, and ends in the triumph of the divine love. And Gaupp

(Note: Praktische Theologie, ii. 1, S. 488f.)

well says: In the book of Job, Satan loses a cause which is intended
only as prelude to the greatest of all causes, since judgment is gone
forth over the world, and the prince of darkness has been cast forth.
Accordingly the church has always recognised in the passion of Job a
type of the passion of Jesus Christ. James ([Jam
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011).md) even compares the patience of
Job and the issue of the Lord's sufferings. And according to this
indication, it was the custom after the second century to read the book
of Job in the churches during passion-week.

(Note: Vid., Origen's Opp. t. ii. p. 851: In conventu ecclesiae in
diebus sanctis legitur passio Iob, in deibus jejunii, in diebus
abstinentiae, in diebus, in quibus tanquam compatiuntur ii qui jejunant
et abstinent admirabili illo Iob, in deibus, in quibus in jejunio et
abstinentia sanctam Domini nostri Jesu Christi passionem sectamur. Known
thus from the public reading in the churches, Job was called among the
Syrians, Machbono, the Beloved, the Friend (Ewald, Jahrb. x. 207); and
among the Arabs, Es-ssabûr, the patient one.)

The ultimate solution of the problem which this marvellous book sets
forth, is then this: the suffering of the righteous, in its deepest
cause, is the conflict of the seed of the woman with the seed of the
serpent, which ends in the head of the serpent being trampled under
foot; it is the type or copy of the suffering of Christ, the Holy God,
who has himself borne our sins, and in the constancy of His reconciling
love has withstood, even to the final overthrow, the assault of wrath
and of the angel of wrath.

The real contents of the book of Job is the mystery of the Cross: the
Cross on Golgotha is the solution of the enigma of every cross; and the
book of Job is a prophecy of this ultimate solution.

12\. The History of the Exposition

Before proceeding to the exposition, we will take a brief review of the
history of the exposition of the book. The promise of the Spirit to lead
into all truth is continually receiving its fulfilment in the history of
the church, and especially in the interpretation of Scripture. But
nowhere is the progress of the church in accordance with this promise so
manifest as in the exposition of the word, and particularly of the Old
Testament. In the patristic and middle ages, light was thrown only on
detached portions of the Old Testament; they lacked altogether, or had
but an inadequate knowledge of, the Hebrew language. They regarded the
Old Testament not as the forerunner, but allegory, of the New, and paid
less attention to it in proportion as the spiritual perception of the
church lost its apostolic purity and freshness. However, so far as
inward spiritual feeling and experience could compensate for the almost
entire absence of outward conditions, this period has produced and
handed down many valuable explanations.

But at the time of the Reformation, the light of the day which had
already dawned first spread in all its brightness over the Old
Testament. The knowledge of Hebrew, until then the private possession of
a few, became the public property of the church: all erroneous
interventions which had hitherto separated the church both from Christ
and from the living source of the word were put aside; and starting from
the central truth of justification by faith and its results, a free but
still not unrestricted investigation commenced. Still there was wanting
to this period all perception of historical development, and
consequently the ability to comprehend the Old Testament as preparing
the way for the New by its gradual historical development of the plan of
redemption. The exposition of Scripture, moreover, soon fell again under
the yoke of an enslaving tradition, of a scholastic systematizing, and
of an unhistorical dogmatizing which mistook its peculiar aim; and this
period of bondage, devoid of spirituality, was followed by a period of
false freedom, that of rationalism, which cut asunder the mutual
relation between the exposition of Scripture and the confession of the
church, since it reduced the covenant contents of the church's
confession to the most shallow notion of God and the most trivial moral
rules, and regarded the Old Testament as historical indeed, but with
carnal eyes, which were blind to the work of God that was preparing the
way in the history of Israel for the New Testament redemption. The
progress of exegesis seemed at that time to have been stayed; but the
Head of the church, who reigns in the midst of His enemies, caused the
exposition of His word to come forth again from the dead in a more
glorious form. The bias towards the human side of Scripture has taught
exegesis that Scripture is neither altogether a divine, nor altogether a
human, but a divine-human book. The historical method of regarding it,
and the advanced knowledge of language, have taught that the Old
Testament presents a divine-human growth tending towards the God-man, a
gradual development and declaration of the divine purpose of salvation,
- a miraculous history moving inward towards that miracle of all
miracles, Jesus Christ. Believing on Him, bearing the seal of His Spirit
in himself, and partaking of the true liberty His Spirit imparts, the
expositor of Scripture beholds in the Old Testament, with open face, now
as never before, the glory of the Lord.

The truth of this sketch is confirmed by the history of the exposition
of the book of Job. The Greek fathers, of whom twenty-two (including
Ephrem) are quoted in the Catena,

(Note: It contains as basis the Greek text of the book of Job from the
Cod. Alexandrinus, arranged in stichs.)

published by Patricius Junius, 1637, furnish little more than could be
expected. If there by any Old Testament book whose comprehensive meaning
is now first understood according to the external and internal
conditions of its gradual advance to maturity, it is the book of Job.
The Greek fathers were confined to the lxx, without being in a position
to test that translation by the original text; and it is just the Greek
translation of the book of Job which suffers most seriously from the
flaws which in general affect the lxx. Whole verses are omitted, others
are removed from their original places, and the omissions are filled up
by apocryphal additions.

(Note: On this subject vid., Gust. Bickel's De indole ac ratione
versionis Alexandrinae in interpretando l. Iobi, just published (1863).)

Origen was well aware of this (Ep. ad Afric. 3f.), but he was not
sufficiently acquainted with Hebrew to give a reliable collation of the
lxx with the original text in his Tetrapla and Hexapla; and his
additions (denoted by daggers), and the passages restored by him from
other translators, especially Theodotion (by asterisks), deprive the
Septuagint text of its original form, without, however, giving a correct
impression of the original text. And since in the book of Job the
meaning of the whole is dependent upon the meaning of the most isolated
passage, the full meaning of the book was a perfect impossibility to the
Greek fathers. They occupied themselves much with this mysterious book,
but typical and allegorical could not make up what was wanting to the
fathers, of grammatical and historical interpretation. The Italic, the
next version to the lxx, was still more defective than this: Jerome
calls the book of Job in this translation, Decurtatus et laceratus
corrosusque. He revised it by the text of the Hexapla, and according to
his own plan had to supply not less than about 700-800 versus (στίχοι).
His own independent translation is far before its age; but he himself
acknowledges its defectiveness, inasmuch as he relates, in his praefatio
in l. Iob, how it was accomplished. He engaged, non parvis numis, a
Jewish teacher from Lydda, where there was at that time an university,
but confesses that, after he had gone through the book of Job with him,
he was no wiser than before: Cujus doctrina an aliquid profecerim
nescio; hoc unum scio, non potuisse me interpretari nisi quod antea
intellexeram. On this account he calls it, as though he would complain
of the book itself, obliquus, figuratus, lubricus, and says it is like
an eel - the more tightly one holds it, the faster it glides away. There
were then three Latin versions of the book of Job, - the Italic, the
Italic improved by Jerome, and the independent translation of Jerome,
whose deviations, as Augustine complains, produced no little
embarrassment. The Syrians were better off with their Peschito, which
was made direct from the original text;

(Note: Perhaps with the use of the Jewish Targum, though not the one
extant, for Talmudic literature recognises the existence of a Targum of
the book of Job before the destruction of the temple, b. Sabbath, 115a,
etc. Besides, the lxx was considered of such authority in the East, that
the monophysite Bishop Paulus of Tela, 617, formed a new Syriac
translation from the lxx and the text of the Hexapla Published by
Middeldorff, 1834-35; cf. his Curae hexaplares in Iobum, 1817).)

but the Scholia of Ephrem (pp. 1-19, t. ii. of the three Syriac tomi of
his works) contain less that is useful than might be expected.

(Note: Froriep. Ephraemiana in l. Iobi, 1769, iv., says much about these
Scholia to little purpose.)

The succeeding age produced nothing better.

Among the expositors of the book of Job we find some illustrious names:
Gregory the Great, Beda Venerabilis (whose Commentary has been
erroneously circulated as the still undiscovered Commentary of Jerome),
Thomas Aquinas, Albertus Magnus,

(Note: His Postillae super Iob are still unprinted.)

and others; but no progress was made in the interpretation of the book,
as the means were wanting. The principal work of the middle ages was
Gregory the Great's Expositio in beatum Iob seu Moralium, ll. xxxv., a
gigantic work, which leaves scarcely a dogmatic-ethical theme untouched,
though in its own proper sphere it furnishes nothing of importance, for
Gregory explained so, ut super historiae fundamentum moralitatis
construeret aedificium et anagoges imposuerit culmen praestantissimum

(Note: Notker quoted by Dmmler, Formelbuch des Bischof's Salomo von
Constanz, 1857, S. 67f.)

but the linguistic-historical foundation is insufficient, and the
exposition, which gives evidence of significant character and talent,
accordingly goes off almost constantly into digressions opposed to its
object.

It was only towards the end of the middle ages, as the knowledge of the
Hebrew language began, through Jewish converts, to come into the church,
that a new era commenced. For what advance the Jewish exposition of the
book of Job had hitherto made, beyond that of the church, it owed to the
knowledge of Hebrew; although, in the absence of any conception of the
task of the expositor, and especially the expositor of Scripture, it
knew not how fittingly to turn it to account. Saadia's (born 890) Arabic
translation of the book of Job, with explanations,

(Note: Vid., Ewald-Duke's Beitrge zur Gesch. der ltesten Auslegung und
Spracherklrung des A. T. 2 Bdd. 1844.)

does not accomplish much more than that of Jerome, if we may in general
say that it surpasses it. Salomo Isaaki of Troyes (Raschi, erroneously
called Jarchi), whose Commentary on the Book of Job (rendered incomplete
by his death, 1105) was completed by his grandson, Samuel b. Mer
(Raschbam, died about 1160),

(Note: Respecting this accounts are uncertain: vid., Geiger, Die
franzsische Exegetenschule (1855), S. 22; and comp. de Rossi, Catalogus
Cod. 181. Zunz, Zur Geschichte und Literatur.)

contains a few attempts at grammatical historical exposition, but is in
other respects entirely dependent on Midrash Haggada (which may be
compared with the church system of allegorical interpretation), whose
barren material is treasured up in the catena-like compilations, one of
which to the collected books of the Old Testament bears the name of
Simeon ha-Darschan (שמעוני ילקוט); the other to the three poetical
books, the name of Machir b. Todros (מכירי ילקוט). Abenezra the
Spaniard, who wrote his Commentary on the Book of Job in Rome, 1175,
delights in new bold ideas, and to enshroud himself in a mystifying
nimbus. David Kimchi, who keeps best to the grammatical-historical
course, has not expounded the book of Job; and a commentary on this book
by his brother, Mose Kimchi, is not yet brought to light. The most
important Jewish works on the book of Job are without doubt the
Commentaries of Mose b. Nachman or Nahmanides (Ramban), born at Gerona
1194, and Levi b. Gerson, or Gersonides (Ralbag), born at Bagnols 1288.
Both were talented thinkers; the former more of the Platonic, the latter
of the Aristotelic type. Their Commentaries (taken up in the collective
Rabbinical Commentaries), especially that of the latter, were widely
circulated in the middle ages. They have both a philosophical bias.

(Note: Other older commentaries bearing on the history of exposition, as
Menahem b. Chelbo, Joseph Kara, Parchon, and others, are not yet known;
also that of the Italian poet Immanuel, a friend of Dante, is still
unprinted. The rabbinical commentaries contain only, in addition, the
Commentary of Abraham Farisol of Avignon (about 1460).)

What is to be found in them that is serviceable on any point, may be
pretty well determined from the compilation of Lyra. Nikolaus de Lyra,
author of Postillae perpetuae in universa Biblia (completed 1330),
possessed, for that age, an excellent knowledge of the original text,
the necessity of which he acknowledged, and regarded the sensus
literalis as basis of all other sensus. But, on the one hand, he was not
independent of his Jewish predecessors; on the other, he was fettered by
the servile unevangelical spirit of his age.

With the Commentary of Albert Schultens, a Dutchman (2 vols. 1737), a
new epoch in the exposition begins. He was the first to bring the
Semitic languages, and chiefly the Arabic, to bear on the translation of
the book. And rightly so,

(Note: Though not in due proportion, especially in Animadversiones
philologicae in Iobum (Op. minora, 1769), where he seeks to explain the
errors of translation in the lxx from the Arabic.)

for the Arabic has retained more that is ancient than any other Semitic
dialect; and Jerome, in his preface to Daniel, had before correctly
remarked, Iob cum arabica lingua plurimam habet societatem. Reiske
(Conjecturae in Iobum, 1779) and Schnurrer (Animadv. ad quaedam loca
Iobi, 1781) followed later in the footsteps of Schultens; but in
proportion as the Israelitish element was considered in its connection
with the Oriental, the divine distinctiveness of the former was
forgotten. Nevertheless, the book of Job had far less to suffer than the
other biblical books from rationalism, with its frivolous moral
judgments and distorted interpretations of Scripture: it reduced the
idea of the book to tameness, and Satan, here with more apparent reason
than elsewhere, was regarded as a mythical invention; but there were,
however, no miracles and prophecies to be got rid of.

And as, for the first time since the apostolic period, attention was now
given to the book as a poetical masterpiece, substantial advantage arose
to the exposition itself from the translations and explanations of an
Eckermann, Moldenhauer, Stuhlmann, and others. What a High-German
rhymster of the fourteenth century, made known by Hennig, and the
Florentine national poet Juliano Dati at the beginning of the sixteenth
century, accomplished in their poetical reproductions of the book of
Job, is here incomparably surpassed. What might not the fathers have
accomplished if they had only had at their disposal such a translation
of the book of Job as e.g., that of Bckel, or of the pious Miss
Elizabeth Smith, skilled in the Oriental languages (died, in her
twenty-eighth year, 1805), or of a studious Swiss layman (Notes to the
Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, together with a Translation of the
Book of Job, Basel 1841)?

The way to the true and full perception of the divine in Scripture is
through the human: hence rationalism - especially after Herder, whose
human mode of perception improved and deepened - prepared the way for a
new era in the church's exposition of the book of Job. The Commentaries
of Samuel Lee (1837), Vaihinger (1842), Welte (1849), Hahn (1850), and
Schlottmann (1851),

(Note: Vid., the review of the last two by Oehler in Reuter's
Repertorium, Feb. 1852; and Kosegarten's Aufsatz ber das B. Hiob in der
Kieler Allgem. Monatsschrift, 1853, S. 761-774.)

are the first-fruits of this new period, rendered possible by the
earlier Commentaries of Umbreit (1824-32), Ewald (1836-51), and Hirzel
(1839, second edition, edited by Olshausen, 1852), of whom the first

(Note: Vid., Ullmann-Riehm's Bltter der Erinnerung an F. W. C. Umbreit
(1862), S. 54-58.)

is characterized by enthusiasm for the poetical grandeur of the book,
the second by vivid perception of the tragical, and the third by sound
tact and good arrangement, - three qualifications which a young Scotch
investigator, A. B. Davidson, strives, not unsuccessfully, to unite in
his Commentary (vol. i. 1862).

(Note: The author, already known by a Treatise on the Hebrew
Accentuology, is not to be mistaken for Sam. Davidson. In addition, we
would call attention to the Commentary of Carey (1858), in which the
archaeology and geography of the book of Job is illustrated by eighty
woodcuts and a map.)

Besides these substantially progressive works, there is the Commentary
of Heiligstedt (1847), which is only a recapitulatory clavis after the
style of Rosenmller, but more condensed; and for what modern Jewish
commentaries, as those of Blumenfeld, Arnheim (1836), and Lwenthal
(1846), contain beyond the standpoint of the earlier פרושׁים and באורים,
they are almost entirely indebted to their Christian predecessors. Also
in the more condensed form of translations, with accompanying
explanations, the understanding of the book of Job has been in many ways
advanced. We may mention here the translations of Kster (1831), who
first directed attention to the strophe-structure of Hebrew poetry, but
who also, since he regarded the Masoretic verse as the constructive
element of the strophe, has introduced an error which has not been
removed even to the present day; Stickel (1842), who has, not
untastefully, sought to imitate the form of this masterpiece, although
his division of the Masoretic verse into strophe lines, according to the
accents, like Hirzel's and Meier's in Canticles, is the opposite extreme
to the mistake of Kster; Ebrard (1858), who translates in iambic
pentameters, as Hosse had previously done;

(Note: Vid., Schneider, Die neuesten Studien ber das B. Hiob, Deutsche
Zeitschr. fr christl. Wissensch., 1859, No. 27.)

and Renan, who solely determines his arrangement of the stichs by the
Masoretic division of verses, and moreover haughtily displays his
scornful opposition to Christianity in the prefatory Etude.

(Note: Against which Abb Crelier has come forward: Le livre de Job venge
des interprtations fausses et impies de M. Ernest Renan, 1860.)

Besides, apart from the general commentaries (Bibelwerke), among which
that of Von Gerlach (Bd. iii. des A. T. 1849) may be mentioned as the
most noted, and such popular practical expositions as Diedrich's (1858),
many - some in the interest of poetry generally (as Spiess, 1852),
others in the interest of biblical theology (as Haupt, 1847; Hosse,
1849; Hayd, 1859; Birkholz, 1859; and in Sweden, Lindgren, Upsala 1831)
- have sought to render the reading of the book of Job easier and more
profitable by means of a translation, with a short introduction and
occasional explanations.

Even with all these works before us, though they are in part excellent
and truly serviceable, it cannot be affirmed that the task of the
exposition has been exhaustively performed, so that absolutely no plus
ultra remains. To adjust the ideal meaning of the book according to its
language, its bearing on the history of redemption, and its spiritual
character, - and throughout to indicate the relation of the single parts
to the idea which animates the whole is, and remains, a great task
worthy of ever-new exertion. We will try to perform it, without
presuming that we are able to answer all the claims on the expositor.
The right expositor of the book of Job must before everything else bring
to it a believing apprehension of the work of Christ, in order that he
may be able to comprehend this book from its connection with the
historical development of the plan of redemption, whose unity is the
work of Christ. Further, he must be able to give himself up freely and
cheerfully to the peculiar vein of this (together with Ecclesiastes)
most bold of all Old Testament books, in order that he may gather from
the very heart its deeply hidden idea. Not less must he possess
historical perception, in order that he may be able to appreciate the
relativeness with which, since the plan of salvation is actually and
confessedly progressive, the development of the idea of the book is
burdened, notwithstanding its absolute truth in itself. Then he must not
only have a clear perception of the divinely true, but also of the
beautiful in human art, in order to be able to appreciate the wonderful
blending of the divine and human in the form as in the contents.
Finally, he must stand on the pinnacle of linguistic and antiquarian
knowledge, in order to be able to follow the lofty flight of its
language, and become families with the incomparably rich variety of its
matter. This idea of an expositor of the book of Job we will keep in
view, and seek, as near as possible, to attain within the limit assigned
to this condensed exegetical handbook.

Appendix to the Commentary on Job

The Monastery of Job in Hauran, and the Tradition of Job

The oral tradition of a people is in general only of very subordinate
value from a scientific point of view when it has reference to an
extremely remote past; but that of the Arabs especially, which is always
combined with traditions and legends, renders the simplest facts
perplexing, and wantonly clothes the images of prominent persons in the
most wonderful garbs, and, in general, so rapidly disfigures every
object, that after a few generations it is no longer recognisable. So
far as it has reference to the personality of Job, whose historical
existence is called in question or denied by some expositors, it may be
considered as altogether worthless, but one can recognise when it speaks
of Job's native country. By the ארץ עוּץ the writer of the book of Job
meant a definite district, which was well known to the people for whom
he wrote; but the name has perished, like many others, and all the
efforts of archaeologist to assign to the land its place in the map of
Palestine have been fruitless. Under these circumstances the matter is
still open to discussion, and the tradition respecting Job has some
things to authorize it. True, it cannot of itself make up for the want
of an historical testimony, but it attains a certain value if it is old,
i.e., if it can be traced back about to the time of the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans, when reliable information was still obtainable
respecting that district, although its name was no longer in use.

In all the larger works of travel on Palestine and Syria, we find it
recorded that Haurn is there called Job's fatherland. In Hauran itself
the traveller hears this constantly; if any one speaks of the
fruitfulness of the whole district, or of the fields around a village,
he is always answered: Is it not the land of Job (bildd jb)? Does it not
belong to the villages of Job (di' jb)? Thus to Seetzen

(Note: Seetzen, Reisen durch Syrien, etc., i. 66.)

Bosr was pointed out as a city of Job; and to Eli Smith

(Note: Ed. Robinson, Palstina, iii. 911 Germ. edit..)

even the country lying to the east of the mountains was called the land
of Job. In Kanawat, a very spacious building, belonging to the Roman or
Byzantine period, situated in the upper town, was pointed out to me as
the summer palace of Job (the inscription 8799 in Corp. Inscr. Graec. is
taken from it). The shepherds of D'il, with whom I passed a night on the
Wdi el-Lebwe, called the place of their encampment Job's pasture-ground.
In like manner, the English traveller Buckingham, when he wandered
through the Nukra, was shown in the distance the village of Gherbi
(i.e., Chirbet el-ghazale, which from its size is called el-chirbe κατ ̓
εξοχήν) as the birthplace and residence of Job,

(Note: C. Ritter, Geogr. von Syr. u. Pal. ii. 842 = Erdkunde, xv. Pt. 2,
p. 842\].)

and it seems altogether as though Hauran and the Land of Job are
synonymous. But if one inquires particularly for that part of the
country in which Job himself dwelt, he is directed to the central point
of Hauran, the plain of Hauran (sahl Haurn),

(Note: Whether the word מישׁר, [Deu
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010.md), only signifies the plain of
Hauran or its southern continuation, the eastern Belk, may be doubtful,
because in that passage both the Amorite kingdoms are spoken of. But
since it is the "cities" of the plain, of which the eastern Balk can
have had but few or none, that are spoken of, מישׁר will surely exclude
the latter.)

and still more exactly to the district between the towns of Naw and
Edre't, which is accounted the most fertile portion of the country,
covered with the ruins of villages, monasteries, and single courts, and
is even now comparatively well cultivated. Among the nomads as well as
among the native agricultural population, this district is called from
its formation Nukra or Nukrat esh-Shm,

(Note: On this name, which belongs to the modern geography of the
country, comp. my Reisebericht ber Hauran u. d. Trachonen, S. 87.)

a name by which this highly-favoured plain is known and celebrated by
the poets in the whole Syrian desert, as far as 'Irk and Higz.

But even the national writers are acquainted with and frequently make
mention of the Hauranitish tradition of Job; yet they do not call Job's
home Nukra, - for this word, which belongs only to the idiom of the
steppe, is unknown to the literature of the language, - but Bethenje
(Betanaea). It is so called in a detailed statement of the legends of
Job:

(Note: Catalogue of Arab. MSS collected in Damascus by J. G. Wetzstein.
Berlin 1863, No. 46, p. 56.)

After the death of his father, Job journeyed into Egypt

(Note: The connection with Egypt, in which these legends place Job, is
worthy of observation. - Del.)

to marry Rahme (רחמה) the daughter of Ephraim, who had inherited from
her grandfather Joseph the robe of beauty; and after he had brought her
to his own country, he received from God a mission as prophet to his
countrymen, viz., to the inhabitants of Haurn and Batanaea (Arab. b‛ṯh
'llh t‛ rsûlâ 'lâ qûmh whm 'hl ḥûrân w-'l-btnı̂t). The historian of
Jerusalem, Mugr ed-dn el-Hambeli, in the chapter on the legend of the
prophets, says: "Job came from el-'s, and the Damascene province of
Batanaea was his property." In like manner, in the Geography of Jkt
el-Hamawi,

(Note: Orient. MSS in the Royal Library in Berlin, Sect. Sprenger, No.
7-10.)

under the art. Bethenje, it is said: "and in this land lived Job (wakn
jb minh)."

Modern exegetes, as is known, do not take the plain of Hauran, but the
mountain range of Hauran with its eastern slope, as the Provincia
Batanaea. I have sought elsewhere

(Note: Reisebericht, S. 83-87.)

to show the error of this view, and may the more readily confine myself
to merely referring to it, as one will be convinced of the correctness
of my position in the course of this article. One thing, however, is to
be observed here, that the supposition that Basan is so called as being
the land of basalt rocks, is an untenable support of this error. The
word basalt may be derived from βασάντις, or a secondary formation,
βασάλτις, because Basan is exclusively volcanic;

(Note: Vid., p. 540, comp. p. 542, note 1, of the foregoing Commentary.)

but we have no more right to reverse the question, than to say that
Damascus may have received its name from the manufacture of damask.

(Note: In the fair at Muzrb we again saw the sheikh of the Wsje-Beduins,
whose guest we had been a week before at the Springs of Joseph in
western Gln, where he had pitched his tent on a wild spot of ground that
had been traversed by lava-streams. In answer to our question whether he
still sojourned in that district, he said: "No, indeed! Nâzilin el-jôm
bi-ard bethêne shêle (we are not encamped in a district that is
completely bethêne)." I had not heard this expression before, and
inquired what it meant. The sheikh replied, bethêne (Arab. buṯaynat) is
a stoneless plain covered with rich pasture. I often sought information
respecting this word, since I was interested about it on account of the
Hebrew word בּשׁן, and always obtained the same definition. It is a
diminutive form, without having exactly a diminutive signification, for
in the language of the nomads it is an acknowledged fact that such a
form takes the place of the usual form. The usual form is either bathne
or bathane. The Kms gives the former signification, "a level country."
That the explanation of the Kamus is too restricted, and that of the
Sheikh of Wjje the more complete, may be shown from the Kamus itself. In
one place it says, The word moreover signifies (a) the thick of the milk
(cream); (b) a tender maiden; (c) repeated acts of benevolence. These
three significations given are, however, manifestly only figurative
applications, not indeed of the signification which the Kamus places
Primo loco, but of that which the Sheikh of the Wjje gave; for the
likening of a "voluptuously formed maiden," or of repeated acts of
benevolence, to a luxurious meadow, is just as natural to a nomad, as it
was to the shepherd Amos ([Amo 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001).md) to
liken the licentious women of Samaria to well-nourished cows of the fat
pastures of Basan. Then the Kamus brings forward a collective form
buthun (Arab. butun, perhaps from the sing. bathan = בּשׁן, like Arab.
usud from asad) in the signification pastures (Arab. ryâd); pastures,
however, that are damp and low, with a rich vegetation. That the word is
ancient, may be seen from the following expression of Chlid ibn el-Weld,
the victor on the Jarmk: "'Omar made me governor of Damascus; and when I
had made it into the buthêne, i.e., a stoneless fertile plain (easy to
govern and profitable), he removed me." Jkt also mentions this
expression under Bethenje. Chlid also uses the diminutive as the nomads
do (he was of the race of Machzm); probably the whole word belongs only
to the steppe, for all the women who were called buthêne, e.g., the
beloved of the poet Geml, and others mentioned in the "Dwn of Love"
(Dı̂wân es-sabâbe), were Beduin women.

After what has been said, we cannot assign to the Hebr. בּשׁן any other
signification than that of a fertile stoneless plain or low country.
This appellation, which was given, properly and originally, only to the
heart of the country, and its most valuable portion, viz., the Nukra,
would then a potiori be transferred to the whole, and when the kingdom
of Basan was again destroyed, naturally remained to that province, of
which it was the proper designation.)

The home of Job is more definitely described in the following passages.
Muhammed el-Makdeshi

(Note: Orient. MSS in the Royal Library at Berlin; Sect. Sprenger, No.
5.)

says, p. 81 of his geography: "And in Haurn and Batanaea lie the
villages of Job and his home (di' jb wa-diruh). The chief place (of the
district) is Naw, rich in wheat and other cereals." The town of Naw is
still more definitely connected with Job by Jkt el-Hamawi under the
article Naw: "Between Nawa and Damascus in two days' journey; it belongs
to the district of Hauran,

(Note: If writers mention Haurn alone, they mean thereby, according to
the usage of the language of the Damascenes, and certainly also of the
prophet Ezekiel ([Eze 47:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#016.md), [Eze
47:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#018).md), the plain of Haurn as far as
the borders of the Belk, including the mountains of Haurn, the Leg, and
Gdr; it is only in the district itself, where special divisions are
rendered necessary, that the three last mentioned parts are excluded. If
writers mention Haurn and Bethenje together, the context must determine
whether the former signifies the whole, and the latter the part, as in
the above quotation from Makdeshi, or whether both are to be taken as
coordinate, as in a passage of Istachri (edited by Mller, Botha 1839):
"And Haurn and Bethenje are two provinces of Damascus with luxuriant
corn-fields." Here the words are related to one another as Auranitis
(with the chief town Bostra) to Batanaea (with the chief town Adratum,
i.e., Edre't), or as the Haurn of the Beduins and the Nukra of the same.
The boundary between both is the Wdi 'Ir, which falls into the Zd south
of Edre't.)

and is, according to some, the chief town of the same. Naw was the
residence (menzil) of Job;" and Ibn er-Rbi says, p. 62 of his essay on
the excellences of Damascus:

(Note: Catalogue of Arab. MSS collected in Damascus, No. 26.)

"To the prophets buried in the region of Damascus belongs also Job, and
his tomb is near Naw, in the district of Hauran." Such passages prove at
the same time the identity of the Nukra with Batanaea; for if the latter
is said to be recognisable from the fact of Job's home being found in
it, and we find this sign in connection with the Nukra in which Naw with
its surrounding country is situated, both names must denote one and the
same district.

That, according to the last citation, Job's tomb is also shown in the
Nukra, has been already observed in my Reisebericht, S. 121. Jkt, under
Dr jb, thus expresses himself: "The Monastery of Job is a locality in
Hauran, a Damascene province, in which Job dwelt and was tried of God.
There also is the fountain which he made to flow with his foot, and the
block of rock on which he leant. There also is his tomb." What Kazwni
ways in his Wonders of Creation (‛agâib el-machlûkât), under Dr jb,
accords with it: "The Monastery of Job lies in one of the Damascene
provinces, and was the place of Job's residence, in which God tried him.
There also is the fountain which sprang forth at the stamping of his
foot, when at the end of his trial God commanded him, and said: Strike
with thy foot - (thus a fountain will spring forth, and) this shall be
to thee a cool bath and a draught (Korn, xxxviii. 41ff.). There is also
the rock on which he sat, and his tomb." Recurring to the passage of the
Koran cited, we shall see that the stone of Job, the fountain and the
tomb, are not situated in the Monastery itself, but at some little
distance from it.

I came with my cortge out of Gln, to see the remarkable pilgrim fair of
Muzrb, just when the Mekka caravan was expected; and since the Monastery
of Job, never visited by any one now-a-days, could not lie far out of
the way, I determined to seek it out, because I deluded myself with the
hope of finding an inscription of its founder, 'Amr I, and in fact one
with a date, which would have been of the greatest importance in
reference to the history of the Ghassanides, - a hope which has remained
unfulfilled. In the evening of the 8th of May we came to Tesl. Here the
Monastery was for the first time pointed out to us. It was lighted up by
the rays of the setting sun, - a stately ruin, which lay in the distance
a good hour towards the east. The following morning we left Tesl. Our
way led through luxuriant corn-fields and fields lying fallow, but
decked with a rich variety of flowers in gayest blossom, to an isolated
volcanic mound, Tell el-Gum',

(Note: "Hill of the heaps of riders." The hill is said to have been
named after a great engagement which took place there in ancient days.
Among the 'Aneze the gem‛, נמע, plur. gumû‛ is a division of 400-600
horsemen.) from which we intended to reconnoitre the surrounding
country.

from this point, as far as the eye could reach, it swept over fields of
wheat belonging to the communities of Sahm, Tell Shihb, Tesl, Naw, and
Sa'dje, which covered a region which tradition calls the home of Job.
True, the volcanic chaos (el-wa'r) extended in the west to the distance
of some three miles up the hill on which we stood, and on the north the
plain was bounded partly by Tell el-Gbia and the "tooth of Naw" (sinn
Naw), a low ridge with a few craters; but towards the E. and S. and S.W.
the plain was almost unbounded, for isolated eminences, as Tell 'Ashtar,
T. Ash'ar, T. Shihb, T. el-Chammn, and others, rose above the level of
the plain only like mole-hills; and the deep gorges of the Meddn, Jarmk,
Ht, and Muchbi, were sudden and almost perpendicular ravines, either not
seen at all, or appeared as dark marks. The plain slopes gently and
scarcely perceptibly towards Kufr el-m, Kufr es-smir, Zzn, and Bendek;
and the Naher el'Owrid, a rover abounding in water in its level bed,
resembles a glistening thread of silver. If this district had trees, as
it once had, - for among the ruins one often discovers traces of
vineyards and garden walls, which it can have no longer, since the
insecurity and injustice of the country do not admit of men remaining
long in one and the same village, therefore not to take hold upon the
soil and establish one's self, and become at home anywhere, - it would
be an earthly paradise, by reason of its healthy climate and the
fertility of its soil. That even the Romans were acquainted with the
glorious climate of Hauran, is proved by the name Palaestina salutaris,
which they gave to the district.

(Note: This appellation is erroneously given to the province of Petra
(Palaestina tertia) in Burckhardt's Travels (Gesenius' edition, S. 676).
Bcking also, Not. dign. or. pp. 139, 345, and 373, is guilty of this
oversight. Comp. thereon, Mommsen, Verzeichniss der rm. Provinzen
aufgesetzt um, 297, in the Transactions of the Berlin Acad. der
Wissensch. 1862, S. 501f.)

The inhabitants of Damascus say there is no disease whatever in Haurn;
and as often as the plague or any other infectious disease shows itself
in their city, thousands flee to Hauran, and to the lava-plateau of the
Leg. This healthy condition may arise from the volcanic formation of the
country, and from the sea-breeze, which it always has in connection with
its position, which is open towards the west. Even during the hottest
days, when e.g., in the Ghta a perfect calm prevails, so that no breeze
is felt, this cool and moist sea-breeze blows refreshingly and regularly
over the plain; and hence the Hauranitish poet never speaks of his
native country without calling it the "cool-blowing Nukra" (en-nukra
el-‛adı̂je). But as to the fertility of the district, there is indeed
much good arable land in the country east of the Jordan, as in Irbid and
Suwt, of the same kind as between Salt and 'Ammn, but nowhere is the
farming, in connection with a small amount of labour (since no manure is
used), more productive than in Hauran, or more profitable; for the
transparent "Batanaean wheat" (hinta bethenı̂je) is always at least 25
per cent. higher in price than other kinds. Hence the agriculture of
that region also, in times of peace and security (during the first six
centuries after Christ), produced that fondness for building, some of
the magnificent memorials of which are our astonishment in the present
day; and, in fact, not unfrequently the inscriptions testify that the
buildings themselves owe their origin to the produce of the field. Thus,
in the locality of Nhite in the Nukra, I found the following fragment of
an inscription:...Μασαλέμου Ράββου κτίσμα ἐξ ἰδίων κόπων γεωργικῶν ἐν
ἔτι στ, Masalemos son of Rabbos set up (this memorial) out of the
produce of his farming in the year 280. Of a like kind is the following
remains of two distichs in Marduk: . . . δρός τε σαόφρων

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

. . . μεγαρόν

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

. . . ις ἀνάπαυμα μέγιστον

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

. . . γεωπονίης. In Shakk the longer inscription of a mausoleum in a
state of good preservation begins:

Βάσσος ἑῆς πάτρης μεγακύδεος ἀγλαὸν ὄμμα

Ἐκ σφετέρου καμάτοιο γεωπονίης τέ μ ̓ ἔδειμεν.

Bassos, beaming eye of the honourable city of his birth,

Has built me out of the produce of his own tillage.

Similar testimonies are to be found in the inscriptions of Burckhardt.

After a long sojourn on the hill, which was occasioned by the
investigation of some interesting plants in the crater of the mound, we
set out for Sa'dje, which is built on the slope of a hill. After a good
hour's journey we arrived at the Makm jb, "the favoured tomb of Job,"
situated at the southern base of the hill, and rendered conspicuous by
two white domes, and there we dismounted. The six attendants and alumni
of the Makm, or, as the Arabs thoughtfully call them, "the servants of
our master Job" (chdimn sjidna jb), received us, with some other
pilgrims, at the door of the courtyard, and led us to the basin of the
fountain of Job, by the side of which they spread out their mantles for
us to rest upon under the shade of walnut tree and a willow. While the
rest were negated in the duties of hospitality, the superior of the
Makm, the Sheikh Sa'd el-Darfri (from Darfr) did not leave us, and made
himself in every way obliging. Like him, all the rest of the inhabitants
of the place were black, and all unmarried; their celibacy, however, I
imagine, was only caused by the want of opportunity of marrying, and the
limited accommodation of the place. Sheikh Sa'd believed himself to be
fifty years of age; he left his home twenty years before to go on
pilgrimage to Mekka, where he "studied" four years; the same length of
time he sojourned in Medna, and had held his present office ten years.
Besides his mother tongue, he spoke Arabic and a little Turkish, having
been in Constantinople a few years before. His judgment of the
inhabitants of that city is rather harsh: he charges them with
immorality, drunkenness, and avarice. In one year, said he, I could
hardly save enough to travel by the steamer to Chdscha Bk (Odessa). How
different was my experience to the inhabitants of this city! I was there
three months, during which time I had nothing to provide for, and left
with ninety Mnt (imperials), which just sufficed to set up these
dilapidated relics again. A Russian ship brought me to Smyrna, whence I
travelled by the Nemswi (Austrian Lloyd steamer) to Syria.

According to the account given by the inhabitants of Sa'dje, the Makm
has been from ancient times a negro hospice. These Africans, commonly
called 'Abd in Damascus, and in the country Tekrine, come chiefly from
Tekrr in Sdn; they first visit Mekka and Medna, then Damascus, and
finally the Makm of Job. Here they sojourn from twenty to thirty days,
during which time they wash themselves daily in Job's fountain, and pray
upon Job's stone; and the rest of the day they either read or assist the
dwellers in the Makm in their tillage of the soil. When they are about
to leave, they received a testimonial, and often return home on foot
across the Isthmus of Suez, often by water, chiefly from Jf, by the
Austrian Lloyd ship to Egypt, and thence to their native country. These
pilgrims, so far as the requirements of their own country are concerned,
are literati; and it appears as though by this journey they obtained
their highest degree. I have frequently met them in my travels. They are
known by their clean white turban, and the white broad-sleeved shirt,
which reaches to the ankles, their only garment. They carry a small
bundle over the shoulder upon a strong staff, which may serve as a
weapon of defence in case of need. In this bundle they carry a few books
and other effects, and above this their cloak. They are modest, taciturn
men, who go nimbly onward on their way, and to whom one always gladly
gives a supper and a night's lodging.

We visited the holy places in the company of the Sheikh Sa'd. The Makm,
and the reservoir, which lies fifty paces to the front of it, are
surrounded by a wall. This reservoir is filled by a strong, rapid, and
cold stream of water, which comes from the fountain of Job, about 400
paces distant. The fountain itself springs up by the basalt hill on
which the village and the Job's stone are situated; and it is covered in
as far as the reservoir (called birke), in order to keep the water
fresh, and to guard against pollution. Between the fountain and the Makm
stand a half-dozen acacias and a pomegranate, which were just then in
full bloom. The Makm itself, on which the wretched habitations for the
attendants and pilgrims adjoin, is a one-storey stone building, of old
material and moderate circumference. The first thing shown us was the
stone trough, called gurn, in which Job bathed at the end of his trial.
The small space in which this relic stands, and over which, so far as I
remember, one of the two domes is raised, is called wadjet sjidn jb,
"the lavatory of our lord Job." Adjoining this is the part with the
tomb, the oblong mound of which is covered with an old torn green cloth.
The tomb of Sa'd was more carefully tended. Our Damascene travelling
companions were divided in their opinions as to the person whose tomb
was near that of Job, as in Syria it is hardly possible to find and
distinguish the makms of the many men of God (rigl Allh) or favoured
ones of God (auli) who bear the same names; but a small white flag
standing upon the grave informed us, for it bore the inscription: "This
is the military emblem (rje) of our lord Sa'd ab Merzka."

Perhaps the preservation of the Makm of Job is due to the tomb of Sa'd,
as its endowments have long since disappeared, while the tomb of Sa'd
still has its revenues. From 'Agln it receives tribute of oil and olives
yearly. And several large vegetable gardens, which lie round about the
Makm, and are cultivated by its attendants, must also contribute
something considerable towards its maintenance. In these gardens they
grow dura (maize), tobacco, turnips, onions, and other things, for their
own use and for sale. The plants, which can be freely watered from the
fountain of Job, are highly esteemed. The government levies no taxes on
the Makm, and the Arabs no tribute; and since, according to the popular
belief, that Beduin horse that is watered from the birke dies, the
Beduins do not even claim the rights of hospitality, - a fortunate
circumstance, the removal of which would speedily cause the ruin of the
hospice. From nightly thieves, who not unfrequently break through the
walls of the stables in the villages of the plain, and carry off the
smaller cattle, both the Makm and the village are secure; for if the
night thieves come, they see, as every one in Hauran testifies, a
surging sea around the place, which prevents their approach.

From the Makm we ascended the hill of the village, on the highest part
of which is the stone of Job (Sachrat jb). It is inside a small
Mussulman hall of prayer, which in its present form is of more modern
origin, but is undoubtedly built from the material of a Christian
chapel, which stood here in the pre-Muhammedan age. It is an unartistic
structure, in the usual Hauranitish style, with six or eight arches and
a small dome, which is just above the stone of Job. My Mussulman
attendants, and a Hauranite Christina from the village of Shemiskn, who
had joined us as we were visiting the Sachra, trod the sacred spot with
bare feet, and kissed the rock, the basaltic formation of which is
unmistakeable. Against this rock, our guide told us, Job leaned "when he
was afflicted by his Lord" (hı̂n ibtelâ min rabbuh).

(Note: As is generally known, the black stone in Mekka and the Sachra in
Jerusalem are more celebrated than the stone of Job; but less revered
are the Mebrak en-nka in Bosr, the thievish stone of Moses in the great
mosque at Damascus, the doset en-neb on the mountain of el-Hgne, and
others.)

While these people were offering up their 'Asr (afternoon) prayer in
this place, Sa'd brought me a handful of small long round stones and
slag, which the tradition declares to be the worms that fell to the
ground out of Job's sores, petrified. "Take them with thee," said he,
"as a memento of this place; let them teach thee not to forget God in
prosperity, and in misfortune not to contend with Him." The frequent use
of these words in the mouth of the man might have weakened them to a set
phrase: they were, however, appropriate to the occasion, and were not
without their effect. After my attendants had provided themselves with
Job's worms, we left the Sachra. These worms form a substantial part of
the Hauranitish tradition of Job, and they are known and revered
generally in the country. Our Christian attendant from Shemiskn bound
them carefully in the broad sleeve of his shirt, and recited to us a few
verses from a kasde, in which they are mentioned. The poem, which a
member of our company, the dervish Regeb, wrote down, is by a Hauranite
Christian, who in it describes his unhappy love in colours as strong as
the bad taste it displays. The lines that are appropriate here are as
follows: -

Min ‛azma nârı̂ nâra jôm el-qijâma,

Tûfâna Nûha 'dmû‛ a 'ênı̂ ‛anuh zôd.

Ja‛ qûba min hoznı̂ hizânuh qisâma

Min belwetı̂ Ejûba jerta‛ bihe ‛d-dûd.

(Note: The metre forms two spondeo-iambics and trochaeo-spondaics.)

The fire of hell at the last day will kindle itself from the glow of my
pain,

And stronger than the flood of Noah are the tear-streams of mine eyes.

The grief of Jacob for his son was but a small part of my grief;

And, visited with my misery, Job was once the prey of worms.

(Note: Comp. p. 576 of the foregoing Commentary.)

The village, which the peasants call Shch Sa'd, and the nomads Sa'dje,
is, as the name implies, of later origin, and perhaps was founded by
people who fled hither when oppressed elsewhere, for the sake of being
able to live more peacefully under the protection of the two tombs. That
the place is not called jbje, is perhaps in order to distinguish it from
the Monastery of Job.

In less than a quarter of an hour we rode up to the Dr jb, a square
building, standing entirely alone, and not surrounded by ruins. When the
Arabian geographers call it a village, they reckon to it the
neighbouring Sa'dje with the Makm. It is very extensive, and built of
fine square blocks of dolerite. While my fellow-traveller, M. Drgens,
was engaged in making a ground-plan of the shattered building, which
seemed to us on the whole to have had a very simple construction, I took
some measurements of its sides and angles, and then searched for
inscriptions. Although the ground-floor is now in part hidden in a
mezbele,

(Note: On the word and subject, vid., p. 573 of the foregoing
Commentary.)

which has been heaped up directly against the walls, on the east side,
upon the architrave, not of the chief doorway, which is on the south,
but of a door of the church, is found a large Greek inscription in a
remarkable state of preservation. The architrave consists of a single
carefully-worked block of dolerite, and at present rests almost upon the
ground, since the rubbish has filled the whole doorway. The writing and
sculpture are hollowed out.

In the center is a circle, and the characters inscribed at each side of
this circle are still undeciphered; the rest of the inscription is easy
to be read: αὕτη ἡ πύλη κ(υρίο)υ δίκαιοι εἰσελεύσοντε ἐν αὐτῇ· τοῦτο τὸ
ὑπέρθυρον ἐτέθη ἐν χρόνοις Ἠελίου εὐλαβεστ(άτου) ἡγουμ(ένου) μ(ηνί)
Ἰουλίῳ κε ἰνδ(ι)κ(τίωνος) ιε τοῦ ἔτους πηντακοσιοστοῦ τρικοστοῦ ἕκτου
κ(υρί)ου Ἰ(ης)οῦ Χ(ριστ)οῦ Βασιλεύοντος. The passage of Scripture, [Psa
118:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#020.md), with which this inscription
beings, is frequently found in these districts in the inscriptions on
church portals.

This inscription was an interesting discovery; for, so far as I know, it
is the oldest that we possess which reckons according to the Christian
era, and in the Roman indiction (indictio)

(Note: Vid., Gibbon, ed. Smith, ii. 333. - Tr.)

we have an important authority for determining its date. Now, since
there might be a difference of opinion as to the beginning of the
"kingdom of Christ," I was anxious to have the judgment of an authority
in chronology on the point; and I referred to Prof. Piper of Berlin, who
kindly furnished me with the following communication: - "...The
inscription therefore furnishes the following data: July 25, indict.
xv., year 536, κυρίου Ιοῦ Χοῦ βασιλεύοντος. To begin with the last, the
Dionysian era, which was only just introduced into the West, is
certainly not to be assumed here. But it is also by no means the birth
of Christ that is intended. Everything turns upon the expression
βασιλεύοντος. The same expression occurs once in an inscription from
Syria, Corp. Inscr. Graec. 8651: βασιλεύοντος Ιουστινιανοῦ τῷ ια ἔτει.
The following expression, however, occurs later concerning Christ on
Byzantine coins: Rex regnantium and βασιλεὺς βασιλέων (after [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014.md); [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016).md), the latter under John Zimiszes
(died 975), in De Saulcy, Pl. xxii. 4. But if the βασιλεία of Christ is
employed as the era, we manifestly cannot refer to the epoch of the
birth of Christ, but must take the epoch of His ascension as our basis:
for with this His βασιλεία first began; just as in the West we sometimes
find the calculation begins a passione. Now the fathers of the Western
Church indeed place the death (and therefore also the ascension) of
Christ in the consulate of the two Gemini, 29 a.d. Not so with the Greek
fathers. Eusebius takes the year of His death, according to one
supposition, to be the 18th year of Tiberius, i.e., 785 a.u.c. = 32 a.d.
Supposing we take this as the first year regnante Jesu Christo, then the
year 536, of the inscription of the Monastery of Job, is reduced to our
era, after the birth of Christ, by adding 31. Thus we have the number of
the year 567, to which the accompanying xv. indictio corresponds, for
567 + 3 = 570; and 570/15 has no remainder. XV is therefore the
indiction of the year 567, which more accurately belongs to the year
from 1st Sept. 566 to 31st Aug. 567. And since the day of the month is
mentioned in the inscription, it is the 25th July 567 that is indicated.
For it appears to me undoubted that the indictions, according to the
usual mode of computation among the Greeks, begin with the 1st Sept.
312. Thus a Sidonian inscription of dec. 642 a.d. has the I indiction
(Corp. Inscr. Gr. 9153)...."

Thus far Prof. Piper's communication. According to this satisfactory
explanation of its date, this inscription is perhaps not unqualified to
furnish a contribution worth notice, even for the chronology of the life
of Jesus, since the Ghassinides, under whom not only the inscription,
but the Monastery itself 300 years earlier, had its origin, dwelt in
Palestine, the land of Christ; and their kings were perhaps the first
who professed Christianity.

The "festival of the Monastery of Job," which, according to Kazwn's
Syrian Calendar,

(Note: Calendarium Syriacum Cazwinii, ed. Guil. Volck, Lips. 1859, p.
15.)

the Christians of the country celebrated annually on the 23rd April,
favours the pre-Muhammedan importance of the Monastery. This festival in
Kazwn's time, appearing only by name inf the calendar, had undoubtedly
ceased with the early decline of Christianity in the plain of Hauran,
for the historically remarkable exodus of a large portion of the
Ghassinides out of the cities of Hauran to the north of Georgia had
taken place even under the chalifate of Omar. The Syrian Christians of
the present day celebrate the festival of Mr Gorgius (St. George), who
slew the dragon (tennn) near Beirt, on the 23rd April. A week later (the
1st May, oriental era) the Jews of Damascus have the sm jb (the fast of
Job), which lasts twenty-four hours. In Kazwn's calendar it is
erroneously set down to the 3rd May.

Moreover, with reference to the Monastery, it must be mentioned that,
according to the history of Ibn Kethr,

(Note: Comp. A. v. Kremer, Mittelsyrien, etc., Vienna 1853, S. 10.)

the great Greco-Ghassinide army, which, under the leadership of
Theodoric, a brother of the Emperor Heraclius, was to have repulsed the
attack of the Mussulmans on Syria, revolted in its neighbourhood in the
13th year of the Hegira (Higra), while the enemy was encamped on the
south bank of the Meddn, and was drawn up near Edre't. After several
months had passed came the battle known as the "battle of the Jarmk,"
the issue of which cost the Byzantines Syria. The volcanic hollows of
the ground, which for miles form a complex network of gorges, for the
most part inaccessible, offer great advantages in defensive warfare; and
here the battle near Edre', in which 'Og king of Bashan lost his
kingdom, was probably fought.

According to the present division of the country, the Monastery of Job
and the Makm are in the southern part of Gdr, an administrative
district, which is bounded on the north by the Wd Brt, on the east by
the W. el-Horr and the high road, on the south by the Jarmk, and on the
west by the W. Hit and by a range of volcanic mounds, which stretch to
the south-east corner of the Snow-mountain (el-Hermn); this district,
however, has only a nominal existence, for it has no administration of
its own. Either it is added to Haurn, or its revenues, together with
those of Gln, are let out to the highest bidder for a number of years.
Gdr is the natural north-western continuation of the plain of Haurn; and
the flat bed of the Horr, which does not form a gorge until it comes to
the bridge of Sra, forms no boundary proper. Moreover, the word is not
found in ancient geography; and the Arabian geographers, even the later
ones, who recognised the idea of Gdr, always so define the position of a
locality situated in Gdr, that they say it is situated in the Haurn.
Thus Jkt describes the town of el-Gbia, situated in western Gdr, and in
like manner, as we have seen above, Naw and the Monastery of Job, etc.

(Note: Jkt says under Gdr, "It is a Damascene district, it has villages,
and lies in the north of Haurn; according to others, it is reckoned
together with Haurn as one district." The last words do not signify that
Gdr and Haurn are words to be used without any distinction; on the
contrary, that Gdr is a district belonging to Haurn, and comprehended in
it.)

There is no doubt that, as the Gdr of the present day is reckoned in the
Nukra, so this country also in ancient days, at least as far as its
northern watershed, has belonged to the tetrarchy of Batanaea.

The Monastery of Job is at present inhabited. A certain sheikh, Ahmed
el-Kdir, has settled down here since the autumn of 1859, as partner of
the senior of the Damascene 'Omarje (the successors of the Chalif
'Omar), to whose family endowments (waqf) the Monastery belongs, and
with his family he inhabits a number of rooms in the inner court, which
have escaped destruction. He showed us the decree of his partner
appointing him to his position, in which he is styled Sheikh of the Dr
jb, Dr el-Lebwe, and 'Ashtar. Dr el-Lebwe, "the monastery of the lion,"

(Note: The name of this monastery, which is about a mile and a half
north-east of the Dr Ejb, is erroneously called D. el-leb in
Burckhardt's Travels in Syria (ed. Gesenius, S. 449). The same may be
said of D. en-nubuwwe in Annales Hamzae, ed. Gottwaldt, p. 118.)

was built by the Gefnide Eihem ibn el-Hrith; and we shall have occasion
to refer to 'Ashtar, in which Newbold,

(Note: C. Ritter, Geogr. v. Syr. u. Pal. ii. 821 \[Erdk. xv. Pt. 2, p.
821\].)

in the year 1846, believed he had found the ancient capital of Basan,
'Ashtart, further on. But the possessor of all these grand things was a
very unhappy man. While we were drinking coffee with him, he related to
us how the inhabitants of Naw had left him only two yoke (feddân) of
arable land from the territory assigned to him, and taken all the rest
to themselves. The harvest of that year, after the deduction of the
bedhâr (the new seed-corn), would hardly suffice to meet the demands of
his family, and of hospitality; and for his partner, how had advanced
money to him, there would be nothing left. In Damascus he found no
redress; and the Sheikh of Naw, Dhib el-Medhjeb, had answered his last
representation with the words, "He who desires Job's inheritance must
look for trials." Here also, as in Arabia generally, I found that
intelligence and energy was on the side of the wife. During our
conversation, his wife, with one of her children, had drawn near; and
while the child kissed my hand, according to custom, she said:
"To-morrow thou wilt arrive at Muzrb; Dhib will also be going thither
with contributions for the pilgrims. We put our cause in thy hands,
arrange it as seems thee best; this old man will accompany thee." And as
we were riding, the Sheikh Ahmed was also obliged to mount, and his
knowledge of the places did us good service on Tell Ashtar and Tell
el-Ash'ar. In Muzrb, where the pilgrim fair and the arriving caravans
for Mekka occupied our attention for five days, we met Dhib and the
Ichtirje (elders of the community) of Naw; and, after some opposition,
the sheikh of the Monastery of Job obtained four feddân of land under
letter and seal, and returned home satisfied.

The case of this man is no standard of the state of the Hauranites, for
there are so many desolated villages that there is no lack of land; only
round about Naw it is insufficient, since this place is obliged to take
possession of far outlying fields, by reason of its exceedingly numerous
agricultural population.

(Note: That the Sheikh Ahmed was permitted to take up his abode in the
Monastery, was owing to a religious dread of his ancestor (gidd),
'Abdel-Kdir el-Glni, and out of courteousness towards his partner.)

The more desolate a land exposed to plunder becomes, the more populous
must its separate towns become, since the inhabitants of the smaller
defenceless villages crowd into them. Thus the inhabitants of the large
town of Kenkir at the present time till the fields of twelve
neighbouring deserted villages; and Salt, the only inhabited place in
the Belk, has its corn-fields even at a distance of fifteen miles away.
The poet may also have conceived of Job's domain similarly, for there
were five hundred ploughmen employed on it; so that it could not come
under the category of ordinary villages, which in Syria rarely have
above, mostly under, fifty yoke of oxen. According to the tradition,
which speaks of "Job's villages" (di' jb), these ploughmen would be
distributed over several districts; but the poet, who makes them to be
overwhelmed by one ghazwe, therefore as ploughing in one district, will
have conceived of them only as dwelling in one locality.

It might not be out of place here to give some illustration of the
picture which the poet draws of Job's circumstances and position as a
wealthy husbandman. Haurn, the scene of the drama (as we here assume),
must at that period, as at present, have been without protection from
the government of the country, and therefore exposed to the marauding
attacks of the tribes of the desert. In such a country there is no
private possession; but each person is at liberty to take up his abode
in it, and to cultivate the land and rear cattle at his own risk, where
and to what extent he may choose. Whoever intends doing so much first of
all have a family, or as the Arabs say, "men" (rigâl), i.e., grown-up
sons, cousins, nephews, sons-in-law; for one who stands alone, "the cut
off one" (maktû‛), as he is called, can attain no position of eminence
among the Semites, nor undertake any important enterprise.

(Note: In the present day the household is called ‛ashı̂ra, and all
families of important in Haurn are and call themselves ‛ashâir (Arab.
‛šâ'r); but the ancient word batn does also occur, and among the Semitic
tribes that have migrated to Mauritania it is still in use instead of
the Syrian ‛ashı̂ra. Batn, collect. butûn, is the fellowship of all those
who are traced back to the בּטן of one ancestral mother. Thus even in
Damascus they say: nahn ferd batn, we belong to one family; in like
manner in the whole of Syria: this foal is the batn of that mare, i.e.,
its young one; or: I sold my mare without batn, or with one, two,
three-fourths of her batn, i.e., without her descendants, or so that the
buyer has only 6 or 12 or 18 kı̂rât right of possession in the foals she
will bear. In all these applications, batn is the progenies uteri, not
the uterus itself; and, according to this, בני בטני, [Job
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017.md), ought to be explained by "all
my relations by blood.")

Then he has to make treaties with all the nomad tribes from which he has
reason to fear any attack, i.e., to pledge himself to pay a yearly
tribute, which is given in native produce (in corn and garments). Thus
the community of el-Hgne, ten years since, had compacts with 101 tribes;
and that Job also did this, seems evident from the fact that the poet
represents him as surprised not by neighbouring, but by far distant
tribes (Chaldaeans and Sabaeans), with whom he could have no compact.

(Note: These sudden attacks, at any rate, do not say anything in favour
of the more southernly position of Ausitis. If the Beduin is but once on
his horse or delûl, it is all the same to him whether a journey is ten
days longer or shorter, if he can only find water for himself and his
beast. This, however, both bands of marauders found, since the poet
distinctly represents the attacks as having been made in the winter. The
general ploughing of the fallow-lying wâgiha of a community (it is
called shiqâq el-wâgiha), ready for the sowing in the following autumn,
always takes place during January and February, because at this time of
the year the earth is softened by the winter rains, and easy to plough.
While engaged in this work, the poet represents Job's ploughmen as being
surprised and slain. Hence, for the destruction of 500 armed ploughmen -
and they were armed, because they could only have been slain with their
weapons in their hands in consequence of their resistance - at least
2000 horsemen were necessary. So large a ghazwe is, however, not
possible in the summer, but only in the winter, because they could not
water at a draw-well, only at the pools (ghudrân) formed by the winter
rains. For one of these raids of the Chaldaeans, Haurn, whither
marauding bands come even now during the winter from the neighbourhood
of Babylon in six or seven days, lay far more convenient than the
country around Ma'n and 'Akaba, which is only reached from the
Euphrates, even in winter, by going a long way round, since the Nufd
(sandy plains) in the east, and their western continuation the Hlt, suck
in the rain without forming any pools. On the other hand, however, this
southern region lay nearer and more convenient for the incursions of the
Sabaeans, viz., the Keturaean ([Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003).md), i.e., Petraean tribe of this
name. The greater or less distance, however, is of little consequence
here. Thus, as the Shemmar of Negd from time to time make raids into the
neighbourhood of Damascus, so even the tribes of Wdi el-Kor might also
do the same. Moreover, as we observed above, the poet represents the
sudden attacks as perpetrated by the Sabaeans and Chaldaeans, probably
because they only, as being foreign and distant races which never had
anything to do with Job and his men, and therefore were without any
consideration, could practise such unwonted barbarities as the robbery
of ploughing heifers, which a ghazwe rarely takes, and the murder of the
ploughmen.)

Next he proceeds to erect a chirbe, i.e., a village that has been
forsaken (for a longer or shorter period), in connection with which,
excepting the relations, slaves, and servants of the master, all those
whom interest, their calling, and confidence in the good fortune of the
master, have drawn thither, set about the work. Perhaps [Job
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#028.md) has reference to Job's
settlement.

(Note: Verbally, [Job 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#014.md), which we,
however, have interpreted differently, accords with this. - Del.)

With reference to the relation of the lord of a village (ustâd beled, or
sâhib dê‛a) to his work-people, there are among the dependents two
classes. The one is called zurrâ‛, "sowers," also fellâhin kism,
"participating husbandmen," because they share the produce of the
harvest with the ustâd thus: he receives a fourth while they retain
three-fourths, from which they live, take the seed for the following
season, give their quota towards the demands of the Arabs, the village
shepherds, the field watchmen, and the scribe of the community (chatı̂b);
they have also to provide the farming implements and the yoke-oxen. On
the other hand, the ustâd has to provide for the dwellings of the
people, to pay the land-tax to the government, and, in the event of a
failure of the crops, murrain, etc., to make the necessary advances,
either in money or in kind at the market price, and without any
compensation. This relation, which guarantees the maintenance of the
family, and is according to the practice of a patriarchal equity, is
greatly esteemed in the country; and one might unhesitatingly consider
it therefore to be that which existed between Job and his ploughmen,
because it may with ease exist between a single ustâd and hundreds,
indeed thousands, of country people, if [Job
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md) did not necessitate our thinking
of another class of country people, viz., the murâbi‛ı̂n, the
"quarterers." They take their name from their receiving a fourth part of
the harvest for their labour, while they have to give up the other
three-fourths to the ustâd, who must provide for their shelter and
board, and in like manner everything that is required in agriculture. As
Job, according to [Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003.md) (comp. on
[Job 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#012).md), provided the yoke-oxen
and means of transport (asses and camels), so he also provided the
farming implements, and the seed for sowing. We must not here think of
the paid day-labourer of the Syrian towns, or the servants of our landed
proprietors; they are unknown on the borders of the desert. The hand
that toils has there a direct share in the gain; the workers belong to
the aulâd, "children of the house," and are so called; in the hour of
danger they will risk their life for their lord.

This rustic labour is always undertaken simultaneously by all the
murâbi‛ı̂n (it is so also in the villages of the zurrâ‛) for the sake of
order, since the ustâd, or in his absence the village sheikh, has the
general work of the following day announced from the roof of his house
every evening. Thus it is explained how the 500 ploughmen could be
together in one and the same district, and be slain all together.

The ustâd is the sole judge, or, by deputy, the sheikh. An appeal to the
government of the country would be useless, because it has no influence
in Hauran; but the servant who has been treated unjustly by his master,
very frequently turns as dachı̂l fi 'l-haqq (a suppliant concerning his
right) to his powerful neighbour, who is bound, according to the customs
of the country, to obtain redress for him (comp. [Job
29:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#012).md). If he does not obtain this
by persuasion, he cries for force, and such a demand lies at the root of
many a bloody feud.

Powerful and respected also as the position, described in [Job
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#001.md), of such a man is, it must,
according to the nature of its basis, fall in under strokes of
misfortune, like those mentioned in [Job
1:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#014.md), and change to the very
opposite, as the poet describes it in [Job
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001.md).

After these observations concerning the agricultural relations of
Hauran, we return to the tradition of Job. As we pursue the track of
this tradition further, we first find it again in some of the Christina
writers of the middle ages, viz., in Eugesippus (De distanc. loc. terr.
sanct.), in William of Tyre (Histor. rerum a Francis gest.), and in
Marino Sanuto (De secretis fid. cruc.). The passages that bear upon the
point are brought together in Reland (Palest. pp. 265f.); and we would
simply refer to them, if it were possible for the reader to find his way
among the fabulous confusion of the localities in Eugesippus and Sanuto.

The oldest of these citations is from Eugesippus, and is as follows: One
part of the country is the land of Hus, out of which Job was; it is also
called Sueta, after which Bildad the Suhite was named. Sanuto tells us
where this locality is to be sought. "Sueta is the home of Baldad the
Suite, Below this city (civitas), in the direction of the Kedar-tribes,
the Saracens are accustomed to assemble out of Aram, Mesopotamia, Ammon,
Moab, and the whole Orient, around the fountain of Fiale; and, on
account of the charms of the place, to hold a fair there during the
whole summer, and to pitch their coloured tents." In another place he
says: fontem Fialen Medan, i.e., aquas Dan, a Saracenis nuncupari.

Now, since according to an erroneous, but previously prevalent
etymology, "the water of Dan" (מי דן = יאר דּן) denoted the Jordan, and
since we further know from Josephus (Bell. iii. 10, 7) that the Phiala
is the small lake of Rm, whose subterranean outflow the tetrarch Philip
is said to have shown to be the spring of the Jordan, which comes to
light deeper below, we should have thought the country round about the
lake of Rm, at the south foot of Hermn, to be the home of Job and
Bildad. This discovery would be confirmed by the following statement of
Eugesippus (in Reland, loc. cit.): "The river Dan flows under ground
from its spring as far as the plain of Meldan, where it comes to light.
This plain is named after the fair, which is held there, for the
Saracens call such an one Meldan. At the beginning of the summer a large
number of men, with wares to sell, congregate there, and several
Parthian and Arabian soldiers also, in order to guard the people and
their herds, which have a rich pasture there in the summer. The word
Meldan is composed of mel and dan." It is indeed readily seen that the
writer has ignorantly jumbled several words together in the expression
meldan, as m Dan, "water of Dan," and Mdn or mı̂dân, "market-place;"
perhaps even also leddân, the name of the great fountain of the Jordan
in the crater of the Tell el-Kdi. In like manner, the statement that the
neighbourhood of Phiala, or that of the large fountain of the Jordan,
might formerly have been a fair of the tribes, is false, for the former
is broken up into innumerable craters, and the latter is poisoned by the
swamp-fevers of the Hle; but as to the rest, both Eugesippus and Sanuto
seem really to speak of a tradition which places Job's or Bildad's home
in that region. And yet it is not so: their tradition is no other than
the Hauranitish; but ignorance of the language and geography of the
country, and some accidental circumstances, so confused their
representations, that it is difficult to find out what is right. The
first clue is given us by the history of William of Tyre, in which (l.
xxii. c. 21) it is said that the crusaders, on their return from a
marauding expedition in the Nukra, wished to reconquer a strong
position, the Cavea Roob, which they had lost a short time before. "This
place," says the historian, "lies in the province of Suite, a district
distinguished by its pleasantness, etc.; and that Baldad, Job's friend,
who is on that account called the Suite, is said to have come from it."
This passage removes us at once into the neighbourhood of Muzrb and the
Monastery of Job, for the province of Suete is nothing but the district
of Suwt (Arab. ṣwı̂t),

(Note: Reisebericht, S. 46; comp. Ritter, Syr. u. Pal. ii. 1019 \[Erdk.
xv. Pt. 2, p. 1019\].)

the north-western boundary of which is formed by the gorge of the Wd
Rahb. The Cavea Roob, which was first of all again found out by me on my
journey in 1862, lies in the middle of the steep bank of that wadi, and
is at present called maghret Rahb, "the cave of R.," or more commonly
mu'allakat Rahb, "the swinging cave of R.," and at the time of the
Crusades commanded the dangerous pass which the traveller, on ascending
from the south end of the Lake of Galilee to Edre't by the nearest way,
has to climb on hands and feet. In another passage (xvi. 9), where the
unhealthy march to Bosr is spoken of, Will. of Tyre says: "After we had
come through the gorge of Roob, we reached the plain which is called
Medan, and where every year the Arabs and other oriental tribes are
accustomed to hold a large fair." This plain is in the vicinity of
Muzrb, in which the great pilgrim-fair is held annually. We find
something similar in xiii. 18: "After having passed Decapolis

(Note: Here in the more contracted sense, the district of Gadara, Kefrt,
and Irbid.)

we came to the pass of Roob, and further on into the plain of Medan,
which stretches far and wide in every direction, and is intersected by
the river Dan, which falls into the Jordan between (Tiberias and
Scythopolis (Bsn)." This river, the same as that which Sanuto means by
his aquae Dan (M Dn), is none other than the Wdi el-Meddn, called "the
overflowing one," because in the month of March it overflows its banks
eastward of the Gezzr-bridge. It is extremely strange that the name of
this river appears corrupted not only in all three writers mentioned
above, but also in Burckhardt; for, deceived by the ear, he calls it Wd
Om el-Dhan.

(Note: Burckhardt, Travels in Syr. and Pal. (ed. Gesenius, S. 392).)

The Meddn is the boundary river between the Suwt and Nukra plains; it
loses its name where it runs into the Makran; and where it falls into
the valley of the Jordan, below the lake of Tiberias, it is called
el-Muchb.

We have little to add to what has been already said. The Fiale of Sanuto
is not the Lake Rm, but the round begge, the lake of springs of Muzrb,
the rapid outflow of which, over a depth of sixty to eighty feet, forms
a magnificent waterfall, the only one in Syria, as it falls into the
Meddn near the village of Tell Shihb.

The unfortunate confusion of the localities was occasioned by two
accidental circumstances: first, that both the springs of the Jordan
below Bnis and the lake of Muzrb, have a village called Rahb (רחוב) in
their vicinity, of which one is mentioned in [Jdg
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#028.md)., and the other, about a mile
below the Cavea Roob, is situated by a fountain of the same name, from
which village, cavern, and wadi derive their names; secondly, that
there, as here, there is a village Abil (אבל): that near Dan is situated
in the "meadow-district of 'Ijn" (Merg. 'Ijn); and that in the Suwt lies
between Rahb and the Makran, and was visited by Seetzen as well as by
myself. Perhaps the circumstance that, just as the environs of Muzrb
have their Mdn,

(Note: The word el-mı̂dân and el-mêdân signifies originally the
hippodrome, then the arena of the sham-fight, then the place of contest,
the battle-field, and finally a wide level place where a large concourse
of men are accustomed to meet. In this sense the Damascenes have their
el-mı̂dân, the Spanish cities their almeidân, and the Italians their
corso.)

so the environs of Bnis have their Ard el-Mejdn, "region of
battle-fields," may also have contributed to the confusion; thus, for
example, the country sloping to the west from the Phiala towards the
Hle, between Gubbt ez-zt and Za'ra, is called, perhaps on account of the
murderous encounters which took place there, both in the time of the
Crusades and also in more ancient times. It is certainly the ground on
which the battle narrated in the book of Joshua, [Jos
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001.md), took place, and also the battle
in which Antiochus the Great slew the Egyptian army about 200 b.c.)

What we have gained for our special purpose from this information (by
which not a few statements of Ritter, K. v. Raumer, and others, are
substantiated), is not merely the fact that the tradition which places
Job's home in the region of Muzrb existed even in the middle ages (which
the quotation given above from Makdesh, who lived before the time of the
Crusades, also confirms), and even came to the ears of the foreigners
who settled in the country as they then passed through the land, but
also the certainty that this tradition was then, as now, common to the
Christians and the Mussulmans, for the three writers previously
mentioned would hardly have recorded it on the testimony of the latter
only.

(Note: Estri ha-Parchi, the most renowned Jewish topographer of
Palestine, in his work Caftor wa-ferach, completed in 1322 (newly edited
by Edelmann, published by Asher, Berlin, 1852, S. 49), says דאר איוב
lies one hour south of נבו, since he identifies Naw with the Reubenitish
Neb, [Num 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#038.md), as Zora'' with יעזר,
[Num 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#035.md); so that he explains ארץ
עוץ by ארץ יעזר, although he at the same time considers the name,
according to Saadia, as one with אלגוטה (el Ghuta). His statements
moreover are exact, as one might expect from a man who had travelled for
seven years in all directions in Palestine; and his conclusion, ארץ עוץ
היא ארץ קדם לארץ ישׂראל כנגד טבריא, perfectly accords with the above
treatise. - Del.)

There can be no doubt as to which of these two religions must be
regarded as the original mother of this tradition. The Hauranite
Christians, who, from their costume, manners, language, and traditions,
undoubtedly inherited the country from the pre-Muhammedan age, venerate
the Makm perhaps even more than the Muhammedans; which would be
altogether impossible in connection with the hostile position of the two
religious sects towards one another, and in connection with the zealous
scorn with which the Syrian Christians regard the religion of Islam, if
the Hauranitish tradition of Job and the Makm were of later, Muhammedan
origin. It is also possible that, on a closer examination of the Makm
and the buildings about the Sachra, one might find, besides crosses,
Greek inscriptions (since they are nowhere wanting in the Nukra), which
could only have their origin in the time before the occupation of Islam
(635 a.d.); for after this the Hauranite Christians, who only prolong
their existence by wandering from chirbe to chirbe, have not even built
a single dwelling-house, much less a building for religious worship,
which was forbidden under pain of death in the treaty of Omar. But in
connection with the pre-Islam Monastery of Job, which owed its origin
only to the sacred tradition that held its ground in that place, are
monumental witnesses that this tradition is pre-Islamic, and has been
transferred from the Christians to the Mussulmans, required? We may go
even further, and assert that Muhammed, in the Sur. xxxviii. 41ff. of
the Korn, had the Hauranitish tradition of Job and the localities near
Sa'dje definitely before his mind.

We must regard the merchandise caravans which the inhabitants of Tehma
sent continuously into the "north country," esh-shâm,

(Note: In Jemen the Higz, Syria may have been called Shm in the earliest
times. The name was taken into Syria itself by the immigration of the
Jemanic tribes of Kud'a, and others, because they brought with them the
name of Syria that was commonly used in their native land.)

and the return freight of which consisted chiefly of Hauranitish corn,
as proof of a regular intercourse between the east Jordanic country and
the west of the Arabian peninsula in the period between Christ and
Muhammed. Hundreds of men from Mekka and Medina came every year to Bosr;
indeed, when it has happened that the wandering tribes of Syria, which
were, then also as now, bound for Hauran with the kêl, i.e., their want
of corn, got before them, and had emptied the granaries of Bosr, or when
the harvests of the south of Hauran had been destroyed by the locusts,
which is not unfrequently the case, they will have come into the Nukra

(Note: The remarkable fair at Muzrb can be traced back to the earliest
antiquity, although Bosr at times injured it; but this latter city, from
its more exposed position, has been frequently laid in ruins. It is
probable that the merchants of Damascus pitched their tents for their
Kasaba, i.e., their moveable fair, twice a year (in spring and in
autumn) by the picturesque lake of Muzrb. If, with the tradition, we
take the Nukra to be the home of Job, of the different ways of
interpreting [Job 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019.md) there is
nothing to hinder our deciding upon that which considers it as the
greater caravan which acme periodically out of southern Arabia to Hauran
(Bosr or Muzrib). Tm with its well, Heddg (comp. [Isa
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014).md), celebrated by the poets of the
steppe, from which ninety camels (sâniât) by turns raise a constantly
flowing stream of clear and cool water for irrigating the palms and the
seed, was in ancient times, perhaps, the crossing point of the merchant
caravans going from south to north, and from east to west. Even under
the Omajad Cahlifs the Mekka pilgrim-route went exclusively by way of
Tm, just as during the Crusades so long as the Franks kept possession of
Kerak and Shbak. An attempt made in my Reisebericht (S. 93-95) to
substitute the Hauranitish Tm in the two previously mentioned passages
of Scripture, I have there (S. 131) given up as being scarcely
probable.)

as far as Naw, sometimes even as far as Damascus, in order to obtain
their full cargo.

If commerce often has the difficult task of bringing together the most
heterogeneous peoples, and of effecting a reciprocal interchange of
ideas, it here had the easy work of sustaining the intercourse among
tribes that were originally one people, spoke one idiom, and regarded
themselves as all related; for the second great Sabaean migration, under
'Amr and his son Ta'labe, had taken possession of Mekka, and left one of
their number, Rab'a ibn Hritha, with his attendants (the Chuz'ites),
behind as lord of the city. In the same manner they had become possessed
of Jathrib (el-Medna), and left this city to their tribes Aus and
Chazreg: the remainder of the people passed on to Peraea and took
possession of the country, at that time devastated, as far as Damascus,
according to Ibn Sa'd, even including this city. By the reception of
Christianity, the Syrian Sabaeans appear to have become but slightly or
not at all estranged from their relatives in the Higz, for Christianity
spread even here, so that the Caesars once ventured to appoint a
Christian governor even to the city of Mekka. This was during the
lifetime of the Gefnite king 'Amr ibn Gebele. At the time of Muhammed
there were many Christians in Mekka, who will for the most part have
brought their Christianity with the Syrian caravans, so that at the
commencement of Islm the Hauranitish tradition of Job might have been
very well known in Mekka, since many men from Mekka may have even
visited the Makm and the Sachra, and there have heard many a legend of
Job like that intimated in the Korn xxxviii. 43. Yea, whoever will give
himself the trouble to investigate minute commentaries on the Koran,
especially such as interpret the Koran from the tradition (hadı̂th),
e.g., the Kitb ed-durr el-muchtr, may easily find that not merely Kazwn,
Ibn el-Ward, and Jkt, whose observations concerning the Monastery of Job
have been given above, but also much older authorities, identify the
Koranish fountain of Job with the Hauranitish.

A statement of Eusebius, of value in connection with this investigation,
brings us at one stride about three hundred years further on. It is in
the Onomastikon, under Καρναείμ, and is as follows: "Astaroth Karnaim is
at present (about 310 a.d.) a very large village (κώμη μεγίστη) beyond
the Jordan, in the province of Arabia, which is also called Batanaea.
Here, according to tradition (ἐκ παραδόσεως), they fix the dwelling
(οἶκος) of Job." On the small map which accompanies these pages, the
reader will find in the vicinity of the Makm the low and somewhat
precipitous mound, not above forty feet in height, of Tell 'Ashtar, the
plateau of which forms an almost round surface, which is 425 paces in
diameter, and shows the unartistic foundations of buildings, and traces
of a ring-wall. Here we have to imagine that 'Astarot Karnaim. Euseb.
here makes no mention whatever of the city of Astaroth, the ancient
capital of Basan, for this he does under Astaroo'th; the hypothesis of
its being the residence of king 'Og, which Newbold

(Note: C. Ritter, Geogr. v. Syr. u. Pal. ii. 819ff. \[Erdk. xv. 2, p.
819ff.\] The information of Newbold, which is printed in the Zeitschr.
d. Deutsch. Morgenl. Gesellschaft, i. 215f., is unfortunately little to
be relied on, and is to be corrected according to the topography of the
mound given above.)

set up here, consequently falls to the ground. The κώμη μεγίστη of
Eusebius must, in connection with the limited character of the ground,
certainly be somewhat contracted; but the identity of the localities is
not to be doubted in connection with the great nearness of the οἶκος
(the Makm).

(Note: A small, desolated stone village, situated a quarter of an hour's
journey from the mound of 'Ashtar, which however has not a single house
of any importance, has two names among the inhabitants of that region,
either Chirbt 'Ijn en-Nle (the ruins near the Nila-springs) or Chirbt
'Ashtar, which can signify the ruins of 'Ashtar and the ruins near
'Ashtar. Since it is, however, quite insignificant, it will not be the
village that has given the name to the mound, but the mound with its
buildings, which in ancient days were perhaps a temple to Astarte,
surrounded by a wall, has given the name to the village.)

Let us compare another statement that belongs here; it stands under
Ἀσταρὼθ Καρναείμ, and is as follows: "There are at the present time two
villages of this name in Batanaea, which lie nine miles distant from one
another, μεταξὺ ΑΔΑΡΩΝ καὶ ΑΒΙΛΗΞ." Jerome has duo castella instead of
two villages, by which at least the κώμη μεγίστη is somewhat reduced;
for that it is one of these two castles

(Note: The meaning of "castle," as defined by Burckhardt, Travels in
Syr. etc. p. 657, should be borne in mind here. "The name of Kal'at or
castle is given on the Hadj route, and over the greater part of the
desert, to any building walled in and covered, and having, like a Khan,
a large courtyard in its enclosure. The walls are sometimes of stone,
but more commonly of earth, though even the latter are sufficient to
withstand an attack of Arabs." - Tr.)

can be the less doubtful, since they also regulate the determining of
the respective localities. If the reading ΑΒΙΛΗΞ is correct, only Abil
(אבל) in the north of Suwt can (since, without doubt, the Arabian names
of the places in Hauran existed in Eusebius' day) be intended; and
ΑΔΑΡΩΝ ought then to be changed into ΑΛΑΡΩΝ, in order to denote the
large village of El-hr, on the lofty peak of the same name in the plain
of Gdr. El-hr lies to the north, and Abil to the south of 'Ashtar. If,
however, as is most highly probable, instead of ΑΒΙΛΗΞ (which form
Euseb. does not use elsewhere, for he calls the town of Abil Ἀβέλ, and
the inscription in Turra has the form πόλεως Ἀβέλις), ΑΒΙΔΗΞ is to be
read, which corresponds to the Ἀβιδᾶ of Ptolemy (ed. Wilberg, p. 369)
and the modern /Abidn near Btirr, thus the name of the other village is
to be changed from ΑΔΑΡΩΝ to ΑΡΑΡΩΝ (for which the Cod. Vat. erroneously
has ΔΡΑΡΩΝ), the modern 'Arr.

(Note: Some, in connection with this word, have erroneously thought of
the city of Edre't, which Eusebius calls Ἀδρά in the immediately
preceding article Ἀδραά, and in the art. Edraei'.)

'Abdn, however, lies nine miles west, and 'Arr nine miles east of
'Ashtar.

Now, as to the second village, and its respective castle, which is
mentioned in the second citation from the Onomastikon, I believe that
both Euseb. and Jerome intend to say there are two villages, of which
the one has the byname of the other; consequently the one is called
Astart (Karnaim), and the other Karnaim (Astart). Twelve miles west of
'Ashtar lies the Golanite village of Kornje (קרניּה), which in old
Kantra I have taken up in my trigonometrical measurements.

We find also a third passage in the Onomast. which belongs here; it is
under Ἰαβώκ in Cod. Vat., under Ἰδουμαία in Cod. Leid. and Vellarsi, and
runs: "According to the view of a certain one (κατά τινος), this region
is the land of Asitis (Ausitis), the home of Job, while according to
others it is Arabia (ἡ Ἀραβία); and again, according to others, it is
the Land of Shn." Whether genuine or not, this passage possesses a
certain value. If it is genuine, Jerome would have left it accordingly
untranslated, because he would not be responsible for its whole
contents, for he not unfrequently passes over or alters statements of
Eusebius where he believes himself to be better informed; but, taken
exactly, he could only have rejected the views of those who seek Job's
native country on the Jabbok (if the passage belongs to the art. Ἰαβώκ)
or in Edom (if it belongs to Ἰδουμαία), or in the Belk, the land of Shn;
but not the view of those who make Arabia (Batanaea) to be Ausitis, for
the statement of Eusebius with reference to this point under Carnaei'm
he translates faithfully. If the passage is not genuine, it at any rate
gives the very early testimony of an authority distinct from Eusebius
and Jerome in favour of the age of the Hauranitish tradition concerning
Job, while it has only a single (κατά τινος) authority for the view of
those who make Edom to be Ausitis, and even this only when the passage
belongs to Ἰδουμαία.

By means of these quotations from the Onomastikon, that passage of
Chrysostom (Homil. V. de Stud. 1, tom. ii. p. 59), in which it is said
that many pilgrims from the end of the earth come to Arabia, in order to
seek for the dunghill on which Job lay, and with rapture to kiss the
ground where he suffered ( - - ἀπὸ περάτων τῆς γῆς εἰς τῆν Ἀραβίαν
τρέχοντες, ἵνα τῆν κοπρίαν ἴδωσι, καὶ θεασάμενοι καταφιλήσωσι τῆν γῆν),
appears also to obtain its right local reference. This Arabia is
certainly none other than that which Eusebius explains by ἣ καὶ
Βαταναία, and that κοπρία or mezbele to be sought nowhere except near
the Makm jb. And should there by any doubts upon the subject, ought they
not to be removed by the consideration that the proud structure of the
Monastery of Job, with its spring festivals mentioned above, standing
like a Pharos casting its light far and wide in that age, did not allow
either the Syrian Christians or the pilgrims from foreign parts to
mistake the place, which tradition had rendered sacred, as the place of
Job's sufferings?

There is no monastery whose origin, according to an unimpeachable
testimony, belongs to such an early date as that of the Monastery of
Job. According to the chronicles of the peoples (ta'rı̂ch el-umem), or
the annals of Hamze el-Isfahni (died about 360 of the Hegira), it was
built by 'Amr I, the second Gefnide. Now, since the first Ghassanitish
king (Gefne I) reigned forty-five years and three months, and 'Amr five
years, the Monastery would have been in existence about 200 a.d., if we
place the beginning of the Gefnide dynasty in the time 150 a.d.
Objections are raised against such an early date, because one is
accustomed on good authority to assign the origin of monasteries to
about the year 300 a.d. In the face of more certain historical dates,
these objections must remain unheeded, for hermit and monastery life
(rahbanı̂ja) existed in the country east of Jordan among the Essenes and
other societies and forms of worship, even before Christianity; so that
the latter, on its appearance in that part, which took place long before
200 a.d., received the monasteries as an inheritance: but certainly the
chronology of the Gefnide dynasty is not reliable. Hamze fixes the
duration of the dynasty at 616 years; Ibn Sa'd,

(Note: Wetzstein, Catal. Arab. MSS collected in Damascus, No. 1, p. 89.)

in his history of the pre-Islamic Arabs, at 601 years; and to the same
period extends the statement of Mejnishi,

(Note: Wetzst. Catal. Arab. MSS collected in Damascus, No. 24, p. 16.)

who, in his topography of the Ka'be, says that between the conquest of
Mekka by Ta'lebe and the rule of the Kos in this city was 500 years. On
the contrary, however, Ibn Jusef

(Note: Hamzae Isfahan. Annales, ed. Gottwald, Vorrede, p. xi.)

informs us that this dynasty began "earlier" than 400 years before
Islamism. With this statement accord all those numerous accounts,
according to which the "rupture of the dyke" (sêl el-‛arim), the
supposed cause of the Jemanic emigration, took place rather more than
400 years before Islamism. If therefore, to content ourselves with an
approximate calculation, we make Islamism to begin about 615 (the year
of the "Mission" was 612 a.d.), and the Gefnide dynasty, with the
addition of the "earlier," 415 years previous, then the commencement of
the reign of Gefne I would have been 200 a.d., and the erection of the
Monastery shortly before 250.

When the tribe whose king later on built the Monastery migrated from
Jemen into Syria, the Trachonitis was in the hands of a powerful race of
the Kud'ides, which had settled there in the first century of our era,
having likewise come out of Jemen, and become tributary to the Romans.
This race had embraced Christianity from the natives; and some
historians maintain that it permitted the Gefnides to settle and share
in the possession of the country, only on the condition that they
likewise should embrace Christianity. In those early times, these
tribes, of course, with the new religion received the tradition of Job
also from the first hand, from the Jews and the Jewish Christians, who,
since the battle of the Jewish people with the Romans, will have found
refuge and safety to a large extent in Petraea, and especially in the
hardly accessible Trachonitis. The Nukra also, as the most favoured
region of Syria and Palestina, will have had its native population,
among which, in spite of the frequent massacres of Syrians and Jews,
there will have been many Jews. Perhaps, moreover, the protection of the
new Jemanic population of Hauran again attracted Jewish settlers
thither: Naw

(Note: If Naw is not also of Jewish origin, its name is nevertheless the
old Semitic נוה, "a dwelling" ([Job
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#003.md), [Job
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024.md); [Job
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006.md); [Job
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#015).md), and not, as Jkt supposes, the
collective form of nawât, "the kernel of a date.")

at least is a place well known in the Talmud and Midrash, which is
mentioned, as a city inhabited by the Jews among those who are not Jews,
and as the birth-place of several eminent teachers.

(Note: No less than three renowned teachers from Naw appear in the
Talmud and Midrash: ר שׁילא דנוה, Schila of Nawa (jer. Sabbath cap. ii.,
Wajikra rabba cap. xxxiv., Midrasch Ruth on ii. 19a), ר פלטיא דנוה
(Midr. Koheleth on i. 4b) and ר שׁאול דנוה (ib. on xii. 9a). נוה is
mentioned as an enemy of the neighbouring town of חלמיש in Wajikra rabba
c. xxiii., Midr. Echa on i. 17a, and Midr. Schir on ii. 1. - Del.)

Moreover, in Syria the veneration of a spot consecrated by religious
tradition is independent of its being at the time inhabited or desolate.
The supposed tombs of Aaron near Petra, of Hud near Gerash, of Jethro
(Su'b) in the valley of Nimrn, of Ezekiel in Melhat Hiskn, of Elisha on
the el-Jesha' mountains, and many other mezâre (tombs of the holy, to
which pilgrims resort), are frequently one or more days' journey distant
from inhabited places, and yet they are carefully tended. They are
preserved from decay and neglect by vows, by the spring processions, and
especially by the piety of the Beduins, who frequently deposit articles
of value near the mezâre, as property entrusted to the care of the
saint. The Makm of Job may also have been such a consecrated spot many
centuries before the erection of the Monastery, and perhaps not merely
to the Jews, but also to the Aramaean and Arab population. The
superstitious veneration of such places is not confined among the
Semites to a particular religious sect, but is the common heritage of
the whole race; and the tradition of Job in particular was, originally,
certainly not Israelitish, but Aramaean.

Job is not mentioned in the writings of Josephus, but we do find there a
remarkable passage concerning Job's native country, the land of the
Usites, viz., Ant. i. 6: "Aram, from whom come the Aramaeans, called by
the Greeks Syrians, had four sons, of whom the first was named Οὔσης,
and possessed Trachonitis and Damascus." The first of these two,
Trachonitis, has usually been overlooked here, and attention has been
fixed only on Damascus. The word el-Ghta (Arab. 'l-gûṭt), the proper
name of the garden and orchard district around Damascus, has been
thought to be connected in sound with 'Us, and they have been treated as
identical: this is, however, impossible even in philological grounds.
Ghta would certainly be written עוּטה in Hebrew, because this language
has no sign for the sound Gh (Arab. g); but Josephus, who wrote in
Greek, ought then to have said Γούσης, not Οὔσης, just as he, and the
lxx before him and Eusebius after him, render the city עזה by Γάζα, the
mountain עיבל by Γαιβάλ, the village עי by Γαΐ́, etc. In the same manner
the lxx ought to have spoken of a Γαυσῖτις, not Αὐσῖτις, if this were
the case. Proper names, also, always receive too definite and lasting an
impress for their consonants, as ץ and ט, to be easily interchanged,
although this is possible with the roots of verbs. Moreover, if the word
עוץ had had the consonant ץ (Arab. ḍ), Josephus must have reproduced it
with τ or θ, not with s, in accordance with the pronunciation
(especially if he had intended to identify עוץ and Ghta). And we see
from Ptolemy and Strabo, and likewise from the Greek mode of
transcribing the Semitic proper names in the Haurnite inscriptions of
the Roman period, e.g., Μάθιος and Νάταρος for Arab. mâḍâ and nḍr, that
in the time of Josephus the sound of ץ had already been divided into
Arab. ṣ and ḍ; comp. Abhandl. der Berlin. Acad. d. Wissenschaft, 1863,
S. 356f. Hence it is that Josephus manifestly speaks only of one
progenitor Οὔσης, therefore of one tribe; while the word Ghta, often as
a synonym of buq'a (בקעה), denotes a low well-watered country enclosed
by mountains, and in this appellative signification occurs as the proper
name of several localities in the most widely separated parts of Arabia
(comp. Jkt, sub voce), which could not be the case if it had been = ארץ
עוץ.

(Note: On the name 'Us, as the name of men and people, may be compared
the proper names 'As and 'Aus, together with the diminutive 'Ows, taken
from the genealogies of the Arabs, since the Old Testament is wanting in
words formed from the root עוץ, and none of those so named was a Hebrew.
In Hebr. they might be sounded עוץ, and signify the "strong one," for
the verbal stems Arab. ‛ṣṣ, ‛wṣ, ‛ṣy (comp. Arab. ‛ṣb, ‛ṣr, ‛ṣm, and
others) have the signif. "to be compressed, firm, to resist.")

The word Ausitis used by the lxx also has no formation corresponding to
the word Ghta, but shows its connection with עוּץ ארץ by the
termination; while the word Ghta rendered in Greek is Gouthata' (in
Theophanes Byzant. Gouthatha'), in analogy e.g., with the form
Cheblatha' for Ribla (Jos. Ant. x. 11).

(Note: On this word-formation comp. Reisebericht, S. 76.)

But why are we obliged to think only of Damascus, since Josephus makes
Trachonitis also to belong to the land of the Usites? If we take this
word in its most limited signification, it is (apart from the eastern
Trachon) that lava plateau, about forty miles long and about
twenty-eight broad, which is called the Leg in the present day. This is
so certain, that one is not obliged first of all to recall the
well-known inscription of the temple of Mismia, which calls this city
situated in the Leg, Μητροκώμη τοῦ Τράχωνος. From the western border of
this Trachon, however, the Monastery of Job is not ten miles distant,
therefore by no means outside the radius that was at all times tributary
to the Trachonites (Arab el-wa'r), a people unassailable in their
habitations in the clefts of the rocks.

(Note: Comp. Jos. Ant. xv. 10, 3; Zeitschr. fr allg. Erdkunde, New
Series, xiii. 213.)

According to this, the statement of Josephus would at least not stand in
open contradiction to the Hauranitish tradition of Job. But we go
further and maintain that the Monastery of Job lies exactly in the
centre of Trachonitis. This word has, viz., in Josephus and others, a
double signification - a more limited and a wider one. It has the more
limited where, together with Auranitis, Batanaea, Gamalitica, and
Gaulonitis, it denotes the separate provinces of the ancient kingdom of
Basan. Then it signifies the Trachonitis kat' exochee'n, i.e., the
wildest portion of the volcanic district, viz., the Leg, the Haurn
mountain range, the Saf and Harra of the Rgil. On the other hand, it has
the wider signification when it stands alone; then it embraces the whole
volcanic region of Middle Syria, therefore with the more limited
Trachonitis the remaining provinces of Basan, but with the exception, as
it seems, of the no longer volcanic Galadine (North Gilead). In this
sense, therefore, as a geographical notion, Trachonitis is almost
synonymous with Basan.

Since it is to the interest of this investigation to make the assertion
advanced sure against every objection, we will not withhold the passages
in support of it. Josephus says, Ant. xv. 10, 3, the district of Hle
(Οὐλαθά) lies between Galilee and Trachonitis. He might have said more
accurately, "between Galilee and Gaulonitis," but he wished to express
that the great basaltic region begins on the eastern boundary of the
Hle. The word Trachonitis has therefore the wider signification. In like
manner, in Bell. iii. 10 it is said the lake of Phiala lies 120 stadia
east of Paneion (Bnis) on the way to the Trachonitis. True, the Phiala
is a crater, and therefore itself belongs to Trachonitis, but between it
and Bnis the lava alternates with the chalk formation of the Hermn,
whereas to the south and east of the Phiala it is everywhere exclusively
volcanic; Trachonitis has therefore here also the wider signification.
Ant. xvii. 2, it is said Herod had the castle of Βαθύρα built in
Batanaea (here, as often in Josephus, in the signification of Basan), in
order to protect the Jews who travel from Babylon (vi Damascus) to
Jerusalem against the Trachonite robbers. Now, since this castle and
village (the Btirr mentioned already), which is situated in the district
of Gamalitica on an important ford of the Muchbi gorge between 'Abidin
and Sebbte, could not be any protection against the robbers of
Trachonitis in the more limited sense, but only against those of Golan,
it is manifest that by the Trachonites are meant the robbers of
Trachonitis in the wider sense. Aurelius Victor (De Hist. Caes. xxvii.)
calls the Emperor M. Julius Philippus, born in Bosr, the metropolis of
Auranitis, quite correctly Arabs Trachonites; because the plain of
Hauran, in which Bosra is situated, is also of a basaltic formation, and
therefore is a part of the Trachonitis.

The passage of Luke's Gospel, [Luk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001.md), where it says Herod tetrarch of
Galilee, and Philip tetrarch of Ituraea and Trachonitis, also belongs
here. That Philip possessed not perhaps merely the Trachonitis (similar
to a province assigned to a man as banishment rather than for
administration, producing little or no revenue) in the more limited
sense, but the whole Basanitis, is shown by Josephus, who informs us,
Ant. xvii. 11, 4 and freq., that he possessed Batanaea (in the more
restricted sense, therefore the fruitful, densely populated, profitable
Nukra), with Auranitis, Trachonitis, etc. We must therefore suppose that
in the words τῆς Ἰτουραίας καὶ Τραχωνίτιδος χώρας in Luke, one district
is meant, which by Ἰτουραίας is mentioned according to the marauding
portion of its population, and by Trachooni'tidos more generally,
according to its trachonitic formation.

(Note: Eusebius in his Onomast. also correctly identifies the two words,
at one time under Ἰτουραία, and the other time under Τραχωνῖτις. After
what we have said elsewhere (Reisebericht, S. 91ff.) on the subject,
surely no one will again maintain that the peaceful villages of the
plain of Gdr were the abodes of the Ituraeans, the wildest of all people
(Cic. Phil. ii. 11; Strabo, xvi. 2). Their principal hiding-places will
have been the Trachonitis in the more restricted sense, but one may seek
them also on the wooded mountains of Gln and in the gorges of the
Makran. That Ptolemy and Josephus speak only of the Trachonites and
never of the Ituraeans (in the passage Ant. xiii. 11, 3, Ἰδουμαία is to
be read instead of Ἰτουραία), and Strabo, on the other hand, speaks only
of the latter, favours the identity of the two; of like import is the
circumstance, that Pliny (H. N. v. 23) makes the inhabitants of the
region of Baetarra (Btirr) Ituraeans, and Josephus (Ant. xvii. 2)
Trachonites. But in spite of the identity of the words Trachonitis and
Ituraea, one must not at the same time overlook the following
distinction. If the Trachonites are called after the country, it must be
the description of all the inhabitants of the country, whereas the
Ituraeans, if they gave the name to the country, are not necessarily its
exclusive population. The whole of the district of which we speak has a
twofold population in keeping with its double character (rugged rock and
fruitful plain), viz., cattle-rearing freebooters in the clefts of the
rocks, and peaceful husbandmen in the plain; the former dwelling in hair
tents (of old also in caves), the latter in stone houses; the former
forming the large majority, the latter the minority of the population of
the district. If writers speak of the Ituraeans, they mean exclusively
that marauding race that hates husbandry; but if they speak of the
Trachonites, the connection must determine, whether they speak of both
classes of the population, or only of the marauding Trachonites (the
Ituraeans), or of the husbandmen of the plain (of the provinces of
Batanaea and Auranitis). The latter are rarely intended, since the
peaceful peasant rarely furnishes material for the historian.)

Ioannes Malalas (Chronogr. ed. Dindorf, p. 236), who, as a Syrian born,
ought to be well acquainted with the native usage of the language, hence
calls Antipas, as a perfectly adequate term, only toparch of
Trachonitis; and if, according to his statement (p. 237), the official
title of this Herod was the following: Σεβαστὸς Ἡρώδης τοπάρχης καὶ
θεσμοδότης Ἰουδαίων τε καὶ Ἑλλήνων, Βασιλεὺς τῆς Τραχωνίτιδος, it is
self-evident that "king of Trachonitis" here is synonymous with king of
Basan. In perfect harmony with this, Pliny says (H. N. v. 18) that the
ten cities of Decapolis lay within the extensive tetrarchies of
Trachonitis, which are divided into separate kingdoms. Undoubtedly Pliny
adds to these tetrarchies of Trachonitis in the wider sense, which are
already known to us, Galadine also, which indeed belonged also the
pre-Mosaic Basan, but at the time of Josephus is mostly reckoned to
Peraea (in the more limited sense).

On the ground of this evidence, therefore, the land of the Usites of
Josephus, with the exception of the Damascene portion, was Trachonitis
in the wider sense; and since the Makm jb is in the central point of
this country, this statement accords most exactly with the Syrian
tradition. It is clear that the latter remains untouched by the
extension of the geographical notion in Josephus, for without knowing
anything more of a "land of the Usites," it describes only a portion of
the same as the "native country of Job;" and again, Josephus had no
occasion to speak of Job in his commentary on the genealogies, therefore
also none to speak of his special home within the land of the Usites.
Eusebius, on the other hand, in his De Originibus (ix. 2, 4), refers to
this home, and says, therefore limiting Josephus' definition: Hus,
Traconitidis conditor, inter Palaestinam et Coelesyriam tenuit imperium;
unde fuit Iob.

With this evidence of agreement between two totally independent
witnesses, viz., the Syrian tradition and Josephus, the testimony of the
latter in particular has an enhanced value; for, although connected with
the Bible, it nevertheless avails as extra-biblical testimony concerning
the Usites, it comes from an age when one might still have the
historical fact from the seat of the race, and from an authority of the
highest order. True, Josephus is not free from disfigurements, where he
has the opportunity of magnifying his people, himself, or his Roman
patrons, and of depreciating an enemy; but here he had to do with
nothing more than the statement of the residence of a people; and since
the word Ou'sees also has no similarity in sound with the words Damascus
and Trachonitis, that might make a combination with them plausible, we
may surely have before us a reliable historical notice here, or at least
a tradition which was then general (and therefore also for us
important), while we may doubt this in connection with other parts of
the genealogies, where Josephus seems only to catch at that which is
similar in sound as furnishing an explanation.

But that which might injure the authority of Josephus is the
contradiction in which it seems to stand to a far older statement
concerning Ausitis, viz., the recognised postscript of the lxx to the
book of Job, which makes Job to be the Edomitish king Jobab. The
identification, it may be said, can however only have been possible
because Ausitis was in or near Edom. But the necessity of this inference
must be disputed. It is indeed unmistakeable that that postscript is
nothing more than a combination of the Jews beyond Palestine (probably
Egytpio-Hellenistic), formed, perhaps, long before the lxx, - such a
vagary as many similar ones in the Talmud and Midrash. From the
similarity in sound of Ἰωβάβ with Ἰώβ, and the similarity in name of
Ζαρά, the father of Jobab, with a son of Re'l and grandson of Esau ([Gen
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#013).md), Job's descent from Esau has
been inferred. That Esau's first-born was called Elphaz and his son
Temn, seemed to confirm this combination, since (in accordance with the
custom

(Note: From this custom, which is called the grandfather's "living
again," the habit, singular to us, of a father calling his son jâ abı̂,
"my father!" or jâ bêjı̂, "my little father," as an endearing form of
address, is explained.)

of naming the grandson as a rule after his grandfather) Elphaz the
Temanite might be regarded as grandson of that Elphaz, therefore like
Job as great-grandson of Esau and πέμπτος ἀπὸ Ἀβραάμ. The apparent and
certainly designed advantages of this combination were: that Job, who
had no pedigree, and therefore was to be thought of as a non-Israelite,
was brought into the nearest possible blood-relationship to the people
of God, and that, by laying the scene in the time of the patriarchs, all
questions which the want of a Mosaic colouring to the book of Job might
excite would be met. Now, even if the abode of Job were transferred from
the land of 'Us to Edom, it would be only the consequence of his
combination with Jobab, and, just as worthless as this latter itself,
might lead no one astray. But it does not seem to have gone so far; it
is even worthy of observation, that מבצרה (from Bosra, the Edomite
city),

(Note: It need hardly be mentioned that one is not to think of the
Hauranitish Bosr (Arab. bṣrâ), since this name of a city only came into
use some centuries after Christ.)

being attached to the misunderstood υἱὸς Ζαρά ἐκ Βοσόῤῥας, [Gen
36:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#033.md), is reproduced in the lxx by
μητρὸς Βοσόῤῥας, as also that Job's wife is not called an Edomitess, but
a γυνὴ Ἀράβισσα. And it appears still far more important, that Ausitis
lies ἐν τοῖς ὁρίοις τῆς Ἰδουμαίας καὶ Ἀραβίας, so far as the central
point of Ἰδουμαία is removed by the addition καὶ τῆς Ἀραβίας, and Job's
abode is certainly removed from the heart of Idumaea. The Cod. Alex.
exchanges that statement of the place, even in a special additional
clause, for ἐπὶ τῶν ὁρίων τοῦ Εὐφράτου, therefore transfers Ausitis to
the vicinity of the Euphrates, and calls the father of Jobab (= Job)
Ζαρὲθ ἐξ ἀνατολῶν ἡλίου (מבני קדם). Nevertheless we attach no importance
to this variation of the text, but rather offer the suggestion that the
postscript gives prominence to the observation: οὗτος (viz., Ἰώβ)
ἑρμεενεύεται ἐκ τῆς Συριακῆς βίβλου.

(Note: It is indeed possible that the Hebrew text is meant here, for
Philo usually calls the Hebrew Χαλδαΐστί, and the Talmud describes the
Jewish country-dialect as סורסי; it is possible, and even more probable,
that it is a Syrian, i.e., Aramaean Targum - but not less possible that
it is a Syrian original document. According to Malalas (ed. Dindorf, p.
12), Origen understands ἐκ τῆς Συριακῆς βίβλου elsewhere of a Hebrew
original, but in c. Celsum iii. 6 he describes the Hebrew language in
relation to the Syriac and Phoenician as ἑτέρα παρ ̓ ἀμθοτέρας, and the
Homilies on Job in Opp. Origenis, ed. Delaure, ii. 851, say: Beati Iob
scriptura primum quidem in Arabia Syriace scripta, ubi et habitabat. -
Del.)

If we compare the postscript of the lxx with the legend of Islam, we
find in both the Esauitish genealogy of Job; the genealogy of the legend
is: jb ibn Zrih (זרח) ibn Re'l ibn el-'Ais ibn Ishk ibn Ibrhm; and we
may suppose that it is borrowed directly from the lxx, and that it
reached Arabia and Mekka even in the pre-Islamic times by means of the
(Arabian) Christians east of Jordan, who had the Old Testament only in
the Greek translation. Even the Arabic orthography of the biblical
proper names, which can be explained only on the supposition of their
transfer from the Greek, is in favour of this mode of the transmission
of the Christian religion and its legends to the people of the Higaz.
Certainly there can be no doubt as to an historical connection between
the postscript and the legend, and therefore it would be strange if they
did not accord respecting the home of Job. The progenitor el-'Ais (עיץ),
in the genealogy of the legend, is also a remarkable counterpart to the
Ausitis ἐν τοῖς ὁρίοις τῆς Ἰδουμ. καὶ Ἀρ., for it is a blending of עשׂו
and עוּץ, and it has to solve the difficult problem, as to how Job can
be at the same time an Usite and an Esauite; for that Job as an Aisite
no longer belongs to Idumaea, but to the district of the more northern
Aramaeans, is shown e.g., from the following passage in Mugr ed-dn's
History of Jerusalem: "Job belonged to the people of the Romans (i.e.,
the Aisites),

(Note: We will spare ourselves the ungrateful task of an inquiry into
the origin of this 'Ais and his Protean nature. Biblical passages like
[Lam 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021.md), or those in which the
readings ארם and אדום are doubtful, or the erroneous supposition (Jos.
Ant. viii. 7) that the Ben-Hadad dynasty in Damascus is of Edomitish
origin, may have contributed to his rise. Moreover, he is altogether one
and the same with the Edom of the Jerish tradition: he is called the
father of Rm, Asfar, Sfar, Sfn (מלך חצפון), and Nidr (Hamz. Isfah. Ann.
p. 79, l. 18, read Arab. ndr for ntsr, and Zeitschr. d. d. m. Gesellsch.
ii. 239, 3, 6, read ennidr for ennefer), i.e., of the Messiah of the
Christians (according to [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001)).md)

for he sprang from el-'Ais, and the Damascene province of Batanaea was
his property."

The κοπρία of the lxx, at [Job 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008.md),
leads to the same result; that it is also found again as mezbele in the
later legend, is a further proof how thoroughly this accords with the
lxx, and how it has understood its statement of the position of Ausitis.
It may also be maintained here, that it was only possible to translate
the words בתוך־חאפר by ἐπὶ τῆς κοπρίας ἔξω τῆς πόλεως when "heap of
ashes" and "dunghill" were synonymous notions. This, however, is the
case only in Hauran, where the dung, as being useless for agricultural
purposes, is burnt from time to time in an appointed place before the
town (vid., p. 573),

(Note: Comp. p. 576, note, of the foregoing Commentary. The Arabic
version of Walton's Polyglot translates after the Peschito in accordance
with the Hebr. text: "on the ashes (er-remâd)," whereas the Arabic
translation, of which Tischendorf brought back fifteen leaves with him
from the East, and which Fleischer, in the Deutsch. Morgenl. Zeitschr.
1864, S. 288ff., has first described as an important memorial in
reference to the history of MSS, translates after the Hexapla in
accordance with the lxx: "on the dunghill (mezbele) outside the
city."-Del.)

while in every other part of Syria it is as valuable and as much stored
up as among us. If the lxx accordingly placed the kopri'a of Job in
Hauran, it could hardly represent Ausitis as Edom.

But how has the Ausitis of the lxx been transferred hither? Certainly
not as the "land of 'Us" (in the sense of the land of Basan, land of
Haurn), for without wasting a word about it, there has never been such
an one in the country east of the Jordan: but as "the land of the
Usites" in the sense of the Arabic dir 'Us (dwelling-place of the
Usites) or ard ben 'Us. A land receives designations of this kind with
the settlement of a people in it; they run parallel with the proper name
of the country, and in the rule vanish again with that people. These
designations belong, indeed, to the geography of the whole earth, but
nowhere have they preserved their natural character of transitoriness
more faithfully than in the lands where the Semitic tongue is spoken. It
is this that makes the geographical knowledge of these countries so
extremely difficult to us, because we frequently take them to be the
names of the countries, which they are not, and which - so far as they
always involve a geological definition of the regions named - can never
be displaced and competently substituted by them. In this sense the land
of the Usites might, at the time of the decay of both Israelitish
kingdoms, when the ארם דמשׂק possessed the whole of Peraea, very easily
extend from the borders of Edom to the gates of Damascus, and even
further northwards, if the Aramaean race of 'Us numbered many or
populous tribes (as it appears to be indicated in כל מלכי ארץ העוץ, [Jer
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#020).md), in perfect analogy with the
tribe of Ghassn, which during five hundred years occupied the country
from the Aelanitic Gulf to the region of Tedmor, at one time settling
down, at another leading a nomadic life, and Hauran was the centre of
its power. By such a rendering the Ἀραβία of the postscript would not be
different from the later provincia Arabiae, of which the capital was the
Trachonitish Bostra, while is was bounded on the south end of the Dead
Sea by Edom (Palaestine tertia).

But should any one feel a difficulty in freeing himself from the idea
that Ausitis is to be sought only in the Ard el-Hlt east of Ma'n, he
must consider that the author of the book of Job could not, like that
legend which places the miraculous city of Iram in the country of
quicksands, transfer the cornfields of his hero to the desert; for
there, with the exception of smaller patches of land capable of culture,
which we may not bring into account, there is by no means to be found
that husbandman's Eldorado, where a single husbandman might find tillage
for five hundred ([Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003).md), yea, for
a thousand ([Job 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#012).md) yoke of oxen.
Such numbers as these are not to be depreciated; for in connection with
the primitive agriculture in Syria and Palestine, - which renders a four
years' alternation of crops necessary, so that the fields must be
divided into so many portions (called in Hauran wâgihât, and around
Damascus auguh, Arab. 'wjh), from which only one portion is used
annually, and the rest left fallow (bûr), - Job required several square
miles of tillage for the employment of his oxen. It is all the same in
this respect whether the book of Job is a history or poem: in no case
could the Ausitis be a country, the notorious sterility of which would
make the statement of the poet ridiculous.

Our limited space does not admit of our proving the worth which we must
acknowledge to the tradition, by illustrating those passages of the Old
Testament scriptures which have reference to עוץ and ארץ עוץ. But to any
one, who, following the hints they give, wishes again to pursue the
investigations, elsewhere useless, concerning the position of the land
of the Usites, we might indicate: (1) that עוץ the first-born of Aram
([Gen 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#023).md) is the tribe sought,
while two others of this name - a Nahorite, [Job
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021.md), and a Horite, [Job
36:28](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#028.md) - may be left out of
consideration; the former because the twelve sons of Nahor need not be
progenitors of tribes, and the latter because he belongs to a tribe
exterminated by the Edomites in accordance with [Deu
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012.md), [Deu
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#022) : (2.md) that ארץ העוץ, [Jer
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#020.md), is expressly distinguished from
אדום in the [Jer 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#021.md), and - if one
compares the round of the cup of punishment, Jer. 25, with the detailed
prophecies which follow in [Jer 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#001.md),
to which it is a prooemium that has been removed from its place -
corresponds to דמשׂק (with Hamt and Arpad), [Jer
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023) : (3.md) that therefore [Lam
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021.md), where יושׁבת בארץ עוץ would be
devoid of purpose if it described the proper habitable land of Edom,
must describe a district extending over that, in which the Edomites had
established themselves in consequence of Assyria having led away captive
the Israelitish and Aramaean population of the East Jordanic country and
Coele-Syria. In connection with [Jer
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#020.md) one must not avoid the question
whether עוץ is the name of the ארם דמשׂק that has been missed. Here the
migration of the Damascene Aramaeans from Kr ([Amo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007).md) ought to be considered, the value
of the Armenian accounts concerning the original abode of the Usites
tested, what is erroneous in the combination of קיר with the river Kur
shown and well considered, and in what relations both as to time and
events that migration might have stood to the overrunning of Middle
Syria by the Aramaean Sbaean tribes (from Mesopotamia) under Hadad-ezer,
and to the seizure and possession of the city of Damascus by Rezon the
Sbaean? Finally, one more tradition might be compared, to which some
value may perhaps be attached, because it is favoured by the stone
monuments, whose testimony we are not accustomed otherwise to despise in
Palestine and Syria. The eastern portal of the mosque of Ben Umja in
Damascus, probably of the very temple, the altar of which king Ahaz
caused to be copied ([Kg2 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010).md), is
called Grn or the Gerun gate: the portal in its present form belongs to
the Byzantine or Roman period. And before this gate is the Grnje, a
spacious, vaulted structure, mostly very old, which has been used since
the Mussulman occupation of the city as a mêda'a, i.e., a place for
religious ablutions. The topographical writings on Damascus trace these
two names back to a Grn ibn Sa'd ibn 'Ad ibn 'Aus (עוץ) ibn Iram (ארם)
ibn Sm (שׁם) ibn Nh (נוח), who settled in Damascus in the time of
Solomon (one version of the tradition identifies him with Hadad, Jos.
Ant. viii. 7), and built in the middle of the city a castle named after
him, in which a temple to the planet (kôkeb) Mushteri, the guardian-god
of the city, has been erected. That this temple, which, as is well
known, under Theodosius, at the same time with the temple of the sun at
Ba'lbek, passed over to the Christians, was actually surrounded with a
strong, fortified wall, is capable of proof even in the present day. In
this tradition, which has assumed various forms, a more genuine
counterpart of the biblical עוץ appears than that 'Ais which we have
characterized above as an invention of the schools, viz., an 'Aus (Arab.
‛wṣ), father of the Adite-tribe which is said to have settled in the
Damascene district under that Grn, and also ancestor of the prophet Hd,
lost to the tradition, whose makâm on the mountains of Sut rises far
above Gerash a city of pillars, this true Iram dht el-'imd, the valley
of the Jabbok and the Sawd of Gilead.

It is with good reason that we have hitherto omitted to mention the
Αἰσῖται of Ptolemy v. 18 (19). The Codd have both Αἰσεῖται and Αἰσῖται;
different Semitic forms (e.g., the name of the Arab. bny hays, which,
according to Jkt, once dwelt in the Harra of the Ragil) may lie at the
basis of this name, only not the form עוּץ, which ought to be Οὐσῖται,
or at least Αὐσῖται (which no Cod. reads). As to the abodes of the
Αἰσῖται, Ptolemy distributes them under nine greater races or groups of
races, which in his time inhabited the Syrian steppe. Three of these had
their settlements in the eastern half of the Syrian steppe towards the
Euphrates of on its western banks: the Καυχαβηνοί in the north, the
Αἰσῖται in the middle, and the Ὀρχηνοί in the south. According to this
the Αἰσῖται would have been about between Ht and Kfa, or in that
district which is called by the natives Ard el-Wudjan, and in which just
that race of the Chaldaeans might have dwelt that plundered Job's
camels. There we are certainly not to seek the scene of the drama of
Job; and if the Edomites were dispersed there ([Lam
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021).md), they were not to be envied on
account of their fortune. But if the Aisi'tai are to be sought there, we
may not connect the Καυχαβηνοί with the village of Cochabe (Arab.
kawkab) on the Hermon (Epiphan. Haer. x. 18), in order then to remove
the Aisi'tai, dwelling "below them," to Batanaea.

And now, in concluding here, I have still to explain, that in writing
these pages I was not actuated by an invincible desire of increasing the
dull literature respecting the ארץ עוץ by another tractate, but
exclusively by the wish of my honoured friend that I should furnish him
with a contribution on my visit to the Makm jb, and concerning the
tradition that prevails there, for his commentary on the book of Job.

As to the accompanying map, it is intended to represent the hitherto
unknown position of the Makm, the Monastery, and the country immediately
around the, by comparing it with two localities marked on most maps, Naw
and the castle of Muzrb. The latter, the position of which we determined
in 1860 as 32 44' north lat. and 35 51' 45" east long. (from Greenwich),
lies three hours' journey on horseback south of the Monastery. The Wdi
Jarmk and Wdi Ht have the gorge formation in common with all other wadis
that unite in the neighbourhood of Zzn and from the Makran, which is
remarkable from a geological point of view: a phenomenon which is
connected with the extreme depression of the valley of the Jordan. For
the majority of the geographical names mentioned in this essay I refer
the reader to Carl Ritter's Geographic von Syrien und Palstina;

(Note: Translated by W. L. Gage, and published by T. and T. Clark,
Edinburgh, 1866, 4 vols.)

others will be explained in my Itinerarien, which will be published
shortly.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 1](job001.md)

</div>

</div>

</div>

</div>
