<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joel Index](joe)  
  [Previous](joe000)  [Next](joe002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001)

I. The Judgment of God, and the Prophet's Call to Repentance - Joel
1:2-2:17

An unparalleled devastation of the land of Judah by several successive
swarms of locusts, which destroyed all the seedlings, all field and
garden fruits, all plants and trees, and which was accompanied by
scorching heat, induced the prophet to utter a loud lamentation at this
unparalleled judgment of God, and an earnest call to all classes of the
nation to offer prayer to the Lord in the temple, together with fasting,
mourning, and weeping, that He might avert the judgment. In the first
chapter, the lamentation has reference chiefly to the ruin of the land
(Joel 1:2-20); in the second, the judgment is depicted as a foretype and
harbinger of the approaching day of the Lord, which the congregation is
to anticipate by a day of public fasting, repentance, and prayer (Joel
2:1-17); so that ch. 1 describes rather the magnitude of the judgment,
and ch. 2:1-17 its significance in relation to the covenant nation.

Lamentation over the Devastation of Judah by Locusts and Drought - Joel
1

After an appeal to lay to heart the devastation by swarms of locusts,
which has fallen upon the land ([Joe
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#002)), the prophet summons the
following to utter lamentation over this calamity: first the drunkards,
who are to awake ([Joe 1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#005)); then
the congregation generally, which is to mourn with penitence ([Joe
1:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008)); and then the priests, who are
to appoint a service of repentance ([Joe
1:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013)). For each of these appeals he
gives, as a reason, a further description of the horrible calamity,
corresponding to the particular appeal; and finally, he sums up his
lamentation in a prayer for the deliverance of the land from destruction
([Joe 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019), [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020)).

[Joel 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 1:1</span></span>

[Joe 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001) contains the heading to the
book, and has already been noticed in the introduction. [Joe
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#002). "Hear this, ye old men; and
attend, all ye inhabitants of the land! Has such a thing indeed happened
in your days, or in the days of your fathers? [Joe
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001). Ye shall tell your sons of it,
and your sons their sons, and their sons the next generation. [Joe
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004). The leavings of the gnawer the
multiplier ate, and the leavings of the multiplier the licker ate, and
the leavings of the licker the devourer ate." Not only for the purpose
of calling the attention of the hearers to his address, but still more
to set forth the event of which he is about to speak as something
unheard of - a thing that has never happened before, and therefore is a
judgment inflicted by God - the prophet commences with the question
addressed to the old men, whose memory went the furthest back, and to
all the inhabitants of Judah, whether they had ever experienced anything
of the kind, or heard of such a thing from their fathers; and with the
command to relate it to their children, and grandchildren, and
great-grandchildren.

(Note: "As he is inquiring concerning the past according to the command
of Moses in [Deu 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007), he asks the old
men, who have been taught by long experience, and are accustomed,
whenever they see anything unusual, to notice that this is not according
to the ordinary course of nature, which they have observed for so many
years. And since this existing calamity, caused by the insects named,
has lasted longer and pressed more heavily than usual, he admonishes
them to carry their memory back to the former days, and see whether
anything of the kind ever happened naturally before; and if no example
can be found, the prophet's advice is, that they should recognise this
as the hand of God from heaven." - Tarnov.)

"The inhabitants of the land" are the inhabitants of Judah, as it was
only with this kingdom that Joel was occupied (cf. [Joe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014) and [Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001)). זאת is the occurrence related in
[Joe 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004), which is represented by the
question "Has this been in your days?" as a fact just experienced.
Yether haggâzâm, the leavings of the gnawer, i.e., whatever the gnawer
leaves unconsumed of either vegetables or plants. The four names given
to the locusts, viz., gâzâm, 'arbeh, yeleq, and châsil, are not the
names applied in natural history to four distinct species, or four
different generations of locusts; nor does Joel describe the swarms of
two successive years, so that "gâzâm is the migratory locust, which
visits Palestine chiefly in the autumn, 'arbeh the young brood, yeleq
the young locust in the last stage of its transformation, or before
changing its skin for the fourth time, and châsı̄l the perfect locust
after this last change, so that as the brood sprang from the gâzâm,
châsı̄l would be equivalent to gâzâm" (Credner). This explanation is not
only at variance with [Joe 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025), where
gâzâm stands last, after châsı̄l, but is founded generally merely upon a
false interpretation of [Nah 3:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#015)
(see the passage) and [Jer 51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027),
where the adjective sâmâr (horridus, horrible), appended to yeleq, from
sâmâr, to shudder, by no means refers to the rough, horny, wing-sheath
of the young locusts, and cannot be sustained from the usage of the
language, It is impossible to point out any difference in usage between
gâzâm and châsı̄l, or between these two words and 'arbeh. The word gâzâm,
from gâzâm, to cut off (in Arabic, Ethiopic, and the Rabb.), occurs only
in this passage, in [Joe 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025), and in
[Amo 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009), where it is applied to a
swarm of flying locusts, which leave the vine, fig-tree, and olive,
perfectly bare, as it is well known that all locusts do, when, as in
Amos, the vegetables and field fruits have been already destroyed.
'Arbeh, from râbhâh, to be many, is the common name of the locust, and
indeed in all probability of the migratory locust, because this always
appears in innumerable swarms. Châsı̄l, from châsal, to eat off,
designates the locust (hâ'arbeh), according to [Deu
28:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038), by its habit of eating off the
field crops and tree fruits, and is therefore used in [Kg1
8:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#037); [Ch2
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#028); [Psa
78:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#046), as synonymous with hâ'arbeh,
and in [Isa 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#004) in its stead. Yeleq,
from yâlaq = lâqaq, to lick, to lick off, occurs in [Psa
105:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#034) as equivalent to 'arbeh, and in
Nahum as synonymous with it; and indeed it there refers expressly to the
Egyptian plague of locusts, so that young locusts without wings cannot
possibly be thought of. Haggâzâm the gnawer, hayyeleq the licker,
hechâsı̄l the devourer, are therefore simply poetical epithets applied to
the 'arbeh, which never occur in simple plain prose, but are confined to
the loftier (rhetorical and poetical) style. Moreover, the assumption
that Joel is speaking of swarms of locusts of two successive years, is
neither required by [Joe 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025) (see the
comm. on this verse), nor reconcilable with the contents of the verse
itself. If the 'arbeh eats what the gâzâm has left, and the yeleq what
is left by the 'arbeh, we cannot possibly think of the field and garden
fruits of two successive years, because the fruits of the second year
are not the leavings of the previous year, but have grown afresh in the
year itself.

(Note: Bochart (Hieroz. iii. p. 290, ed. Ros.) has already expressed the
same opinion. "If," he says, "the different species had been assigned to
so many different years, the 'arbeh would not be said to have eaten the
leavings of the gâzâm, or the yeleq the leavings of the 'arbeh, or the
châsı̄l the leavings of the yeleq; for the productions of this year are
not the leavings of last, nor can what will spring up in future be
looked upon as the leavings of this. Therefore, whether this plague of
locusts was confined to one year, or was repeated for several years,
which seems to be the true inference from [Joe
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025), I do not think that the
different species of locusts are to be assigned to different years
respectively, but that they all entered Judaea in the same year; so that
when one swarm departed from a field, another followed, to eat up the
leavings of the previous swarm, if there were any; and that this was
repeated as many times as was necessary to consume the whole, so that
nothing at all should be left to feed either man or beast.")

The thought is rather this: one swarm of locusts after another has
invaded the land, and completely devoured its fruit. The use of several
different words, and the division of the locusts into four successive
swarms, of which each devours what has been left by its precursor,
belong to the rhetorical drapery and individualizing of the thought. The
only thing that has any real significance is the number four, as the
four kinds of punishment in [Jer 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#003),
and the four destructive judgments in [Eze
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021), clearly show. The number four,
"the stamp of oecumenicity" (Kliefoth), indicates here the spread of the
judgment over the whole of Judah in all directions.

[Joel 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joe 1:5</span></span>

In order that Judah may discern in this unparalleled calamity a judgment
of God, and the warning voice of God calling to repentance, the prophet
first of all summons the wine-bibbers to sober themselves, and observe
the visitation of God. [Joe 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#005).
"Awake, ye drunken ones, and weep! and howl, all ye drinkers of wine! at
the new wine; for it is cut off from your mouth. [Joe
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006). For a people has come up over my
land, a strong one, and innumerable: its teeth are lion's teeth, and it
has the bite of a lioness. [Joe 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007).
It has made my vine a wilderness, and my fig-tree into sticks. Peeling,
it has peeled it off, and cast it away: its shoots have grown white."
הקיץ to awake out of the reeling of intoxication, as in [Pro
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#035). They are to howl for the new
wine, the fresh sweet juice of the grape, because with the destruction
of the vines it is taken away and destroyed from their mouth. [Joe
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006) and [Joe
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007) announce through whom. In the
expression gōi ‛âlâh (a people has come up) the locusts are represented
as a warlike people, because they devastate the land like a hostile
army. Gōi furnishes no support to the allegorical view. In [Pro
30:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#025), not only are the ants
described as a people (‛âm), but the locusts also; although it is said
of them that they have no king. And ‛âm is synonymous with gōi, which
has indeed very frequently the idea of that which is hostile, and even
here is used in this sense; though it by no means signifies a heathen
nation, but occurs in [Zep 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009) by the
side of ‛âm, as an epithet applied to the people of Jehovah (i.e.,
Israel: see also [Gen 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#002)). The
weapons of this army consist in its teeth, its "bite," which grinds in
pieces as effectually as the teeth of the lion or the bite of the
lioness (מתלּעות; see at [Job 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#017)).
The suffix attached to ארצי does not refer to Jehovah, but to the
prophet, who speaks in the name of the people, so that it is the land of
the people of God. And this also applies to the suffixes in גּפני and
תּאנתי in [Joe 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#007). In the description
of the devastation caused by the army of locusts, the vine and fig-tree
are mentioned as the noblest productions of the land, which the Lord has
given to His people for their inheritance (see at [Hos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014)). לקצפה, εἰς κλασμόν, literally,
for crushing. The suffix in chăsâphâh refers, no doubt, simply to the
vine as the principal object, the fig-tree being mentioned casually in
connection with it. Châsaph, to strip, might be understood as referring
simply to the leaves of the vine (cf. [Psa
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009)); but what follows shows that the
gnawing or eating away of the bark is also included. Hishlı̄kh, to throw
away not merely what is uneatable, "that which is not green and contains
no sap" (Hitzig), but the vine itself, which the locusts have broken
when eating off its leaves and bark. The branches of the vine have
become white through the eating off of the bark (sârı̄gı̄m, [Gen
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#010)).

(Note: H. Ludolf, in his Histor. Aethiop. i. c. 13, 16, speaking of the
locusts, says: "Neither herbs, nor shrubs, nor trees remain unhurt.
Whatever is either grassy or covered with leaves, is injured, as if it
had been burnt with fire. Even the bark of trees is nibbled with their
teeth, so that the injury is not confined to one year alone.")

[Joel 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joe 1:8</span></span>

The whole nation is to mourn over this devastation. [Joe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008). "Lament like a virgin girded with
sackcloth for the husband of her youth. [Joe
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#009). The meat-offering and the
drink-offering are destroyed from the house of Jehovah. The priests, the
servant of Jehovah. mourn. [Joe 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#010).
The field is laid waste, the ground mourns: for the corn is laid waste:
the new wine is spoiled, the oil decays. [Joe
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#011). Turn pale, ye husbandmen; howl,
ye vinedressers, over wheat and barley: for the harvest of the field is
perished. [Joe 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#012). The vine is
spoiled, and the fig-tree faded; the pomegranate, also the palm and the
apple tree: all the trees of the field are withered away; yea, joy has
expired from the children of men." In [Joe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008) Judah is addressed as the
congregation of Jehovah. אלי is the imperative of the verb אלה,
equivalent to the Syriac 'elā', to lament. The verb only occurs here.
The lamentation of the virgin for the בּעל נעוּריה, i.e., the beloved of
your youth, her bridegroom, whom she has lost by death ([Isa
54:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#006)), is the deepest and bitterest
lamentation. With reference to חגרת־שׂק, see Delitzsch on [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024). The occasion of this deep
lamentation, according to [Joe 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#009), is
the destruction of the meat-offering and drink-offering from the house
of the Lord, over which the servants of Jehovah mourn. The meat and
drink offerings must of necessity cease, because the corn, the new wine,
and the oil are destroyed through the devastation of the field and soil.
Hokhrath minchâh does not affirm that the offering of the daily morning
and evening sacrifice ([Exo 29:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038))
- for it is to this that מנחה ונסך chiefly, if not exclusively, refers -
has already ceased; but simply that any further offering is rendered
impossible by the failure of meal, wine, and oil. Now Israel could not
suffer any greater calamity than the suspension of the daily sacrifice;
for this was a practical suspension of the covenant relation - a sign
that God had rejected His people. Therefore, even in the last siege of
Jerusalem by the Romans, the sacrificial worship was not suspended till
it had been brought to the last extremity; and even then it was for the
want of sacrificers, and not of the material of sacrifice (Josephus, de
bell. Jud. vi. 2, 1). The reason for this anxiety was the devastation of
the field and land ([Joe 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#010)); and
this is still further explained by a reference to the devastation and
destruction of the fruits of the ground, viz., the corn, i.e., the corn
growing in the field, so that the next harvest would be lost, and the
new wine and oil, i.e., the vines and olive-trees, so that they could
bear no grapes for new wine, and no olives for oil. The verbs in [Joe
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#011) are not perfects, but
imperatives, as in the fifth verse. הבישׁ has the same meaning as bōsh,
as in [Jer 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026); [Jer
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015), etc., to stand ashamed, to turn
pale with shame at the disappointment of their hope, and is probably
written defectively, without ו, to distinguish it from הובישׁ, the
hiphil of יבשׁ, to be parched or dried up ([Joe
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#010) and [Joe
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#012)). The hope of the husbandmen was
disappointed through the destruction of the wheat and barley, the most
important field crops. The vine-growers had to mourn over the
destruction of the vine and the choice fruit-trees ([Joe
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#012)), such as the fig and
pomegranate, and even the date-palm (gam-tâmâr), which has neither a
fresh green rind nor tender juicy leaves, and therefore is not easily
injured by the locusts so as to cause it to dry up; and tappūăch, the
apple-tree, and all the trees of the field, i.e., all the rest of the
trees, wither. "All trees, whether fruit-bearing or not, are consumed by
the devastating locusts" (Jerome). In the concluding clause of [Joe
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#012), the last and principal ground
assigned for the lamentation is, that joy is taken away and withered
from the children of men (hōbbı̄sh min, constr. praegn.). כּי introduces
a reason here as elsewhere, though not for the clause immediately
preceding, but for the הבישׁוּ and הילילוּ in [Joe
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#011), the leading thought in both
verses; and we may therefore express it by an emphatic yea.

[Joel 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joe 1:13</span></span>

The affliction is not removed by mourning and lamentation, but only
through repentance and supplication to the Lord, who can turn away all
evil. The prophet therefore proceeds to call upon the priests to offer
to the Lord penitential supplication day and night in the temple, and to
call the elders and all the people to observe a day of fasting,
penitence, and prayer; and then offers supplication himself to the Lord
to have compassion upon them ([Joe
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019)). From the motive assigned for
this appeal, we may also see that a terrible drought had been associated
with the devastation by the locusts, from which both man and beast had
endured the most bitter suffering, and that Joel regarded this terrible
calamity as a sign of the coming of the day of the Lord. [Joe
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013). "Gird yourselves, and lament, ye
priests; howl, ye servants of the altar; come, pass the night in
sackcloth, ye servants of my God: for the meat-offering and
drink-offering are withdrawn from the house of your God. [Joe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014). Sanctify a fast, call out an
assembly, assemble the elders, all ye inhabitants of the land, at the
house of Jehovah your God, and cry to Jehovah." From what follows we
must supply bassaqqı̄m (with sackcloth) to chigrū (gird yourselves). Gird
yourselves with mourning apparel, i.e., put it on (see [Joe
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008)). In this they are to pass the
night, to offer supplication day and night, or incessantly, standing
between the altar and the porch ([Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017)). "Servants of my God," i.e., of
the God whose prophet I am, and from whom I can promise you a hearing.
The reason assigned for this appeal is the same as for the lamentation
in [Joe 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#009). But it is not the priests
only who are to pray incessantly to the Lord; the elders and all the
people are to do the same. קדּשׁ צום, to sanctify a fast, i.e., to
appoint a holy fast, a divine service of prayer connected with fasting.
To this end the priests are to call an ‛ătsârâh, i.e., a meeting of the
congregation for religious worship. ‛Atsârâh, or ‛ătsereth, πανήγυρις,
is synonymous with מקרא קודשׁ in [Lev
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036) (see the exposition of that
passage). In what follows, כּל־ישׁבי ה is attached ἀσυνδέτως to זקנים;
and the latter is not a vocative, but an accusative of the object. On
the other hand, בּית יהוה is an accus. loci, and dependent upon אספוּ.
זעק, to cry, used of loud and importunate prayer. It is only by this
that destruction can still be averted.

[Joel 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joe 1:15</span></span>

"Alas for the day! for the day of Jehovah is near, and it comes like
violence from the Almighty." This verse does not contain words which the
priests are to speak, so that we should have to supply לאמר, like the
Syriac and others, but words of the prophet himself, with which he
justifies the appeal in [Joe 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#013) and
[Joe 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014). ליּום is the time of the
judgment, which has fallen upon the land and people through the
devastation by the locusts. This "day" is the beginning of the
approaching day of Jehovah, which will come like a devastation from the
Almighty. Yōm Yehōvâh is the great day of judgment upon all ungodly
powers, when God, as the almighty ruler of the world, brings down and
destroys everything that has exalted itself against Him; thus making the
history of the world, through His rule over all creatures in heaven and
earth, into a continuous judgment, which will conclude at the end of
this course of the world with a great and universal act of judgment,
through which everything that has been brought to eternity by the stream
of time unjudged and unadjusted, will be judged and adjusted once for
all, to bring to an end the whole development of the world in accordance
with its divine appointment, and perfect the kingdom of God by the
annihilation of all its foes. (Compare the magnificent description of
this day of the Lord in [Isa 2:12-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#012).)
And accordingly this particular judgment - through which Jehovah on the
one hand chastises His people for their sins, and on the other hand
destroys the enemies of His kingdom - forms one element of the day of
Jehovah; and each of these separate judgment is a coming of that day,
and a sign of His drawing near. This day Joel saw in the judgment that
came upon Judah in his time, keshōd misshaddai, lit., like a devastation
from the Almighty, - a play upon the words (since shōd and shaddai both
come from shâdad), which Rckert renders, though somewhat too freely, by
wie ein Graussen vom grossen Gott. כ is the so-called כ veritatis,
expressing a comparison between the individual and its genus or its
idea. On the relation between this verse and [Isa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006), see the Introduction.

[Joel 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joe 1:16</span></span>

"Is not the food destroyed before our eyes, joy and exulting from the
house of our God? [Joe 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#017). The
grains have mouldered under their clods, the storehouses are desolate,
the barns have fallen down; because the corn is destroyed. [Joe
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#018). How the cattle groan! the herds
of oxen are bewildered, for no pasture was left for them; even the
flocks of sheep suffer." As a proof that the day of the Lord is coming
like a devastation from the Almighty, the prophet points in [Joe
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#016) to the fact that the food is
taken away before their eyes, and therewith all joy and exulting from
the house of God. "The food of the sinners perishes before their eyes,
since the crops they looked for are snatched away from their hands, and
the locust anticipates the reaper" (Jerome). אכל, food as the means of
sustenance; according to [Joe 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019),
corn, new wine, and oil. The joy is thereby taken from the house of
Jehovah, inasmuch as, when the crops are destroyed, neither first-fruits
nor thank-offerings can be brought to the sanctuary to be eaten there at
joyful meals ([Deu 12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#006); [Deu
16:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#010)). And the calamity became all
the more lamentable, from the fact that, in consequence of a terrible
drought, the seed perished in the earth, and consequently the prospect
of a crop the following year entirely disappeared. The prophet refers to
this in [Joe 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#017), which has been
rendered in extremely different ways by the lxx, Chald., and Vulg., on
account of the ̔απ. λεγ. עבשׁוּ, פּרדות, and מגרפות (compare Pococke, ad
h. l.). עבשׁ signifies to moulder away, or, as the injury was caused by
dryness and heat, to dry up; it is used here of grains of corn which
lose their germinating power, from the Arabic ‛bs, to become dry or
withered, and the Chaldee עפשׁ, to get mouldy. Perudōth, in Syriac,
grains of corn sowed broadcast, probably from pârad, to scatter about.
Megrâphōth, according to Ab. Esr., clods of earth (compare Arab. jurf,
gleba terrai), from gâraph, to wash away ([Jdg
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#021)) a detached piece of earth. If
the seed-corn loses its germinating power beneath the clod, no
corn-harvest can be looked for. The storehouses ('ōtsârōth; cf. [Ch2
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#027)) moulder away, and the barns
(mammegurâh with dag. dirim. = megūrâh in [Hag
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#019)) fall, tumble to pieces, because
being useless they are not kept in proper condition. The drought also
deprives the cattle of their pasture, so that the herds of oxen and
flocks of sheep groan and suffer with the rest from the calamity. בּוּך,
niphal, to be bewildered with fear. 'Ashēm, to expiate, to suffer the
consequences of men's sin.

The fact, that even irrational creatures suffer along with men, impels
the prophet to pray for help to the Lord, who helps both man and beast
([Psa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007)). [Joe
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#019). "To Thee, O Jehovah, do I cry:
for fire has devoured the pastures of the wilderness, and flame has
consumed all the trees of the field. [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020). Even the beasts of the field cry
unto Thee; for the water-brooks are dried up, and fire has devoured the
pastures of the wilderness." Fire and flame are the terms used by the
prophet to denote the burning heat of the drought, which consumes the
meadows, and even scorches up the trees. This is very obvious from the
drying up of the water-brooks (in [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020)). For [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020), compare [Jer
14:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#005). In [Jer
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#020) the address is rhetorically
rounded off by the repetition of ואשׁ אכלה וגו from [Jer
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Chapter 2](joe002)

</div>
