<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jonah Index](jon)  
  [Previous](jon001)  [Next](jon003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)

[Jonah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 2:1</span></span>

"Jonah prayed to Jehovah his God out of the fish's belly."

The prayer which follows ([Jon 2:2-9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002))
is not a petition for deliverance, but thanksgiving and praise for
deliverance already received. It by no means follows from this, however,
that Jonah did not utter this prayer till after he had been vomited upon
the land, and that v. 10 ought to be inserted before v. 2; but, as the
earlier commentators have shown, the fact is rather this, that when
Jonah had been swallowed by the fish, and found that he was preserved
alive in the fish's belly, he regarded this as a pledge of his
deliverance, for which he praised the Lord. Luther also observes, that
"he did not actually utter these very words with his mouth, and arrange
them in this orderly manner, in the belly of the fish; but that he here
shows what the state of his mind was, and what thoughts he had when he
was engaged in this conflict with death." The expression "his God"
(אלהיו) must not be overlooked. He prayed not only to Jehovah, as the
heathen sailors also did ([Jon 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#014)),
but to Jehovah as his God, from whom he had tried to escape, and whom he
now addresses again as his God when in peril of death. "He shows his
faith by adoring Him as his God" (Burk). The prayer consists for the
most part of reminiscences of passages in the Psalms, which were so
exactly suited to Jonah's circumstances, that he could not have
expressed his thoughts and feelings any better in words of his own. It
is by no means so "atomically compounded from passages in the Psalms"
that there is any ground for pronouncing it "a later production which
has been attributed to Jonah," as Knobel and De Wette do; but it is the
simple and natural utterance of a man versed in the Holy Scripture and
living in the word of God, and is in perfect accordance with the
prophet's circumstances and the state of his mind. Commencing with the
confession, that the Lord has heard his crying to Him in distress ([Jon
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002)), Jonah depicts in two strophes
([Jon 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003) and [Jon
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004), [Jon
2:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005)) the distress into which he had
been brought, and the deliverance out of that destruction which appeared
inevitable, and closes in [Jon 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008),
[Jon 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#009) with a vow of thanksgiving
for the deliverance which he had received.

[Jonah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jon 2:2</span></span>

2 I cried to Jehovah out of my distress, and He heard me;

Out of the womb of hell I cried: Thou heardest my voice!

The first clause recals to mind [Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007) and [Psa
120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001); but it also shows itself to be
an original reproduction of the expression מצּרה לי, which expresses the
prophet's situation in a more pointed manner than בּצּר־לי in [Psa
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001) and בּצּרתה לּי in [Psa
120:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001). The distress is still more
minutely defined in the second hemistich by the expression מבּטן שׁאול,
"out of the womb of the nether world." As a throat or swallow is
ascribed to she'ōl in [Isa 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#014), so
here it is spoken of as having a בטן, or belly. This is not to be taken
as referring to the belly of the shark, as Jerome supposes. The
expression is a poetical figure used to denote the danger of death, from
which there is apparently no escape; like the encompassing with snares
of death in [Psa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005), and the
bringing up of the soul out of sheol in [Psa
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003). In the last clause the words
pass over very appropriately into an address to Jehovah, which is
brought out into still greater prominence by the omission of the copula
Vav.

[Jonah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jon 2:3</span></span>

3 Thou castedst me into the deep, into the heart of the seas,

And the stream surrounded me;

All Thy billows and Thy waves went over me.

4 Then I said, I am thrust away from Thine eyes,

Yet I will look again to Thy holy temple.

The more minute description of the peril of death is attached by Vav
consec., to express not sequence in time, but sequence of thought.
Jehovah cast him into the depth of the sea, because the seamen were
merely the executors of the punishment inflicted upon him by Jehovah.
Metsūlâh, the deep, is defined by "the heart of the seas" as the deepest
abyss of the ocean. The plural yammı̄m (seas) is used here with distinct
significance, instead of the singular, "into the heart of the sea" (yâm)
in [Exo 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008), to express the idea of
the boundless ocean (see Dietrich, Abhandlung zur hebr. Grammatik, pp.
16, 17). The next clauses are circumstantial clauses, and mean, so that
the current of the sea surrounded me, and all the billows and waves of
the sea, which Jehovah had raised into a storm, went over me. Nâhâr, a
river or stream, is the streaming or current of the sea, as in [Psa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002). The words of the second
hemistich are a reminiscence of [Psa
42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008). What the Korahite singer of that
psalm had experienced spiritually, viz., that one wave of trouble after
another swept over him, that had the prophet literally experienced.
Jonah "does not say, The waves and the billows of the sea went over me;
but Thy waves and Thy billows, because he felt in his conscience that
the sea with its waves and billows was the servant of God and of His
wrath, to punish sin" (Luther). [Jon
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004) contains the apodosis to [Jon
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003): "When Thou castedst me into the
deep, then I said (sc., in my heart, i.e., then I thought) that I was
banished from the sphere of Thine eyes, i.e., of Thy protection and
care." These words are formed from a reminiscence of [Psa
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#023), נגרשׁתּי being substituted for
the נגרזתּי of the psalm. The second hemistich is attached
adversatively. אך, which there is no necessity to alter into אך = איך,
as Hitzig supposes, introduces the antithesis in an energetic manner,
like אכם elsewhere, in the sense of nevertheless, as in [Isa
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#015); [Psa
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016); [Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015) (cf. Ewald, 354, a). The thought
that it is all over with him is met by the confidence of faith that he
will still look to the holy temple of the Lord, that is to say, will
once more approach the presence of the Lord, to worship before Him in
His temple, - an assurance which recals [Psa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008).

The thought that by the grace of the Lord he has been once more
miraculously delivered out of the gates of death, and brought to the
light of the world, is carried out still further in the following
strophe, in entirely new turns of thought.

[Jonah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 2:5</span></span>

5 Waters surrounded me even to the soul: the flood encompassed me,

Sea-grass was wound round my head.

6 I went down to the foundations of the mountains;

The earth, its bolts were behind me for ever:

Then raisedst Thou my life out of the pit, O Jehovah my God.

7 When my soul fainted within me, I thought of Jehovah;

And my prayer came to Thee into Thy holy temple.

This strophe opens, like the last, with a description of the peril of
death, to set forth still more perfectly the thought of miraculous
deliverance which filled the prophet's mind. The first clause of the
fifth verse recals to mind [Psa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005)
and [Psa 69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002); the words "the waters
pressed (בּאוּ) even to the soul" ([Psa
69:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#002)) being simply strengthened by
אפפוּני after [Psa 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#005). The waters of
the sea girt him round about, reaching even to the soul, so that it
appeared to be all over with his life. Tehōm, the unfathomable flood of
the ocean, surrounded him. Sūph, sedge, i.e., sea-grass, which grows at
the bottom of the sea, was bound about his head; so that he had sunk to
the very bottom. This thought is expressed still more distinctly in [Psa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006). קצבי הרים, "the ends of the
mountains" (from qâtsabh, to cut off, that which is cut off, then the
place where anything is cut off), are their foundations and roots, which
lie in the depths of the earth, reaching even to the foundation of the
sea (cf. [Psa 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#016)). When he sank
into the deep, the earth shut its bolts behind him (הארץ is placed at
the head absolutely). The figure of bolts of the earth that were shut
behind Jonah, which we only meet with here (בּעד from the phrase סגר
הדּלת בּעד, to shut the door behind a person: [Gen
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#016); [Kg2
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#004), [Kg2
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#033); [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020)), has an analogy in the idea
which occurs in [Job 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#010), of bolts
and doors of the ocean. The bolts of the sea are the walls of the
sea-basin, which set bounds to the sea, that it cannot pass over.
Consequently the bolts of the earth can only be such barriers as
restrain the land from spreading over the sea. These barriers are the
weight and force of the waves, which prevent the land from encroaching
on the sea. This weight of the waves, or of the great masses of water,
which pressed upon Jonah when he had sunk to the bottom of the sea, shut
or bolted against him the way back to the earth (the land), just as the
bolts that are drawn before the door of a house fasten up the entrance
into it; so that the reference is neither to "the rocks jutting out
above the water, which prevented any one from ascending from the sea to
the land," nor "densissima terrae compages, qua abyssus tecta Jonam in
hac constitutum occludebat" (Marck). Out of this grave the Lord "brought
up his life." Shachath is rendered φθορά, corruptio, by the early
translators (lxx, Chald., Syr., Vulg.); and this rendering, which many
of the more modern translators entirely reject, is unquestionably the
correct one in [Job 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014), where the
meaning "pit" is quite unsuitable. But it is by no means warranted in
the present instance. The similarity of thought to [Psa
30:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#004) points rather to the meaning pit
= cavern or grave, as in [Psa 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#010),
where shachath is used interchangeably with בּור and שׁאול in [Jon
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004) as being perfectly synonymous.
[Jon 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#007) is formed after [Psa
142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004) or [Psa
143:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#004), except that נפשׁי is used
instead of רוּחי, because Jonah is not speaking of the covering of the
spirit with faintness, but of the plunging of the life into night and
the darkness of death by drowning in the water. התעטּף, lit., to veil or
cover one's self, hence to sink into night and faintness, to pine away.
עלי, upon or in me, inasmuch as the I, as a person, embraces the soul or
life (cf. [Psa 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005)). When his soul
was about to sink into the night of death, he thought of Jehovah in
prayer, and his prayer reached to God in His holy temple, where Jehovah
is enthroned as God and King of His people ([Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007); [Psa
88:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#003)).

But when prayer reaches to God, then He helps and also saves. This
awakens confidence in the Lord, and impels to praise and thanksgiving.
These thoughts form the last strophe, with which the Psalm of
thanksgiving is appropriately closed.

[Jonah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jon 2:8</span></span>

8 They who hold to false vanities

Forsake their own mercy.

9 But I will sacrifice to Thee with the call of thanksgiving.

I will pay what I have vowed.

Salvation is with Jehovah.

In order to express the thought emphatically, that salvation and
deliverance are only to be hoped for from Jehovah the living God, Jonah
points to the idolaters, who forfeit their mercy. משׁמּרים הבלי־שׁוא is
a reminiscence of [Psa 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#007).
הבלי־שׁוא, worthless vanities, are all things which man makes into idols
or objects of trust. הבלים are, according to [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021), false gods or idols. Shâmar, to
keep, or, when applied to false gods, to keep to them or reverence them;
in [Hos 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#010) it is also applied to
Jehovah. חסדּם signifies neither pietatem suam nor gratiam a Deo ipsis
exhibitam, nor "all the grace and love which they might receive"
(Hitzig); but refers to God Himself, as He whose government is pure
grace (vid., [Gen 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#027)), and might
become the grace even of the idolatrous. Jonah, on the contrary, like
all the righteous, would sacrifice to the Lord beqōl tōdâh, "with the
voice or cry, of thanksgiving," i.e., would offer his sacrifices with a
prayer of sincere thanksgiving (cf. [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005)), and pay the vow which he had
made in his distress (cf. [Psa 50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014),
[Psa 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)). These utterances are
founded upon the hope that his deliverance will be effected (Hitzig);
and this hope is based upon the fact that "salvation is Jehovah's,"
i.e., is in His power, so that He only can grant salvation.

[Jonah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 2:10</span></span>

"Then Jehovah spake to the fish, and it vomited Jonah upon the dry
land."

The nature of God's speaking, or commanding, may be inferred from the
words ויּקא וגו. Cyril explains the thought correctly thus: The whale is
again impelled by a certain divine and secret power of God, being moved
to that which seems good to Him." The land upon which Jonah was vomited
was, of course, the coast of Palestine, probably the country near Joppa.
According to [Jon 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#001), this took place
on the third day after he had been swallowed by the fish.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 3](jon003)

</div>
