<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos014)  [Next](jos016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 15:0</span></span>

Inheritance of the Tribe of Judah - Joshua 15

Under the superintending providence of God, the inheritance which fell
to the tribe of Judah by lot was in the southern part of Canaan, where
Caleb had already received his inheritance, so that he was not separated
from his tribe. The inheritance of Judah is first of all described
according to its boundaries ([Jos
15:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)); then for the sake of
completeness it is stated once more with regard to Caleb, that he
received Kirjath-arba for his inheritance, and took possession of it by
expelling the Anakites and conquering Debir ([Jos
15:13-20](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013)); and after this a list is
given of the towns in the different parts (vv. 21-63).

[Joshua 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 15:1</span></span>

Boundaries of the inheritance of the tribe of Judah. - [Jos
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#001). Its situation in the land. "And
there was (i.e., fell, or came out; cf. [Jos
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001); [Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001)) the lot to the tribe of Judah
according to its families to the frontier of Edom (see at [Num
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#003)), to the desert of Zin southward,
against the extreme south" (lit. from the end or extremity of the
south), i.e., its inheritance fell to it, so that it reached to the
territory of Edom and the desert of Zin, in which Kadesh was situated
(see at [Num 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021)), on the extreme
south of Canaan.

[Jos 15:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002)

The southern boundary. This was also the southern boundary of the land
of Israel generally, and coincided with the southern boundary of Canaan
as described in [Num 34:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#003). It went
out "from the end of the salt sea, namely, from the tongue which turneth
to the south," i.e., from the southern point of the Dead Sea, which is
now a salt marsh.

[Jos 15:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003)

Thence it proceeded "to the southern boundary of the ascent of
Akrabbim," i.e., the row of lofty whitish cliffs which intersects the
Arabah about eight miles below the Dead Sea (see at [Num
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#004)), "and passed across to Zin,"
i.e., the Wady Murreh (see at [Num
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021)), "and went up to the south of
Kadesh-barnea," i.e., by Ain Kudes (see at [Num
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016)), "and passed over to Hezron,
and went up to Adar, and turned to Karkaa, and went over to Azmon, and
went out into the brook of Egypt," i.e., the Wady el Arish. On the
probable situation of Hezron, Adar, Karkaa, and Azmon, see at [Num
34:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#004). "And the outgoings of the
boundary were to the sea" (the Mediterranean). The Wady el Arish, a
marked boundary, takes first of all a northerly and then a
north-westerly course, and opens into the Mediterranean Sea (see Pent.
p. 358). היה in the singular before the subject in the plural must not
be interfered with (see Ewald, 316, a.). - The words "this shall be your
south coast" point back to the southern boundary of Canaan as laid down
in [Num 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#002)., and show that the
southern boundary of the tribe-territory of Judah was also the southern
boundary of the land to be taken by Israel.

[Jos 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005)

"The eastern boundary was the salt sea to the end of the Jordan," i.e.,
the Dead Sea, in all its length up to the point where the Jordan entered
it.

[Jos 15:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005)

In [Jos 15:5-11](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005) we have a description
of the northern boundary, which is repeated in [Jos
18:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#015) as the southern boundary of
Benjamin, though in the opposite direction, namely, from west to east.
It started "from the tongue of the (salt) sea, the end (i.e., the mouth)
of the Jordan, and went up to Beth-hagla," - a border town between Judah
and Benjamin, which was afterwards allotted to the latter ([Jos
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#019), [Jos
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#012)), the present Ain Hajla, an hour
and a quarter to the south-east of Riha (Jericho), and three-quarters of
an hour from the Jordan (see at [Gen
50:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#011), note), - "and went over to the
north side of Beth-arabah," a town in the desert of Judah ([Jos
15:61](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061)), afterwards assigned to
Benjamin ([Jos 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022)), and called
Ha-arabah in [Jos 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#018), about twenty
or thirty minutes to the south-west of Ain Hajla, in a "level and barren
steppe" (Seetzen, R. ii. p. 302), with which the name very well agrees
(see also Rob. Pal. ii. pp. 268ff.). "And the border went up to the
stone of Bohan, the son of Reuben." The expression "went up" shows that
the stone of Bohan must have been on higher ground, i.e., near the
western mountains, though the opposite expression "went down" in [Jos
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#017) shows that it must have been by
the side of the mountain, and not upon the top. According to [Jos
18:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#018), the border went over from
the stone of Bohan in an easterly direction "to the shoulder over
against (Beth) Arabah northwards, and went down to (Beth) Arabah, and
then went over to the shoulder of Beth-hagla northwards," i.e., on the
north side of the mountain ridge of Beth-arabah and Beth-hagla. This
ridge is "the chain of hills or downs which runs from Kasr Hajla towards
the south to the north side of the Dead Sea, and is called Katar
Hhadije, i.e., a row of camels harnessed together."

[Jos 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007)

The boundary ascended still farther to Debir from the valley of Achor.
Debir is no doubt to be sought for by the Wady Daber, which runs down
from the mountains to the Dead Sea to the south of Kasr Hajla, possibly
not far from the rocky grotto called Choret ed Daber, between the Wady
es Sidr and the Khan Chadrur on the road from Jerusalem to Jericho,
about half-way between the two. On the valley of Achor see at [Jos
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#024). Then "it turned northwards to
Gilgal, opposite to the ascent of Adummim south of the brook." Gilgal,
which must not be confounded, as it is by Knobel, with the first
encampment of the Israelites in Canaan, viz., the Gilgal between Jericho
and the Jordan, is called Geliloth in [Jos
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#017). The situation of this place,
which is only mentioned again in [Jdg
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#019), and was certainly not a town,
probably only a village or farm, is defined more precisely by the clause
"opposite to the ascent of Adummim." Maaleh Adummim, which is correctly
explained in the Onom. (s. v. Adommim) as ἀνάβασις πύῤῥηων, ascensus
rufforum, "was formerly a small villa, but is now a heap of ruins, which
is called even to the present day Maledomim - on the road from Aelia to
Jericho" (Tobler). It is mentioned by ancient travellers as an inn
called a terra ruffa, i.e., "the red earth;" terra russo, or "the red
house." By later travellers it is described as a small place named
Adomim, being still called "the red field, because this is the colour of
the ground; with a large square building like a monastery still standing
there, which was in fact at one time a fortified monastery, though it is
deserted now" (Arvieux, Merk. Nachr. ii. p. 154). It is the present ruin
of Kalaat el Dem, to the north of the road from Jerusalem to Jericho, or
Kalaat ed Domm, near the Khan Chadrur. Gilgal, or Geliloth (circle), was
probably the "small round valley" or "field of Adommim," of which
Pococke speaks as being at the foot of the hill on which the deserted
inn was standing (viz., ed Domm; see Pococke, Reise ins Morgenland, ii.
p. 46). The valley (nachal, rendered river) to the south of which Gilgal
or the ascent of Adummim lay, and which was therefore to the north of
these places, may possibly be the Wady Kelt, or the brook of Jericho in
the upper part of its course, as we have only to go a quarter or half an
hour to the east of Khan Chadrur, when a wide and splendid prospect
opens towards the south across the Wady Kelt as far as Taiyibeh; and
according to Van de Velde's map, a brook-valley runs in a northerly
direction to the Wady Kelt on the north-east of Kalaat ed Dem. It is
probable, however, that the reference is to some other valley, of which
there are a great many in the neighbourhood. The boundary then passed
over to the water of En Shemesh (sun-fountain), i.e., the present
Apostle's Well, Ain el Hodh or Bir el Kht, below Bethany, and on the
road to Jericho (Tobler, Topogr. v. Jerus. ii. pp. 398, 400; Van de
Velde, Mem. p. 310), and then ran out at the fountain of Rogel (the
spies), the present deep and copious fountain of Job or Nehemiah at the
south-east corner of Jerusalem, below the junction of the valley of
Hinnom and the valley of Jehoshaphat or Kedron valley (see Rob. Pal. i.
p. 491, and Tobler, Topogr. v. Jerus. ii. pp. 50ff.).

[Jos 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008)

It then went up into the more elevated valley of Ben-hinnom, on the
south side of the Jebusite town, i.e., Jerusalem (see at [Jos
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)), and still farther up to the top
of the mountain which rises on the west of the valley of Ben-hinnom, and
at the farthest extremity of the plain of Rephaim towards the north. The
valley of Ben-hinnom, or Ben-hinnom (the son or sons of Hinnom), on the
south side of Mount Zion, a place which was notorious from the time of
Ahaz as the seat of the worship of Moloch ([Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010); [Ch2
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#003); [Ch2
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#006); [Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031), etc.), is supposed there, but of
whom nothing further is known (see Robinson, Pal. i. pp. 402ff.). The
plain of Rephaim (lxx γῆ Ῥαφαείν, in [Sa2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#018), [Sa2
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#022); [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013) κοιλὰς τῶν Τιτάνων), probably
named after the gigantic race of Rephaim, and mentioned several times in
2 Sam. as a battle-field, is on the west of Jerusalem, and is separated
from the edge of the valley of Ben-hinnom by a small ridge of rock. It
runs southwards to Mar Elias, is an hour long, half an hour broad, and
was very fertile ([Isa 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#005)); in fact,
even to the present day it is carefully cultivated (see Rob. Pal. i. p.
323; Tobler, Topogr. v. Jerus. ii. pp. 401ff.). It is bounded on the
north by the mountain ridge already mentioned, which curves westwards on
the left side of the road to Jaffa. This mountain ridge, or one of the
peaks, is "the mountain on the west of the valley of Hinnom," at the
northern end of the plain referred to.

[Jos 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009)

From this mountain height the boundary turned to the fountain of the
waters of Nephtoah, i.e., according to Van de Velde's Mem. p. 336, the
present village of Liftah (nun and lamed being interchanged, according
to a well-known law), an hour to the north-west of Jerusalem, where
there is a copious spring, called by the name of Samuel, which not only
supplies large basons, but waters a succession of blooming gardens
(Tobler, Topogr. v. Jerus. ii. pp. 758ff.; Dieterici, Reisebilder, ii.
pp. 221-2). It then "went out to the towns of Mount Ephraim," which is
not mentioned again, but was probably the steep and lofty mountain ridge
on the west side of the Wady Beit Hanina (Terebinth valley), upon which
Kulonia, a place which the road to Joppa passes, Kastal on a lofty peak
of the mountain, the fortress of Milane, Soba, and other places stand
(Seetzen, R. ii. pp. 64, 65; Rob. Bibl. Res. p. 158). The boundary then
ran to Baala, i.e., Kirjath-jearim, the modern Kureyet el Enab, three
hours to the north-west of Jerusalem (see at [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017)).

[Jos 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010)

From this point "the boundary (which had hitherto gone in a
north-westerly direction) turned westwards to Mount Seir, and went out
to the shoulder northwards (i.e., to the northern side) of Har-jearim,
that is Chesalon, and went down to Beth-shemesh, and passed over to
Timnah." Mount Seir is the ridge of rock to the south-west of Kureyet el
Enab, a lofty ridge composed or rugged peaks, with a wild and desolate
appearance, upon which Saris and Mishir are situated (Rob. Bibl. Res. p.
155). Chesalon is the present Kesla on the summit of a mountain, an
elevated point of the lofty ridge between Wady Ghurb and Ismail,
south-west of Kureyet el Enab (Rob. Bibl. Res. p. 154). Beth-shemesh
(i.e., sun-house), a priests' city in the territory of Judah ([Jos
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#016); [Ch1
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#044)), is the same as Ir-shemesh ([Jos
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#041)), a place on the border of Dan,
where the ark was deposited by the Philistines ([Sa1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009).), and where Amaziah was slain by
Joash ([Kg2 14:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#011); [Ch2
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#021)). It was conquered by the
Philistines in the time of Ahaz ([Ch2
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)). According to the Onom. it was
ten Roman miles, i.e., four hours, from Eleutheropolis towards
Nicopolis. It is the present Ain Shems, upon a plateau in a splendid
situation, two hours and a half to the south-west of Kesla (Rob. Pal.
iii. p. 17; Bibl. Res. p. 153). Timnah, or Timnatah, belonged to Dan
([Jos 19:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#043)); and it was thence that
Samson fetched his wife ([Jdg 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#001).).
It is the present Tibneh, three-quarters of an hour to the west of Ain
Shems (Rob. Pal. i. p. 344).

[Jos 15:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#011)

Thence "the border went out towards the north-west to the shoulder of
Ekron (Akir: see at [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)), then
bent to Shichron, passed over to Mount Baalah, and went out to Jabneel."
Shichron is possibly Sugheir, an hour to the south-west of Jebna
(Knobel). But if this is correct, the mountain of Baalah cannot be the
short range of hills to the west of Akir which runs almost parallel with
the coast Rob. Pal. iii. p. 21), as Knobel supposes; but must be a
mountain on the south side of the Wady Surar, since the boundary had
already crossed this wady between Ekron and Shichron. Jabneel is the
Philistine town of Jabneh, the walls of which were demolished by Uzziah
([Ch2 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006)), a place frequently
mentioned in the books of Maccabees as well as by Josephus under the
name of Jamnia. It still exists as a good-sized village, under the name
of Jebnah, upon a small eminence on the western side of Nahr Rubin, four
hours to the south of Joppa, and an hour and a half from the sea (Rob.
Pal. iii. p. 22). From Jabneh the boundary went out to the
(Mediterranean) Sea, probably along the course of the great valley,
i.e., the Nahr Rubin, as Robinson supposes (Pal. ii. p. 343). The
western boundary was the Great Sea, i.e., the Mediterranean.

[Joshua 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 15:13</span></span>

The account of the conquest of the inheritance, which Caleb asked for
and received before the lots were cast for the land ([Jos
14:6-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006)), by the extermination of the
Anakites from Hebron, and the capture of the fortified town of Debir, is
repeated with very slight differences in [Jdg
1:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010), in the enumeration of the
different conflicts in which the separate tribes engaged after the death
of Joshua, in order to secure actual possession of the inheritance which
had fallen to them by lot, and is neither copied from our book by the
author of the book of Judges, nor taken from Judges by the author of
Joshua; but both of them have drawn it from one common source, upon
which the accounts of the conquest of Canaan contained in the book of
Joshua are generally founded.

[Jos 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013)

As an introduction to the account of the conquest of Hebron and Debir,
the fact that they gave Caleb his portion among the sons of Judah,
namely Hebron, is first of all repeated from [Jos
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#013). נתן impers., they gave, i.e.,
Joshua ([Jos 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#013)). The words
"according to the command of Jehovah to Joshua" are to be explained from
[Jos 14:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#009), according to which
Jehovah had promised, in the hearing of Joshua, to give Caleb possession
of the mountains of Hebron, even when they were at Kadesh ([Jos
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#012)). The "father of Anak" is the
tribe father of the family of Anakites in Hebron, from whom this town
received the name of Kirjath-arba; see at [Num
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022) and [Gen
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002).

[Jos 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#014)

Thence, i.e., out of Hebron, Caleb drove (ויּרשׁ, i.e., rooted out: cf.
יכּוּ, [Jdg 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010)) the three sons of
Anak, i.e., families of the Anakites, whom the spies that were sent out
from Kadesh had already found there ([Num
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022)). Instead of Caleb, we find the
sons of Judah (Judaeans) generally mentioned in [Jdg
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010) as the persons who drove out the
Anakites, according to the plan of the history in that book, to describe
the conflicts in which the several tribes engaged with the Canaanites.
But the one does not preclude the other. Caleb did not take Hebron as an
individual, but as the head of a family of Judaeans, and with their
assistance. Nor is there any discrepancy between this account and the
fact stated in [Jos 11:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021), that
Joshua had already conquered Hebron, Debir, and all the towns of that
neighbourhood, and had driven out the Anakites from the mountains of
Judah, and forced them back into the towns of the Philistines, as Knobel
fancies. For that expulsion did not preclude the possibility of the
Anakites and Canaanites returning to their former abodes, and taking
possession of the towns again, when the Israelitish army had withdrawn
and was engaged in the war with the Canaanites of the north; so that
when the different tribes were about to settle in the towns and
districts allotted to them, they were obliged to proceed once more to
drive out or exterminate the Anakites and Canaanites who had forced
their way in again (see the remarks on [Jos
10:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#038), p. 86, note).

[Jos 15:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#015)

From Hebron Caleb went against the Inhabitants of Debir, to the south of
Hebron. This town, which has not yet been discovered (see at [Jos
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#038)), must have been very strong and
hard to conquer; for Caleb offered a prize to the conqueror, promising
to give his daughter Achzah for a wife to any one that should take it,
just as Saul afterwards promised to give his daughter to the conqueror
of Goliath ([Sa1 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025); [Sa1
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017)).

[Jos 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#017)

Othniel took the town and received the promised prize. Othniel,
according to [Jdg 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009) the first judge
of the Israelites after Joshua's death, is called כלב אחי קנז בּן, i.e.,
either "the son of Kenaz (and) brother of Caleb," or "the son of Kenaz
the brother of Caleb." The second rendering is quite admissible (comp.
[Sa2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#003), [Sa2
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#032), with [Ch1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#013)), but the former is the more
usual; and for this the Masorites have decided, since they have
separated achi Caleb from ben-Kenaz by a tiphchah. And this is the
correct one, as "the son of Kenaz" is equivalent to "the Kenizzite"
([Jos 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006)). According to [Jdg
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#013) and [Jdg
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009), Othniel was Caleb's younger
brother. Caleb gave him his daughter for a wife, as marriage with a
brother's daughter was not forbidden in the law (see my Bibl. Archol.
ii. 107, note 14).

[Jos 15:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018)

When Achzah had become his wife ("as she came," i.e., on her coming to
Othniel, to live with him as wife), she urged him to ask her father for
a field. "A field:" in [Jdg 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#014) we
find "the field," as the writer had the particular field in his mind.
This was not "the field belonging to the town of Debir" (Knobel), for
Othniel had no need to ask for this, as it naturally went with the town,
but a piece of land that could be cultivated, or, as is shown in what
follows, one that was not deficient in springs of water. What Othniel
did is not stated, but only what Achzah did to attain her end, possibly
because her husband could not make up his mind to present the request to
her father. She sprang from the ass upon which she had ridden when her
father brought her to Othniel. צנח, which only occurs again in [Jdg
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#021), and in the parallel passage,
[Jdg 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#014), is hardly connected with
צנע, to be lowly or humble (Ges.); the primary meaning is rather that
suggested by Frst, to force one's self, to press away, or further; and
hence in this case the meaning is, to spring down quickly from the
animal she had ridden, like נפל in [Gen
24:64](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#064). Alighting from an animal was a
special sign of reverence, from which Caleb inferred that his daughter
had some particular request to make of him, and therefore asked her what
she wanted: "What is to thee?" or, "What wilt thou?" She then asked him
for a blessing (as in [Kg2 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#015));
"for," she added, "thou hast given me into barren land." הנּגב ארץ
(rendered a south land) is accus. loci; so that negeb is not to be taken
as a proper name, signifying the southernmost district of Canaan (as in
[Jos 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021), etc.), but as an
appellative, "the dry or arid land," as in [Psa
126:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#004). "Give me springs of water,"
i.e., a piece of land with springs of water in it. Caleb then gave her
the "upper springs and lower springs:" this was the name given to a
tract of land in which there were springs on both the higher and lower
ground. It must have been somewhere in the neighbourhood of Debir,
though, like the town itself, it has not yet been found.

[Joshua 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 15:20</span></span>

[Jos 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#020) contains the closing
formula to vv. 1-19, i.e., to the description of the territory of Judah
by its boundaries (vid., [Jos 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#020)).

[Joshua 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 15:21</span></span>

In vv. 21-63 there follows a list of the towns of the tribe of Judah,
arranged in the four districts into which the land was divided,
according to the nature of the soil, viz., the south-land (negeb), the
lowland (shephelah) on the Mediterranean Sea, the mountains, and the
desert of Judah.

[Jos 15:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)

The towns in the south land. - Negeb (south-land) was the name given to
the southernmost district of Canaan in its full extent, from the Arabah,
at the southern end of the Dead Sea, right across to the coast of the
Mediterranean, and from the southern border of Canaan, as described in
[Jos 15:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002), as far north as Wady
Sheriah, below Gaza, on the western side, and up to the mountains and
desert of Judah on the east, stretching across the wadys of es Seba,
Milh, and Ehdeib, above which that part of Palestine commences where
rain is more abundant, and to which, as we have already observed at [Num
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#017), the Negeb formed a kind of
intermediate link between the fertile land and the desert. It was a line
of steppe-land, with certain patches here and there that admitted of
cultivation, but in which tracts of heath prevailed, for the most part
covered with grass and bushes, where only grazing could be carried on
with any success. The term which Eusebius and Jerome employ for Negeb in
the Onom. is Daromas, but they carry it farther northwards than the
Negeb of the Old Testament (see Reland, Pal. Ill. pp. 185ff.). The
numerous towns mentioned in [Jos
15:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021) as standing in the Negeb, may
none of them have been large or of any importance. In the list before us
we find that, as a rule, several names are closely connected together by
the copula vav, and in this way the whole may be divided into four
separate groups of towns.

[Jos 15:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)

First group of nine places. - [Jos
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021). The towns "from," i.e., at "the
end of the tribe-territory of Judah, towards the territory of Edom."
Kabzeel: the home of the hero Benaiah ([Sa2
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020)), probably identical with
Jakabzeel, which is mentioned in [Neh
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#025) in connection with Dibon, but
has not been discovered. This also applies to Eder and Jagur.

[Jos 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#022)

Kinah: also unknown. Knobel connects it with the town of the Kenites,
who settled in the domain of Arad, but this is hardly correct; for which
the exception of [Jdg 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016), where the
Kenites are said to have settled in the south of Arad, though not till
after the division of the land, the Kenites are always found in the
western portion of the Negeb ([Sa1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006); [Sa1
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#010); [Sa1
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#029)), whereas Kinah is
unquestionably to be looked for in the east. Dimonah, probably the same
as Dibon ([Neh 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#025)); possibly the
ruins of el Dheib, on the south side of the wady of the same name, to
the north-east of Arad (V. de Velde, Mem. p. 252), although Robinson
(Pal. ii. p. 473) writes the name Ehdeib. Adadah is quite unknown.

[Jos 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#023)

Kedesh, possibly Kadesh-barnea ([Jos
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003)). Hazor might then be Hezron, in
the neighbourhood of Kadesh-barnea ([Jos
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003)). Ithnan is unknown.

[Jos 15:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#024)

Second group of five or six places. - Of these, Ziph and Telem are not
met with again, unless Telem is the same as Telaim, where Saul mustered
his army to go against the Amalekites ([Sa1
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#004)). Their situation is unknown.
There was another Ziph upon the mountains (see [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055)). Knobel supposes the one
mentioned here to be the ruins of Kuseifeh, to the south-west of Arad
(Rob. Pal. ii. p. 620). Ziph would then be contracted from Ceziph; but
the contraction of Achzib ([Jos 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029))
into Zib does not present a corresponding analogy, as in that case the
abbreviated form is the later one, whereas in the case of Ziph a
lengthening of the name must have taken place by the addition of a D.
Bealoth, probably the same as the Simeonitish Baaloth-beer ([Jos
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#008)), which is called Baal simply in
[Ch1 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#033), and which was also called
Ramath-negeb ([Jos 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#008)) and
Ramoth-negeb ([Sa1 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#027)). It is not
to be identified with Baalath, however ([Jos
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#045); [Kg1
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#018)), as V. de Velde supposes (Reise,
ii. pp. 151-2). Knobel fancies it may be the ridge and place called
Kubbet el Baul, between Milh and Kurnub (Rob. ii. p. 617); but Baul and
Baal are very different. Hazor Hadatta (Chazor Chadathah), i.e., new
Hazor, might be the ruins of el Hudhaira on the south of Jebel Khulil
(Rob. Appendix). Kenoth was supposed by Robinson (Pal. ii. p. 472, and
Appendix) to be the ruins of el Kuryetein, on the north-east of Arad and
at the foot of the mountains, and with this V. de Velde agrees. Reland
(Pal. p. 708) connects the following word Hezron with Kenoth, so as to
read Kenoth-hezron, i.e., Hezron's towns, also called Hazor. This is
favoured by the Sept. and Syriac, in which the two words are linked
together to form one name, and probably by the Chaldee as well, also by
the absence of the copula vav (and) before Hezron, which is not omitted
anywhere else throughout this section, except at the beginning of the
different groups of towns, as, for example, before Ziph in [Jos
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#024), and Amam in [Jos
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#026), and therefore ought to stand
before Hezron if it is an independent town. The Masoretic pointing
cannot be regarded as a decisive proof of the contrary.

[Jos 15:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#026)

Third group of nine towns. - [Jos
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#026). Amam is not mentioned again,
and is quite unknown. Shema, which is called Sheba in [Jos
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#002), and is mentioned among the towns
of the Simeonites between Beersheba and Moladah, is supposed by Knobel
to the ruins of Sawe (Sweh) between Milh and Beersheba (see V. de Velde,
ii. p. 148). Molada, which was given to the Simeonites ([Jos
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#002); [Ch1
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#028)) and was still inhabited by Jews
after the captivity ([Neh 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#026)), was
the later Μάλαδα, an Idumaean fortress (Josephus, Ant. 18:6, 2), which
Eusebius and Jerome describe as being twenty Roman miles, i.e., eight
hours, to the south of Hebron on the road to Aila (Elath). It has been
identified by Robinson (Pal. ii. p. 621) in the ruins of el Milh, by the
Wady Malath or Malahh.

[Jos 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#027)

Hazar-gaddah, Heshmon, and Beth-palet have not yet been identified. The
last of the three is mentioned again in [Neh
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#026), by the side of Molada, as still
inhabited by Judaeans.

[Jos 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#028)

Hazor-shual, i.e., fox-court, which was assigned to the Simeonites ([Jos
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#003)) and still inhabited after the
captivity ([Neh 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#027)), answers, so
far as the name if concerned, to the ruins of Thly (Rob. Pal. iii.
App.). Beersheba, which was a well-known place in connection with the
history of the patriarchs ([Gen
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#014)., [Jos
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019), etc.), and is frequently
mentioned afterwards as the southern boundary of the land of Israel
([Jdg 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001); [Sa2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#011), etc.), was also given up to the
Simeonites ([Jos 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#002)), and still
inhabited after the captivity ([Neh
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#027)). It is the present Bir es Seba
on the Wady es Seba (see at [Gen
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#031)). Bizjothjah is unknown.

[Jos 15:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#029)

The four groups of thirteen towns in the western portion of the Negeb.

[Jos 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#029)

Baalah, which was assigned to the Simeonites, is called Balah in [Jos
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#003), and Bilhah in [Ch1
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#029). Knobel identifies it with the
present Deir Belah, some hours to the south-west of Gaza Rob. iii. App.;
Ritter, Erdk. xvi. pp. 41, 42); but it cannot have been so far to the
west, or so near the coast as this. Iim (or Ivvim, according to the
Αυεἴμ of the lxx) is probably the ruins of Beit-auwa (Rob. iii. App.).
Azem, which was also given up to the Simeonites ([Jos
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#003); [Ch1
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#029)), is supposed by Knobel to be
Eboda, the present Abdeh, eight hours to the south of Elusa, a
considerable mass of ruins on a ridge of rock (Rob. i. p. 287), because
the name signifies firmness or strength, which is also the meaning of
the Arabic name-a very precarious reason.

[Jos 15:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#030)

Eltolad, which was given to the Simeonites ([Jos
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#004)), and is called Tolad (without
the Arabic article) in [Ch1 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#029), has
not been discovered. Chesil, for which the lxx have Βαιθήλ, is probably,
as Reland supposes, simply another name, or as Knobel suggests a corrupt
reading for, Bethul or Bethuel, which is mentioned in [Jos
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#004) and [Ch1
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#030), between Eltolad and Hormah, as a
town of the Simeonites, and the same place as Beth-el in [Sa1
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#027). As this name points to the seat
of some ancient sanctuary, and there was an idol called Khalasa
worshipped by the Arabs before the time of Mohamet, and also because
Jerome observes (vita Hilar. c. 25) that there was a temple of Venus at
Elusa, in which the Saracens worshipped Lucifer (see Tuch, Deutsch.
Morgenl. Ztschr. iii. pp. 194ff.), Knobel supposes Bethul (Chesil) to be
Elusa, a considerable collection of ruins five hours and a half to the
south of Beersheba (see Rob. i. p. 296): assuming first of all that the
name el Khulasa, as the Arabs called this place, was derived from the
Mahometan idol already referred to; and secondly, that the Saracen
Lucifer mentioned by Jerome was the very same idol whose image and
temple Janhari and Kamus call el Khalasa. Hormah: i.e., Zephoth, the
present Sepata (see at [Jos 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#014)).
Ziklag, which was assigned to the Simeonites ([Jos
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#005); [Ch1
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#030)), burnt down by the Amalekites
([Sa1 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#001).), and still inhabited
after the captivity ([Neh 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#028)), is
supposed by Rowland to be the ancient place called Asluj or Kasluj, a
few hours to the east of Zepata, with which Knobel, however, in a most
remarkable manner, identifies the Asluj to the south-west of Milh on the
road to Abdeh, which is more than thirty-five miles distant (see Rob.
Pal. ii. p. 621). Both places are too far to the south and east to suit
Ziklag, which is to be sought for much farther west. So far as the
situation is concerned, the ruins of Tell Sheriah or Tell Mellala, one
of which is supposed by V. de Velde to contain the relics of Ziklag,
would suit much better; or even, as Ritter supposes (Erdk. xvi. pp.
132-3), Tell el Hasy, which is half an hour to the south-west of Ajlan,
and in which Felix Fabri found the ruins of a castle and of an ancient
town, in fact of the ancient Ziklag, though Robinson (i. pp. 389ff.)
could discover nothing that indicted in any way the existence of a town
or building of any kind. Madmannah and Sansannah cannot be traced with
any certainty. Madmannah, which is confounded in the Onom. (s. v.
Medemena) with Madmena, a place to the north of Jerusalem mentioned in
[Isa 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#031), though elsewhere it is
correctly described as Menois oppidum juxta civitatem Gazam, has
probably been preserved in the present Miniay or Minieh, to the south of
Gaza. Sansannah, Knobel compares with the Wady Suni, mentioned by
Robinson (i. p. 299), to the south of Gaza, which possibly received its
name from some town in the neighbourhood. But in the place of them we
find Beth-marcaboth (i.e., carriage-house) and Hazar-susa (i.e.,
horse-court) mentioned in [Jos 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#005)
and [Ch1 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#031) among the towns of the
Simeonites, which Reland very properly regards as the same as Madmannah
and Sansannah, since it is very evident from the meaning of the former
names that they were simply secondary names, which were given to them as
stations for carriages and horses.

[Jos 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032)

Lebaoth, one of the Simeonite towns, called Beth-lebaoth (i.e.,
lion-house) in [Jos 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#006), and
Beth-birei in [Ch1 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#031), has not been
discovered yet. Shilchim, called Sharuchen in [Jos
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#006), and Shaaraim in [Ch1
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#031), may possibly have been preserved
in Tell Sheriah, almost half-way between Gaza and Beersheba (V. de
Velde, ii. p. 154). Ain and Rimmon are given as Simeonite towns, and
being written without the copula, are treated as one name in [Jos
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#007) and [Ch1
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#032), although they are reckoned as
two separate towns in [Jos 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#007). But
as they were also called En Rimmon after the captivity, and are given as
one single place in [Neh 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#029), they
were probably so close together that in the course of time they grew
into one. Rimmon, which is mentioned in [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010) as the southern boundary of
Judah, probably the Eremmon of the Onom. ("a very large village of the
Judaeans, sixteen miles to the south of Eleutheropolis in Daroma"), was
probably the present ruin called Um er Rummanim, four hours to the north
of Beersheba (Rob. iii. p. 8). Not more than thirty or thirty-five
minutes distant from this, between Tell Khuweilifeh (Rob. iii. p. 8) or
Chewelfeh (V. de Velde) and Tell Hhora, you find a large old but
half-destroyed well, the large stones of which seem to belong to a very
early period of the Israelitish history (V. de Velde, ii. p. 153). This
was mentioned as a very important drinking-place even in the lifetime of
Saladin, whilst to the present day the Tillah Arabs water their flocks
there (see Rob. iii. p. 8). To all appearance this was Ain (see V. de
Velde, Mem. p. 344). "All the cities were twenty and nine, and their
villages." This does not agree with the number of towns mentioned by
name, which is not twenty-nine, but thirty-six; to that the number
twenty-nine is probably an error of the text of old standing, which has
arisen from a copyist confounding together different numeral letters
that resembled one another.

(Note: Some commentators and critics explain this difference on the
supposition that originally the list contained a smaller number of names
(only twenty-nine), but that it was afterwards enlarged by the addition
of several other places by a different hand, whilst the number of the
whole was left just as it was before. But such a conjecture presupposes
greater thoughtlessness on the part of the editor than we have any right
to attribute to the author of our book. If the author himself made these
additions to his original sources, as Hvernick supposes, or the Jehovist
completed the author's list from his second document, as Knobel
imagines, either the one or the other would certainly have altered the
sum of the whole, as he has not proceeded in so thoughtless a manner in
any other case. The only way in which this conjecture could be defended,
would be by supposing, as J. D. Michaelis and others have done, that the
names added were originally placed in the margin, and that these
marginal glosses were afterwards interpolated by some thoughtless
copyist into the text. But this conjecture is also rendered improbable
by the circumstance that, in the lists of towns contained in our book,
not only do other differences of the same kind occur, as in v. 36, where
we find only fourteen instead of fifteen, and in [Jos
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#006), where only thirteen are given
instead of fourteen, but also differences of the very opposite kind, -
namely, where the gross sum given is larger than the number of names,
as, for example, in [Jos 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015), where
only five names are given instead of twelve, and in [Jos
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#038), where only sixteen are given
instead of nineteen, and where it can be shown that there are gaps in
the text, as towns are omitted which the tribes actually received and
ceded to the Levites. If we add to this the fact that there are two
large gaps in our Masoretic text in [Jos
15:59-60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#059), and [Jos
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#035), which proceed from copyists,
and also that many errors occur in the numbers given in other historical
books of the Old Testament, we are not warranted in tracing the
differences in question to any other cause than errors in the text.)

[Jos 15:33-47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033)

Towns in the lowland or shephelah. - The lowland (shephelah), which is
generally rendered ἡ πεδινή in the Sept., rarely τὸ πεδιόν ([Deu
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#007)), but which is transferred as a
proper name ἡ Σεφηλά in [Oba 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019);
[Jer 32:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#044); [Jer
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#013), as well as in 1 Macc. 12:38,
where even Luther has Sephela, is the name given to the land between the
mountains of Judah and the Mediterranean Sea, - a broad plain of
undulating appearance, intersected by heights and low ranges of hills,
with fertile soil, in which corn fields alternate with meadows, gardens,
and extensive olive groves. It is still tolerably well cultivated, and
is covered with villages, which are situated for the most part upon the
different hills. Towards the south, the shephelah was bounded by the
Negeb \_([Jos 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)); on the north, it
reached to Ramleh and Lydda, or Diospolis, where the plain of Sharon
began, - a plain which extended as far as Carmel, and was renowned for
the beauty of its flowers. Towards the east the hills multiply and shape
themselves into a hilly landscape, which forms the intermediate link
between the mountains and the plain, and which is distinguished from the
shephelah itself, in [Jos 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040) and
[Jos 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#008), under the name of Ashedoth,
or slopes, whereas here it is reckoned as forming part of the shephelah.
This hilly tract is more thickly studded with villages than even the
actual plain (See Rob. Pal. ii. p. 363, and iii. p. 29.) The towns in
the shephelah are divided into four groups.

[Jos 15:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033)

The first group contains the towns in the northern part of the hilly
region or slopes, which are reckoned as forming part of the lowland: in
all, fourteen towns. The most northerly part of this district was given
up to the tribe of Dan on the second division ([Jos
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#041).). Eshtaol and Zoreah, which
were assigned to the tribe of Dan ([Jos
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#041)), and were partly inhabited by
Danites ([Jdg 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#025); [Jdg
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#002), [Jdg
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#008),[Jdg
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#011)) and partly by families of
Judah, who had gone out from Kirjath-jearim ([Ch1
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#053); [Ch1
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#002)), probably after the removal of
the 600 Danites to Laish-Dan ([Jos
19:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#047); [Jdg
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001)), were situated, according to the
Onom. (s. v. Esthaul and Saara), ten Roman miles to the north of
Eleutheropolis, on the road to Nicopolis. Zoreah, the home of Samson,
who was buried between Zoreah and Eshtaol ([Jdg
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#002); [Jdg
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#031)), was fortified by Rehoboam, and
still inhabited by Judaeans after the captivity ([Ch2
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#010); [Neh
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#029)); it has been preserved in the
ruins of Sur, at the south-western end of the mountain range which
bounds the Wady es Surar on the north (Rob. ii. p. 341, and Bibl. Res.
p. 153). Eshtaol has probably been preserved in Um Eshteiyeh, to the
south-west (Rob. ii. p. 342). Ashnah is possibly to be read Ashvah,
according to the lxx, Cod. Vat. (Ἄσσα). In that case it might resemble a
town on the east of Zorea (Tobler, p. 180), as Knobel supposes.

[Jos 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#034)

Zanoah was still inhabited by Judaeans after the captivity ([Neh
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#030); [Neh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013)), and is the present Zanua, not
far from Zoreah, towards the east (see Rob. ii. p. 343). Engannim and
Tappuah are still unknown. Enam, the same as Enaim ([Gen
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#014) : rendered "an open place"), on
the road from Adullam to Timnah on the mountains ([Jos
15:57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#057)), has not yet been discovered.

[Jos 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035)

Jarmuth, i.e., Jarmk; see [Jos 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003).
Adullam has not yet been discovered with certainty (see at [Jos
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#015)). Socoh, which was fortified by
Rehoboam, and taken by the Philistines in the reign of Ahaz ([Ch2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#007); [Ch2
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)), is the present Shuweikeh by
the Wady Sumt, half an hour to the south-west of Jarmk, three hours and
a half to the south-west of Jerusalem (see Rob. ii. pp. 343, 349). The
Onom. (s. v. Socoh) mentions two viculi named Sochoth, one upon the
mountain, the other in the plain, nine Roman miles from Eleutheropolis
on the road to Jerusalem. On Azekah, see at [Jos
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010).

[Jos 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#036)

Sharaim, which was on the west of Socoh and Azekah, according to [Sa1
17:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#052), and is called Σακαρίμ or
Σαργαρείμ in the Sept., is probably to be sought for in the present Tell
Zakariya and the village of Kefr Zakariya opposite, between which there
is the broad deep valley called Wady Sumt, which is only twenty minutes
in breadth (Rob. ii. p. 350). This is the more probable as the Hebrew
name is a dual. Adithaim is unknown. Gederah is possibly the same as the
Gederoth which was taken by the Philistines in the time of Ahaz ([Ch2
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)), and the Gedrus of the Onom.
(s. v. Gaedur, or Gahedur), ten Roman miles to the south of Diospolis,
on the road to Eleutheropolis, as the Gederoth in [Jos
15:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#041) was in the actual plain, and
therefore did not stand between Diospolis and Eleutheropolis.
Gederothaim is supposed by Winer, Knobel, and others, to be an ancient
gloss. This is possible no doubt, but it is not certain, as neither the
omission of the name from the Sept., nor the circumstance that the full
number of towns is given as fourteen, and that this is not the number
obtained if we reckon Gederothaim, can be adduced as a decisive proof,
since this difference may have arisen in the same manner as the similar
discrepancy in [Jos 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032).

[Jos 15:37-41](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#037)

The second group, containing the towns of the actual plain in its full
extent from north to south, between the hilly region and the line of
coast held by the Philistines: sixteen towns in all.

[Jos 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#037)

Zenan, probably the same as Zaanan ([Mic
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)), is supposed by Knobel to be the
ruins of Chirbet-es-Senat, a short distance to the north of Beit-jibrin
(Tobler, Dritte Wand. p. 124). Hadashah, according to the Mishnah Erub.
v. vi. the smallest place in Judah, containing only fifty houses, is
unknown, and a different place from the Adasa of 1 Macc. 7:40, 45, and
Joseph. Ant. xii. 10, 5, as this was to the north of Jerusalem (Onom.).
- Migdal-gad is unknown. Knobel supposes it to be the small hill called
Jedeideh, with ruins upon it, towards the north of Beit-jibrin (V. de
Velde, R. ii. pp. 162, 188).

[Jos 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#038)

Dilean is unknown; for Bet Dula, three full hours to the east of
Beit-jibrin, with some relics of antiquity (Tobler, pp. 150-1), with
which Knobel identifies it, is upon the mountains and not in the plain.
Mizpeh, i.e., specula, a different place from the Mizpeh of Benjamin
([Jos 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026)), was on the north of
Eleutheropolis, according to the Onom. (s. v. Maspha), and therefore may
possibly be the castle Alba Specula, or Alba Custodia of the middle
ages, the present Tell es Saphieh, in the middle of the plain and upon
the top of a lofty hill, from which there is an extensive prospect in
all directions (see Rob. ii. p. 363). Joktheel has possibly been
preserved in the ruins of Keitulaneh (Rob. Pal. iii. App.), which are
said to lie in that neighbourhood.

[Jos 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039)

Lachish, i.e., Um Lakis (see at [Jos
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003)). Bozkath is unknown: according
to Knobel, it may possibly be the ruins of Tubakah, on the south of Um
Lakis and Ajlan (Rob. ii. pp. 388, 648). Eglon, i.e., Ajlan; see at [Jos
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003).

[Jos 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#040)

Cabbon, probably the heap of ruins called Kubeibeh or Kebeibeh, "which
must at some time or other have been a strong fortification, and have
formed the key to the central mountains of Judah" (v. de Velde, R. ii.
p. 156), and which lie to the south of Beit-jibrin, and two hours and a
half to the east of Ajlan (Rob. Pal. ii. p. 394). Lachmas: according to
Knobel a corruption of Lachmam, which is the reading given in many MSS
and editions, whilst the Vulgate has Leheman, and Luther (and the Eng.
Ver). Lahmam. Knobel connects it with the ruins of el Lahem to the south
of Beit-jibrin (Tobler). Kithlish (Chitlis) is unknown, unless it is to
be found in Tell Chilchis, to the S.S.E. of Beit-jibrin (V. de Velde, R.
ii. p. 157).

[Jos 15:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#041)

Gederoth, Beth-dagon, and Naamah have not yet been traced. The village
mentioned in the Onom. (s. v. Beth-dagon) as grandis vicus Capher-dagon,
and said to lie between Diospolis and Jamnia, the present Beit-dejan
(Rob. iii. p. 30), was far beyond the northern boundary of the tribe of
Judah. Makkedah: see at [Jos 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010).

[Jos 15:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#042)

The third group, consisting of the towns in the southern half of the
hilly region: nine towns.

[Jos 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#042)

Libnah: see at [Jos 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#029). Ether and
Ashan, which were afterwards given to the Simeonites ([Jos
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#007)), and are probably to be sought
for on the border of the Negeb, have not yet been discovered. The
conjecture that Ether is connected with the ruins of Attrah (Rob. iii.
App.) in the province of Gaza, is a very uncertain one. Ashan, probably
the same as Kor-ashan ([Sa1 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#030)),
became a priests' city afterwards ([Ch1
6:44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#044); see at [Jos
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#016)).

[Jos 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#043)

Jiphtah, Ashnah, and Nezib have not yet been traced. Beit-nesib, to the
east of Beit-jibrin on the Wady Sur (Rob. ii. p. 344, and iii. p. 13),
the Neesib of the Onom., seven Roman miles to the east of
Eleutheropolis, does not suit this group so far as its situation is
concerned, as it lies within the limits of the first group.

[Jos 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044)

Keilah, which is mentioned in the history of David (1 Sam 23), and then
again after the captivity ([Neh 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#017)),
is neither the Κεελά, Ceila of the Onom., on the east of Eleutheropolis,
the present Kila (Tobler, Dritte Wand. p. 151), which lies upon the
mountains of Judah; nor is it to be found, as Knobel supposes, in the
ruins of Jugaleh (Rob. iii. App.), as they lie to the south of the
mountains of Hebron, whereas Keilah is to be sought for in the
shephelah, or at all events to the west or south-west of the mountains
of Hebron. Achzib ([Mic 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014)), the
same as Chesib ([Gen 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#005)), has been
preserved in the ruins at Kussbeh, a place with a fountain (Rob. ii. p.
391), i.e., the fountain of Kesba, about five hours south by west from
Beit-jibrin. Mareshah, which was fortified by Rehoboam ([Ch2
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#008); cf. [Mic
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015)), and was the place where Asa
defeated Zerah the Ethiopian ([Ch2
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009)), the home of Eliezer ([Ch2
20:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#037)), and afterwards the important
town of Marissa (see v. Raumer, Pal. pp. 211-12), was between Hebron and
Ashdod, since Judas Maccabaeus is represented in 1 Macc. 5:65-68 (where
the reading should be Μαρίσσαν instead of Σαμάρειαν, according to
Joseph. Ant. xii. 8, 6) as going from Hebron through Marissa into the
land of the Philistines, and turning to Ashdod. According to the Onom.
(s. v. Mareshah), it was lying in ruins in the time of Eusebius, and was
about two Roman miles from Eleutheropolis-a description which applies
exactly to the ruins of Maresh, twenty-four minutes to the south of
Beit-jibrin, which Robinson supposes for this reason to be Maresa (Rob.
ii. p. 422), whereas Knobel finds it in Beit-mirsim, a place four hours
to the south of Beit-jibrin.

(Note: Knobel founds his opinion partly upon [Ch2
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009), according to which Mareshah was
in the valley of Zephatah, which is the bason-like plain at Mirsim, and
partly upon the fact that the Onom. also places Moraste on the east
(south-east) of Eleutheropolis; and Jerome (ad Mich. [Jos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)) describes Morasthi as haud
grandem viculum juxta Eleutheropolin, and as sepulcrum quondam Micheae
prophetae nunc ecclesiam (ep. 108 ad Eustoch. 14); and this ecclesia is
in all probability the ruins of a church called Santa Hanneh, twenty
minutes to the south-east of Beit-jibrin, and only ten minutes to the
east of Marash, which makes the assumption a very natural one, that the
Maresa and Morasthi of the fathers are only different parts of the same
place, viz., of Moreseth-gath, the home of Micah ([Mic
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001), [Mic
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014); [Jer
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#018)). But neither of these is
decisive. The valley of Zephatah might be the large open plain which
Robinson mentions (ii. p. 355) near Beit-jibrin; and the conjecture that
Morasthi, which Euseb. and Jer. place πρὸς ἀνατολὰς, contra orientem
Eleutheropoleos, is preserved in the ruins which lie in a straight line
towards the south from Beit-jibrin, and are called Marash, has not much
probability in it.)

[Jos 15:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#045)

The fourth group, consisting of the towns of the Philistine line of
coast, the northern part of which was afterwards given up to the tribe
of Dan (Dan [Jos 19:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#043)), but which
remained almost entirely in the hands of the Philistines (see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)).

(Note: There is no force in the reasons adduced by Ewald, Bertheau, and
Knobel, for regarding these verses as spurious, or as a later
interpolation from a different source. For the statement, that the
"Elohist" merely mentions those towns of which the Hebrews had taken
possession, and which they held either partially or wholly in his own
day, and also that his list of the places belonging to Judah in the
shephelah never goes near the sea, are assertions without the least
foundation, which are proved to be erroneous by the simple fact, that
according to the express statement in [Jos
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#012), the Mediterranean Sea formed
the western boundary of the tribe of Judah; and according to [Jos
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006), Joshua was to distribute by lot
even those parts of Canaan which had not yet been conquered. The
difference, however, which actually exists between the verses before us
and the other groups of towns, namely, that in this case the "towns" (or
daughters) are mentioned as well as the villages, and that the towns are
not summed up at the end, may be sufficiently explained from the facts
themselves, namely, from the circumstance that the Philistine cities
mentioned were capitals of small principalities, which embraced not only
villages, but also small towns, and for that very reason did not form
connected groups, like the towns of the other districts.)

[Jos 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#045)

Ekron, i.e., Akir (see [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)).
"Her daughters" are the other towns of the principality of Ekron that
were dependent upon the capital, and חצרים the villages and farms.

[Jos 15:46](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#046)

Judah was also to receive "from Ekron westwards all that lay on the side
of Ashdod and their (i.e., Ekron's and Ashdod's) villages." The
different places in this district are not given, because Judah never
actually obtained possession of them.

[Jos 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#047)

Ashdod, now Esdd, and Gaza, now Ghuzzeh: see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003). Also "the daughter towns and
villages, unto the brook of Egypt (Wady el Arish: see [Jos
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#004)), and the great sea with its
territory," i.e., the tract of land lying between Gaza and the coast of
the Mediterranean. Gath and Askalon are not mentioned, because they are
both of them included in the boundaries named. Askalon was between
Ashdod and Gaza, by the sea-coast (see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)), and Gath on the east of Ekron
and Ashdod (see [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)), so that,
as a matter of course, it was assigned to Judah.

[Jos 15:48-60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)

The towns on the mountains are divided into five, or more correctly,
into six groups. The mountains of Judah, which rise precipitously from
the Negeb, between the hilly district on the west, which is reckoned as
part of the shephelah, and the desert of Judah, extending to the Dead
Sea on the east ([Jos 15:61](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061)), attain
the height of 3000 feet above the level of the sea, in the neighbourhood
of Hebron, and run northwards to the broad wady of Beit-hanina, above
Jerusalem. They are a large rugged range of limestone mountains, with
many barren and naked peaks, whilst the sides are for the most part
covered with grass, shrubs, bushes, and trees, and the whole range is
intersected by many very fruitful valleys. Josephus describes it as
abounding in corn, fruit, and wine; and to the present day it contains
many orchards, olive grounds, and vineyards, rising in terraces up the
sides of the mountains, whilst the valleys and lower grounds yield
plentiful harvests of wheat, millet, and other kinds of corn. In ancient
times, therefore, the whole of this district was thickly covered with
towns (see Rob. ii. pp. 185, 191-2, and C. v. Raumer, Pal. pp. 45ff.).

[Jos 15:48-51](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)

The first group consists of eleven towns on the south-west of the
mountains.

[Jos 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)

Shamir has probably been preserved in the ruins of Um Shaumerah,
mentioned by Robinson (iii. App.), though the situation of these ruins
has not yet been precisely determined. Jattir, which was given up to the
priests ([Jos 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#014)), and is mentioned
again in [Sa1 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#027), is described in
the Onom. (s. v. Jether) as a large placed inhabited by Christians,
twenty miles from Eleutheropolis, in interiori Daroma juxta Malathan, -
a description which suits the ruins of Attir, in the southern portion of
the mountains (see Rob. ii. p. 194; called Ater by Seetzen, R. iii. p.
6). Socoh, two hours N.W. of this, the present Shuweikeh (Rob. ii. p.
194), called Suche by Seetzen (R. iii. p. 29), a village about four
hours from Hebron.

[Jos 15:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#049)

Dannah (Sept., Syr., Renna) is unknown. Knobel imagines that Dannah
should be Danah, for Deanah, plur. Deanoth, which would then be
suggestive of Zanute, the last inhabited place upon the mountains, five
hours from Hebron, between Shuweikeh and Attir (see Rob. ii. p. 626;
Seetzen, iii. p. 27, 29). Kirjath-sannah, or Debir, has not been traced
(see at [Jos 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#038)).

[Jos 15:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#050)

Anab, on the north-east of Socoh (see at [Jos
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021)). Eshtemoh, or Eshtemoa, which
was ceded to the priests ([Jos 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#014);
[Ch1 6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#042)), and is mentioned again in
[Sa1 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#028); [Ch1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#017), [Ch1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#019), is the present Semua, an
inhabited village, with remains of walls, and a castle of ancient date,
on the east of Socoh (Rob. ii. pp. 194, 626; Seetzen, iii. 28; and v.
Schubert, R. ii. p. 458). Anim, contracted, according to the probable
conjecture of Wilson, from Ayanim (fountains), a place still preserved
in the ruins of the village of el Ghuwein, on the south of Semua, though
Robinson erroneously connects it with Ain ([Jos
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032) : see Rob. Pal. ii. p. 626).

[Jos 15:51](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#051)

Goshen, Holon, and Giloh, are still unknown. On Goshen, see at [Jos
10:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#041). Holon was given up to the
priests ([Jos 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#015); [Ch1
6:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#043)); and Giloh is mentioned in [Sa2
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012) as the birth-place of
Ahithophel.

[Jos 15:52-54](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#052)

The second group of nine towns, to the north of the former, in the
country round Hebron.

[Jos 15:52](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#052)

Arab is still unknown; for we cannot connect it, as Knobel does, with
the ruins of Husn el Ghurab in the neighbourhood of Semua (Rob. i. p.
312), as these ruins lie within the former group of towns. Duma,
according to Eusebius the largest place in the Daromas in his time, and
seventeen miles from Eleutheropolis, is probably the ruined village of
Daumeh, by the Wady Dilbeh (Rob. i. p. 314), which is fourteen miles in
a straight line to the south-east of Eleutheropolis according to the
map. Es'an (Eshean) can hardly be identified with Asan ([Ch1
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#032)), as Van de Velde supposes, but
is more likely Korasan ([Sa1 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#030)).
In that case we might connect it with the ruins of Khursah, on the
north-west of Daumeh, two hours and a half to the south-west of Hebron
(Rob. iii. p. 5). As the Septuagint reading is Σομά, Knobel conjectures
that Eshean is a corrupt reading for Shema ([Ch1
2:43](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#043)), and connects it with the ruins
of Simia, on the south of Daumeh (Seetzen, iii. 28, and Rob. iii. App.).

[Jos 15:53](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#053)

Janum is still unknown. Beth-tappuah has been preserved in the village
of Teffuh, about two hours to the west of Hebron (Rob. ii. p. 428).
Apheka has not been discovered.

[Jos 15:54](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#054)

Humtah is also unknown. Kirjath-arba, or Hebron: see at [Jos
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003). Zior has also not been traced;
though, "so far as the name is concerned, it might have been preserved
in the heights of Tugra, near to Hebron" (Knobel).

[Jos 15:55-57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055)

The third group of ten towns, to the east of both the former groups,
towards the desert.

[Jos 15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055)

Maon, the home of Nabal ([Sa1 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002)),
on the border of the desert of Judah, which is here called the desert of
Maon ([Sa1 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#025)), has been preserved
in Tell Man, on a conical mountain commanding an extensive prospect,
east by north of Semua, three hours and three-quarters to the S.S.E. of
Hebron (Rob. ii. p. 193). Carmel, a town and mountain mentioned in the
history of David, and again in the time of Uzziah ([Sa1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#012); [Sa1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002).; [Ch2
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#010)). In the time of the Romans it
was a large place, with a Roman garrison (Onom.), and is the present
Kurmul, on the north-west of Maon, where there are considerable ruins of
a very ancient date (Rob. ii. pp. 196ff.). Ziph, in the desert of that
name, to which David fled from Saul ([Sa1
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014)., [Sa1
26:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#002)), was fortified by Rehoboam
([Ch2 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#008)), and has been preserved in
the ruins upon the hill Ziph, an hour and three-quarters to the
south-east of Hebron (Rob. ii. p. 191). Juttah, which was assigned to
the priests ([Jos 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#016)), and was a
vicus praegrandis Judaeorum in the time of the fathers (Onom. s. v.
Jethan), was eighteen Roman miles to the south (south-east) of
Eleutheropolis, and is the present Jutta or Jitta, a large Mahometan
place with ruins, an hour and three-quarters to the south of Hebron
(Seetzen, iii. p. 8; Rob. ii. p. 191, 628).

[Jos 15:56](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#056)

Jezreel, the home of Ahinoam ([Sa1
25:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#043); [Sa1
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#003), etc.), a different place from
the Jezreel in the plain of Esdraelon, has not yet been discovered. This
also applies to Jokdeam and Zanoah, which are only met with here.

[Jos 15:57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#057)

Cain (Hakkain) is possibly the same as Jukin, on the south-east of
Hebron (Rob. ii. p. 449). Gibeah cannot be the Gabatha near Bethlehem,
mentioned in the Onom. (s. v. Gabathaon), or the Gibea mentioned by
Robinson (ii. p. 327), i.e., the village of Jeba, on a hill in the Wady
el Musurr, as this does not come within the limits of the present group;
it must rather be one of the two places (Gebaa and Gebatha) described as
viculi contra orientalem plagam Daromae, though their situation has not
yet been discovered. Timnah, probably the place already mentioned in
[Gen 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012)., has not been discovered.

[Jos 15:58-59](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#058)

The fourth group of six towns, on the north of Hebron or of the last two
groups. - Halhul, according to the Onom. (s. v. Elul) a place near
Hebron named Alula, has been preserved in the ruins of Halhl, an hour
and a half to the north of Hebron (Rob. i. p. 319, ii. p. 186, and Bibl.
Res. p. 281). Beth-zur, which was fortified by Rehoboam ([Ch2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#007)), and is frequently mentioned in
the time of the Maccabees as a border defence against the Idumaeans (1
Macc. 4:29, 61, etc.), was twenty (? fifteen) Roman miles from
Jerusalem, according to the Onom. (s. v. Beth-zur), on the road to
Hebron. It is the present heap of ruins called Beit-zur on the
north-west of Halhl (Rob. Bibl. Res. pp. 276-7; Ritter, Erdk. xvi. pp.
236, 267-8). Gedor, the ruins of Jedr, an hour and a half to the
north-west (Rob. ii. p. 338; Bibl. Res. pp. 282-3).

[Jos 15:59](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#059)

Maarath and Eltekon have not yet been discovered. Beth-anoth (probably a
contraction of Beth-ayanoth) has been discovered by Wolcott in the ruins
of Beit-anum, on the east of Halhl (Rob. Bibl. Res. p. 279; cf. Pal. ii.
p. 186).

Between [Jos 15:59](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#059) and [Jos
15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060), the fifth group of towns given
in the Septuagint is wanting in the Masoretic text. This group lay to
the north of the fourth, and reached as far as Jerusalem, It comprised a
district in which even now there are at least fifteen places and ruins,
so that we have not an arbitrary interpolation made by the lxx, as
Jerome assumed, but rather a gap in the Hebrew text, arising from the
fact that an ancient copyist passed by mistake from the word וחצריהן in
[Jos 15:59](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#059) to the same word at the
close of the missing section. In the Alexandrian version the section
reads as follows in Cod. Al. and Vat.: Θεκώ καὶ Ἐφραθά, αὕτη ἐστὶ
Βαιθλέεμ, καὶ Φαγώρ καὶ Αἰτὰν καὶ Καολὸν καὶ Τατὰμ καὶ Θωβἠς (Cod. Al.
Σωρὴς) καὶ Καρέμ καὶ Γαλὲμ καὶ Θεθὴρ (Cod. Al. Βαιθῆρ) καὶ Μαμοχώ,
πόλεις ἕνδεκα καὶ αἱ κῶμαι αὐτῶν. - Theko, the well-known Tekoah, the
home of the wise woman and of the prophet Amos ([Sa2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002); [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)), was fortified by Rehoboam, and
still inhabited after the captivity ([Ch2
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#006); [Neh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005), [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027)). It is the present Tekua, on the
top of a mountain covered with ancient ruins, two hours to the south of
Bethlehem (Rob. ii. pp. 181-184; Tobler, Denkbl. aus Jerus. pp. 682ff.).
Ephratah, i.e., Bethlehem, the family seat of the house of David ([Rut
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001); [Rut
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011); [Sa1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#004); [Sa1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012).; [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)), was fortified by Rehoboam ([Ch2
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#006)), and is a place frequently
mentioned. It was the birth-place of Christ ([Mat
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001).; [Luk
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004)), and still exists under the
ancient name of Beit-lahm, two hours to the south of Jerusalem (Seetzen,
ii. pp. 37ff.; Rob. ii. pp. 159ff.; Tobler, Topogr. v. Jerus. ii. pp.
464ff.). Bethlehem did not receive the name of Ephratah for the first
time from the Calebite family of Ephrathites ([Ch1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#019), [Ch1
2:50](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#050); [Ch1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#004)), but was known by that name even
in Jacob's time ([Gen 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019); [Gen
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007)). Phagor, which was near to
Bethlehem according to the Onom. (s. v. Fogor), and is also called
Phaora, is the present Faghur, a heap of ruins to the south-west of
Bethlehem (Rob. Bibl. Res. p. 275). Aetan was fortified by Rehoboam
([Ch2 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#006)), and has been preserved in
the Wady and Ain Attan between Bethlehem and Faghur (Tobler, Dritte
Wand. pp. 88, 89). Kulon, the present village of Kulomeh, an hour and a
half west by north from Jerusalem on the road to Ramleh (see Rob. ii. p.
146; Bibl. Res. p. 158: it is called Kolony by Seetzen, ii. p. 64).
Tatam cannot be traced. Sores (for Thobes appears to be only a copyist's
error) is probably Saris, a small village four hours to the east of
Jerusalem, upon a ridge on the south of Wady Aly (Rob. Bibl. Res. pp.
154-5). Karem, now Ain Karim, a large flourishing village two hours to
the wets of Jerusalem, with a Franciscan convent dedicated to John the
Baptist in the middle, and a fountain (Rob. ii. p. 141; Bibl. Res. p.
271). Galem, a different place from the Gallim on the north of Jerusalem
([Isa 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#030)), has not yet been
discovered. Baither, now a small dirty village called Bettir or Bittir,
with a beautiful spring, and with gardens arrange din terraces on the
western slope of the Wady Bittir, to the south-west of Jerusalem (Rob.
Bibl. Res. p. 266). Manocho, possibly the same place as Manachat ([Ch1
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#006)), has not been found.

[Jos 15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060)

The sixth group of only two towns, to the west of Jerusalem, on the
northern border of the tribe of Judah. - Kirjath-baal, or
Kirjath-jearim, the present Kureyet el Enab; see at [Jos
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009), and [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017). Rabbah (Ha-rabbah, the great) is
quite unknown.

[Jos 15:61-62](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061)

The towns in the desert of Judah, which ran along the Dead Sea from the
northern border of Judah ([Jos 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006),
[Jos 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007)) to Wady Fikreh on the
south, and reached to the districts of Maon, Ziph, Tekoah, and Bethlehem
towards the west. This tract of land is for the most part a terrible
desert, with a soil composed of chalk, marl, and limestone, and with
bald mountains covered with flint and hornstone, and without the
slightest trace of vegetation on the side bordering on the Dead Sea (see
v. Schubert, Reise, iii. pp. 94, 96; Rob. ii. pp. 202, 475, 477). Yet
wherever there are springs even this desert is covered with a luxuriant
vegetation, as far as the influence of the water extends (Seetzen, ii.
pp. 249, 258); and even in those parts which are now completely
desolate, there are traces of the work of man of a very ancient date in
all directions (Rob. ii. p. 187). Six towns are mentioned in the verses
before us. Beth-arabah: see at [Jos
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006). Middin and Secaca are unknown.
According to Knobel, Middin is probably the ruins of Mird or Mardeh, to
the west of the northern end of the Dead Sea (Rob. ii. p. 270).

[Jos 15:62](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#062)

Nibsan, also unknown. The city of salt (salt town), in which the
Edomites sustained repeated defeats ([Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013); [Psa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002); [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007); [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012); [Ch2
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#011)), was no doubt at the southern
end of the Dead Sea, in the Salt Valley (Rob. ii. p. 483). Engedi, on
the Dead Sea ([Eze 47:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#010)), to which
David also fled to escape from Saul ([Sa1
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001).), according to the Onom. (s. v.
Engaddi) a vicus praegrandis, the present Ain-Jidi, a spring upon a
shelf of the high rocky coast on the west of the Dead Sea, with ruins of
different ancient buildings (see Seetzen, ii. pp. 227-8; Rob. ii. pp.
214ff.; Lynch, pp. 178-9, 199, 200).

[Jos 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063)

In [Jos 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063) there follows a notice
to the effect that the Judaeans were unable to expel the Jebusites from
Jerusalem, which points back to the time immediately after Joshua, when
the Judaeans had taken Jerusalem and burned it ([Jdg
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008)), but were still unable to
maintain possession. This notice is not at variance with either [Jos
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028) or [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021), since it neither affirms that
Jerusalem belonged to the tribe of Judah, nor that Judah alone laid
claim to the possession of the town to the exclusion of the Benjamites
(see the explanation of [Jdg 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 16](jos016)

</div>
