<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos010)  [Next](jos012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

[Joshua 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 11:1</span></span>

The War in Northern Canaan. - [Jos
11:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001). On receiving intelligence of
what had occurred in the south, the king of Hazor formed an alliance
with the kings of Madon, Shimron, and Achshaph, and other kings of the
north, to make a common attack upon the Israelites. This league
originated with Jabin the king of Hazor, because Hazor was formerly the
head of all the kingdoms of northern Canaan ([Jos
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)). Hazor, which Joshua conquered
and burned to the ground ([Jos 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010),
[Jos 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#011)), was afterwards restored,
and became a capital again ([Jdg 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#002);
[Sa1 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#009)); it was fortified by
Solomon ([Kg1 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015)), and taken by
Tiglath-Pileser ([Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)). It
belonged to the tribe of Naphtali ([Jos
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#036)), but has not yet been
discovered. According to Josephus (Ant. v. 5, 1), it was above the Lake
of Samochonitis, the present Bahr el Huleh. Robinson conjectures that it
is to be found in the ruins upon Tell Khuraibeh, opposite to the
north-west corner of the lake of Huleh, the situation of which would
suit Hazor quite well, as it is placed between Ramah and Kedesh in [Jos
19:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#035) (see Bibl. Res. p. 364). On
the other hand, the present ruins of Huzzur or Hazireh, where there are
the remains of large buildings of a very remote antiquity (see Rob.
Bibl. Res. p. 62), with which Knobel identifies Hazor, cannot be thought
of for a moment, as these ruins, which are about an hour and a quarter
to the south-west of Yathir, are so close to the Ramah of Asher ([Jos
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029)) that Hazor must also have
belonged to Asher, and could not possibly have been included in the
territory of Naphtali. There would be more reason for thinking of Tell
Hazr or Khirbet Hazr, on the south-west of Szafed (see Rob. Bibl. Res.
p. 81); but these ruins are not very ancient, and only belong to an
ordinary village, and not to a town at all. Madon is only mentioned
again in [Jos 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#019), and its situation
is quite unknown. Shimron, called Shimron-meron in [Jos
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#020), was allotted to the tribe of
Zebulun ([Jos 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015)), and is also
unknown. For Meron cannot be connected, as Knobel supposes, with the
village and ruins of Marn, not far from Kedesh, on the south-west (see
Rob. Pal. iii. p. 371), or Shimron with the ruins of Khuraibeh, an hour
to the south of Kedesh; as the territory of Zebulun, to which Shimron
belonged, did not reach so far north, and there is not the slightest
ground for assuming that there were two Shimrons, or for making a
distinction between the royal seat mentioned here and the Shimron of
Zebulun. There is also no probability in Knobel's conjecture, that the
Shimron last named is the same as the small village of Semunieh,
probably the Simonias of Josephus (Vita, 24), on the west of Nazareth
(see Rob. Pal. iii. p. 201). Achshaph, a border town of Ashwer ([Jos
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#025)), is also unknown, and is
neither to be sought, as Robinson supposes (Bibl. Res. pp. 55), in the
ruins of Kesf, which lie even farther north than Abel (Abil), in the
tribe of Naphtali, and therefore much too far to the north to have
formed the boundary of Asher; nor to be identified with Acco
(Ptolemais), as Knobel imagines, since Acco has nothing in common with
Achshaph except the letter caph (see also at [Jos
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#025)).

[Jos 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#002)

Jabin also allied himself with the kings of the north "upon the
mountains," i.e., the mountains of Naphtali ([Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007)), and "in the Arabah to the south
of Chinnereth" ([Jos 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#035)), i.e., in
the Ghor to the south of the sea of Galilee, and "in the lowland," i.e.,
the northern portion of it, as far down as Joppa, and "upon the heights
of Dor." The town of Dor, which was built by Phoenicians, who settled
there on account of the abundance of the purple mussels (Steph. Byz. s.
v. Δῶρος), was allotted to the Manassites in the territory of Asher
([Jos 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011); cf. [Jos
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#026)), and taken possession of by the
children of Joseph ([Ch1 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#029)). It was
situated on the Mediterranean Sea, below the promontory of Carmel, nine
Roman miles north of Caesarea, and is at the present time a hamlet
called Tantura or Tortura, with very considerable ruins (Wilson, The
Holy Land, ii. 249, and V. de Velde, Journey, i. p. 251). The old town
was a little more than a mile to the north, on a small range of hills,
which is covered with ruins (Ritter, Erdk. xvi. pp. 608-9; V. de Velde,
Mem. p. 307), and on the north of which there are rocky ranges, with
many grottos, and houses cut in the rock itself (Buckingham, Syria, i.
pp. 101-2). These are "the heights of Dor," or "the high range of Dor"
([Jos 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#023); [Kg1
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#011)).

[Jos 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003)

"Namely, with the Canaanites on the east and west, the Amorites" and
other tribes dwelling upon the mountains (vid., [Jos
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#010)), and "the Hivites under the
Hermon in the land of Mizpah," i.e., the country below Hasbeya, between
Nahr Hasbany on the east, and Merj. Ayn on the west, with the village of
Mutulleh or Mtelleh, at present inhabited by Druses, which stands upon a
hill more than 200 feet high, and from which there is a splendid
prospect over the Huleh basin. It is from this that it has derived its
name, which signifies prospect, specula, answering to the Hebrew Mizpah
(see Robinson, Bibl. Res. p. 372).

[Jos 11:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#004)

These came out with their armies, a people as numerous as the sand by
the sea-shore (vid., [Gen 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017),
etc.), and very many horses and chariots. All these kings agreed
together, sc., concerning the war and the place of battle, and encamped
at Merom to fight against Israel. The name Merom (Meirm in the Arabic
version) answers to Meirm, a village whose name is also pronounced
Meirm, a celebrated place of pilgrimage among the Jews, because Hillel,
Shammai, Simeon ben Jochai, and other noted Rabbins are said to be
buried there (see Robinson, Pal. iii. p. 333), about two hours' journey
north-west of Szafed, upon a rocky mountain, at the foot of which there
is a spring that forms a small brook and flows away through the valley
below Szafed (Seetzen, R. ii. pp. 127-8; Robinson, Bibl. Res. pp.
73ff.). This stream, which is said to reach the Lake of Tiberias, in the
neighbourhood of Bethsaida, is in all probability to be regarded as the
"waters of Merom," as, according to Josephus (Ant. v. 1, 18), "these
kings encamped at Berothe (de. Bell. Jud. xx. 6, and Vit. 37, 'Meroth'),
a city of Upper Galilee, not far from Kedese."

(Note: The traditional opinion that "waters of Merom" is the Old
Testament name for the Lake of Samochonitis, or Huleh, is not founded
upon any historical evidence, but is simply an inference of Hadr. Reland
(Pal. Ill. p. 262), (1) from the statement made by Josephus (Ant. v. 5,
1), that Hazor was above the Lake of Somochonitis, it being taken for
granted without further reason that the battle occurred at Hazor, and
(2) from the supposed similarity in the meaning of the names, viz., that
Samochonitis is derived from an Arabic word signifying to be high, and
therefore means the same as Merom (height), though here again the zere
is disregarded, and Merom is arbitrarily identified with Marom.)

[Jos 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006)

On account of this enormous number, and the might of the enemy, who were
all the more to be dreaded because of their horses and chariots, the
Lord encouraged Joshua again,

(Note: "As there was so much more difficulty connected with the
destruction of so populous and well-disciplined an army, it was all the
more necessary that he should be inspired with fresh confidence. For
this reason God appeared to Joshua, and promised him the same success as
He had given him so many times before." - Calvin.)

as in [Jos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001), by promising him that
on the morrow He would deliver them all up slain before Israel; only
Joshua was to lame their horses ([Gen
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006)) and burn their chariots. אנכי
before נתן gives emphasis to the sentence: "I will provide for this; by
my power, which is immeasurable, as I have shown thee so many times, and
by my nod, by which heaven and earth are shaken, shall these things be
done" (Masius).

[Jos 11:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#007)

With this to inspirit them, the Israelites fell upon the enemy and smote
them, chasing them towards the north-west to Sidon, and westwards as far
as Misrephothmaim, and into the plain of Mizpah on the east. Sidon is
called the great (as in [Jos 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#028)),
because at that time it was the metropolis of Phoenicia; whereas even by
the time of David it had lost its ancient splendour, and was outstripped
by its daughter city Tyre. It is still to be seen in the town of Saida,
a town of five or six thousand inhabitants, with many large and
well-built houses (see Rob. Pal. iii. p. 415, and Movers, Phnizier, ii.
1, pp. 86ff.). Misrephothmaim (mentioned also at [Jos
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#006)), which the Greek translators
have taken as a proper name, though the Rabbins and some Christian
commentators render it in different ways, such as salt-pits,
smelting-huts, or glass-huts (see Ges. Thes. p. 1341), is a collection
of springs, called Ain Mesherfi, at the foot of the promontory to which
with its steep pass the name of Ras el Nakhra is given, the scala
Tyriorum or Passepoulain of the Crusaders (see V. de Velde, Mem. p. 335,
and Ritter, Erdk. xvi. p. 807). מצפּה בּקעת (Eng. Ver. "the valley of
Mizpeh") is probably the basin of the Huleh lake and of Nahr Hasbany, on
the western side of which lay the land of Mizpah ([Jos
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003)).

[Jos 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#009)

Joshua carried out the command of the Lord with regard to the chariots
and horses.

[Jos 11:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#010)

After destroying the foe, and returning from the pursuit, Joshua took
Hazor, smote its king and all the inhabitants with the edge of the
sword, and burned the town, the former leader of all those kingdoms. He
did just the same to the other towns, except that he did not burn them,
but left them standing upon their hills. על־תּלּם העמחות ([Jos
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#013)) neither contains an allusion to
any special fortification of the towns, nor implies a contrast to the
towns built in the valleys and plains, but simply expresses the thought
that these towns were still standing upon their hill, i.e., upon the old
site (cf. [Jer 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018) : the participle
does not express the preterite, but the present). At the same time, the
expression certainly implies that the towns were generally built upon
hills. The pointing in תּלּם is not to be altered, as Knobel suggests.
The singular "upon their hill" is to be taken as distributive: standing,
now as then, each upon its hill. - With [Jos
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#015), "as Jehovah commanded His
servant Moses" (cf. [Num 33:52](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#052).; [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001)., [Deu
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#016)), the account of the wars of
Joshua is brought to a close, and the way opened for proceeding to the
concluding remarks with reference to the conquest of the whole land
([Jos 11:16-23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016)). דּבר הסיר לא, he put
not away a word, i.e., left nothing undone.

[Joshua 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 11:16</span></span>

Retrospective View of the Conquest of the Whole Land. - [Jos
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#016), [Jos
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017). Joshua took all this land,
namely, those portions of Southern Canaan that have already been
mentioned in [Jos 10:40-41](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#040); also the
Arabah, and the mountains of Israel and its lowlands (see [Jos
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#002)), i.e., the northern part of the
land (in the campaign described in [Jos
11:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#001)), that is to say, Canaan in
all its extent, "from the bald mountain which goeth up to Seir" in the
south, "to Baal-gad, in the valley of Lebanon under Hermon." The "bald
mountain" (Halak), which is mentioned here and in [Jos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#007) as the southern boundary of
Canaan, is hardly the row of white cliffs which stretches obliquely
across the Arabah eight miles below the Dead Sea and forms the dividing
line that separates this valley into el-Ghor and el-Araba (Rob. Pal. ii.
pp. 489, 492), or the present Madara, a strange-looking chalk-hill to
the south-west of the pass of Sufah (Rob. ii. p. 589), a steep bare
mountain in a barren plain, the sides of which consist of stone and
earth of a leaden ashy hue (Seetzen, R. iii. pp. 14, 15); but in all
probability the northern edge of the Azazimeh mountain with its white
and glistening masses of chalk. Baal-gad, i.e., the place or town of
Baal, who was there worshipped as Gad (see [Isa
65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)), also called Baal-hermon in
[Jdg 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003) and [Ch1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#023), is not Baalbek, but the Paneas
or Caesarea Philippi of a later time, the present Banjas (see at [Num
34:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008)). This is the opinion of v.
Raumer and Robinson, though Van de Velde is more disposed to look for
Baal-gad in the ruins of Kalath (the castle of) Bostra, or of Kalath
Aisafa, the former an hour and a half, the latter three hours to the
north of Banjas, the situation of which would accord with the biblical
statements respecting Baal-gad exceedingly well. The "valley of Lebanon"
is not Coele-Syria, the modern Beka, between Lebanon and Antilibanus,
but the valley at the foot of the southern slope of Jebel Sheik
(Hermon).

[Joshua 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 11:18</span></span>

Joshua made war with the kings of Canaan a long time; judging from [Jos
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#007), [Jos
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010), as much as seven years, though
Josephus (Ant. v. 1, 19) speaks of five (see at [Jos
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#010)). No town submitted peaceably to
the Israelites, with the exception of Gibeon: they took the whole in
war. "For it was of the Lord" ([Jos
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#020)), i.e., God ordered it so that
they (the Canaanites) hardened their heart to make war upon Israel, that
they might fall under the ban, and be destroyed without mercy. On the
hardening of the heart as a work of God, see the remarks upon the
hardening of Pharaoh ([Exo 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#021)). It
cannot be inferred from this, that if the Canaanites had received the
Israelites amicably, God would have withdrawn His command to destroy
them, and allowed the Israelites to make peace with them; for when they
made peace with the Gibeonites, they did not inquire what as the will of
the Lord, but acted in opposition to it (see at [Jos
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#014)). The remark is made with special
reference to this, and has been correctly explained by Augustine (qu. 8
in Jos.) as follows: "Because the Israelites had shown mercy to some of
them of their own accord, though in opposition to the command of God,
therefore it is stated that they (the Canaanites) made war upon them so
that none of them were spared, and the Israelites were not induced to
show mercy to the neglect of the commandment of God."

[Joshua 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 11:21</span></span>

In [Jos 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#021), [Jos
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022), the destruction of the Anakites
upon the mountains of Judah and Israel is introduced in a supplementary
form, which completes the history of the subjugation and extermination
of the Canaanites in the south of the land (Josh 10). This supplement is
not to be regarded either as a fragment interpolated by a different
hand, or as a passage borrowed from another source. On the contrary, the
author himself thought it necessary, having special regard to [Num
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#028), [Num
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#031)., to mention expressly that
Joshua also rooted out from their settlements the sons of Anak, whom the
spies in the time of Moses had described as terrible giants, and drove
them into the Philistine cities of Gaza, Bath, and Ashdod. "At that
time" points back to the "long time," mentioned in [Jos
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#018), during which Joshua was making
war upon the Canaanites. The words "cut off," etc., are explained
correctly by Clericus: "Those who fell into his hands he slew, the rest
he put to flight, though, as we learn from [Jos
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#014), they afterwards returned." (On
the Anakim, see at [Num 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022).) They
had their principal settlement upon the mountains in Hebron (el Khulil,
see [Jos 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003)), Debir (see at [Jos
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#038)), and Anab. The last place
(Anab), upon the mountains of Judah ([Jos
15:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#050)), has been preserved along with
the old name in the village of Anb, four or five hours to the south of
Hebron, on the eastern side of the great Wady el Khulil, which runs from
Hebron down to Beersheba (Rob. Pal. ii. p. 193). "And from all (the rest
of) the mountains of Judah, and all the mountains of Israel:" the latter
are called the mountains of Ephraim in [Jos
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#015). The two together form the real
basis of the land of Canaan, and are separated from one another by the
large Wady Beit Hanina (see Rob. Pal. ii. p. 333). They received their
respective names from the fact that the southern portion of the mountain
land of Canaan fell to the tribe of Judah as its inheritance, and the
northern part to the tribe of Ephraim and other tribes of Israel.

(Note: The distinction here made may be explained without difficulty
even from the circumstances of Joshua's own time. Judah and the double
tribe of Joseph (Ephraim and Manasseh) received their inheritance by lot
before any of the others. But whilst the tribe of Judah proceeded into
the territory allotted to them in the south, all the other tribes still
remained in Gilgal; and even at a later period, when Ephraim and
Manasseh were in their possessions, all Israel, with the exception of
Judah, were still encamped at Shiloh. Moreover, the two parts of the
nation were now separated by the territory which was afterwards assigned
to the tribe of Benjamin, but had no owner at this time; and in addition
to this, the altar, tabernacle, and ark of the covenant were in the
midst of Joseph and the other tribes that were still assembled at
Shiloh. Under such circumstances, then, would not the idea of a
distinction between Judah, on the one hand, and the rest of Israel, in
which the double tribe of Joseph and then the single tribe of Ephraim
acquired such peculiar prominence, on the other, shape itself more and
more in the mind, and what already existed in the germ begin to attain
maturity even here? And what could be more natural than that the
mountains in which the "children of Judah" had their settlements should
be called the mountains of Judah; and the mountains where all the rest
of Israel was encamped, where the "children of Israel" were gathered
together, be called the mountains of Israel, and, as that particular
district really belonged to the tribe of Ephraim, the mountains of
Ephraim also? ([Jos 19:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#050); [Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007); also [Jos
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#030).))

Gaza, Gath, and Ashdod were towns of the Philistines; of these Gaza and
Ashdod were allotted to the tribe of Judah ([Jos
15:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#047)), but were never taken
possession of by the Israelites, although the Philistines were sometimes
subject to the Israelites (see at [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)). - With [Jos
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023), "thus Joshua took the whole
land" etc., the history of the conquest of Canaan by Joshua is brought
to a close; and [Jos 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#023), "and
Joshua gave it for an inheritance unto Israel," forms a kind of
introduction to the second part of the book. The list of the conquered
kings in Josh 12 is simply an appendix to the first part.

The taking of the whole land does not imply that all the towns and
villages to the very last had been conquered, or that all the Canaanites
were rooted out from every corner of the land, but simply that the
conquest was of such a character that the power of the Canaanites was
broken, their dominion overthrown, and their whole land so thoroughly
given into the hands of the Israelites, that those who still remained
here and there were crushed into powerless fugitives, who could neither
offer any further opposition to the Israelites, nor dispute the
possession of the land with them, if they would only strive to fulfil
the commandments of their God and persevere in the gradual extermination
of the scattered remnants. Moreover, Israel had received the strongest
pledge, in the powerful help which it had received from the Lord in the
conquests thus far obtained, that the faithful covenant God would
continue His help in the conflicts which still remained, and secure for
it a complete victory and the full possession of the promised land.
Looking, therefore, at the existing state of things from this point of
view, Joshua had taken possession of the whole land, and could now
proceed to finish the work entrusted to him by the Lord, by dividing the
land among the tribes of Israel. Joshua had really done all that the
Lord had said to Moses. For the Lord had not only promised to Moses the
complete extermination of the Canaanites, but had also told him that He
would not drive out the Canaanites at once, or "in one year," but only
little by little, until Israel multiplied and took the land ([Exo
23:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#028); cf. [Deu
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#022)). Looking at this promised,
therefore, the author of the book could say with perfect justice, that
"Joshua took the whole land according to all that (precisely in the
manner in which) the Lord had said to Moses." But this did not preclude
the fact, that a great deal still remained to be done before all the
Canaanites could be utterly exterminated from every part of the land.
Consequently, the enumeration of towns and districts that were not yet
conquered, and of Canaanites who still remained, which we find in [Jos
13:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#001); [Jos
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#014)., [Jos
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#003); [Jos
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#005), [Jos
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012), forms no discrepancy with the
statements in the verses before us, so as to warrant us in adopting any
critical hypotheses or conclusions as to the composition of the book by
different authors. The Israelites could easily have taken such portions
of the land as were still unconquered, and could have exterminated all
the Canaanites who remained, without any severe or wearisome conflicts;
if they had but persevered in fidelity to their God and in the
fulfilment of His commandments. If, therefore, the complete conquest of
the whole land was not secured in the next few years, but, on the
contrary, the Canaanites repeatedly gained the upper hand over the
Israelites; we must seek for the explanation, not in the fact that
Joshua had not completely taken and conquered the land, but simply in
the fact that the Lord had withdrawn His help from His people because of
their apostasy from Him, and had given them up to the power of their
enemies to chastise them for their sins. - The distribution of the land
for an inheritance to the Israelites took place "according to their
divisions by their tribes." מחלקות denote the division of the twelve
tribes of Israel into families, fathers' houses, and households; and is
so used not only here, but in [Jos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#007) and [Jos
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010). Compare with this [Ch1
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#006); [Ch1
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#001), etc., where it is applied to the
different orders of priests and Levites. "And the land rested from war:"
i.e., the war was ended, so that the peaceable task of distributing the
land by lot could now be proceeded with (vid., [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015); [Jdg
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#011), [Jdg
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#030); [Jdg
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 12](jos012)

</div>
