<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1001)  [Next](kg1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 2:1</span></span>

The anointing of Solomon as king, which was effected by David's command
(1 Kings 1), is only briefly mentioned in [Ch1
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#001) in the words, "When David was old
and full of days, he made his son Solomon king over Israel;" which serve
as an introduction to the account of the arrangements made by David
during the closing days of his life. After these arrangements have been
described, there follow in 1 Chron 28 and 29 his last instructions and
his death. The aged king gathered together the tribe-princes and the
rest of the dignitaries and superior officers to a diet at Jerusalem,
and having introduced Solomon to them as the successor chosen by God,
exhorted them to keep the commandments of God, and urged upon Solomon
and the whole assembly the building of the temple, gave his son the
model of the temple and all the materials which he had collected towards
its erection, called upon the great men of the kingdom to contribute to
this work, which they willingly agreed to, and closed this last act of
his reign with praise and thanksgiving to God and a great sacrificial
festival, at which the assembled states of the realm made Solomon king a
second time, and anointed him prince in the presence of Jehovah ([Ch1
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#022)). - A repetition of the
anointing of the new king at the instigation of the states of the realm,
accompanied by their solemn homage, had also taken place in the case of
both Saul (2 Sam 11) and David ([Sa2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004) and [Sa2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003)), and appears to have been an
essential requirement to secure the general recognition of the king on
the part of the nation, at any rate in those cases in which the
succession to the throne was not undisputed. In order, therefore, to
preclude any rebellion after his death, David summoned this national
assembly again after Solomon's first anointing and ascent of the throne,
that the representatives of the whole nation might pay the requisite
homage to king Solomon, who had been installed as his successor
according to the will of God. - To this national assembly, which is only
reported in the Chronicles, there are appended the last instructions
which David gave, according to [Ch1
29:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#001) of our chapter, to his
successor Solomon immediately before his death. Just as in the
Chronicles, according to the peculiar plan of that work, there is no
detailed description of the installation of David on the throne; so here
the author of our books has omitted the account of this national diet,
and the homage paid by the estates of the realm to the new king, as not
being required by the purpose of his work, and has communicated the last
personal admonitions and instructions of the dying king David instead.

(Note: To refute the assertion of De Wette, Gramberg, and Thenius, that
this account of the Chronicles arises from a free mode of dealing with
the history, and an intention to suppress everything that did not
contribute to the honour of David and his house, - an assertion which
can only be attributed to their completely overlooking, not to say
studiously ignoring, the different plans of the two works (the books of
Kings on the one hand, and those of Chronicles on the other), - it will
be sufficient to quote the unprejudiced and thoughtful decision of
Bertheau, who says, in his Comm. on [Ch1
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#001) : "These few words ([Ch1
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#001)) give in a condensed form the
substance of the account in 1 Kings 1, which is intimately bound up with
the account of the family affairs of David in the books of Samuel and
Kings, and therefore, according to the whole plan of our historical
work, would have been out of place in the Chronicles.")

[Kg1 2:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#001)

David's Last Instructions and Death. - [Kg1
2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#001). When David saw that his life
was drawing to a close, he first of all admonished his son Solomon to be
valiant in the observance of the commandments of God. "I go the way of
all the world" (as in [Jos 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#014)),
i.e., the way of death; "be strong and be a man," - not "bear my
departure bravely," as Thenius supposes, but prove thyself brave (cf.
[Sa1 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#009)) to keep the commandments of
the Lord. Just as in [Sa1 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#009) the
object in which the bravery is to show itself is appended simply by the
copula Vv; so is it here also with וגו ושׁמרתּ. The phrase יי את־משׁמרת
שׁמר, to keep the keeping of Jehovah, which so frequently occurs in the
Thorah, i.e., to observe or obey whatever is to be observed in relation
to Jehovah (cf. [Gen 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005); [Lev
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035); [Lev
18:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#030), etc.), always receives its more
precise definition from the context, and is used here, as in [Gen
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005), to denote obedience to the law
of God in all its extent, or, according to the first definition, to walk
in the ways of Jehovah. This is afterwards more fully expanded in the
expression וגו חקּתין לשׁמר, to keep the ordinances, commandments,
rights, and testimonies of Jehovah. These four words were applied to the
different precepts of the law, the first three of which are connected
together in [Gen 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005); [Deu
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#028); [Deu
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#011), and served to individualize the
rich and manifold substance of the demands of the Lord to His people as
laid down in the Thorah. תּשׂכּיל למען, that thou mayest act wisely and
execute well, as in [Deu 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#008); [Jos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#007).

[Kg1 2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#004)

Solomon would then experience still further this blessing of walking in
the ways of the Lord, since the Lord would fulfil to him His promise of
the everlasting possession of the throne. וגו יקים למען is grammatically
subordinate to תּשׂכּיל למען in [Kg1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#003). The word which Jehovah has spoken
concerning David (עלי דּבּר) is the promise in [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012)., the substance of which is
quoted here by David with a negative turn, וגו יכּרת לא, and with
express allusion to the condition on which God would assuredly fulfil
His promise, viz., if the descendants of David preserve their ways, to
walk before the Lord in truth. בּאמת is more precisely defined by
נפשׁם...בּכל. For the fact itself see [Deu
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005); [Deu
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013), [Deu
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#018). The formula וגו יכּרת לא is
formed after [Sa1 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#033) (compare also
[Sa2 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029) and [Jos
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#023)). "There shall not be cut off to
thee a man from upon the throne of Israel," i.e., there shall never be
wanting to thee a descendant to take the throne; in other words, the
sovereignty shall always remain in thy family. This promise, which reads
thus in [Sa2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016), "Thy house and thy
kingdom shall be continual for ever before thee, and thy throne stand
fast for ever," and which was confirmed to Solomon by the Lord Himself
after his prayer at the consecration of the temple ([Kg1
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#025); [Kg1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#005)), is not to be understood as
implying that no king of the Davidic house would be thrust away from the
throne, but simply affirms that the posterity of David was not to be cut
off, so as to leave no offshoot which could take possession of the
throne. Its ultimate fulfilment it received in Christ (see at [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012).). The second לאמר in [Sa2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#004) is not to be erased as suspicious,
as being merely a repetition of the first in consequence of the long
conditional clause, even though it is wanting in the Vulgate, the
Arabic, and a Hebrew codex.

After a general admonition David communicated to his successor a few
more special instructions; viz., first of all ([Sa2
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#005), [Sa2
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#006)), to punish Joab for his
wickedness. "What Joab did to me:" - of this David mentions only the two
principal crimes of Joab, by which he had already twice deserved death,
namely, his killing the two generals. Abner ([Sa2
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#027)) and Amasa the son of Jether
([Sa2 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#010)). The name יתר is written
יתרא in [Sa2 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025). Joab had murdered
both of them out of jealousy in a treacherous and malicious manner; and
thereby he had not only grievously displeased David and bidden defiance
to his royal authority, but by the murder of Abner had exposed the king
to the suspicion in the eyes of the people of having instigated the
crime (see at [Sa2 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#028), [Sa2
3:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#037)). דּמי מ ויּשׂם "and he made
war-blood in peace," i.e., he shed in the time of peace blood that ought
only to flow in war (שׂים in the sense of making, as in [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001); [Exo
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#002), etc.), "and brought war-blood
upon his girdle which was about his loins, and upon his shoes under his
feet," sc. in the time of peace. This was the crime therefore: that Joab
had murdered the two generals in a time of peace, as one ought only to
slay his opponent in time of war. Girdle and shoes, the principal
features in oriental attire when a man is preparing himself for any
business, were covered with blood, since Joab, while saluting them, had
treacherously stabbed both of them with the sword. David ought to have
punished these two crimes; but when Abner was murdered, he felt himself
too weak to visit a man like Joab with the punishment he deserved, as he
had only just been anointed king, and consequently he did nothing more
than invoke divine retribution upon his head ([Sa2
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029)). And when Amasa was slain, the
rebellions of Absalom and Sheba had crippled the power of David too
much, for him to visit the deed with the punishment that was due. But as
king of the nation of God, it was not right for him to allow such crimes
to pass unpunished: he therefore transferred the punishment, for which
he had wanted the requisite power, to his son and successor.

[Kg1 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#006)

"Do according to thy wisdom ("mark the proper opportunity of punishing
him" - Seb. Schmidt), and let not his grey hair go down into hell (the
region of the dead) in peace (i.e., punished)." The punishment of so
powerful a man as Joab the commander-in-chief was, required great
wisdom, to avoid occasioning a rebellion in the army, which was devoted
to him.

[Kg1 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#007)

If the demands of justice required that Joab should be punished, the
duty of gratitude was no less holy to the dying king. And Solomon was to
show this to the sons of Barzillai the Gileadite, and make them
companions of his table; because Barzillai had supplied David with
provisions on his flight from Absalom ([Sa2
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027)., [Sa2
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#032).). שׁלחנך בּאכלי והיוּ, "let
them be among those eating of thy table;" i.e., not, "let them draw
their food from the royal table," - for there was no particular
distinction in this, as all the royal attendants at the court received
their food from the royal kitchen, as an equivalent for the pay that was
owing - but, "let them join in the meals at the royal table." The fact
that in [Sa2 9:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#010), [Sa2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#013), we have על־שׁלחן אכל to express
this, makes no material difference. According to [Sa2
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#038), Barzillai had, it is true,
allowed only one son to follow the king to his court. "For so they drew
near to me," i.e., they showed the kindness to me of supplying me with
food; compare [Sa2 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027), where
Barzillai alone is named, though, as he was a man of eighty years old,
he was certainly supported by his sons.

[Kg1 2:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#008)

On the other hand, Shimei the Benjamite had shown great hostility to
David (cf. [Sa2 16:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)). He had cursed
him with a vehement curse as he fled from Absalom (נמרצת, vehement,
violent, not ill, heillos, from the primary meaning to be sick or ill,
as Thenius supposes, since it cannot be shown that מרץ has any such
meaning); and when David returned to Jerusalem and Shimei fell at his
feet, he had promised to spare his life, because he did not want to mar
the joy at his reinstatement in his kingdom by an act of punishment
([Sa2 19:19-24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#019)), and therefore had
personally forgiven him. But the insult which Shimei had offered in his
person to the anointed of the Lord, as king and representative of the
rights of God, he could not forgive. The instruction given to his
successor (אל־תּנקּהוּ, let him not be guiltless) did not spring from
personal revenge, but was the duty of the king as judge and
administrator of the divine right.

(Note: "Shimei is and remains rather a proof of David's magnanimity than
of vengeance. It was not a little thing to tolerate the miscreant in his
immediate neighbourhood for his whole life long (not even banishment
being thought of). And if under the following reign also he had been
allowed to end his days in peace (which had never been promised him),
this would have been a kindness which would have furnished an example of
unpunished crimes that might easily have been abused." This is the
verdict of J. J. Hess in his Geschichte Davids, ii. p. 221.)

It follows from the expression עמּך, with thee, i.e., in thy
neighbourhood, that Shimei was living at that time in Jerusalem (cf.
[Kg1 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#036)).

[Kg1 2:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010)

After these instructions David died, and was buried in the city of
David, i.e., upon Mount Zion, where the sepulchre of David still existed
in the time of Christ ([Act 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029)).

(Note: The situation of the tombs of the kings of Judah upon Zion,
Thenius has attempted to trace minutely in a separate article in
Illgen's Zeitschrift fr die histor. Theol. 1844, i. p. 1ff., and more
especially to show that the entrance to these tombs must have been on
the eastern slope of Mount Zion, which falls into the valley of
Tyropoeon, and obliquely opposite to the spring of Siloah. This is in
harmony with the statement of Theodoret (quaest. 6 in iii. Reg.), to the
effect that Josephus says, τὸ δὲ μνῆμα (τῆς ταφῆς) παρὰ τὴν Σιλοὰμ εἶναι
ἀντροειδὲς ἔχον τὸ σχῆμα, καὶ τῆν βασιλικὴν δηλοῦν πολυτέλειαν; although
this statement does not occur in any passage of his works as they have
come down to us.)

On the length of his reign see [Sa2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 2:12</span></span>

Accession of Solomon and Establishment of his Government. - [Kg1
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#012) is a heading embracing the
substance of what follows, and is more fully expanded in [Ch1
29:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023). Solomon established his
monarchy first of all by punishing the rebels, Adonijah ([Ch1
29:13-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#013)) and his adherents ([Ch1
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#026) -35), and by carrying out the
final instructions of his father (vv. 36-46).

[Kg1 2:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#013)

Adonijah forfeits his life. - [Kg1
2:13-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#013). Adonijah came to Bathsheba
with the request that she would apply to king Solomon to give him
Abishag of Shunem as his wife. Bathsheba asked him, "Is peace thy
coming?" i.e., comest thou with a peaceable intention? (as in [Sa1
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#004)), because after what had occurred
([Kg1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005).) she suspected an evil
intention. He introduced his petition with these words: "Thou knowest
that the kingdom was mine, and all Israel had set its face upon me that
I should be king, then the kingdom turned about and became my brother's;
for it became his from the Lord." The throne was his, not because he had
usurped it, but because it belonged to him as the eldest son at that
time, according to the right of primogeniture. Moreover it might have
been the case that many of the people wished him to be king, and the
fact that he had found adherents in Joab, Abiathar, and others, confirms
this; but his assertion, that all Israel had set its eyes upon him as
the future king, went beyond the bounds of truth. At the same time, he
knew how to cover over the dangerous sentiment implied in his words in a
very skilful manner by adding the further remark, that the transfer of
the kingdom to his brother had come from Jehovah; so that Bathsheba did
not detect the artifice, and promised to fulfil his request ([Kg1
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#016).) to intercede with king Solomon
for Abishag to be given him to wife. את־פּני אל־תּשׁבי, "do not turn
back my face," i.e., do not refuse my request.

[Kg1 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#019)

When Bathsheba came to Solomon, he received her with the reverence due
to the queen-mother: "he rose up to meet her" (a pregnant expression for
"he rose up and went to meet her"), made a low bow, then sat upon his
throne again, and bade her sit upon a throne at his right hand. The seat
at the right hand of the king was the place of honour among the
Israelites (cf. [Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)), also with
the ancient Arabian kings (cf. Eichhorn, Monumenta Antiq. Hist. Arab. p.
220), as well as among the Greeks and Romans.

[Kg1 2:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#020)

To her request, "Let Abishag of Shunem be given to Adonijah thy brother
for a wife" (את יתּן, cf. Ges. 143, 1, a.), which she regarded in her
womanly simplicity as a very small one (קטנּה), he replied with
indignation, detecting at once the intrigues of Adonijah: "And why dost
thou ask Abishag of Shunem for Adonijah? ask for him the kingdom, for he
is my elder brother; and indeed for him, and for Abiathar the priest,
and for Joab the son of Zeruiah." The repetition of לו in ולו ([Kg1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#022)), for the purpose of linking on
another clause, answers entirely to the emotional character of the
words. "For him, and for Abiathar and Joab:" Solomon said this, because
these two men of high rank had supported Adonijah's rebellion and wished
to rule under his name. There is no ground for any such alterations of
the text as Thenius proposes. - Although Abishag had been only David's
nurse, in the eyes of the people she passed as his concubine; and among
the Israelites, just as with the ancient Persians (Herod. iii. 68),
taking possession of the harem of a deceased king was equivalent to an
establishment of the claim to the throne (see at [Sa2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#008) and [Sa2
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007)). According to [Sa2
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021), this cannot have been unknown
even to Bathsheba; but as Adonijah's wily words had disarmed all
suspicion, she may not have thought of this, or may perhaps have thought
that Abishag was not to be reckoned as one of David's concubines,
because David had not known her ([Kg1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#004)).

[Kg1 2:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#023)

Solomon thereupon solemnly swore (the formula of an oath, and the כּי
introducing the oath, as in [Sa1
14:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#044), etc.), "Adonijah has spoken
this word against his own life." בּנפשׁו, at the cost of his life, as in
[Sa2 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#017), i.e., at the hazard of his
life, or to his destruction. [Sa2
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#024). "And now, as truly as Jehovah
liveth, who hath established me and set me on the throne of my father
David, and hath made me a house, as He said (verbatim, [Sa2
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#011)): yea, to-day shall Adonijah be
put to death." Jehovah established Solomon, or founded him firmly, by
raising him to the throne in spite of Adonijah's usurpation. In
ויושׁיביני the central י has got into the text through a copyist's
error. בּית לי עשׂה, i.e., He has bestowed upon me a family or
posterity. Solomon had already one son, viz., Rehoboam, about a year old
(compare [Kg1 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#042) with [Kg1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021) and [Ch2
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013)).

(Note: When Thenius denies this, and maintains that Rehoboam cannot have
been 41 years old when he began to reign, referring to his discussion at
[Kg1 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021), he answers himself,
inasmuch as at [Kg1 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021) he
demonstrates the fallacy of the objections which Cappellus has raised
against the correctness of the reading "41 years.")

[Kg1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#025)

Solomon had this sentence immediately executed upon Adonijah by Benaiah,
the chief of the body-guard, according to the oriental custom of both
ancient and modern times. The king was perfectly just in doing this. For
since Adonijah, even after his first attempt to seize upon the throne
had been forgiven by Solomon, endeavoured to secure his end by fresh
machinations, duty to God, who had exalted Solomon to the throne,
demanded that the rebel should be punished with all the severity of the
law, without regard to blood-relationship.

[Kg1 2:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#026)

Deposition of Abiathar. - The conduct of Solomon towards the high priest
Abiathar is a proof how free his actions were from personal revenge or
too great severity. Abiathar had also forfeited his life through the
part he took in Adonijah's conspiracy; but Solomon simply sent him to
Anathoth (i.e., Anata; see at [Jos
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024)), to his own fields, i.e., to
his property there, telling him, "Thou art indeed a man of death," i.e.,
thou hast deserved to die, "but I will not put thee to death to-day,
because thou hast borne the ark of Jehovah," namely, both on the
occasion of its solemn conveyance to Jerusalem ([Ch1
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#011).) and also on David's flight
from Absalom ([Sa2 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#024), [Sa2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#029)), that is to say, because of his
high-priestly dignity, and because thou didst endure all that my father
endured, i.e., thou didst share all his afflictions and sufferings, both
in the period of Saul's persecution ([Sa1
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020)., [Sa1
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#008).), and during the rebellion of
Absalom ([Sa2 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#024).). ההוּא בּיּום
(to-day) puts a limit upon the pardon, because Solomon could not foresee
whether Abiathar would always keep quiet, and not forfeit his life again
by fresh crimes.

(Note: There is no meaning in the objection of Thenius, that Abiathar
did not carry the ark himself, since this was not the duty of the high
priest. For, in the first place, it is questionable whether Abiathar did
not lend a helping hand at the removal of the ark during Absalom's
conspiracy. And, secondly, the duty binding upon the high priest, to
superintend and conduct the removal of the ark, might very well be
called carrying the ark. The conjecture, that for ארון we should read
אפוד, founders on the preterite נשׂאת; for Abiathar had not only worn
the ephod once before, but he wore it till the very hour in which
Solomon deposed him from his office.)

[Kg1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027)

The banishment of Abiathar to his own private possession involved his
deposition from the priesthood. And, as the historian adds, thus was the
word of the Lord concerning the house of Eli fulfilled ([Sa1
2:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030)). למלּא corresponds to the New
Testament ἵνα πληρωθῇ. For further remarks on this prophecy and its
fulfilment, see at [Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030).

(Note: Nothing is related concerning the subsequent fate of Abiathar,
since the death of a high priest who had been deprived of his office was
a matter of no importance to the history of the kingdom of God. At any
rate, he would not survive his deposition very long, as he was certainly
eighty years old already (see Comm. on Sam. p. 267). - The inference
which Ewald (Gesch. iii. pp. 269,270) draws from [Sa1
2:31-36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#031) as to the manner of his death,
namely, that he fell by the sword, is one of the numerous fictions
founded upon naturalistic assumptions with which this scholar has
ornamented the biblical history.)

Thus was the high-priesthood of the house of Eli extinguished, and
henceforth this dignity passed through Zadok into the sole possession of
the line of Eleazar.

[Kg1 2:28-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#028)

Execution of Joab. - When the report (of the execution of Adonijah and
the deposition of Abiathar) came to Joab, he fled to the tent of Jehovah
(not to the tabernacle, but to the holy tent upon Zion) to seek
protection at the altar (see at [Kg1
1:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#050)). The words נטה לא...יואב כּי are
introduced as a parenthesis to explain Joab's flight: "for Joab had
leaned after Adonijah," i.e., taken his side (אהרי נטה, as in [Exo
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#002); [Jdg
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#003)), "but not after Absalom."

(Note: Instead of אבשׁלום the lxx (Cod. Vat.), Vulgate, Syr., and Arab.
have adopted the reading שּׁלמה, and both Thenius and Ewald propose to
alter the text accordingly. But whatever plausibility this reading may
have, especially if we alter the preterite נטה into the participle נטה
after the ἦν κεκλικώς of the lxx, as Thenius does, it has no other
foundation than an arbitrary rendering of the lxx, who thought, but
quite erroneously, that the allusion to Absalom was inapplicable here.
For אחר נטה, to take a person's side, would suit very well in the case
of Adonijah and Absalom, but not in that of Solomon, whose claim to the
throne was not a party affair, but had been previously determined by
God.)

There is no foundation in the biblical text for the conjecture, that
Joab had given Adonijah the advice to ask for Abishag as his wife, just
as Ahithophel had given similar advice to Absalom ([Sa2
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021)). For not only is there no
intimation of anything of the kind, but Solomon punished Joab solely
because of his crimes in the case of Abner and Amasa. Moreover, Abiathar
was also deposed, without having any fresh machinations in favour of
Adonijah laid to his charge. The punishment of Adonijah and Abiathar was
quite sufficient to warn Joab of his approaching fate, and lead him to
seek to save his life by fleeing to the altar. It is true that,
according to [Exo 21:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#013), the altar
could afford no protection to a man who had committed two murders. But
he probably thought no more of these crimes, which had been committed a
long time before, but simply of his participation in Adonijah's
usurpation; and he might very well hope that religious awe would keep
Solomon from putting him to death in a holy place for such a crime as
that. And it is very evident that this hope was not altogether a
visionary one, from the fact that, according to [Exo
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#030), when Joab refused to leave the
altar at the summons addressed to him in the name of the king, Benaiah
did not give him the death-blow at once, but informed Solomon of the
fact and received his further commands. Solomon, however, did not arrest
the course of justice, but ordered him to be put to death there and
afterwards buried. The burial of the persons executed was a matter of
course, as, according to [Deu 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023),
even a person who had been hanged was to be buried before sunset. When,
therefore, Solomon gives special orders for the burial of Joab, the
meaning is that Benaiah is to provide for the burial with distinct
reference to the services which Joab had rendered to his father. "And
take away the blood, which Joab shed without cause, from me and my
father's house." So long as Joab remained unpunished for the double
murder, the blood-guiltiness rested upon the king and his house, on whom
the duty of punishment devolved (cf. [Num
35:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030); [Deu
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#013)). חנּם דּמי, blood without
cause, i.e., blood shed in innocence. On the connection of the adverb
with the substantive, at which Thenius takes offence, comp. Ges. 151, 1,
and Ewald, 287, d. - For V. 32, compare [Deu
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#005). The words of Solomon in v. 33a
point back to the curse which David uttered upon Joab and his
descendants after the murder of Abner ([Sa2
3:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#028)). "But to David, and his seed,
and his house, and his throne, let there be salvation for ever from
Jehovah." This wish sprang from a conviction, based upon [Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014), that the Lord would not fulfil
His promise to David unless his successors upon the throne exercised
right and justice according to the command of the Lord.

[Kg1 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#034)

Benaiah went up (ויּעל), inasmuch as the altar by the ark of the
covenant stood higher up Mount Zion than Solomon's house. Joab was
buried "in his house" (i.e., in the tomb prepared in his house, either
in the court or in the garden: cf. [Sa1
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001)), "in the desert," probably the
wilderness of Judah, as Joab's mother was a step-sister of David, and
therefore probably dwelt in the neighbourhood of Bethlehem.

[Kg1 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#035)

Solomon appointed Benaiah commander-in-chief in the place of Joab, and
put Zadok in Abiathar's place (cf. [Kg1
1:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#008)).

[Kg1 2:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#036)

Punishment of Shimei. - Solomon thereupon ordered Shimei to come,
probably from Bahurim, where his home was ([Sa2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005)), and commanded him to build
himself a house in Jerusalem to dwell in, and not to leave the city "any
whither" (ואנה אנה), threatening him with death if ever he should cross
the brook Kidron. The valley of Kidron is mentioned as the eastern
boundary of the city with an allusion to the fact, that Bahurim was to
the east of Jerusalem towards the desert.

[Kg1 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#038)

Shimei vowed obedience, and that on oath, as is supplementarily observed
in [Kg1 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#042), though it has been
arbitrarily interpolated by the lxx here; and he kept his word a
considerable time.

[Kg1 2:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#039)

But after the lapse of three years, when two slaves fled to Gath to king
Achish, with whom David had also sought and found refuge ([Sa1
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002), compare [Kg1
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#011).), he started for Gath as soon
as he knew this, and fetched them back.

[Kg1 2:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#041)

When this was reported to Solomon, he sent for Shimei and charged him
with the breach of his command: "Did I not swear to thee by Jehovah, and
testify to thee, etc.? Why hast thou not kept the oath of Jehovah (the
oath sworn by Jehovah)...?"

[Kg1 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#044)

He then reminded him of the evil which he had done to his father: "Thou
knowest all the evil, which thy heart knoweth (i.e., which thy
conscience must tell thee); and now Jehovah returns the evil upon thy
head," namely, by decreeing the punishment of death, which he deserved
for blaspheming the anointed of the Lord ([Sa2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009)).

[Kg1 2:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#045)

"And king Solomon will be blessed, and the throne of David be
established before Jehovah for ever," namely, because the king does
justice (compare the remark on [Kg1
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#033)).

[Kg1 2:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#046)

Solomon then ordered him to be executed by Benaiah. This punishment was
also just. As Solomon had put Shimei's life in his own hand by imposing
upon him confinement in Jerusalem, and Shimei had promised on oath to
obey the king's command, the breach of his oath was a crime for which he
had no excuse. There is no force at all in the excuses which some
commentators adduce in his favour, founded upon the money which his
salves had cost him, and the wish to recover possession of them, which
was a right one in itself. If Shimei had wished to remain faithful to
his oath, he might have informed the king of the flight of his slaves,
have entreated the king that they might be brought back, and have
awaited the king's decision; but he had no right thus lightly to break
the promise given on oath. By the breach of his oath he had forfeited
his life. And this is the first thing with which Solomon charges him,
without his being able to offer any excuse; and it is not till
afterwards that he adduces as a second fact in confirmation of the
justice of his procedure, the wickedness that he practised towards his
father. - The last clause, "and the kingdom was established by (בּיד)
Solomon," is attached to the following chapter in the Cod. Al. of the
lxx (in the Cod. Vat. it is wanting, or rather its place is supplied by
a long interpolation), in the Vulgate, and in the Syriac; and indeed
rightly so, as Thenius has shown, not merely because of the רק in [Kg1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002), but also because of its form as a
circumstantial clause, to which the following account ([Kg1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#001).) is appended.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 3](kg1003)

</div>
