<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1016)  [Next](kg1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 17:0</span></span>

The prophets Elijah and Elisha

When Ahab, who was not satisfied with the sin of Jeroboam, had
introduced the worship of Baal as the national religion in the kingdom
of the tribes, and had not only built a temple to Baal in his capital
and place of residence, but had also appointed a very numerous
priesthood to maintain the worship (see [Kg1
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#019)); and when his godless wife
Jezebel was persecuting the prophets of Jehovah, for the purpose of
exterminating the worship of the true God: the Lord God raised up the
most powerful of all the prophets, namely Elijah the Tishbite, who by
his deeds attested his name אליּהוּ or אליּה, i.e., whose God is
Jehovah. For however many prophets of Jehovah arose in the kingdom of
the ten tribes from its very commencement and bore witness against the
sin of Jeroboam in the power of the Spirit of God, and threatened the
kings with extermination of their house on account of this sin, no other
prophet, either before or afterwards, strove and worked in the
idolatrous kindom for the honour of the Lord of Saboath with anything
like the same mighty power of God as the prophet Elijah. And there was
no other prophet whom the Lord so gloriously acknowledged by signs and
wonders as Elijah, although He fulfilled the words of all His servants
by executing the judgments with which they had threatened the
rebellious, and whenever it was necessary accredited them as as His
messengers by miraculous signs. - Although, I accordance with the plan
of our books, which was to depict the leading features in the historical
development of the kingdom, all that is related in detail of the life
and labours of Elijah is the miracles which he performed in his conflict
with the worshippers of Baal, and the miraculous display of the
omnipotence and grace of God which he experienced therein; yet we may
see very clearly that these formed but one side of his prophetic labours
from the passing notices of the schools of the prophets, which he
visited once more before his departure from the earth (2 Kings 2); from
which it is obvious that this other side of his ministry, which was more
hidden fro the world, was not less important than his public ministry
before the kings and magnates of the land. For these societies of "sons
of the prophets," which we meet with at Gilgal, Bethel, and Jericho
([Kg2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#003), [Kg2
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#005); [Kg2
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038)), had no doubt been called into
existence by Elijah, by associating together those whose souls were
fitted to receive the Spirit of God for mutual improvement in the
knowledge and fear of Jehovah, in order to raise up witnesses to the
truth and combatants for the cause of the Lord, and through these
societies to provide the godly, who would not bow the knee before Baal,
with some compensation for the loss of the Levitical priesthood and the
want of the temple-worship. Compare the remarks on the schools of the
prophets at [Sa1 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024). - The more
mightily idolatry raised its head in the kindom of Israel, the more
powerfully did the Lord show to His people that He, Jehovah, and not
Baal, was God and Lord in Israel. In the prophet Elijah there were
combined in a marvellous manner a life of solitude spent in secret and
contemplative intercourse with God, and an extraordinary power for
action, which would suddenly burst forth, and by which he acted as a
personal representative of God (see at [Kg1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)). In his person the spirit of
Moses revived; he was the restorer of the kingdom of God in Israel, of
which Moses was the founder. His life recalls that of Moses in many of
its features: namely, his flight into the desert, the appearance of the
Lord to him at Horeb, and the marvellous termination of his life. Moses
and Elijah are the Coryphaei of the Old Testament, in whose life and
labours the nature and glory of this covenant are reflected. As the
thunder and lightning and the blast of trumpets and the smoking mountain
bare witness to the devouring fire of the holiness of God who had come
down upon Sinai to give effect to the promises He had made to the
father, and to make the children of Israel the people of His possession;
so does the fiery zeal of the law come out so powerfully in Moses and
Elijah, that their words strike the ungodly like lightning and flames of
fire, to avenge the honour of the Lord of Sabaoth and maintain His
covenant of grace in Israel. Moses as lawgiver, and Elijah as prophet,
are, as Ziegler has well said (p.206), the two historical anticipations
of those two future witnesses, which are "the two olive-trees and two
torches standing before the God of the earth. And if any one will hurt
them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth and devoureth their enemies;
and if any man will hurt them, he must therefore be slain. These have
power to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their prophecy,
and have power over waters to turn them into blood, and to smite the
earth with all kinds of plagues, as often as they will" ([Rev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004).).Elijah was called to this
office of witness to turn the heart of the fathers to the sons, and of
the sons to their fathers ([Mal 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#006)),
so that in his ministry the prophecy of the future of the kingdom of God
falls quite into the backgrounds. Nevertheless he was not only a
forerunner but also a type of the Prophet promised by Moses, who was to
fulfil both law and prophets ([Mat
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)); and therefore he appeared as
the representative of prophecy, along with Moses the representative of
the law, upon the mount Transfiguration, to talk with Christ of decease
which He was to accomplish at Jerusalem ([Luk
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031); [Mat
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003)). - To continue his work, Elijah,
by command of God, called Elisha the son of Shaphat, of Abel-Meholah,
who during the whole of his prophetic course carried on with power the
restoration of the law in the kingdom of Israel, which his master had
begun, by conducting schools of the prophets and acting as the
counsellor of kings, and proved himself by many signs and wonders to be
the heir of a double portion of the gifts of Elijah.

Modern theology, which has its roots in naturalism, has taken offence at
the many miracles occurring in the history of these two prophets, but it
has overlooked the fact that these miracles were regulated by the
extraordinary circumstances under which Elijah and Elisha worked. At a
time when the sovereignty of the living God in Israel was not only
called in question, but was to be destroyed by the worship of Baal, it
was necessary that Jehovah as the covenant God should interpose in a
supernatural manner, and declare His eternal Godhead in extraordinary
miracles. In the kingdom of the ten tribes there were no priestly or
Levitical duties performed, nor was there the regular worship of God in
a temple sanctified by Jehovah Himself; whilst the whole order of life
prescribed in the law was undermined by unrighteousness and ungodliness.
But with all this, the kingdom was not yet ripe for the judgment of
rejection, because there were still seven thousand in the land who had
not bowed their knee before Baal. For the sake of these righteous men,
the Lord had still patience with the sinful kingdom, and sent it
prophets to call the rebellious to repentance. If, then, under the
circumstances mentioned, the prophets were to fufil the purpose of their
mission and carry on the conflict against the priests of Baal with
success, they needed a much greater support on the part of God, through
the medium of miracles, than the prophets in the kingdom of Judah, who
had pwoerful and venerable supports in the Levitical priesthood and the
lawful worship.

(Note: "Where the temple was wanting, and image-worship took its place,
and the priesthood was an unlawful caste, it was only by extraordinary
methods that the spreading evil could be met. The illegitimacy, which
was represented here by the monarchy and priesthood, was opposed by the
prophetic order as the representative of the law, and therefore also as
a peculiarly constituted and strong body divided up into societies of
considerable scope, and having a firm organization. And this prophetic
order, as the only accredited representative of the law, also took the
place of the law, and was therefore endowed with the power and majesty
of the law which had been manifested in wonders and signs. Not only was
the spirit of Moses inherited by Elijah and others, but his miraculous
power also." - Haevernick, Einl. in d. A. Test. ii. 1, pp. 166,167.
Compare Hengstenberg, Dissertation, vol. i. p. 186ff.)

It is only when we overlook the object of these miracles, therefore,
that they can possibly appear strange. "If," as Kurtz has said,

(Note: Herzog's Cyclopaedia, Art. Elijah.)

"we take the history of our prophet as one living organic link in the
whole of the grand chain of the marvellous works of God, which stretches
from Sinai to Golgotha and the Mount of Olives, and bear in mind the
peculiarity of the position and circumstances of Elijah, the occurrence
of a miracle in itself, and even the accumulation of them and their
supposed externality, will appear to us in a very different light. -
Without miracle, without very striking, i.e., external miracles, their
ministry would have been without basis, without a starting-point, and
without hold." - The miracles are still more numerous in the history of
Elisha, and to some extent bear such a resemblance to those of Elijah,
that the attempt has been made to set them down as merely legendary
imitations of the latter; but considered as a whole, they are more of a
helpful and healing nature,whereas those of Elijah are for the most part
manifestations of judicial and punitive wrath. The agreement and the
difference may both be explained from Elisha's position in relation to
Elijah and his time. By the performance of similar and equal miracles
(such as the division of the Jordan, [Kg2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#008) and [Kg2
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#014); the increase of the oil, [Kg2
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#003). compared with [Kg1
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#014).; the raising of the dead, [Kg2
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#034). compared with [Kg1
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#019).). Elisha proved himself to be
the divinely-appointed successor of Elijah, who was carrying forward his
master's work (just as Joshua by the drying up of the Jordan proved
himself to be the continuer of the work of Moses), and as such performed
more miracles, so far as number is concerned, than even his master had
done, though he was far inferior to him in spiritual power. But the
difference does not prevail throughout. For whilst the helpful and
healing side of Elijah's miraculous power is displayed in his relation
to the widow at Zarephath; the judicial and punitive side of that of
Elisha comes out in the case of the mocking boys at Bethel, of Gehazi,
and of Joram's knight. But the predominance of strict judicial sternness
in the case of Elijah, and of sparing and helpful mildness in that of
Elisha, is to accounted for not so much from any difference in the
personality of the two, as from the altered circumstances. Elijah, with
his fiery zeal, had broken the power of the Baal-worship, and had so far
secured an acknowledgement of the authority of Jehovah over His people
that Joram and the succeeding kings gave heed to the words of the
prophets of the Lord; so that Elisha had for the most part only to
cherish and further the conversion of the people to their God, for which
Elijah had prepared the way.

First Appearance of Elijah - 1 Kings 17

The prophet Elijah predicts to Ahab, as a punishment for his idolatry
the coming of a drought and famine. During their continuance he is
miraculously preserved by God, first of all at the brook Cherith, and
then at the house of a widow at Zarephath (vv. 1-16), whose deceased son
he calls to life again ([Kg1
17:17-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 17:1</span></span>

Elijah the Tishbite is introduced without the formula "The word of the
Lord came to ...," with which the appearance of the prophets is
generally announced, proclaiming to king Ahab in the name of the Lord
the punitive miracle of a drought that will last for years. This abrupt
appearance of Elijah cannot be satisfactorily explained from the fact
that we have not the real commencement of his history here; it is rather
a part of the character of this mightiest of all the prophets, and
indicates that in him the divine power of the Spirit appeared as it were
personified, and his life and acts were the direct effluence of the
higher power by which he was impelled. His origin is also uncertain. The
epithet התּשׁבּי is generally derived from a place called Tishbeh,
since, according to Tobit 1:2, there existed in Upper Galilee a Θίσβη ἐκ
δεξιῶν Κυδίως, "on the right, i.e., to the south of Kydios," probably
Kedesh in the tribe of Naphtali, from which the elder Tobias was carried
away captive, although this description of the place is omitted in the
Hebrew version of the book of Tobit issued by Fagius and Mnster, and in
the Vulgate. And to this we must adhere, and as no other Thisbe occurs,
must accept this Galilean town as the birthplace of Elijah; in which
case the expression "of the settlers of Gilead" indicates that Elijah
did not live in his birthplace, but dwelt as a foreigner in Gilead. For
תּושׁב in itself by no means denotes a non-Israelite, but, like גּד,
simply one who lived away from his home and tribe relations in the
territory of a different tribe, without having been enrolled as a member
of it, as is clearly shown by [Lev
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#040), and still more clearly by [Jdg
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007), where a Levite who was born in
Bethlehem is described as גּר in the tribe of Ephraim.

(Note: The supposition of Seb. Schmidt, with which I formerly agreed,
namely, that Elijah was a foreigner, a Gentile by birth, after further
examination I can no longer uphold, though not from the priori objection
raised against it by Kurtz (in Herzog's Cycl.), namely, that it would
show a complete misapprehension of the significance of Israel in
relation to sacred history and the history of the world, and that
neither at this nor any other time in the Old Testament history could a
prophet for Israel be called from among the Gentiles, - an assertion of
which it would be difficult to find any proof, - but because we are not
forced to this conclusion by either התּשׁבּי or גלעד מתּשׁבי. For even
if the Thisbeh in Tob. 1:2 should not be Elijah's birthplace, it would
not follow that there was no other place named Thisbeh in existence. How
many places in Canaan are there that are never mentioned in the Old
Testament! And such cases as that described in [Jdg
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#007), where the Levite is said to have
left his birthplace and to have lived in another tribe as a foreigner or
settler, may not have been of rare occurrence, since the Mosaic law
itself refers to it in [Lev 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#041). -
Again, the lxx were unable to explain גלעד מתּשׁבי, and have paraphrased
these words in an arbitrary manner by ὁ ἐκ Θεσβῶν τῆς Γαλαάδ, from which
Thenius and Ewald conjecture that there was a Thisbeh in Gilead, and
that it was probably the Tisieh (tsh) mentioned by Robinson (Pal. iii.
153) to the south of Busra = Bostra. The five arguments by which Kurtz
has attempted to establish the probability of this conjecture are very
weak. For (1) the defective writing מתּשׁבי by no means proves that the
word which is written plene (תּושׁב) in every other case must
necessarily have been so written in the stat. constr. plur.; and this is
the only passage in the whole of the Old Testament in which it occurs in
the stat. constr. plur.; - (2) the precise description of the place
given in Tobit 1:2 does not at all lead "to the assumption that the
Galilean Thisbeh was not the only place of that name," but may be fully
explained from the fact that Thisbeh was a small and insignificant
place, the situation of which is defined by a reference to a larger town
and one better known; - (3) there is no doubt that "Gilead very
frequently denotes the whole of the country to the east of the Jordan,"
but this does not in the least degree prove that there was a Thisbeh in
the country to the east of the Jordan; - (4) "that the distinction and
difference between a birthplace and a place of abode are improbable in
themselves, and not to be expected in this connection," is a perfectly
unfounded assumption, and has first of all to be proved; - (5) the
Tisieh mentioned by Robinson cannot be taken into consideration, for the
simple reason that the assumption of a copyist's error, the confusion of
(Arabic) b with y (Tsieh instead of Thisbeh), founders on the long i of
the first syllable in Tsieh; moreover the Arabic t corresponds to the
Hebrew E and not to t.)

The expression "as truly as Jehovah the God of Israel liveth, before
whom I stand (i.e., whom I serve; see at [Kg1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#002)), there shall not fall dew and
rain these years, except at my word," was a special application of the
threats of the law in [Deu 11:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#016);
[Deu 28:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023), and [Lev
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019), to the idolatrous kingdom.
האלּה השּׁנים, "these (ensuing) years," does not fix any definite
terminus. In דברי לפי there is involved an emphatic antithesis to
others, and more especially to the prophets of Baal. "When I shall say
this by divine authority and might, let others prate and lie as they may
please" (Berleb. Bibel). Elijah thereby describes himself as one into
whose power the God of Israel has given up the idolatrous king and his
people. In [Jam 5:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017), this act of
Elijah is ascribed to the power of his prayers, since Elijah "was also a
man such as we are," inasmuch as the prophets received their power to
work solely through faith and intercourse with God in prayer, and faith
gives power to remove mountains.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 17:2</span></span>

After the announcement of this judgment, Elijah had to hide himself, by
the command of God, until the period of punishment came to an end, not
so much that he might be safe from the wrath and pursuit of Ahab and
Jezebel, as to preclude all earnest entreaties to remove the punishment.
"For inasmuch as the prophet had said that the rain would come at his
word, how would they have urged him to order it to come!" (Seb. Schm.)
He was to turn קדמה, eastward, i.e., from Samaria, where he had no doubt
proclaimed the divine judgment to Ahab, to the Jordan, and to hide
himself at the brook Cherith, which is in front of the Jordan. The brook
Cherith was in any case a brook emptying itself into the Jordan; but
whether upon the eastern or the western side of that river, the
ambiguity of על־פּני, which means both "to the east of" ([Gen
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018)) and also "in the face of,"
i.e., before or towards ([Gen 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#012);
[Gen 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#016)), it is impossible to
determine with certainty. That it must signify "to the east of the
Jordan" here, does not follow from קדמה with anything like the certainty
that Thenius supposes. An ancient tradition places the Cherith on this
side of the Jordan, and identifies it with the spring Phasaelis, which
takes its rise in the slope of the mountains into the Jordan valley
above the city of Phasaelis, and empties itself into the Jordan (cf.
Ges. thes. p. 719, and V. de Velde, Reise, ii. pp. 273-4); whereas
Eusebius, in the Onom. s.v. Chorat (Chorra'), places it on the other
side of the Jordan, and Thenius thinks of the apparently deep Wady Rajib
or Ajlun. All that can be affirmed with certainty is, that neither the
brook Kanah ([Jos 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#008); [Jos
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#009)), which flows into the
Mediterranean, nor the Wady Kelt near Jericho, which Robinson (Pal. ii.
p. 288) suggests, can possibly come into consideration: the latter for
the simple reason, that the locality in the neighbourhood of Jericho was
unsuitable for a hiding-place. Elijah was to drink of this brook, and
the ravens by divine command were to provide him with bread and meat,
which they brought him, according to [Kg1
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#006), both morning and evening. It is
now generally admitted that הערבים does not mean either Arabs or
Orebites (the inhabitants of an imaginary city named Oreb), but ravens.
Through this miracle, which unbelievers reject, because they do not
acknowledge a living God, by whom, as the Creator and Lord of all
creatures, even the voracious ravens are made subservient to His plans
of salvation, Elijah was not only cut off from intercourse with men, who
might have betrayed his place of abode to the king, but was mightily
strengthened himself, through the confidence inspired in the almighty
assistance of his God, for his approaching contests with the worshippers
of idols, and for the privations and sufferings which awaited him in the
fulfilment of his vocation.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 17:7</span></span>

After some time this brook dried up for want of rain. Then the Lord
directed His servant to go to the Sidonian Zarephath, and to live with a
widow whom He had commanded to provide for him. ימים מקּץ does not mean
post annum, for ימים merely derives this meaning in certain passages
from the context (cf. [Lev 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029); [Sa1
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#007); [Jdg
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#010)); whereas in this instance the
context does not point to the space of a year, but to a longer period of
indefinite duration, all that we know being that, according to [Kg1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#001), the sojourn of Elijah at Cherith
and Zarephath lasted at least two years. Zarephath (Σαρέπτα, lxx) was
situated on the Mediterranean Sea between Tyre and Sidon, where a
miserable Mohammedan village with ruins and a promontory, Surafend,
still preserve the name of the former town (Rob. iii. p. 413ff., and V.
de Velde, Syria and Palestine, i. pp. 101-3, transl.).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 17:10</span></span>

When Elijah arrived at the city gate, he met a widow engaged in
gathering wood. To discover whether it was to her that the Lord had sent
him, he asked her for something to drink and for a morsel of bread to
eat; whereupon she assured him, with an oath by Jehovah, that she had
nothing baked (מעוג = עגּה, ἐγκρυφίας, a cake baked in hot ashes), but
only a handful of meal in the כּד (a pail or small vessel in which meal
was kept) and a little oil in the pitcher, and that she was just
gathering wood to dress this remnant for herself and her son, that they
might eat it, and then die. From this statement of the widow it is
evident, on the one hand, that the drought and famine had spread across
the Phoenician frontier, as indeed Menander of Ephesus attests;

(Note: Josephus gives this statement from his Phoenician history:
ἀβροχία τε ἐπ ̓ αὐτοῦ (sc., Ἰθοβάλου) ἐγένετο ἀπὸ τοῦ Ὑπερβερεταίου
μηνὸς ἕως τοῦ ἐρχομένου ἔτους Ὑπερβερεταίου (Ant. viii. 13, 2).
Hyperberetaeus answers to Tishri of the Hebrews; cf. Benfey and Stern,
die Monatsnamen, p. 18.)

on the other hand, the widow showed by the oath, "as Jehovah thy God
liveth," that she was a worshipper of the true God, who spoke of Jehovah
as his God, because she recognised the prophet as an Israelite.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 17:13</span></span>

In order, however, to determine with indisputable certainty whether this
believing Gentile was the protectress assigned him by the Lord, Elijah
comforted her, and at the same time desired her first of all to bake him
a little cake משּׁם, i.e., of the last of the meal in the Kad and of the
oil in the pitcher, and then to bake for herself and her son, adding
this promise: Jehovah the God of Israel will not let the meal in the Kad
and the oil in the pitcher fail, till He sends rain upon the earth
again. And the widow did according to his word. She gave up the certain
for the uncertain, because she trusted the word of the Lord, and
received the reward of her believing confidence in the fact that during
the whole time of the drought she suffered from no want of either meal
or oil. This act of the pious Gentile woman, who had welcomed with a
simple heart the knowledge of the true God that had reached her from
Israel, must have been the source of strong consolation to Elijah in the
hour of conflict, when his faith was trembling because of the multitude
of idolaters in Israel. If the Lord Himself had raised up true
worshipers of His name among the Gentiles, his work in Israel could not
be put to shame.

The believing widow, however, received from the prophet not only a
material blessing, but a spiritual blessing also. For, as Christ tells
His unbelieving contemporaries to their shame ([Luk
4:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025)), Elijah was not sent to this
widow in order that he might be safely hidden at her house, although
this object was better attained thereby than by his remaining longer in
Israel; but because of her faith, namely, to strengthen and to increase
it, he was sent to her, and not to one of the many widows in Israel,
many of whom would also have received the prophet if they had been
rescued by him from the pressure of the famine. And the miraculous
increase of the meal and oil did not merely subserve the purpose of
keeping the prophet and the widow alive; but the relief of her bodily
need was also meant to be a preparatory means of quieting her spiritual
need as well. On the Chethb תתּן, see at [Kg1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#019). In [Kg1
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#015) the Keri והוּה היא is an
unnecessary emendation of the Chethb והיא הוּא; the feminine form ותּאכל
is occasioned primarily by the preceding verbs, and may be taken as an
indefinite neuter: "and there ate he and she." The offence which Thenius
has taken at ימים (days) has no foundation, if we do not understand the
sentence as referring merely to their eating once of the bread just
baked, but take it generally as signifying that in consequence of their
acting according to the word of Jehovah, they (Elijah, the widow, and
her family) ate for days, i.e., until God sent rain again ([Kg1
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#014)).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 17:17</span></span>

The widow's deceased son raised to life again. - [Kg1
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#017). After these events, when Elijah
had taken up his abode in the upper room of her house, her son fell
sick, so that he breathed out his life. וגו אשׁר עד, literally till no
breath remained in him. That these words do not signify merely a
death-like torpor, but an actual decease, is evident from what follows,
where Elijah himself treats the boy as dead, and the Lord, in answer to
his prayer, restores him to life again.

[Kg1 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018)

The pious woman discerned in this death a punishment from God for her
sin, and supposed that it had been drawn towards her by the presence of
the man of God, so that she said to Elijah, "What have we to do with one
another (מה־לּי ולך; cf. [Jdg 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#012);
[Sa2 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010)), thou man of God? Hast
thou come to me to bring my sin to remembrance (with God), and to kill
my son?" In this half-heathenish belief there spoke at the same time a
mind susceptible to divine truth and conscious of its sin, to which the
Lord could not refuse His aid. Like the blindness in the case of the man
born blind mentioned in John 9, the death of this widow's son was not
sent as a punishment for particular sins, but was intended as a medium
for the manifestation of the works of God in her ([Joh
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#003)), in order that she might learn
that the Lord was not merely the God of the Jews, but the God of the
Gentiles also ([Rom 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029)).

[Kg1 17:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#019)

Elijah told her to carry the dead child up to the chamber in which he
lived and lay it upon his bed, and then cried to the Lord, "Jehovah, my
God! hast Thou also brought evil upon the widow with whom I sojourn, to
slay her son?" These words, in which the word also refers to the other
calamities occasioned by the drought, contain no reproach of God, but
are expressive of the heartiest compassion for the suffering of his
benefactress and the deepest lamentation, which, springing from living
faith, pours out the whole heart before God in the hour of distress,
that I may appeal to Him the more powerfully for His aid. The meaning
is, "Thou, O Lord my God, according to Thy grace and righteousness,
canst not possibly leave the son of this widow in death." Such confident
belief carries within itself the certainty of being heard. The prophet
therefore proceeds at once to action, to restore the boy to life.

[Kg1 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#021)

He stretched himself (יתמדד) three times upon him, not to ascertain
whether there was still any life left in him, as Paul did in [Act
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#010), nor to warm the body of the
child and set its blood in circulation, as Elisha did with a dead child
([Kg2 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#034)), - for the action of
Elisha is described in a different manner, and the youth mentioned in
[Act 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#010) was only apparently dead, -
but to bring down the vivifying power of God upon the dead body, and
thereby support his own word and prayer.

(Note: "This was done, that the prophet's body might be the instrument
of the miracle, just as in other cases of miracle there was an
imposition of the hand." - Seb. Schmidt.)

He then cried to the Lord, "Jehovah, my God, I pray Thee let the soul of
this boy return within it." על־קרבּו, inasmuch as the soul as the vital
principle springs from above.

[Kg1 17:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#022)

The Lord heard this prayer: the boy came to life again; whereupon Elijah
gave him back to his mother.

[Kg1 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#024)

Through this miracle, in which Elijah showed himself as the forerunner
of Him who raiseth all the dead to life, the pious Gentile woman was
mightily strengthened in her faith in the God of Israel. She now not
only recognised Elijah as a man of God, as in [Kg1
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#018), but perceived that the word of
Jehovah in his mouth was truth, by which she confessed implicite her
faith in the God of Israel as the true God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 18](kg1018)

</div>
