<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1010)  [Next](kg1012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 11:1</span></span>

The idolatry into which Solomon fell in his old age appears so strange
in a king so wise and God-fearing as Solomon showed himself to be at the
dedication of the temple, that many have been quite unable to reconcile
the two, and have endeavoured to show either that Solomon's worship of
idols was psychologically impossible, or that the knowledge of God and
the piety attributed to him are unhistorical. But great wisdom and a
refined knowledge of God are not a defence against the folly of
idolatry, since this has its roots in the heart, and springs from
sensual desires and the lust of the flesh. The cause assigned in the
biblical account for Solomon's falling away from the Lord, is that he
loved many strange, i.e., foreign or heathen, wives, who turned his
heart from Jehovah to their own gods in his old age. Consequently the
falling away did not take place suddenly, but gradually, as Solomon got
old, and was not a complete renunciation of the worship of Jehovah, to
whom he offered solemn sacrifices three times a year, and that certainly
to the day of his death ([Kg1 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#025)),
but consisted simply in the fact that his heart was no longer thoroughly
devoted to the Lord ([Kg1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004)), and
that he inclined towards the idols of his foreign wives and built them
altars ([Kg1 11:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005)); that is to say,
it consisted merely in a syncretic mixture of Jehovah-worship and
idolatry, by which the worship which should be paid solely and
exclusively to the true God was not only injured, but was even turned
into idolatry itself, Jehovah the only true God being placed on a level
with the worthless gods of the heathen. - Love to foreign wives no doubt
presupposed an inclination to foreign customs; it was not, however,
idolatry in itself, but was still reconcilable with that sincere worship
of Jehovah which is attributed to Solomon in the earlier years of his
reign. At the same time it was a rock on which living faith and true
adherence to the Lord might at last suffer shipwreck. And we may even
infer from the repeated warnings of God ([Kg1
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#014); [Kg1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#012); [Kg1
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#004)), that from the earliest years of
his reign Solomon was in danger of falling into idolatry. This danger
did, indeed, spring in his case from his inclination to foreign customs;
but this inclination was again influenced by many of the circumstances
of his reign, which we must regard as contributing more remotely to his
eventual fall. And among the first of these we must place the splendour
and glory of his reign. Through long and severe conflicts David had
succeeded in conquering all the enemies of Israel, and had not only
helped his people to peace and prosperity, but had also raised the
kingdom to great power and glory. And Solomon inherited these fruits of
his father's reign. Under the blessings of peace he was not only able to
carry out the work of building a splendid temple, which his father had
urged upon him, but was also able, by a wise use of the sources already
existing and by opening new ones, still further to increase the
treasures which he had collected, and thereby to exalt the splendour of
his kingdom. The treaty with Hiram of Tyre, which enabled him to execute
the intended state buildings in Jerusalem, was followed by alliances for
the establishment of a widespread commerce both by sea and land, through
which ever increasing treasures of gold and silver, and other costly
goods, were brought to the king. As this accumulation of riches helped
to nourish his inclination to a love of show, and created a kind of
luxury which was hardly reconcilable with the simplicity of manners and
the piety of a servant of God, so the foreign trade led to a toleration
of heathen customs and religious views which could not fail to detract
from the reverence paid to Jehovah, however little the trade with
foreigners might be in itself at variance with the nature of the Old
Testament kingdom of God. And again, even the great wisdom of king
Solomon might also become a rock endangering his life of faith, not so
much in the manner suggested by J. J. Hess (Gesch. Dav. u. Sal. ii. p.
413), namely, that an excessive thirst for inquiry might easily seduce
him from the open and clearer regions of the kingdom of truth into the
darker ones of the kingdom of lies, i.e., of magic, and so lead him to
the paths of superstition; as because the widespread fame of his wisdom
brought distinguished and wise men from distant lands to Jerusalem and
into alliance with the king, and their homage flattered the vanity of
the human heart, and led to a greater and greater toleration of heathen
ways. But these things are none of them blamed in the Scriptures,
because they did not of necessity lead to idolatry, but might simply
give an indirect impulse to it, by lessening the wall of partition
between the worship of the true God and that of heathen deities, and
making apostasy a possible thing. The Lord Himself had promised and had
given Solomon wisdom, riches, and glory above all other kings for the
glorification of his kingdom; and these gifts of God merely contributed
to estrange his heart from the true God for the simple reason, that
Solomon forgot the commandments of the Lord and suffered himself to be
besotted by the lusts of the flesh, not only so as to love many foreign
wives, but so as also to take to himself wives from the nations with
which Israel was not to enter into any close relationship whatever.

[Kg1 11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)

Solomon's Love of Many Wives and Idolatry. - [Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001), [Kg1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#002).

"Solomon loved many foreign wives, and that along with the daughter of
Pharaoh." ואת־בּת פ, standing as it does between נכריּות ר נשׁים and
מואביּות, cannot mean "and especially the daughter of P.," as Thenius
follows the earlier commentators in supposing, but must mean, as in [Kg1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#025), "and that with, or along with,"
i.e., actually beside the daughter of Pharaoh. She is thereby
distinguished from the foreign wives who turned away Solomon's heart
from the Lord, so that the blame pronounced upon those marriages does
not apply to his marriage to the Egyptian princess (see at [Kg1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#001)). All that is blamed is that, in
opposition to the command in [Deu
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017), Solomon loved (1) many foreign
wives, and (2) Moabitish, Ammonitish, and other wives, of the nations
with whom the Israelites were not to intermarry. All that the law
expressly prohibited was marriage with Canaanitish women ([Deu
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001); [Exo
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016)); consequently the words "of the
nations," etc., are not to be taken as referring merely to the Sidonian
and Hittite women (J. D. Mich.); but this prohibition is extended here
to all the tribes enumerated in [Kg1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#002), just as in [Ezr
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002)., [Kg1
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#003); [Neh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023); not from a rigour surpassing
the law, but in accordance with the spirit of the law, namely, because
the reason appended to the law, ne in idololatriam a superstitiosis
mulieribus pellicerentur (Clericus), applied to all these nations. The
Moabites and Ammonites, moreover, were not to be received into the
congregation at all, not even to the tenth generation, and of the
Edomites only the children in the third generation were to be received
([Deu 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#004), [Deu
23:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#008)). There was all the less
reason, therefore, for permitting marriages with them, that is to say,
so long as they retained their nationality or their heathen ways. The
words בּכם...לא־תבאוּ are connected in form with [Jos
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#012), but, like the latter, they
really rest upon [Exo 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016) and [Deu
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001). In the last clause בּהם is used
with peculiar emphasis: Solomon clave to these nations, of which God had
said such things, to love, i.e., to enter into the relation of love or
into the marriage relation, with them. דּבק is used of the attachment of
a man to his wife ([Gen 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004)) and also
to Jehovah ([Deu 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#004); [Deu
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020), etc.).

[Kg1 11:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003)

[Kg1 11:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003) carry out still further
what has been already stated. In [Kg1
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003) the taking of many wives is first
explained. He had seven hundred שׂרות נשׁים, women of the first rank,
who were exalted into princesses, and three hundred concubines. These
are in any case round numbers, that is to say, numbers which simply
approximate to the reality, and are not to be understood as affirming
that Solomon had all these wives and concubines at the same time, but as
including all the women who were received into his harem during the
whole of his reign, whereas the sixty queens and eighty concubines
mentioned in [Sol 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008) are to be
understood as having been present in the court at one time. Even in this
respect Solomon sought to equal the rulers of other nations, if not to
surpass them.

(Note: Nevertheless these numbers, especially that of the wives who were
raised to the rank of princesses, appear sufficiently large to suggest
the possibility of an error in the numeral letters, although Oriental
rulers carried this custom to a very great length, as for example Darius
Codomannus, of whom it is related that he took with him 360 pellices on
his expedition against Alexander (see Curtius, iii. 3, 24; Athen.
Deipnos. iii. 1).

\- These women "inclined his heart," i.e., determined the inclination of
his heart.

[Kg1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004)

In the time of old age, when the flesh gained the supremacy over the
spirit, they turned his heart to other gods, so that it was no longer
wholly with Jehovah, his God. שׁלם, integer, i.e., entirely devoted to
the Lord (cf. [Kg1 8:61](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#061)), like the
heart of David his father, who had indeed grievously sinned, but had not
fallen into idolatry.

[Kg1 11:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005)

He walked after the Ashtaroth, etc. According to [Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007), the idolatry here condemned
consisted in the fact that he built altars to the deities of all his
foreign wives, upon which they offered incense and sacrifice to their
idols. It is not stated that he himself also offered sacrifice to these
idols. But even the building of altars for idols was a participation in
idolatry which was irreconcilable with true fidelity to the Lord.
עשׁתּרת, Astarte, was the chief female deity of all the Canaanitish
tribes; her worship was also transplanted from Tyre to Carthage, where
it flourished greatly. She was a moon-goddess, whom the Greeks and
Romans called sometimes Aphrodite, sometimes Urania, Σεληναίη,
Coelestis, and Juno (see the Comm. on [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013)). מלכּם, which is called מלך
(without the article) in [Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007),
and מלכּם in [Jer 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001), [Jer
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003), and [Amo
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#015), the abomination of the
Ammonites, must not be confounded with the Molech (המּלך, always with
the article) of the early Canaanites, to whom children were offered in
sacrifice in the valley of Benhinnom from the time of Ahaz onwards (see
the Comm. on [Lev 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021)), since they
had both of them their separate places of worship in Jerusalem (cf. [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010), [Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013)), and nothing is ever said about
the offering of children in sacrifice to Milcom; although the want of
information prevents us from determining the precise distinction between
the two. Milcom was at any rate related to the Chemosh of the Moabites
mentioned in [Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007); for Chemosh is
also described as a god of the Ammonites in [Jdg
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#024), whereas everywhere else he is
called the god of the Moabites ([Num
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029); [Amo
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#015), etc.). Chemosh was a sun-god,
who was worshipped as king of his people and as a god of war, and as
such is depicted upon coins with a sword, lance, and shield in his
hands, and with two torches by his side (see at [Num
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029)). The enumeration of the
different idols is incomplete; Chemosh being omitted in [Kg1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005), and Astarte, to whom Solomon
also built an altar in Jerusalem, according to [Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013), in [Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007). Still this incompleteness does
not warrant our filling up the supposed gaps by emendations of the text.
וגו/ .txe הרע ויּעשׂ, as in [Jdg 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011);
[Jdg 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#007), etc. יי אהרי מלּא, a
pregnant expression for יי אח ללכת מלּא, as in [Num
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#024); [Num
32:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#011), etc. - These places of
sacrifice (בּמה, see at [Kg1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002))
Solomon built upon the mountain in front, i.e., to the east, of
Jerusalem, and, according to the more precise account in [Kg2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013), to the right, that is to say,
on the southern side, of the Mount of Corruption, - in other words, upon
the southern peak of the Mount of Olives; and consequently this peak has
been called in church tradition from the time of Brocardus onwards,
either Mons Offensionis, after the Vulgate rendering of המּשׁחית הר in
[Kg2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013), or Mons Scandali, Mount of
Offence (vid., Rob. Pal. i. 565 and 566).

[Kg1 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#008)

"So did he for all his foreign wives," viz., built altars for their
gods; for instance, in addition to those already named, he also built an
altar for Astarte. These three altars, which are only mentioned in the
complete account in [Kg2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#013), were
sufficient for all the deities of the foreign wives. For the Hittites
and Edomites do not appear to have had any deities of their own that
were peculiar to themselves. The Hittites no doubt worshipped Astarte in
common with the Sidonians, and the Edomites probably worshipped Milcom.
In the whole of the Old Testament the only place in which gods of the
Edomite are mentioned is in [Ch2
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#020), and there no names are given.
Of course we must except Pharaoh's daughter, according to [Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001), and the remarks already made in
connection with that verse; for she brought no idolatrous worship to
Jerusalem, and consequently even in later times we do not find the
slightest trace of Egyptian idolatry in Jerusalem and Judah.

(Note: From the fact that these places of sacrifice still existed even
in the time of Josiah, notwithstanding the reforms of Asa, Jehoshaphat,
Joash, and Hezekiah, which rooted out all public idolatry, at least in
Jerusalem, Movers infers (Phniz. ii. 3, p. 207), and that not without
reason, that there was an essential difference between these sacred
places and the other seats of Israelitish idolatry which were
exterminated, namely, that in their national character they were also
the places of worship for the foreigners settled in and near Jerusalem,
e.g., the Sidonian, Ammonitish, and Moabitish merchants, which were
under the protection of treaties, since this is the only ground on which
we can satisfactorily explain their undisturbed continuance at
Jerusalem. But this would not preclude their having been built by
Solomon for the worship of his foreign wives; on the other hand, it is
much easier to explain their being built in the front of Jerusalem, and
opposite to the temple of Jehovah, if from the very first regard was had
to the foreigners who visited Jerusalem. The objection offered by
Thenius to this view, which Bertheau had already adopted (zur Gesch.
der. Isr. p. 323), has been shown by Bttcher (N. exeg. Aehrenl. ii. p.
95) to be utterly untenable.)

Burning incense (מקטירות) is mentioned before sacrificing (מזבּחות),
because vegetable offerings took precedence of animal sacrifices in the
nature-worship of Hither Asia (vid., Bhr, Symbolik, ii. pp. 237ff.).

[Kg1 11:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009)

Through this apostasy from the Lord his God, who had appeared to him
twice ([Kg1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#005). and [Kg1
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#002).) and had warned him against
idolatry (וצוּה is a continuation of the participle הנּראה), Solomon
drew down upon himself the anger of Jehovah. The emphasis lies upon the
fact that God had appeared to him Himself for the purpose of warning
him, and had not merely caused him to be warned by prophets, as
Theodoret has explained. In consequence of this, the following
announcement is made to him, no doubt through the medium of a prophet,
possibly Ahijah ([Kg1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029)): "Because
this has come into thy mind, and thou hast not kept my covenant, ... I
will tear the kingdom from thee and give it to thy servant; nevertheless
I will not do it in thy lifetime for thy father David's sake: howbeit I
will not tear away the whole kingdom; one tribe I will give to thy son."
In this double limitation of the threatened forfeiture of the kingdom
there is clearly manifested the goodness of God (δείκνυσι τὴν ἄμετρον
ἀγαθότητα - Theodoret); not, however, with reference to Solomon, who had
forfeited the divine mercy through his idolatry, but with regard to
David and the selection of Jerusalem: that is to say, not from any
special preference for David and Jerusalem, but in order that the
promise made to David (2 Sam 7), and the choice of Jerusalem as the
place where His name should be revealed which was connected with that
promise, might stand immoveably as an act of grace, which no sin of men
could overturn (vid., [Kg1 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#036)). For
אחד שׁבט see the Comm. on [Kg1 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031),
[Kg1 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#032).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 11:14</span></span>

Solomon's Opponents. - Although the punishment with which Solomon was
threatened for his apostasy was not to be inflicted till after his
death, the Lord raised up several adversaries even during his lifetime,
who endangered the peace of his kingdom, and were to serve as constant
reminders that he owed his throne and his peaceable rule over the whole
of the kingdom inherited from his father solely to the mercy, the
fidelity, and the long-suffering of God. - The rising up of Hadad and
Rezon took place even before the commencement of Solomon's idolatry, but
it is brought by יהוה ויּקם ([Kg1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014)) into logical connection with
the punishment with which he is threatened in consequence of that
idolatry, because it was not till a later period that it produced any
perceptible effect upon his government, yet it ought from the very first
to have preserved him from self-security.

[Kg1 11:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014)

The first adversary was Hadad the Edomite, a man of royal birth. The
name הדד (אדד in [Kg1 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#017), according
to an interchange of ה and א which is by no means rare) was also borne
by a prae-Mosaic king of Edom ([Gen
36:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#035)), from which we may see that it
was not an uncommon name in the royal family of the Edomites. But the
conjecture of Ewald and Thenius, that our Hadad was a grandson of Hadar,
the last of the kings mentioned there, is quite a groundless one, since
it rests upon the false assumption that Hadar (called Hadad in the
Chronicles by mistake) reigned in the time of David (see the Comm. on
[Gen 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#031).). הוּא before בּאדום
stands in the place of the relative אשׁר: "of royal seed he = who was of
the royal seed in Edom" (cf. Ewald, 332, a.).

[Kg1 11:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015)

When David had to do with the Edomites, ... Hadad fled. את היה is
analogous to עם היה, to have to do with any one, though in a hostile
sense, as in the phrase to go to war with (את) a person, whereas עם היה
generally means to be upon the side of any one. The correctness of the
reading בּהיוה is confirmed by all the ancient versions, which have
simply paraphrased the meaning in different ways. For Bttcher has
already shown that the lxx did not read בּהכּות, as Thenius supposes.
The words from בּעלות to the end of [Kg1
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#016) form explanatory circumstantial
clauses. On the circumstance itself, compare [Sa2
8:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013), with the explanation given
there. "The slain," whom Joab went to bury, were probably not the
Israelites who had fallen in the battle in the Salt valley ([Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013)), but those who had been slain on
the invasion of the land by the Edomites, and still remained unburied.
After their burial Joab defeated the Edomites in the valley of Salt, and
remained six months in Edom till he had cut off every male. "All Israel"
is the whole of the Israelitish army. "Every male" is of course only the
men capable of bearing arms, who fell into the hands of the Israelites;
for "Hadad and others fled, and the whole of the Idumaean race was not
extinct" (Clericus). Then Hadad fled, while yet a little boy, with some
of his father's Edomitish servants, to go to Egypt, going first of all
to Midian and thence to Paran. The country of Midian cannot be more
precisely defined, inasmuch as we meet with Midianites sometimes in the
peninsula of Sinai on the eastern side of the Elanitic Gulf, where
Edrisi and Abulfeda mention a city of Madian (see at [Exo
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)), and sometimes on the east of
the Moabitish territory (see at [Num
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#004) and [Jdg
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#001)). Here, at any rate, we must think
of the neighbourhood of the Elanitic Gulf, though not necessarily of the
city of Madian, five days' journey to the south of Aela; and probably of
the country to which Moses fled from Egypt. Paran is the desert of that
name between the mountains of Sinai and the south of Canaan (see at [Num
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#012)), through which the Haj route
from Egypt by Elath to Mecca still runs. Hadad would be obliged to take
the road by Elath in order to go to Egypt, even if he had taken refuge
with the Midianites on the east of Moab and Edom.

[Kg1 11:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#018)

From Paran they took men with them as guides through the desert. Thus
Hadad came to Egypt, where Pharaoh received him hospitably, and gave
them a house and maintenance (לחם), and also assigned him land (ארץ) to
cultivate for the support of the fugitives who had come with him, and
eventually, as he found great favour in his eyes, gave him for a wife
the sister of his own wife, queen Tachpenes, who bare him a son,
Genubath. This son was weaned by Tachpenes in the royal palace, and then
brought up among (with) the children of Pharaoh, the royal princes.
According to Rosellini and Wilkinson (Ges. Thes. p. 1500), Tachpenes was
also the name of a female deity of Egypt. The wife of Pharaoh is called
הגּבירה, i.e., the mistress among the king's wives, as being the
principal consort. In the case of the kings of Judah this title is given
to the king's mother, probably as the president in the harem, whose
place was taken by the reigning queen after her death. The weaning,
probably a family festival as among the Hebrews ([Gen
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#008)) and other ancient nations (vid.,
Dougtaei Analecta ss . i. 22f.), was carried out by the queen in the
palace, because the boy was to be thereby adopted among the royal
children, to be brought up with them.

[Kg1 11:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#021)

When Hadad heard in Egypt of the death of David and Joab, he asked
permission of Pharaoh to return to his own country. Pharaoh replied,
"What is there lacking to thee with me?" This answer was a pure
expression of love and attachment to Hadad, and involved the request
that he would remain. But Hadad answered, "No, but let me go." We are
not told that Pharaoh then let him go, but this must be supplied; just
as in [Num 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#032) we are not told what
Hobab eventually did in consequence of Moses' request, but it has to be
supplied from the context. The return of Hadad to his native land is
clearly to be inferred from the fact that, according to [Kg1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014), [Kg1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#025), he rose up as an adversary of
Solomon.

(Note: The lxx have supplied what is missing e conjectura: καὶ
ἀνέστρεψεν Ἄδερ (i.e., Hadad) εἰς τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ· αὑτὴ ἡ κακία ἥν
ἐποίησεν Ἄδερ· καὶ ἐβαρυθύμησεν Ἰσραήλ, καὶ ἐβασίλευσεν ἐν γῇ Ἐδώμ.
Thenius proposes to alter the Hebrew text accordingly, and draws this
conclusion, that "shortly after the accession of Solomon, Hadad, having
returned from Egypt, wrested from the power of the Israelites the
greatest part of Edom, probably the true mountain-land of Edom, so that
certain places situated in the plain, particularly Ezion-geber, remained
in the hands of the Israelites, and intercourse could be maintained with
that port through the Arabah, even though not quite without
disturbance." This conclusion, which is described as "historical," is
indeed at variance with [Kg1 22:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#048),
according to which Edom had no king even in the time of Jehoshaphat, but
only a vicegerent, and also with [Kg2
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020), according to which it was not
till the reign of Jehoshaphat's son Joram that Edom fell away from
Judah. But this discrepancy Thenius sets aside by the remark at [Kg1
22:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#048), that in Jehoshaphat's time the
family of Hadad had probably died out, and Jehoshaphat prudently availed
himself of the disputes which arose concerning the succession to enforce
Judah's right of supremacy over Edom, and to appoint first a vicegerent
and then a new king, though perhaps one not absolutely dependent upon
him. But this conjecture as to the relation in which Jehoshaphat stood
to Edom is proved to be an imaginary fiction by the fact that, although
this history does indeed mention a revolt of the Edomites from Judah (2
Chron 20; see at [Kg1 22:48](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#048)), it not
only says nothing whatever about the dying out of the royal family of
Hadad or about disputes concerning the succession, but it does not even
hint at them. - But with regard to the additions made to this passage by
the lxx, to which even Ewald (Gesch. iii. p. 276) attributes historical
worth, though without building upon them such confident historical
combinations as Thenius, we may easily convince ourselves of their
critical worthlessness, if we only pass our eye over the whole section
([Kg1 11:14-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014)), instead of merely
singling out those readings of the lxx which support our preconceived
opinions, and overlooking all the rest, after the thoroughly
unscientific mode of criticism adopted by a Thenius or Bttcher. For
example, the lxx have connected together the two accounts respecting the
adversaries Hadad and Rezon who rose up against Solomon ([Kg1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014) and [Kg1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023)), which are separated in the
Hebrew text, and have interpolated what is sated concerning Rezon in
[Kg1 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023) and [Kg1
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#024) after האדמי in [Kg1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014), and consequently have been
obliged to alter וגו שׂטן ויהי in [Kg1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#025) into καὶ ἦσαν Σατάν, because
they had previously cited Hadad and Rezon as adversaries, whereas in the
Hebrew text these words apply to Rezon alone. But the rest of [Kg1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#025), namely the words from ואת־רעה
onwards, they have not given till the close of [Kg1
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#022) (lxx); and in order to connect
this with what precedes, they have interpolated the words καὶ ἀνέστρεψεν
Ἄδερ εἰς τὴν γῆν αὐτοῦ. The Alexandrians were induced to resort to this
intertwining of the accounts concerning Hadad and Rezon, which are kept
separate in the Hebrew text, partly by the fact that Hadad and Rezon are
introduced as adversaries of Solomon with the very same words ([Kg1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014) and [Kg1
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023)), but more especially by the
fact that in [Kg1 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#025) of the Hebrew
text the injury done to Solomon by Hadad is merely referred to in a
supplementary manner in connection with Rezon's enterprise, and indeed
is inserted parenthetically within the account of the latter. The
Alexandrian translators did not know what to make of this, because they
did not understand ואת־הרעה and took ואת for זאת, αὕτη ἡ κακία. With
this reading ויּקץ which follows was necessarily understood as referring
to Hadad; and as Hadad was an Edomite, על־ארם ויּמלך had to be altered
into ἐβασίλευσεν ἐν γῇ Ἐδώμ. Consequently all the alterations of the lxx
in this section are simply the result of an arbitrary treatment of the
Hebrew text, which they did not really understand, and consist of a
collocation of all that is homogeneous, as every reader of this
translation who is acquainted with the original text must see so clearly
even at the very beginning of the chapter, where the number of Solomon's
wives is taken from [Kg1 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003) of the
Hebrew text and interpolated into [Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001), that, as Thenius observes, "the
true state of the case can only be overlooked from superficiality of
observation or from preconceived opinion.")

[Kg1 11:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023)

A second adversary of Solomon was Rezon, the son of Eliadah (for the
name see at [Kg1 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#018)), who had fled
from his lord Hadadezer, king of Zobah, and who became the captain of a
warlike troop (גּדוּד), when David smote them (אתם), i.e., the troops of
his lord ([Sa2 8:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003)). Rezon probably
fled from his lord for some reason which is not assigned, when the
latter was engaged in war with David, before his complete overthrow, and
collected together a company from the fugitives, with which he
afterwards marched to Damascus, and having taken possession of that
city, made himself king over it. This probably did not take place till
towards the close of David's reign, or even after his death, though it
was at the very beginning of Solomon's reign; for "he became an
adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon (i.e., during the whole of
his reign), and that with (beside) the mischief which Hadad did, and he
abhorred Israel (i.e., became disgusted with the Israelitish rule), and
became king over Aram." הדד אשׁר is an abbreviated expression, to which
עשׂה may easily be supplied, as it has been by the lxx (vid., Ewald,
292, b., Anm.). It is impossible to gather from these few words in what
the mischief done by Hadad to Solomon consisted.

(Note: What Josephus (Ant. viii. 7, 6) relates concerning an alliance
between Hadad and Rezon for the purpose of making hostile attacks upon
Israel, is merely an inference drawn from the text of the lxx, and
utterly worthless.)

Rezon, on the other hand, really obtained possession of the rule over
Damascus. Whether at the beginning or not till the end of Solomon's
reign cannot be determined, since all that is clearly stated is that he
was Solomon's adversary during the whole of his reign, and attempted to
revolt from him from the very beginning. If, however, he made himself
king of Damascus in the earliest years of his reign, he cannot have
maintained his sway very long, since Solomon afterwards built or
fortified Tadmor in the desert, which he could not have done if he had
not been lord over Damascus, as the caravan road from Gilead to Tadmor
(Palmyra) went past Damascus.

(Note: Compare Ewald, Gesch. iii. p. 276. It is true that more could be
inferred from [Ch2 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#003), if the
conquest of the city of Hamath by Solomon were really recorded in that
passage, as Bertheau supposes. But although על הזק is used to signify
the conquest of tribes or countries, we cannot infer the conquest of the
city of Hamath from the words, "Solomon went to Hamath Zobah עליה ויּחזק
and built Tadmor," etc., since all that עליה יחזק distinctly expresses
is the establishment of his power over the land of Hamath Zobah. And
this Solomon could have done by placing fortifications in that province,
because he was afraid of rebellion, even if Hamath Zobah had not
actually fallen away from his power.)

[Kg1 11:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026)

Attempted rebellion of Jeroboam the Ephraimite. - Hadad and Rezon are
simply described as adversaries (שׂטן) of Solomon; but in the case of
Jeroboam it is stated that "he lifted up his hand against the king,"
i.e., he stirred up a tumult or rebellion. בּ יד נשׂא is synonymous with
בּ יד נשׂא in [Sa2 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#028); [Sa2
20:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#021). It is not on account of this
rebellion, which was quickly suppressed by Solomon, but on account of
the later enterprise of Jeroboam, that his personal history is so
minutely detailed. Jeroboam was an Ephraimite (אפרתי, as in [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001); [Jdg
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005)) of Zereda, i.e., Zarthan, in the
Jordan valley (see [Kg1 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#046)), son of
a widow, and עבד, i.e., not a subject (Then.), but an officer, of
Solomon. All that is related of his rebellion against the king is the
circumstances under which it took place. אשׁר הדּבר יד, this is how it
stands with, as in [Jos 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#004). Solomon
built Millo ([Kg1 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015)), and closed
the rent (the defile?) in the city of David. פּרץ, ruptura, cannot be a
rent or breach in the wall of the city of David, inasmuch as חומה is not
added, and since the fortification of the city by David ([Sa2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009)) no hostile attack had ever been
made upon Jerusalem; but in all probability it denotes the ravine which
separated Zion from Moriah and Ophel, the future Tyropoeon, through the
closing of which the temple mountain was brought within the city wall,
and the fortification of the city of David was completed (Thenius,
Ewald, Gesch. iii. p. 330). Compare מפרץ, a gap in the coast, a bay. On
the occasion of this building, Jeroboam proved himself a חיל גּבּור,
i.e., a very able and energetic man; so that when Solomon saw the young
man, that he was doing work, i.e., urging it forward, he committed to
him the oversight over all the heavy work of the house of Joseph. It
must have been while occupying this post that he attempted a rebellion
against Solomon. This is indicated by וגו הדּבר יד in v. 27. According
to [Kg1 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004), the reason for the
rebellion is to be sought for in the appointment of the Ephraimites to
heavy works. This awakened afresh the old antipathy of that tribe to
Judah, and Jeroboam availed himself of this to instigate a rebellion.

[Kg1 11:29-36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029)

At that time the prophet Ahijah met him in the field and disclosed to
him the word of the Lord, that he should become king over Israel. ההיא
בּעת: at that time, viz., the time when Jeroboam had become overseer
over the heavy works, and not after he had already stirred up the
rebellion. For the whole of the account in [Kg1
11:29-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029) forms part of the explanation
of בּמּלך יד הרים which commences with [Kg1
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#027), so that ההיא בּעת ויהי is
closely connected with אתו ויּפקד in [Kg1
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#028), and there is no such gap in the
history as is supposed by Thenius, who builds upon this opinion most
untenable conjectures as to the intertwining of different sources. At
that time, as Jeroboam was one day going out of Jerusalem, the prophet
Ahijah of Shilo (Seilun) met him by the way (בּדּרך), with a new upper
garment wrapped around him; and when they were alone, he rent the new
garment, that is to say, his own, not Jeroboam's, as Ewald (Gesch. iii.
p. 388) erroneously supposes, into twelve pieces, and said to Jeroboam,
"Take thee ten pieces, for Jehovah saith, I will rend the kingdom out of
the hand of Solomon, and give thee ten tribes; and one tribe shall
remain to him (Solomon) for David's sake," etc. The new שׂלמה wen ehT .
was probably only a large four-cornered cloth, which was thrown over the
shoulders like the Heik of the Arabs, and enveloped the whole of the
upper portion of the body (see my bibl. Archol. ii. pp. 36, 37). By the
tearing of the new garment into twelve pieces, of which Jeroboam was to
take ten for himself, the prophetic announcement was symbolized in a
very emphatic manner. This symbolical action made the promise a
completed fact. "As the garment as torn in pieces and lay before the
eyes of Jeroboam, so had the division of the kingdom already taken place
in the counsel of God" (O. v. Gerlach). There was something significant
also in the circumstance that it was a new garment, which is stated
twice, and indicates the newness, i.e., the still young and vigorous
condition, of the kingdom (Thenius).

In the word of God explaining the action it is striking that Jeroboam
was to receive ten tribes, and the one tribe was to remain to Solomon
([Kg1 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031), [Kg1
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#032), [Kg1
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#035), [Kg1
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#036), as in [Kg1
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013)). The nation consisted of twelve
tribes, and Ahijah had torn his garment into twelve pieces, of which
Jeroboam was to take ten; so that there were two remaining. It is
evident at once from this, that the numbers are intended to be
understood symbolically and not arithmetically. Ten as the number of
completeness and totality is placed in contrast with one, to indicate
that all Israel was to be torn away from the house of David, as is
stated in [Kg1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020), "they made
Jeroboam king over all Israel," and only one single fragment was to be
left to the house of Solomon out of divine compassion. This one tribe,
however, is not Benjamin, the one tribe beside Judah, as Hupfeld (on Ps
80), C. a Lap., Mich., and others suppose, but, according to the
distinct statement in [Kg1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020), "the
tribe of Judah only." Nevertheless Benjamin belonged to Judah; for,
according to [Kg1 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#021), Rehoboam
gathered together the whole house of Judah and the tribe of Benjamin to
fight against the house of Israel (which had fallen away), and to bring
the kingdom again to himself. And so also in [Ch2
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#003) and [Ch2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#023) Judah and Benjamin are reckoned
as belonging to the kingdom of Rehoboam. This distinct prominence given
to Benjamin by the side of Judah overthrows the explanation suggested by
Seb. Schmidt and others, namely, that the description of the portion
left to Rehoboam as one tribe is to be explained from the fact that
Judah and Benjamin, on the border of which Jerusalem was situated, were
regarded in a certain sense as one, and that the little Benjamin was
hardly taken into consideration at all by the side of the great Judah.
For if Ahijah had regarded Benjamin as one with Judah, he would not have
torn his garment into twelve pieces, inasmuch as if Benjamin was to be
merged in Judah, or was not to be counted along with it as a distinct
tribe, the whole nation could only be reckoned as eleven tribes.
Moreover the twelve tribes did not so divide themselves, that Jeroboam
really received ten tribes and Rehoboam only one or only two. In reality
there were three tribes that fell to the kingdom of Judah, and only nine
to the kingdom of Israel, Ephraim and Manasseh being reckoned as two
tribes, since the tribe of Levi was not counted in the political
classification. The kingdom of Judah included, beside the tribe of
Judah, both the tribe of Benjamin and also the tribe of Simeon, the
territory of which, according to [Jos
19:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001), was within the tribe-territory
of Judah and completely surrounded by it, so that the Simeonites would
have been obliged to emigrate and give up their tribe-land altogether,
if they desired to attach themselves to the kingdom of Israel. But it
cannot be inferred from [Ch2 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009) and
[Ch2 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#006) that an emigration of the
whole tribe had taken place (see also at [Kg1
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#017)). On the other hand, whilst the
northern border of the tribe of Benjamin, with the cities of Bethel,
Ramah, and Jericho, fell to the kingdom of Jeroboam ([Kg1
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#029); [Kg1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#017), [Kg1
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#021); [Kg1
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034)), several of the cities of the
tribe of Dan were included in the kingdom of Judah, namely, Ziklag,
which Achish had presented to David, and also Zorea and Ajalon ([Ch2
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#010); [Ch2
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)), in which Judah obtained
compensation for the cities of Benjamin of which it had been deprived.

(Note: On the other hand, the fact that in [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002) Benjamin is placed between
Ephraim and Manasseh is no proof that it belonged to the kingdom of
Israel; for can this be inferred from the fact that Benjamin, as the
tribe to which Saul belonged, at the earlier split among the tribes took
the side of those which were opposed to David, and that at a still later
period a rebellion originated with Benjamin. For in [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002) the exposition is disputed, and
the jealousy of Benjamin towards Judah appears to have become extinct
with the dying out of the royal house of Saul. Again, the explanation
suggested by Oehler (Herzog's Cycl.) of the repeated statement that the
house of David was to receive only one tribe, namely, that there was not
a single whole tribe belonging to the southern kingdom beside Judah, is
by no means satisfactory. For it cannot be proved that any portion of
the tribe of Simeon ever belonged to the kingdom of Israel, although the
number ten was not complete without it. And it cannot be inferred from
[Ch2 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#009) that Simeonites had settled
outside their tribe-territory. And, as a rule, single families or
households that may have emigrated cannot be taken into consideration as
having any bearing upon the question before us, since, according to the
very same passage of the Chronicles, many members of the tribes of
Ephraim and Manasseh had emigrated to the kingdom of Judah.)

Consequently there only remained nine tribes for the northern kingdom.
For וגו עבדּי למען see at [Kg1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013).
For [Kg1 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033) compare [Kg1
11:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004). The plurals עזבוּני,
ישׁתּחווּ, and הלכוּ are not open to critical objection, but are used in
accordance with the fact, since Solomon did not practise idolatry alone,
but many in the nation forsook the Lord along with him. צדנין, with a
Chaldaic ending (see Ges. 87, 1, a.). In [Kg1
11:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#034) there follows a more precise
explanation: Solomon himself is not to lose the kingdom, but to remain
prince all his life, and his son is to retain one tribe; both out of
regard to David (vid., [Kg1 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#012),
[Kg1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013)). אשׁתנּוּ נשׂיא כּי, "but
I will set him for prince," inasmuch as leaving him upon the throne was
not merely a divine permission, but a divine act. "That there may be a
light to my servant David always before me in Jerusalem." This phrase,
which is repeated in [Kg1 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#004); [Kg2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#019); [Ch2
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#007), is to be explained from [Sa2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017), where David's regal rule is
called the light which God's grace had kindled for Israel, and affirms
that David was never to want a successor upon the throne.

[Kg1 11:37-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#037)

The condition on which the kingdom of Jeroboam was to last was the same
as that on which Solomon had also been promised the continuance of his
throne in [Kg1 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#014); [Kg1
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#012); [Kg1
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#004), namely, faithful observance of
the commandments of God. The expression, "be king over all that thy soul
desireth," is explained in what follows by "all Israel." It is evident
from this that Jeroboam had aspired after the throne. On the condition
named, the Lord would build him a lasting house, as He had done for
David (see at [Sa2 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#016)). In the case
of Jeroboam, however, there is no allusion to a lasting duration of the
ממלכה (kingdom) such as had been ensured to David; for the division of
the kingdom was not to last for ever, but the seed of David was simply
to be chastised. זאת למען, for this, i.e., because of the apostasy
already mentioned; "only not all the days," i.e., not for ever. ואענּה
is explanatory so far as the sense is concerned: "for I will humble."
Jeroboam did not fulfil this condition, and therefore his house was
extirpated at the death of his son ([Kg1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#028).).

[Kg1 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040)

[Kg1 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040) is a continuation of בּמּלך
יד ויּרם in [Kg1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026); for [Kg1
11:27-39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#027) contain simply an explanation
of Jeroboam's lifting up his hand against Solomon. It is obvious from
this that Jeroboam had organized a rebellion against Solomon; and also,
as [Kg1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029) is closely connected
with [Kg1 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#028), that this did not
take place till after the prophet had foretold his reigning over ten
tribes after Solomon's death. But this did not justify Jeroboam's
attempt; nor was Ahijah's announcement an inducement or authority to
rebel. Ahijah's conduct as perfectly analogous to that of Samuel in the
case of Saul, and is no more to be attributed to selfish motives than
his was, as though the prophetic order desired to exalt itself above the
human sovereign (Ewald; see, on the other hand, Oehler's article in
Herzog's Cycl.). For Ahijah expressly declared to Jeroboam that Jehovah
would let Solomon remain prince over Israel during the remainder of his
life. This deprived Jeroboam of every pretext for rebellion. Moreover
the prophet's announcement, even without this restriction, gave him no
right to seize with his own hand and by means of rebellion upon that
throne which God intended to give to him. Jeroboam might have learned
how he ought to act under these circumstances from the example of David,
who had far more ground, according to human opinion, for rebelling
against Saul, his persecutor and mortal foe, and who nevertheless, even
when God had delivered his enemy into his hand, so that he might have
slain him, did not venture to lay his hand upon the anointed of the
Lord, but waited in pious submission to the leadings of his God, till
the Lord opened the way to the throne through the death of Saul. By the
side of David's behaviour towards Saul the attempt of Jeroboam has all
the appearance of a criminal rebellion, so that Solomon would have been
perfectly justified in putting him to death, if Jeroboam had not escaped
from his hands by a flight into Egypt. - On Shishak see at [Kg1
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#025).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 11:41</span></span>

Conclusion of the history of Solomon. - Notice of the original works, in
which further information can be found concerning his acts and his
wisdom (see the Introduction); the length of his reign, viz., forty
years; his death, burial, and successor. Solomon did not live to a very
great age, since he was not more than twenty years old when he ascended
the throne. - Whether Solomon turned to the Lord again with all his
heart, a question widely discussed by the older commentators (see
Pfeifferi Dubia vex. p. 435; Buddei hist. eccl. ii. p. 273ff.), cannot
be ascertained from the Scriptures. If the Preacher Koheleth) is
traceable to Solomon so far as the leading thoughts are concerned, we
should find in this fact an evidence of his conversion, or at least a
proof that at the close of his life Solomon discovered the vanity of all
earthly possessions and aims, and declared the fear of God to be the
only abiding good, with which a man can stand before the judgment of
God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](kg1012)

</div>
