<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1011)  [Next](kg1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 12:0</span></span>

II\. History of the Kingdoms of Israel and Judah to the Destruction of
the Former - 1 Kings 12-2 Kings 17

After the death of Solomon the Israelitish kingdom of God was rent
asunder, through the renunciation of the Davidic sovereignty by the ten
tribes, into the two kingdoms of Israel (the ten tribes) and Judah; and
through this division not only was the external political power of the
Israelitish state weakened, but the internal spiritual power of the
covenant nation was deeply shaken. And whilst the division itself gave
rise to two small and weak kingdoms in the place of one strong nation,
the power of both was still further shaken by their attitude towards
each other. - The history of the two kingdoms divides itself into three
epochs. In the first epoch, i.e., the period from Jeroboam to Omri in
Israel, and from Rehoboam to Asa in Judah (1 Kings 12-16), they
maintained a hostile attitude towards each other, until Israel sustained
a severe defeat in a great war with Judah; and on the renewal of its
attacks upon Judah, king Asa called the Syrians to his help, and thereby
entangled Israel in long and severe conflicts with this powerful
neighbouring state. The hostility terminated in the second epoch, under
Ahab and his sons Ahaziah and Joram in Israel, and under Jehoshaphat,
Joram, and Ahaziah of Judah, since the two royal families connected
themselves by marriage, and formed an alliance for the purpose of a
joint attack upon their foreign foes, until the kings of both kingdoms,
viz., Joram of Israel and Ahaziah of Judah, were slain at the same time
by Jehu (1 Kings 17-2 Kings 10:27). This period of union was followed in
the third epoch, from Jehu in Israel and Joash in Judah onwards, by
further estrangement and reciprocal attacks, which led eventually to the
destruction of the kingdom of Israel by the Assyrians through the
untheocratical policy of Ahaz.

If we take a survey of the attitude of the two kingdoms towards the
Lord, the invisible God-King of His people, during these three epochs,
to all appearance the idolatry was stronger in the kingdom of Judah than
in the kingdom of Israel. For in the latter it is only under Ahab and
his two sons, under whom the worship of Baal was raised into the state
religion at the instigation of Jezebel the Phoenician wife of Ahab, that
we meet with the actual worship of idols. Of the other kings both before
and afterwards, all that is related is, that they walked in the ways of
Jeroboam, and did not desist from his sin, the worship of the calves. In
the kingdom of Judah, on the other hand, out of thirteen kings, only
five were so truly devoted to the Lord that they promoted the worship of
Jehovah and opposed idolatry (viz., Asa, Jehoshaphat, Uzziah, Jotham,
and Hezekiah). Of the others, it is true that Joash and Amaziah walked
for a long time in the ways of the Lord, but in the closing years of
their reign they forsook the God of their fathers to serve idols and
worship them ([Ch2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#018) and [Ch2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014).). Even Rehoboam was
strengthened at the outset in the worship of Jehovah by the Levites who
emigrated from the kingdom of the ten tribes to Judah; but in the course
of three years he forsook the law of the Lord, and Judah with him, so
that altars of high places, Baal columns, and Asherah idols, were set up
on every hill and under every green tree, and there were even male
prostitutes in the land, and Judah practised all the abominations of the
nations that were cut off before Israel ([Kg1
14:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023); [Ch2
11:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#013); [Ch2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)). In all these sins of his father
Abijam also walked ([Kg1 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#003)). At a
later period, in the reign of Joram, the worship of Baal was
transplanted from Israel to Judah and Jerusalem, and was zealously
maintained by Ahaziah and his mother Athaliah. It grew still worse under
Ahaz, who even went so far as to set up an idolatrous altar in the court
of the temple and to close the temple doors, for the purpose of
abolishing altogether the legal worship of Jehovah. But notwithstanding
this repeated spread of idolatry, the apostasy from the Lord was not so
great and deep in the kingdom of Judah as in the kingdom of Israel. This
is evident from the fact that idolatry could not strike a firm root
there, inasmuch as the kings who were addicted to it were always
followed by pious and God-fearing rulers, who abolished the idolatrous
abominations, and nearly all of whom had long reigns; so that during the
253 years which intervened between the division of the kingdom and the
destruction of the kingdom of the ten tribes, idolatry did not prevail
in Judah for much more than fifty-three years,

(Note: Namely, fourteen years under Rehoboam, three under Abijah, six
under Joram, one under Ahaziah, six under Athaliah, and sixteen under
Ahaz, - in all forty-six years; to which we have also to add the closing
years of the reigns of Joash and Amaziah.)

and for about 200 years the worship of the true God was maintained
according to the commandment of the law. This constant renewal of a
victorious reaction against the foreign deities shows very clearly that
the law of God, with its ordinances and institutions for divine worship,
had taken firm and deep root in the people and kingdom, and that the
reason why idolatry constantly revived and lifted up its head afresh
was, that the worship of Jehovah prescribed in the law made no
concessions to the tendency to idolatry in hearts at enmity against God.
It was different with the kingdom of the ten tribes. There the fact that
idolatry only appeared in the reigns of Ahab and his sons and
successors, is to be accounted for very simply from the attitude of that
kingdom towards the Lord and His lawful worship. Although, for instance,
the secession of the ten tribes from the house of David was threatened
by God, as a punishment that would come upon Solomon and his kingdom on
account of Solomon's idolatry; on the part of the rebellious tribes
themselves it was simply the ripe fruit of their evil longing for a less
theocratic and more heathen kingdom, and nothing but the work of
opposition to the royal house appointed by Jehovah, which had already
shown itself more than once in the reign of David, though is had been
suppressed again by the weight of his government, which was strong in
the Lord.

This opposition became open rebellion against the Lord, when Jeroboam,
its head, gave the ten tribes a religious constitution opposed to the
will of God for the purpose of establishing his throne, and not only
founded a special sanctuary for his subjects, somewhat after the model
of the tabernacle or of the temple at Jerusalem, but also set up golden
calves as symbols and images of Jehovah the invisible God, to whom no
likeness can be made. This image-worship met the wishes and religious
cravings of the sensual and carnally-minded people, because it so far
filled up the gap between the legal worship of Jehovah and the worship
of the nature-deities, that the contrast between Jehovah and the Baalim
almost entirely disappeared, and the principal ground was thereby
removed for the opposition on the part of the idolatrous nation to the
stringent and exclusive worship of Jehovah. In this respect the worship
of the calves worked more injuriously upon the religious and moral life
of the nation than the open worship of idols. This sin of Jeroboam is
therefore "the ground, the root and cause of the very sinful development
of the kingdom of Israel, which soon brought down the punishment of God,
since even from the earliest time one judgment after another fell openly
upon the kingdom. For beside the sin of Jeroboam, that which was the
ground of its isolation continued to increase, and gave rise to tumult,
opposing aspirants to the throne, and revolutionary movements in the
nation, so that the house of Israel was often split up within itself"
(Ziegler). Therefore the judgment, with which even from the time of
Moses the covenant nation had been threatened in case of obstinate
rebellion against its God, namely the judgment of dispersion among the
heathen, fell upon the ten tribes much earlier than upon Judah, because
Israel had filled up the measure of sin earlier than Judah.

The chronological computation of this period, both as a whole and in its
separate details, is one of the more difficult features connected with
this portion of the history of the Israelitish kingdom. As our books
give not only the length of time that every king both of Israel and
Judah reigned, but also the time when every king of Israel ascended the
throne, calculated according to the year of the reign of the
contemporaneous king of Judah, and vice versa, these accounts
unquestionably furnish us with very important help in determining the
chronology of the separate data; but this again is rendered difficult
and uncertain by the fact, that the sum-total of the years of the
several kings is greater, as a rule, than the number of years that they
can possibly have reigned according to the synchronistic accounts of the
contemporaneous sovereigns in the other kingdom. Chronologists have
therefore sought from time immemorial to reconcile the discrepancies by
assuming inaccuracies in the accounts, or regencies and interregna. The
necessity for such assumptions is indisputable, from the fact that the
discrepancies in the numbers of the years are absolutely irreconcilable
without them.

(Note: This is indirectly admitted even by O. Wolff (in his Versuch die
Widersprche in den Jahrreihen der Knige Juda's und Israel's und andere
Differenzen in der bibl. Chronologie auszugleichen; Theol. Stud. u.
Krit. 1858, p. 625ff.), though for the most part he declares himself
opposed to such assumptions as arbitrary loopholes, inasmuch as, with
his fundamental principle to adhere firmly to the years of the reigns of
the kings of Judah as normative, he is only able to effect a
reconciliation by shortening at his pleasure the length of the reigns
given in the text for the kings of Israel in the period extending from
Rehoboam to the death of Ahaziah of Judah, and in the following period
by arbitrarily interpolating a thirty-one years' interregnum of the
Israelitish kings in the kingdom of Judah between Amaziah and Uzziah.)

But if the application of them in the several cases is not to be
dependent upon mere caprice, the reconciliation of the sum-totals of the
years that the different kings reigned with the differences which we
obtain from the chronological data in the synchronistic accounts must be
effected upon a fixed and well-founded historical principle, regencies
and interregna being only assumed in cases where there are clear
indications in the text. Most of the differences can be reconciled by
consistently observing and applying the principle pointed out in the
Talmud, viz., that the years of the kings are reckoned from Nisan to
Nisan, and that with such precision, that even a single day before or
after Nisan is reckoned as equal to a year, - a mode of reckoning which
is met with even in the New Testament, e.g., in the statement that Jesus
rose from the dead after three days, or on the third day, and also in
the writings of Josephus, so that it is no doubt an early Jewish custom,

(Note: Compare Gemara babyl. tract. השנה ראש, c. i. fol. 3, p. 1, ed.
Amstel.: למלכים להם מונין אין מניסן אלא, "non numerant in regibus nisi a
Nisano" (i.e., regum annos nonnisi a Nisano numerant). After quoting
certain passages, he says as a proof of this, ישראל למלכי אלא שׁני לא
חסדא אמר ר, "dixit R. Chasda: hoc non docent nisi de regibus
Israelitarum." - Ibid. fol. 2, p. 2; השנה ראש ניסן שנה השוב בשנה אחד
ויום למלכים, "Nisanus initium anni regibus, ac dies quidem unus in anno
(videl. post calendas Nisani) instar anni computatur." - Ibid.: שנה חשוב
שנה בסוף אחד יום, "unus dies in fine anni pro anno computatur." For the
examples of the use of this mode of calculation in Josephus, see
Wieseler, chronol. Synopse der vier Evangelien (Ham. 1852), p. 52ff.
They are sufficient of themselves to refute the assertion of Joach.
Hartmann, Systema chronol. bibl., Rostoch. 1777, p. 253f., that this is
a mere invention of the Rabbins and later commentators, even though the
biblical writers may not have carried it out to such an extent as to
reckon one single day before or after the commencement of Nisan as equal
to a whole year, as is evident from [Kg2
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#017) and [Kg2
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#023).)

\- for, according to this, it is not necessary to assume a single
interregnum in the kingdom of Judah, and only one regency (that of Joram
with his father Jehoshaphat), which is clearly indicated in the text
([Kg2 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#016)); and in the kingdom of
Israel there is no necessity to assume a single regency, and only two
interregna (the first after Jeroboam II, the second between Pekah and
Hoshea).

If, for example, we arrange the chronological data of the biblical text
upon this principle, we obtain for the period between the division of
the kingdom and the Babylonian captivity the following table, which only
differs from the statements in the text in two instances,

(Note: Namely, in the fact that the commencement of the reign of
Jehoahaz of Israel is placed in the twenty-second year of Joash of
Judah, and not in the twenty-third, according to [Kg2
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#001), and that that of Azariah or
Uzziah of Judah is placed in the fifteenth year of Jeroboam of Israel,
and not the twenty-seventh, according to [Kg2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001). The reasons for this will be
given in connection with the passages themselves.)

and has a guarantee of its correctness in the fact that it coincides
with the well-established chronological data of the universal history of
the ancient world.

(Note: Not only with the ordinary chronological calculation as to the
beginning and end of this entire period, which has been adopted in most
text-books of the biblical history, and taken from Usserii Annales Vet.
et Novi Test., but also with such data of ancient history as have been
astronomically established. For the fourth year of Jehoiakim, with which
the captivity or seventy years' servitude of the Jews in Babylon
commences, coincides with the twenty-first year of the reign of
Nabopolasar, in the fifth year of whose reign an eclipse of the moon,
recorded in Almagest, was observed, which eclipse, according to the
calculation of Ideler (in the Abhdll. der Berliner Academie der
Wissensch. fr histor. Klasse of the year 1814, pp. 202 and 224), took
place on April 22 of the year 621 b.c. Consequently the twenty-first
year of Nabopolasar, in which he died, coincides with the year 605 b.c.;
and the first conquest of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, which occurred
before the death of Nabopolasar, took place in the year 606 b.c. -
Compare with this Marc. Niebuhr's Geschichte Assurs und Babels, p. 47.
Among other things, this scholar observes, at p. 5, note 1, that "the
whole of the following investigation has given us no occasion whatever
to cherish any doubts as to the correctness of the narratives and
numbers in the Old Testament;" and again, at p. 83ff., he has
demonstrated the agreement of the chronological data of the Old
Testament from Azariah or Uzziah to the captivity with the Canon of
Ptolemy, and in so doing has only deviated two years from the numbers
given in our chronological table, by assigning the battle at Carchemish
to the year 143 aera Nabonas., i.e., 605 b.c., the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar, 144 aer. Nab., or 604 b.c., and the destruction of
Jerusalem and the temple to the year 162 aer. Nab., or 586 b.c., - a
difference which arises chiefly from the fact that Niebuhr reckons the
years of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar given in the Old Test. from the
death of Nabopolasar in the year 605, and assumes that the first year of
Nebuchadnezzar corresponded to the year 605 b.c.)

1\. From the Division of the Kingdom to the Ascent of the Throne by Ahab
in the 38th Year of Asa King of Judah - 1 Kings 12-16:28

This epoch embraces only fifty-seven years, which are filled up in the
kingdom of Judah by the reigns of three kings, and in the kingdom of
Israel by six rulers from four different houses, Jeroboam's sin of
rebellion against the ordinance and commandment of God having produced
repeated rebellions, so that one dynasty was ever rising up to overthrow
and exterminate another. - Commencing with the secession of the ten
tribes from Rehoboam, we have first of all an account of the founding of
the kingdom of Israel (1 Kings 12), and of the predictions of the
prophets concerning the introduction of the calf-worship (1 Kings 13)
and the rejection of Jeroboam and his house by God (1 Kings 14:1-20);
and after this the most important facts connected with the reigns of
Rehoboam, Abijam, and Asa are given (1 Kings 14:21-15:24); and, finally,
a brief history of the kingdom of Israel from the ascent of the throne
by Nadab to the death of Omri (1 Kings 15:25-16:28).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 12:1</span></span>

The jealousy which had prevailed from time immemorial between Ephraim
and Judah, the two most powerful tribes of the covenant nation, and had
broken out on different occasions into open hostilities ([Jdg
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#001).; [Sa2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#009); [Sa2
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#042).), issued, on the death of
Solomon, in the division of the kingdom; ten tribes, headed by Ephraim,
refusing to do homage to Rehoboam, the son and successor of Solomon, and
choosing Jeroboam the Ephraimite as their king. Now, although the
secession of the ten tribes from the royal house of David had been
ordained by God as a punishment for Solomon's idolatry, and not only had
Solomon been threatened with this punishment, but the sovereignty over
ten tribes had been promised to Jeroboam by the prophet Ahijah, whilst
the secession itself was occasioned by Rehoboam's imprudence; yet it was
essentially a rebellion against the Lord and His anointed, a conspiracy
on the part of these tribes against Judah and its king Rehoboam. For
apart from the fact that the tribes had no right to choose at their
pleasure a different king from the one who was the lawful heir to the
throne of David, the very circumstance that the tribes who were
discontented with Solomon's government did not come to Jerusalem to do
homage to Rehoboam, but chose Sichem as the place of meeting, and had
also sent for Jeroboam out of Egypt, showed clearly enough that it was
their intention to sever themselves from the royal house of David; so
that the harsh reply given by Rehoboam to their petition that the
service imposed upon them might be lightened, furnished them with the
desired opportunity for carrying out the secession upon which they had
already resolved, and for which Jeroboam was the suitable man. And we
have already shown at [Kg1 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040) that
the promise of the throne, which Jeroboam had already received from God,
neither warranted him in rebelling against Solomon, nor in wresting to
himself the government over the tribes that were discontented with the
house of David after Solomon's death. The usurpation of the throne was
therefore Jeroboam's first sin (vv. 1-24), to which he added a second
and much greater one immediately after his ascent of the throne, namely,
the establishment of an unlawful worship, by which he turned the
political division into a religious schism and a falling away from
Jehovah the God-King of His people ([Kg1
12:25-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025)).

[Kg1 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001)

Secession of the Ten Tribes (cf., 2 Chron 10:1-11:4). - [Kg1
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#001). Rehoboam went to Shechem,
because all Israel had come thither to make him king. "All Israel,"
according to what follows (cf., [Kg1
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020), [Kg1
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#021)), was the ten tribes beside
Judah and Benjamin. The right of making king the prince whom God had
chosen, i.e., of anointing him and doing homage to him (compare [Ch1
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038), where המליך alternates with
למלך משׁך, ([Sa2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004); [Sa2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003)), was an old traditional right in
Israel, and the tribes had exercised it not only in the case of Saul and
David ([Sa1 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015); [Sa2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#004); [Sa2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003)), but in that of Solomon also
([Ch1 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#022)). The ten tribes of Israel
made use of this right on Rehoboam's ascent of the throne; but instead
of coming to Jerusalem, the residence of the king and capital of the
kingdom, as they ought to have done, and doing homage there to the
legitimate successor of Solomon, they had gone to Sichem, the present
Nabulus (see at [Gen 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006) and [Gen
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)), the place where the ancient
national gatherings were held in the tribe of Ephraim ([Jos
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#001)), and where Abimelech the son of
Gideon had offered himself as king in the time of the Judges ([Jdg
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#001).). On the choice of Sichem as the
place for doing homage Kimchi has quite correctly observed, that "they
sought an opportunity for transferring the government to Jeroboam, and
therefore were unwilling to come to Jerusalem, but came to Sichem, which
belonged to Ephraim, whilst Jeroboam was an Ephraimite." If there could
be any further doubt on the matter, it would be removed by the fact that
they had sent for Jeroboam the son of Nebat to come from Egypt, whither
he had fled from Solomon ([Kg1 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040)),
and attend this meeting, and that Jeroboam took the lead in the meeting,
and no doubt suggested to those assembled the demand which they should
lay before Rehoboam ([Kg1 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004)).

(Note: "This pretext was no doubt furnished to the people by Jeroboam,
who, because he had formerly been placed above Ephraim as superintendent
of the works, could most craftily suggest calumnies, from the things
which he knew better than others." - (Seb. Schmidt.)

[Kg1 12:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#002)

The construction of [Kg1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#002), [Kg1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#003) is a complicated one, since it is
only in ויּבאוּ in [Kg1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#003) that the
apodosis occurs to the protasis וגו כּשׁמע ויהי, and several
circumstantial clauses intervene. "And it came to pass, when Jeroboam
the son of Nebat heard, sc., that Solomon was dead and Rehoboam had been
made king ... he was still in Egypt, however, whither he had fled from
king Solomon; and as Jeroboam was living in Egypt, they had sent and
called him ... that Jeroboam came and the whole congregation of Israel,"
etc. On the other hand, in [Ch2 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#002)
the construction is very much simplified, and is rendered clearer by the
alteration of בּמצרים יר ויּשׁב, "and Jeroboam dwelt in Egypt," into
ממּצרים יר ויּשׁב, "that Jeroboam returned from Egypt."

(Note: At the same time, neither this explanation in the Chronicles, nor
the fact that the Vulgate has the same in our text also, warrants our
making alterations in the text, for the simple reason that the deviation
in the Chronicles and Vulgate is so obviously nothing but an elucidation
of our account, which is more obscurely expressed. There is still less
ground for the interpolation, which Thenius has proposed, from the
clauses contained in the Septuagint partly after [Kg1
11:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#043), partly in 1 Kings 12 between
[Kg1 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#024) and [Kg1
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025), and in an abbreviated form once
more after [Kg1 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#034), so as to obtain
the following more precise account of the course of the rebellion which
Jeroboam instigated, and of which we have not a very minute description
in [Kg1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026) : "Solomon having
appointed Jeroboam superintendent of the tributary labour in Ephraim,
for the purpose of keeping in check the Sichemites, who were probably
pre-eminently inclined to rebel, directed him to make a fortress, which
already existed upon Mount Gerizim under the name of Millo, into a
strong prison (צרירה( ), from which the whole district of Gerizim, the
table-land, received the name of the land of Zerirah, and probably made
him governor of it and invested him with great power. When holding this
post, Jeroboam rebelled against Solomon, but was obliged to flee. Having
now returned from Egypt, he assembled the members of his own tribe, and
with them he first of all besieged this prison, for the purpose of
making himself lord of the surrounding district. Now this castle was the
citadel of the city in which Jeroboam was born, to which he had just
returned, and from which they fetched him to take part in the
negotiations with Rehoboam. Its ruins are still in existence, according
to Robinson (Pal. iii. p. 99), and from all that has been said it was
not called Zeredah ([Kg1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026)), but
(after the castle) Zerira." This is what Thenius says. But if we read
the two longer additions of the lxx quite through, we shall easily see
that the words ᾠκοδόμησε τῷ Σαλωμὼν τὴν ἐν ὄρει Ἐφραΐ́μ do not give any
more precise historical information concerning the building of the Millo
mentioned in [Kg1 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#027), since this
verse is repeated immediately afterwards in the following form: οὖτος
ᾠκοδόμησε τὴν ἄκραν ἐν ταῖς ἄρσεσιν οἴκου Ἐφραΐ́μ οὖτος συνέκλεισε τὴν
πόλιν Δαβίδ, - but are nothing more than a legendary supplement made by
an Alexandrian, which has no more value than the statement that
Jeroboam's mother was named Sarira and was γυνὴ πόρνη. The name of the
city Σαριρά is simply the Greek form of the Hebrew צררה, which the lxx
have erroneously adopted in the place of צרדה, as the reading in [Kg1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026). But in the additional clauses
in question in the Alexandrian version, Σαριρά is made into the
residence of king Jeroboam and confounded with Thirza; what took place
at Thirza according to [Kg1 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#017) (of
the Hebrew text) being transferred to Sarira, and the following account
being introduced, viz., that Jeroboam's wife went ἐκ Σαριρά to the
prophet Ahijah to consult him concerning her sick son, and on returning
heard of the child's death as she was entering the city of Sarira. -
These remarks will be quite sufficient to prove that the Alexandrian
additions have not the least historical worth.)

[Kg1 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#004)

The persons assembled desired that the burdens which Solomon had laid
upon them should be lightened, in which case they would serve Rehoboam,
i.e., would yield obedience to him as their king. אביך מעבדת הקל, "make
light away from the service of thy father," i.e., reduce what was
imposed upon us by thy father. Solomon had undoubtedly demanded greater
performances from the people than they had previously been accustomed
to, not only to meet the cost of maintaining the splendour of his court,
but also and principally to carry out his large and numerous buildings.
But in return for this, he had secured for his people not only the
blessings of undisturbed peace throughout his whole reign, but also
great wealth from the trade and tribute of the subjugated nations, so
that there cannot have been any well-grounded occasion for complaint.
But when, as is too often the case, men overlooked the advantages and
blessings which they owed to his government, and fixed their attention
in a one-sided manner merely upon the performances which the king
demanded, it might appear as though he had oppressed his people with
excessive burdens.

[Kg1 12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#005)

In order that the request of the tribes might be maturely weighed,
Rehoboam directed them to appear before him again in three days, and in
the meantime discussed the matter with the older counsellors,who had
served his father.

[Kg1 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#007)

These counsellors said (the singular וידבּר is used- because one of them
spoke in the name of the whole), "If thou wilt be subservient to this
people to-day (now), and servest them, and hearkenest to them, ... they
will serve thee for ever."

[Kg1 12:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#008)

But Rehoboam forsook this advice, and asked the younger ministers who
had grown up with him. They advised him to overawe the people by harsh
threats. "My little finger is stronger than my father's loins." קטי,
from קטן, littleness, i.e., the little finger (for the form, see Ewald,
255, b.), - a figurative expression in the sense of, I possess much
greater might than my father. "And now, my father laid a heavy yoke upon
you, and I will still further add to your yoke (lay still more upon
you): my father chastised you with whips, I will chastise you with
scorpions." עקרבּים, scorpiones, are whips with barbed points like the
point of a scorpion's sting.

(Note: The Rabbins give this explanation: virgae spinis instructae.
Isidor. HisPal. Origg. v. c. 27, explains it in a similar manner: virga
si est nodosa vel aculeata, scorpio vocatur. The Targ. and Syr., on the
other hand, מרגגין, Syr. mārganā', i.e., the Greek μάραγνα, a whip. See
the various explanations in Bochart, Hieroz. iii. p. 554f. ed. Ros.)

This advice was not only imprudent, "considering all the circumstances"
(Seb. Schmidt), but it was unwise in itself, and could only accelerate
the secession of the discontented. It was the language of a tyrant, and
not of a ruler whom God had placed over His people. This is shown in
[Kg1 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#013), [Kg1
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#014) : "The king answered the people
harshly, and forsook the counsel of the old men," i.e., the counsellors
who were rich in experience, and spoke according to the counsels of the
young men, who flattered his ambition. It is very doubtful, indeed,
whether the advice of the old men would have been followed by so
favourable a result; it might probably have been so for the moment, but
not for a permanency. For the king could not become the עגלים of the
people, serve the people, without prejudicing the authority entrusted to
him by God; though there is no doubt that if he had consented to such
condescension, he would have deprived the discontented tribes of all
pretext for rebellion, and not have shared in the sin of their
secession.

[Kg1 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#015)

"And the king hearkened not to the people (to their request for their
burdens to be reduced), for it was יהוה מעם סבּה, a turning from the
Lord, that He might establish His word" ([Kg1
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031).), i.e., by a divine decree,
that Rehoboam contributed to the fulfilment of the counsel of God
through his own folly, and brought about the accomplishment of the
sentence pronounced upon Solomon.

[Kg1 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#016)

The harsh word supplied the discontented with an apparently just
occasion for saying, "What portion have we in David? We have no
inheritance in the son of Jesse! To thy tents, O Israel! Now see to thy
house, David!" i.e., take care of thy house. David, the tribe-father, is
mentioned in the place of his family. These words, with which Sheba had
once preached rebellion in the time of David ([Sa2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001)), give expression to the
deep-rooted aversion which was cherished by these tribes towards the
Davidic monarchy, and that in so distinct and unvarnished a manner, that
we may clearly see that there were deeper causes for the secession than
the pretended oppression of Solomon's government; that its real
foundation was the ancient jealousy of the tribes, which had been only
suppressed for the time by David and Solomon, but had not been entirely
eradicated, whilst this jealousy again had its roots in the estrangement
of these tribes from the Lord, and from His law and righteousness.

[Kg1 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#017)

But the sons of Israel, who dwelt in the cities of Judah, over these
Rehoboam became king. These "sons of Israel" are members of the ten
tribes who had settled in Judah in the course of ages (cf., [Kg1
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#023)); and the Simeonites especially
are included, since they were obliged to remain in the kingdom of Judah
from the very situation of their tribe-territory, and might very well be
reckoned among the Israelites who dwelt in the cities of Judah, inasmuch
as at first the whole of their territory was allotted to the tribe of
Judah, from which they afterwards received a portion ([Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001)). The verse cannot possibly mean
that "the tribe of Judah declared in favour of their countryman Rehoboam
as king" (Ewald, Gesch. iii. p. 399).

[Kg1 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#018)

In order to appease the agitated tribes and commence negotiations with
them, Rehoboam sent Adoram, the superintendent of the tribute, to them
(see at [Kg1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#006)). Rehoboam entrusted
him with the negotiation, because the tribes had complained that the
tribute burdens were too severe, and the king was no doubt serious in
his wish to meet the demands of the people. But the very fact that he
sent this man only increased the bitterness of feeling, so that they
stoned him to death, and Rehoboam himself was obliged to summon up all
his strength (התאמּץ) to escape a similar fate by a speedy flight to his
chariot.

[Kg1 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#019)

Thus Israel fell away from the house of David "unto this day."

[Kg1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020)

The secession was completed by the fact that all Israel (of the ten
tribes) called Jeroboam to the assembly of the congregation and made him
king "over all Israel," so that the tribe of Judah alone adhered to the
house of David (see at [Kg1 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#032)).
[Kg1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020) commences in the same
manner as [Kg1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#002), to indicate that
it closes the account commenced in [Kg1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#002).

[Kg1 12:21-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#021)

But after the return of Rehoboam to Jerusalem he was still desirous of
bringing back the seceders by force of arms, and raised for that purpose
an army of 180,000 men out of all Judah, the tribe of Benjamin, and the
rest of the people, i.e., the Israelites dwelling in the cities of
Judah, - a number which does not appear too large according to [Sa2
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009). But the prophet Shemaiah, a
prophet who is not mentioned again, received instructions from God to
forbid the king to go to war with their brethren the Israelites, "for
this thing was from the Lord." הזּה הדּבר, "this thing, i.e., his being
deprived of the sovereignty over ten tribes, but not their rebellion"
(Seb. Schmidt). For the fact itself, see the remark on [Kg1
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#015). The king and the people
hearkened to this word. ללכת ישׁוּבוּ, "they turned to go," i.e., they
gave up the intended expedition and returned home. In [Ch2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#004) we have the explanatory phrase
מלּכת ישׁוּבוּ.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 12:25</span></span>

Founding of the Kingdom of Israel. - [Kg1
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#025). When Jeroboam had become king,
it was his first care to give a firmer basis to his sovereignty by the
fortification of Sichem and Pnuel. בּנח, to build, is used here in the
sense of fortifying, because both cities had stood for a long time, and
nothing is known of their having been destroyed under either Solomon or
David, although the tower of Sichem had been burnt down by Abimelech
([Jdg 9:49](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#049)), and the tower of Pnuel
had been destroyed by Gideon ([Jdg
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#017)). Sichem, a place well known from
the time of Abraham downwards ([Gen
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006)), was situated upon the mountains
of Ephraim, between Mount Gerizim and Mount Ebal, and still exists under
the name of Nabulus or Nabls, a name corrupted from Flavia Neapolis.
Jeroboam dwelt therein, i.e., he chose it at first as his residence,
though he afterwards resided in Thirza (see [Kg1
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#017)). Pnuel was situated, according
to [Gen 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#031), on the other side of
the Jordan, on the northern bank of the Jabbok (not the southern side,
as Thenius supposes); and judging from [Gen
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#022). and [Jdg
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#008)., it was on the caravan road,
which led through Gilead to Damascus, and thence past Palmyra and along
the Euphrates to Mesopotamia. It was probably on account of its
situation that Jeroboam fortified it, to defend his sovereignty over
Gilead against hostile attacks from the north-east and east.

[Kg1 12:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#026)

In order also to give internal strength to his kingdom, Jeroboam
resolved to provide for his subjects a substitute for the sacrificial
worship in the temple by establishing new sacra, and thus to take away
all occasion for making festal journeys to Jerusalem, from which he
apprehended, and that probably not without reason, a return of the
people to the house of David and consequently further danger for his own
life. "If this people go up to perform sacrifice in the house of Jehovah
at Jerusalem, their heart will turn to their lord, king Rehoboam," etc.

[Kg1 12:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#028)

He therefore consulted, sc., with his counsellors, or the heads of the
nation, who had helped him to the throne, and made two calves of gold.
זהב עגלי are young oxen, not of pure gold however, or cast in brass and
gilded, but in all probability like the golden calf which Aaron had cast
for the people at Sinai, made of a kernel of wood, which was then
covered with gold plate (see the Comm. on [Exo
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)). That Jeroboam had in his mind
not merely the Egyptian Apis-worship generally, but more especially the
image-worship which Aaron introduced for the people at Sinai, is evident
from the words borrowed from [Exo
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004), with which he studiously
endeavoured to recommend his new form of worship to the people: "Behold,
this is thy God, O Israel, who brought thee up out of the land of
Egypt." רב־לכם מעלות, it is too much for you to go to Jerusalem; not
"let your going suffice," because מן is not to be taken in a partitive
sense here, as it is in [Exo 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#028) and
[Eze 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#006). What Jeroboam meant to say
by the words, "Behold thy God," etc., was, "this is no new religion, but
this was the form of worship which our fathers used in the desert, with
Aaron himself leading the way" (Seb. Schmidt). And whilst the verbal
allusion to that event at Sinai plainly shows that this worship was not
actual idolatry, i.e., was not a worship of Egyptian idols, from which
it is constantly distinguished in our books as well as in Hosea and
Amos, but that Jehovah was worshipped under the image of the calves or
young oxen; the choice of the places in which the golden calves were set
up also shows that Jeroboam desired to adhere as closely as possible to
ancient traditions. He did not select his own place of residence, but
Bethel and Dan. Bethel, on the southern border of his kingdom, which
properly belonged to the tribe of Benjamin ([Jos
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#013) and [Jos
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022)), the present Beitin, had
already been consecrated as a divine seat by the vision of Jehovah which
the patriarch Jacob received there in a dream ([Gen
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#011), [Gen
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019)), and Jacob gave it the name of
Bethel, house of God, and afterwards built an altar there to the Lord
([Gen 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007)). And Jeroboam may easily
have fancied, and have tried to persuade others, that Jehovah would
reveal Himself to the descendants of Jacob in this sacred place just as
well as He had done to their forefather. - Dan, in the northern part of
the kingdom, on the one source of the Jordan, formerly called Laish
([Jdg 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#026).), was also consecrated as
a place of worship by the image-worship established there by the
Danites, at which even a grandson of Moses had officiated; and regard
may also have been had to the convenience of the people, namely, that
the tribes living in the north would not have to go a long distance to
perform their worship.

[Kg1 12:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#030)

But this institution became a sin to Jeroboam, because it violated the
fundamental law of the Old Testament religion, since this not only
prohibited all worship of Jehovah under images and symbols ([Exo
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004)), but had not even left the
choice of the place of worship to the people themselves ([Deu
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005).). "And the people went before
the one to Dan." The expression "to Dan" can only be suitably explained
by connecting it with העם: the people even to Dan, i.e., the people
throughout the whole kingdom even to Dan. The southern boundary as the
terminus a quo is not mentioned; not because it was for a long time in
dispute, but because it was already given in the allusion to Bethel.
האחד is neither the golden calf at Dan nor (as I formerly thought) that
at Bethel, but is to be interpreted according to the receding את־האחד
ואת־האחד: one of the two, or actually both the one and the other
(Thenius). The sin of which Jeroboam was guilty consisted in the fact
that he no longer allowed the people to go to the house of the Lord in
Jerusalem, but induced or compelled them to worship Jehovah before one
or the other of the calves which he had set up, or \_(as it is expressed
in [Kg1 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#031)) made a house of high
places, בּמות בּית (see at [Kg1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#002)),
instead of the house of God, which the Lord had sanctified as the place
of worship by filling it with His gracious presence. The singular בּית ב
may be accounted for from the antithesis to יהוה בּית, upon which it
rests. There was no necessity to say expressly that there was a house of
high places at Bethel and Dan, i.e., in two places, because it followed
as a matter of course that the golden calves could not stand in the open
air, but were placed in a temple, by which the sacrificial altar stood.
These places of worship were houses of high places, Bamoth, because the
ark of the covenant was wanting, and therewith the gracious presence of
God, the Shechinah, for which no symbol invented by men could be a
substitute. Moreover Jeroboam made "priests from the mass of the people,
who were not of the sons of Levi." העם מקצות, i.e., not of the poorest
of the people (Luther and others), but from the last of the people
onwards, that is to say, from the whole of the people any one without
distinction even to the very last, instead of the priests chosen by God
out of the tribe of Levi. For this meaning of מקצות see [Gen
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#004) and [Eze
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#002), also Lud. de Dieu on this
passage. This innovation on the part of Jeroboam appears very
surprising, if we consider how the Ephraimite Micah ([Jdg
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#010).) rejoiced that he had obtained
a Levite to act as priest for his image-worship, and can only be
explained from the fact that the Levites did not consent to act as
priests in the worship before the golden calves, but set their faces
against it, and therefore, as is stated in [Ch2
11:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#013), were obliged to leave their
district towns and possessions and emigrate into the kingdom of Judah.

[Kg1 12:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#032)

Jeroboam also transferred to the eighth month the feast which ought to
have been kept in the seventh month (the feast of tabernacles, [Lev
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034).). The pretext for this
arbitrary alteration of the law, which repeatedly describes the seventh
month as the month appointed by the Lord ([Lev
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034), [Lev
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039), [Lev
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#041)), he may have found in the fact
that in the northern portion of the kingdom the corn ripened a month
later than in the more southern Judah (see my Bibl. Archol. ii. 118,
Anm. 3, and 119, Anm. 2), since this feast of the ingathering of the
produce of the threshing-floor and wine-press ([Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016); [Lev
23:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039); [Deu
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013)) was a feast of thanksgiving for
the gathering in of all the fruits of the ground. But the true reason
was to be found in his intention to make the separation in a religious
point of view as complete as possible, although Jeroboam retained the
day of the month, the fifteenth, for the sake of the weak who took
offence at his innovations. For we may see very clearly that many beside
the Levites were very discontented with these illegal institutions, from
the notice in [Ch2 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#016), that out of
all the tribes those who were devoted to the Lord from the heart went to
Jerusalem to sacrifice to the God of the fathers there. "And he
sacrificed upon the altar." This clause is connected with the preceding
one, in the sense of: he instituted the feast and offered sacrifices
thereat. In [Kg1 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#032) (from עשׂה כּן
onwards) and [Kg1 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#033), what has
already been related concerning Jeroboam's religious institutions is
brought to a close by a comprehensive repetition of the leading points.
"Thus did he in Bethel, (namely) to offer sacrifice to the calves; and
there he appointed the priests of the high places which he had made, and
offered sacrifice upon the altar which he had made at Bethel, on the
fifteenth day in the eighth month, which he himself had devised, and so
made a feast for the children of Israel and sacrificed upon the altar to
turn." מלּבד signifies seorsum, by himself alone, i.e., in this
connection, i.q. "from his own heart." The Keri מלּבּו is therefore a
correct explanation as to the fact; but it is a needless correction from
[Neh 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#008). The last clause,
להקטיר...ויּעל, leads on to what follows, and it would be more correct
to take it in connection with [Kg1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001) and render it thus: and when he
was offering sacrifice upon the altar to burn, behold there came a man
of God, etc. Thenius has rendered ויּעל incorrectly, and he stood at the
altar. This thought would have been expressed by הם על ויּעמוד, as in
[Kg1 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001). By הקטיר we are not to
understand the burning or offering of incense, but the burning of the
sacrificial portions of the flesh upon the altar, as in [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009), [Lev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#013), [Lev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017), etc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](kg1013)

</div>
