<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2011)  [Next](kg2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 12:0</span></span>

Reign of King Joash of Judah, and Repairing of the Temple - 2 Kings 12

All that is recorded of the forty years' reign of Joash, in addition to
the general characteristics of the reign ([Kg2
12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001)), is the repairing of the
temple which was effected by him ([Kg2
12:5-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#005)), and the purchased retreat of
the Syrians from their invasion of Judah ([Kg2
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#018) and [Kg2
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#019)), and finally his violent death
in consequence of a conspiracy formed against him, of which we have only
a brief notice in [Kg2 12:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#020). The
parallel account in 2 Chron 24 supplies several additions to this: viz.,
concerning the wives of Joash, the distribution of the Levites at the
repairing of the temple, the death of Jehoiada, and the seduction of
Joash to idolatry by the chief men of Judah, and the stoning of the
prophet Zechariah, who condemned this rebellion - all of which can
easily be fitted into our account.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 12:1</span></span>

(1-5). Reign of Joash. - [Kg2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001) (1,
2). His age on ascending the throne, viz., seven years (cf. [Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004)). - Commencement and length of
his reign. His mother's name was Zibiah of Beersheba.

[Kg2 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#002)

(3). Joash did that which was right in the eyes of the Lord וגו אשׁר
כּל־ימין, "all his days that," etc., i.e., during the whole period of
his life that Jehoiada instructed him (for אשׁר after substantives
indicating time, place, and mode, see Ewald, 331, c., 3; and for the use
of the suffix attached to the noun defined by וגו אשׁר, compare [Kg2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#014)); not "all his life long,
because Jehoiada had instructed him," although the Athnach under ימין
favours this view. For Jehoiada had not instructed him before he began
to reign, but he instructed him after he had been raised to the throne
at the age of seven years, that is to say, so long as Jehoiada himself
lived. The יהוידע כּל־ימי of the Chronicles is therefore a correct
explanation. But after Jehoiada's death, Joash yielded to the petitions
of the princes of Judah that he would assent to their worshipping idols,
and at length went so far as to stone the son of his benefactor, the
prophet Zechariah, on account of his candid reproof of this apostasy
([Ch2 24:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#017)).

[Kg2 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#003)

(4). But the worship on the high places was not entirely suppressed,
notwithstanding the fact that Jehoiada instructed him (on this standing
formula see the Comm. on [Kg1 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#014)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 12:4</span></span>

(5-17). Repairing of the temple (cf. [Ch2
24:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#005)). - [Kg2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#004), [Kg2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#005). That the temple, which had
fallen into ruins, might be restored, Joash ordered the priests to
collect all the money of the consecrated gifts, that was generally
brought into the house of the Lord, and to effect therewith all the
repairs that were needed in the temple. The general expression הקּדשׁים
כּסף, money of the holy gifts, i.e., money derived from holy gifts, is
more specifically defined by וגו עובר כּסף, according to which it
consisted of three kinds of payments to the temple: viz., (1) עובר כּסף,
i.e., money of persons mustered (or numbered in the census); עובר is an
abbreviated expression for הפּקדים העובר, "he who passes over to those
who are numbered" ([Exo 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013)), as it
has been correctly interpreted by the Chald., Rashi, Abarb., and others;
whereas the explanation "money that passes" (Luther), or current coin,
which Thenius still defends, yields not suitable sense, since it is
impossible to see why only current coin should be accepted, and not
silver in bars of vessels, inasmuch as Moses had accepted gold, silver,
copper, and other objects of value in natura, for the building of the
tabernacle ([Exo 24:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#002); [Exo
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#005); [Exo
36:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo036.htm#005)). The brevity of the expression
may be explained from the fact, that עובר כּסף had become a technical
term on the ground of the passage in the law already cited. The
objection raised by Thenius, that the explanation adopted would be
without any parallel, would, if it could be sustained, also apply to his
own explanation "current money," in which עובר is also taken as an
abbreviation of לסּהר עבר לסּ in [Gen
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#016). There is still less ground for
the other objection, that if עובר כּסף denoted one kind of
temple-revenue, כּל or אישׁ would necessarily have been used. (2)
ערכּו...אישׁ, "every kind of souls' valuation money;" אישׁ is more
precisely defined by ערכּו, and the position in which it stands before
כּסף resembles the בּתרו in [Gen 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#010)
-literally, soul money of each one's valuation. Thenius is wrong in his
interpretation, "every kind of money of the souls according to their
valuation," to which he appends the erroneous remark, that אישׁ is also
used in [Zac 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) and [Joe
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007) in connection with inanimate
objects as equivalent to כּל. ערכּו...אישׁ, every kind of valuation,
because both in the redemption of the male first-born ([Num
18:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015)) and also in the case of
persons under a vow a payment had to be made according to the valuation
of the priest. (3) "All the money that cometh into any one's mind to
bring into the house of the Lord," i.e., all the money which was offered
as a free-will offering to the sanctuary. This money the priests were to
take to themselves, every one from his acquaintance, and therewith
repair all the dilapidations that were to be found in the temple. In the
Chronicles the different kinds of money to be collected for this purpose
are not specified; but the whole is embraced under the general
expression "the taxes of Moses the servant of God, and of the
congregation of Israel, to the tent of the testimony," which included
not only the contribution of half a shekel for the building of the
temple, which is prescribed in [Exo
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012)., but also the other two taxes
mentioned in this account.

(Note: There is no ground either in the words or in the facts for
restricting the perfectly general expression "taxes of Moses and of the
congregation of Israel" to the payment mentioned in [Exo
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012), as Thenius and Bertheau have
done, except perhaps the wish to find a discrepancy between the two
accounts, for the purpose of being able to accuse the chronicler, if not
of intentional falsification, as De Wette does, at any rate of
perverting the true state of the case. The assertion of Thenius, that
the yearly payment of half a shekel, which was appointed in the law and
regarded as atonement-money, appears to be directly excluded in our
text, is simply founded upon the interpretation given to עובר כּסף as
current money, which we have already proved to be false.)

Again, according to [Kg2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#007) of the
Chronicles, Joash gave the following reason for his command: "For
Athaliah, the wicked woman, and her sons have demolished the house of
God, and all the dedicated gifts of the house of Jehovah have they used
for the Baals." We are not told in what the violent treatment of
demolition (פּרץ) of the temple by Athaliah had her sons consisted. The
circumstance that considerable repairs even of the stonework of the
temple were required in the time of Joash, about 130 or 140 years after
it was built, is quite conceivable without any intentional demolition.
And in no case can we infer from these words, as Thenius has done, that
Athaliah or her sons had erected a temple of Baal within the limits of
the sanctuary. The application of all the dedicatory offerings of the
house of Jehovah to the Baals, involves nothing more than that the gifts
which were absolutely necessary for the preservation of the temple and
temple-service were withdrawn from the sanctuary of Jehovah and applied
to the worship of Baal, and therefore that the decay of the sanctuary
would necessarily follow upon the neglect of the worship.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 12:6</span></span>

But when the twenty-third year of the reign of Joash arrived, and the
dilapidations had not been repaired, the king laid the matter before the
high priest Jehoiada and the priests, and directed them not to take the
money any more from their acquaintance, but to give it for the
dilapidations of the temple; "and the priests consented to take no
money, and not to repair the dilapidations of the house," i.e., not to
take charge of the repairs. We may see from this consent how the command
of the king is to be understood. Hitherto the priests had collected the
money to pay for the repairing of the temple; but inasmuch as they had
not executed the repairs, the king took away from them both the
collection of the money and the obligation to repair the temple. The
reason for the failure of the first measure is not mentioned in our
text, and can only be inferred from the new arrangement made by the king
([Kg2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#009)): "Jehoiada took a chest-of
course by the command of the king, as is expressly mentioned in [Ch2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#008), - bored a hole in the door (the
lid) thereof, and placed it by the side of the altar (of burnt-offering)
on the right by the entrance of every one into the house of Jehovah,
that the priests keeping the threshold might put thither (i.e., into the
chest) all the money that was brought into the house of Jehovah."

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 12:10</span></span>

"And when they saw that there was much money in the chest, the king's
writer and the high priest came, and bound up and reckoned the money
that was found in the house of Jehovah." צוּר, to bind up the money in
bags (cf. [Kg2 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#023)). The binding is
mentioned before the reckoning, because the pieces of money were not
counted singly, but packed at once into bags, which were then weighed
for the purpose of estimating the amount received.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 12:11</span></span>

"They gave the money weighed into the hands of those who did the work,
who were placed over the house of Jehovah," i.e., the appointed
overlookers of the work; "and they paid it (as it was required) to the
carpenters and builders, who worked at the house, and to the masons and
hewers of stone, and for the purchase of wood and hewn stones, to repair
the dilapidations of the house, and for all that might be spent (יצא,
i.e., be given out) for the house for repairing it." It is quite clear
from this, that the assertion of J. D. Michaelis, De Wette, and others,
that the priests had embezzled the money collected, is perfectly
imaginary. For if the king had cherished any such suspicion against the
priests, he would not have asked for their consent to an alteration of
the first arrangement or to the new measure; and still less would he
have commanded that the priests who kept the door should put the money
into the chest, for this would have been no safeguard against
embezzlement. For if the door-keepers wished to embezzle, all that they
would need to do would be to put only a part of the money into the
chest. The simple reason and occasion for giving up the first
arrangement and introducing the new arrangement with the chest, was that
the first measure had proved to be insufficient fore the accomplishment
of the purpose expected by the king. For inasmuch as the king had not
assigned any definite amount for the repairing of the temple, but had
left it to the priests to pay for the cost of the repairs out of the
money that was to be collected, one portion of which at least came to
themselves, according to the law, for their own maintenance and to
provide for the expenses of worship, it might easily happen, without the
least embezzlement on the part of the priests, that the money collected
was paid out again for the immediate necessities of worship and their
own maintenance, and that nothing remained to pay for the building
expenses. For this reason the king himself now undertook the execution
of the requisite repairs. The reason why the chest was provided for the
money to be collected was, first of all, that the money to be collected
for the building might be separated from the rest of the money that came
in and was intended for the priests; and secondly, that the
contributions to be gathered for the building might be increased, since
it might be expected that the people would give more if the collections
were made for the express purpose of restoring the temple, than if only
the legal and free-will offerings were simply given to the priests,
without any one knowing how much would be applied to the building. - And
because the king had taken the building into his own hand, as often as
the chest was full he sent his secretary to reckon the money along with
the high priest, and hand it over to the superintendents of the
building.

If we compare with this the account in the Chronicles, it helps to
confirm the view which we have obtained from an unprejudiced examination
of the text as to the affair in question. According to [Kg2
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#005) of the Chronicles, Joash had
commanded the priests and Levites to accelerate the repairs; "but the
Levites did not hurry." This may be understood as signifying that they
were dilatory both in the collection of the money and in the devotion of
a portion of their revenues to the repairing of the temple. But that the
king took the matter in hand himself, not so much because of the
dilatoriness or negligence of the priests as because his first measure,
regarded as an expedient, did not answer the purpose, is evident from
the fact that, according to the Chronicles, he did not content himself
with placing the chest at the entrance, but had a proclamation made at
the same time in Judah and Jerusalem, to offer the tax of Moses for the
repair of the temple ([Kg2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#009)) -
evidently with no other intention than to procure more liberal
contributions. For, according to [Kg2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010), all the chief men and all the
people rejoiced thereat, and cast their gifts into the chest, i.e., they
offered their gifts with joy for the purpose that had been proclaimed. -
The other points of difference between the Chronicles and our text are
unimportant. For instance, that they placed the chest "at the gate of
the house of Jehovah on the outside." The הוּצה merely defines the
expression in our text, יי בּית בּבוא־אישׁ בּימין, "to the right at the
entrance into the temple," more minutely, by showing that the ark was
not placed on the inner side of the entrance into the court of the
priests, but against the outer wall of it. This is not at variance with
המּזבּח אצל in [Kg2 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010); for even
apart from the account in the Chronicles, and according to our own text,
this cannot be understood as signifying that the ark had been placed in
the middle of the court, as Thenius explains in opposition to וגו
בּבוא־אישׁ, but can only mean at the entrance which was on the right
side of the altar, i.e., at the southern entrance into the inner court.
Again, the further variation, that according to the Chronicles ([Kg2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#011)), when the chest was full, an
officer of the high priest came with the scribe (not the high priest
himself), furnishes simply a more exact definition of our account, in
which the high priest is named; just as, according to [Kg2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010), the high priest took the chest
and bored a hole in the lid, which no intelligent commentator would
understand as signifying that the high priest did it with his own hand.
But there is a real difference between [Kg2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#014) and [Kg2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#015) of our text and [Kg2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#014) of the Chronicles, though the
solution of this suggests itself at once on a closer inspection of the
words. According to our account, there were no golden or silver vessels,
basons, knives, bowls, etc., made with the money that was brought in,
but it was given for the repairing of the house. In the Chronicles, on
the contrary, it is stated that "when they had finished the repairs,
they brought the remnant of the money to the king and Jehoiada, and he
(the king) used it for vessels for the house of the Lord, for vessels of
the service," etc. But if we take proper notice of כּכלּותם here, there
is no ground for saying that there is any contradiction, since the words
of our text affirm nothing more than that none of the money that came in
was applied to the making of vessels of worship so long as the repairing
of the building went on. What took place afterwards is not stated in our
account, which is limited to the main fact; this we learn from the
Chronicles.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 12:15</span></span>

No return was required of the inspectors as to the money handed over to
them, because they were convinced of their honesty.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 12:16</span></span>

The money obtained from trespass-offerings and sin-offerings was not
brought into the house of Jehovah, i.e., was not applied to the
repairing of the temple, but was left for the priests. In the case of
the trespass-offering compensation had to be made for the earthly debt
according to the valuation of the priest, with the addition of a fifth
in money; and this was assigned to the priests not only in the case of a
מעל committed against Jehovah, but also when a neighbour had been
injured in his property, if he had died in the meantime (see at [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016) and [Num
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#009)). On the other hand, in the case
of the sin-offerings the priests received no money according to the law.
Most of the commentators therefore assume, that those who lived at a
distance had sent money to the priests, that they might offer
sin-offerings with it, and what money as over they had retained for
themselves. But there is not the slightest trace of any such custom,
which is quite at variance with the idea of the sin-offering. It may
probably have become a customary thing in the course of time, for those
who presented these offerings to compensate the officiating priest for
his trouble by a free-will gift.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 12:17</span></span>

The brief account of Hazael's campaign against Jerusalem is completed by
[Ch2 24:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#023). Hazael had gone down
along the coast after defeating Israel (see [Kg2
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#003)), for the purpose of making war
upon Judah also, and had taken Gath, which Rehoboam had fortified ([Ch2
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#008)). He then set his face, i.e.,
determined, to advance to Jerusalem; and Joash took the temple
treasures, etc. According to the Chronicles, he sent an army against
Judah and Jerusalem, which destroyed all the princes of the nation and
sent much booty to the king to Damascus, as the small army of the
Syrians had smitten the very large army of Judah. To protect Jerusalem,
after this defeat, from being taken by the Syrians, Joash sent all the
treasures of the temple and palace to Hazael, and so purchased the
withdrawal of the Syrians. In this way the two brief accounts of the war
may be both reconciled and explained; whereas the opinion, still
repeated by Thenius, that the two passages treat of different wars, has
no tenable ground to rest upon. The Philistian city of Gath (see the
Comm. on [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)) appears to have
belonged at that time to the kingdom of Judah, so that the Gathites were
not among the Philistines who made an incursion into Judah in the reign
of Joram along with the Arabian tribes of the south ([Ch2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016)). And it is impossible to
determine when Gath was wrested from the Syrians again; probably in the
time of Joash the son of Jehoahaz of Israel, as he recovered from the
Syrians all the cities which they had taken from the Israelites under
Jehoahaz ([Kg2 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#025)), and even smote
Amaziah the king of Judaea at Bethshemesh and took him prisoner ([Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013); [Ch2
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#021).). "All the consecrated things,
which Jehoshaphat, Joram, and Ahaziah had consecrated, and his own
consecrated things," i.e., what he (Joash) himself had consecrated. The
existence of such temple treasures is not at variance either with the
previous account of the repairing of the temple, for Joash would not use
the consecrated offerings for the restoration of the temple, as the
current revenue of the temple was sufficient for the purpose, or with
[Ch2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#007), where it is stated that
Athaliah and her sons had applied all the יהוה בּית קרשׁי to the Baals
(see at [Kg2 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#005)); for even if we are
to understand by the sons of Athaliah not bastard sons (Ewald, Gesch.
iii. p. 582), but the brethren of Joram whom the Philistines and
Arabians had carried off, Ahaziah and Joram, although they both of them
served Baal, may, from political considerations, have now and then made
consecrated gifts to the temple, if only in a passing fit of religious
fear.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 12:19</span></span>

Conspiracy against Joash. - Not long after the departure of the Syrians,
who had left Joash, according to [Ch2
24:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#025), with many wounds, his servants
formed a conspiracy against him and slew him upon his bed in the house
Millo, which goeth down to Silla. This description of the locality is
perfectly obscure for us. The conjecture that בּית־מלּא was the house in
the castle of Millo which is so frequently mentioned (see at [Kg1
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#015) and [Sa2
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009)), is precluded by the fact that
this castle is always called המּלּא (with the article). סלּא is regarded
by many as an abbreviation of מסלּה, "which goes down by the road;" and
Thenius supposes that the reference is to the road which ran diagonally
through the city from the Joppa gate to the Haram-area, corresponding to
the present David's road. Others regard סלּא as the proper name of a
place in the neighbourhood of Jerusalem. It is impossible to get any
certain meaning out of it, unless we alter the text according to
arbitrary assumptions, as Thenius has done. The conspirators were
Jozachar the son of Shimeath, and Jehozabad the son of Shomer, according
to [Kg2 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#021); but according to the
Chronicles (v. 26), they were Zabad the son of Shimeath the Ammonitess,
and Jehozabad the son of Shimrith the Moabitess. The identity of the
first names is perfectly obvious. זבד is a copyist's error for זכר, and
this is the contracted form of יוזכר. The difference in the second: son
of Shomer according to our text, and son of the Shimrith according to
the Chronicles, has probably also arisen from a slip of the pen, since
שׁמר might easily be occasioned by the dropping out of the ת from the
defectively written שׁמרת, although it is also possible that Shomer may
be the name of the grandfather. Joash was buried with his father sin the
city of David; but according to v. 25 of the Chronicles he was not
buried in the graves of the kings. The two statements are not
irreconcilable; and there may be good historical ground for the account
in the Chronicles, as Bertheau acknowledges with perfect justice, in
spite of the suspicion which has been cast upon it by Thenius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 13](kg2013)

</div>
