<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2015)  [Next](kg2017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 16:0</span></span>

Reign of King Ahaz of Judah - 2 Kings 16

With the reign of Ahaz a most eventful change took place in the
development of the kingdom of Judah. Under the vigorous reigns of Uzziah
and Jotham, by whom the earthly prosperity of the kingdom had been
studiously advanced, there had been, as we may see from the prophecies
of Isaiah, chs. 2-6, which date from this time, a prevalence of luxury
and self-security, of unrighteousness and forgetfulness of God, among
the upper classes, in consequence of the increase of their wealth. Under
Ahaz these sins grew into open apostasy from the Lord; for this weak and
unprincipled ruler trod in the steps of the kings of Israel, and
introduced image-worship and idolatrous practices of every kind, and at
length went so far in his ungodliness as to shut up the doors of the
porch of the temple and suspend the temple-worship prescribed by the law
altogether. The punishment followed this apostasy without delay. The
allied Syrians and Israelites completely defeated the Judaeans, slew
more than a hundred thousand men and led away a much larger number of
prisoners, and then advanced to Jerusalem to put an end to the kingdom
of Judah by the conquest of the capital. In this distress, instead of
seeking help from the Lord, who promised him deliverance through the
prophet Isaiah, Ahaz sought help from Tiglat-pileser the king of
Assyria, who came and delivered him from the oppression of Rezin and
Pekah by the conquest of Damascus, Galilee, and the Israelitish land to
the east of the Jordan, but who then oppressed him himself, so that Ahaz
was obliged to purchase the friendship of this conqueror by sending him
all the treasures of the temple and palace. - In the chapter before us
we have first of all the general characteristics of the idolatry of Ahaz
([Kg2 16:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002)), then a summary account
of his oppression by Rezin and Pekah, and his seeking help from the king
of Assyria ([Kg2 16:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005)), and lastly a
description of the erection of a heathen altar in the court of the
temple on the site of the brazen altar of burnt-offering, and of other
acts of demolition performed upon the older sacred objects in the
temple-court ([Kg2 16:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010)). The
parallel account in 2 Chron 28 supplies many additions to the facts
recorded here.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 16:1</span></span>

[Kg2 16:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#001)

On the time mentioned, "in the seventeenth year of Pekah Ahaz became
king" see at [Kg2 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032). The datum
"twenty years old" is a striking one, even if we compare with it [Kg2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002). As Ahaz reigned only sixteen
years, and at his death his son Hezekiah became king at the age of
twenty-five years ([Kg2 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002)), Ahaz
must have begotten him in the eleventh year of his age. It is true that
in southern lands this is neither impossible nor unknown,

(Note: In the East they marry girls of nine or ten years of age to boys
of twelve or thirteen (Volney, Reise, ii. p. 360). Among the Indians
husbands of ten years of age and wives of eight are mentioned (Thevenot,
Reisen, iii. pp. 100 and 165). In Abyssinia boys of twelve and even ten
years old marry (Rppell, Abessynien, ii. p. 59). Among the Jews in
Tiberias, mothers of eleven years of age and fathers of thirteen are not
uncommon (Burckh. Syrien, p. 570); and Lynch saw a wife there, who to
all appearance was a mere child about ten years of age, who had been
married two years already. In the epist. ad N. Carbonelli, from
Hieronymi epist. ad Vitalem, 132, and in an ancient glossa, Bochart has
also cited examples of one boy of ten years and another of nine, qui
nutricem suam gravidavit, together with several other cases of a similar
kind from later writers. Cf. Bocharti Opp. i. (Geogr. sacr.) p. 920, ed.
Lugd. 1692.)

but in the case of the kings of Judah it would be without analogy. The
reading found in the lxx, Syr., and Arab. at [Ch2
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#001), and also in certain codd., viz.,
five and twenty instead of twenty, may therefore be a preferable one.
According to this, Hezekiah, like Ahaz, was born in his father's
sixteenth year.

[Kg2 16:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003)

"Ahaz walked in the way of the kings of Israel," to which there is added
by way of explanation in [Ch2 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#002),
"and also made molten images to the Baals." This refers, primarily,
simply to the worship of Jehovah under the image of a calf, which they
had invented; for this was the way in which all the kings of Israel
walked. At the same time, in [Kg2 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#018)
the same formula is so used of Joram king of Judah as to include the
worship of Baal by the dynasty of Ahab. Consequently in the verse before
us also the way of the kings of Israel includes the worship of Baal,
which is especially mentioned in the Chronicles. - "He even made his son
pass through the fire," i.e., offered him in sacrifice to Moloch in the
valley of Benhinnom (see at [Kg2
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#010)), after the abominations of the
nations, whom Jehovah had cast out before Israel. Instead of בּנו we
have the plural בּנין in [Ch2 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#003),
and in [Ch2 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#016) אשּׁוּר מלכי, kings
of Asshur, instead of אשּׁוּר מלך, although only one, viz.,
Tiglath-pileser, is spoken of. This repeated use of the plural shows
very plainly that it is to be understood rhetorically, as expressing the
thought in the most general manner, since the number was of less
importance than the fact.

(Note: The Greeks and Romans also use the plural instead of the singular
in their rhetorical style of writing, especially when a father, a
mother, or a son is spoken of. Cf. Cic. de prov. cons. xiv. 35: si ad
jucundissimos liberos, si ad clarissimum generum redire properaret,
where Julia, the only daughter of Caesar, and the wife of Pompey the
Great, is referred to; and for other examples see Caspari, der Syr.
Ephraimit. Krieg, p. 41.)

So far as the fact is concerned, we have here the first instance of an
actual Moloch-sacrifice among the Israelites, i.e., of one performed by
slaying and burning. For although the phrase בּאשׁ העביר or למּלך does
not in itself denote the slaying and burning of the children as
Moloch-sacrifices, but primarily affirms nothing more than the simple
passing through fire, a kind of februation or baptism of fire (see at
[Lev 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021)); such passages as [Eze
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#021) and [Jer
7:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#031), where sacrificing in the valley
of Benhinnom is called slaying and burning the children, show most
distinctly that in the verse before us בּאשׁ העביר is to be taken as
signifying actual sacrificing, i.e., the burning of the children slain
in sacrifice to Moloch, and, as the emphatic וגם indicates, that this
kind of idolatrous worship, which had never been heard of before in
Judah and Israel, was introduced by Ahaz.

(Note: "If this idolatry had occurred among the Israelites before the
time of Ahaz, its abominations would certainly not have been passed over
by the biblical writers, who so frequently mention other forms of
idolatry." These are the correct words of Movers (Phniz. i. p. 65), who
only errs in the fact that on the one hand he supposes the origin of
human sacrifices in the time of Ahaz to have been inwardly connected
with the appearance of the Assyrians, and traces them to the
acquaintance of the Israelites with the Assyrian fire-deities
Adrammelech and Anammelech ([Kg2
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031)), and on the other hand gives
this explanation of the phrase, "cause to pass through the fire for
Moloch," which is used to denote the sacrificing of children: "the
burning of children was regarded as a passage, whereby, after the
separation of the impure and earthly dross of the body, the children
attained to union with the deity" (p. 329). To this J. G. Mller has
correctly replied (in Herzog's Cyclop.): "This mystic, pantheistic,
moralizing view of human sacrifices is not the ancient and original view
of genuine heathenism. It is no more the view of Hither Asia than the
Mexican view (i.e., the one which lay at the foundation of the custom of
the ancient Mexicans, of passing the new-born boy four times through the
fire). The Phoenician myths, which Movers (p. 329) quotes in support of
his view, refer to the offering of human sacrifices in worship, and the
moral view is a later addition belonging to Hellenism. The sacrifices
were rather given to the gods as food, as is evident from innumerable
passages (compare the primitive religions of America), and they have no
moral aim, but are intended to reward or bribe the gods with costly
presents, either because of calamities that have already passed, or
because of those that are anticipated with alarm; and, as Movers himself
admits (p. 301), to make atonement for ceremonial sins, i.e., to follow
smaller sacrifices by those of greater value.")

In the Chronicles, therefore העביר is correctly explained by ויּבער, "he
burned;" though we cannot infer from this that העביר is always a mere
conjecture for הבעיר, as Geiger does (Urschrift u. Uebers, der Bibel, p.
305). The offering of his son for Moloch took place, in all probability,
during the severe oppression of Ahaz by the Syrians, and was intended to
appease the wrath of the gods, as was done by the king of the Moabites
in similar circumstances ([Kg2 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027)).
- In [Kg2 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#004) the idolatry is
described in the standing formulae as sacrificing upon high places and
hills, etc., as in [Kg1 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023). The
temple-worship prescribed by the law could easily be continued along
with this idolatry, since polytheism did not exclude the worship of
Jehovah. It was not till the closing years of his reign that Ahaz went
so far as to close the temple-hall, and thereby suspend the
temple-worship ([Ch2 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#024)); in any
case it was not till after the alterations described in [Kg2
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#011). as having been made in the
temple.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 16:5</span></span>

Of the war which the allied Syrians and Israelites waged upon Ahaz, only
the principal fact is mentioned in [Kg2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005), namely, that the enemy marched
to Jerusalem to war, but were not able to make war upon the city, i.e.,
to conquer it; and in [Kg2 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006) we
have a brief notice of the capture of the port of Elath by the Syrians.
We find [Kg2 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005) again, with very
trifling alterations, in [Isa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001) at
the head of the prophecy, in which the prophet promises the king the
help of God and predicts that the plans of his enemies will fail.
According to this, the allied kings intended to take Judah, to dethrone
Ahaz, and to install a vassal king, viz., the son of Tabeel. We learn
still more concerning this war, which had already begun, according to
[Kg2 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037), in the closing years of
Jotham, from [Ch2 28:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005); namely,
that the two kings inflicted great defeats upon Ahaz, and carried off
many prisoners and a large amount of booty, but that the Israelites set
their prisoners at liberty again, by the direction of the prophet Oded,
and after feeding and clothing them, sent them back to their brethren.
It is now generally admitted that these statements are not at variance
with our account (as Ges., Winer, and others maintain), but can be
easily reconciled with it, and simply serve to complete it.

(Note: Compare C. P. Caspari's article on the Syro-Ephraimitish war in
the reigns of Jotham and Ahaz (Univers. Progr. von Christiania, 1849),
where the different views concerning the relation between the two
accounts are fully discussed, and the objections to the credibility of
the account given in the Chronicles most conclusively answered.)

The only questions in dispute are, whether the two accounts refer to two
different campaigns, or merely to two different events in the same
campaign, and whether the battles to which the Chronicles allude are to
be placed before or after the siege of Jerusalem mentioned in our text.
The first question cannot be absolutely decided, since there are no
decisive arguments to be found in favour of either the one supposition
or the other; and even "the one strong argument" which Caspari finds in
[Isa 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#006) against the idea of two
campaigns is not conclusive. For if the design which the prophet there
attributes to the allied kings, "we will make a breach in Judah," i.e.,
storm his fortresses and his passes and conquer them, does obviously
presuppose, that at the time when the enemy spake or thought in this
manner, Judah was still standing uninjured and unconquered, and
therefore the battles mentioned in [Ch2
28:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005) cannot yet have been fought; it
by no means follows from the connection between [Isa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#006) and [Isa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001) (of the same chapter) that [Isa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#006) refers to plans which the enemy
had only just formed at the time when Isaiah spoke ([Kg2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#004).). On the contrary, Isaiah is
simply describing the plans which the enemy devised and pursued, and
which they had no doubt formed from the very commencement of the war,
and now that they were marching against Jerusalem, hoped to attain by
the conquest of the capital. All that we can assume as certain is, that
the war lasted longer than a year, since the invasion of Judah by these
foes had already commenced before the death of Jotham, and that the
greater battles ([Ch2 28:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005)) were not
fought till the time of Ahaz, and it was not till his reign that the
enemy advanced to the siege of Jerusalem. - With regard to the second
question, it cannot be at all doubtful that the battles mentioned
preceded the advance of the enemy to the front of Jerusalem, and
therefore our account merely mentions the last and principal event of
the war, and that the enemy was compelled to retreat from Jerusalem by
the fact that the king of Assyria, Tiglath-pileser, whom Ahaz had called
to his help, marched against Syria and compelled Rezin to hurry back to
the defence of his kingdom. - It is more difficult to arrange in the
account of the capture of Elath by the Syrians ([Kg2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006)) among the events of this war.
The expression ההיא בּעת merely assigns it in a perfectly general manner
to the period of the war. The supposition of Thenius, that it did not
take place till after the siege of Jerusalem had been relinquished, and
that Rezin, after the failure of his attempt to take Jerusalem, that he
might not have come altogether in vain, marched away from Jerusalem
round the southern point of the Dead Sea and conquered Elath, is
impossible, because he would never have left his own kingdom in such a
defenceless state to the advancing Assyrians. We must therefore place
the taking of Elath by Rezin before his march against Jerusalem, though
we still leave it undecided how Rezin conducted the war against Ahaz:
whether by advancing along the country to the east of the Jordan,
defeating the Judaeans there ([Ch2
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005)), and then pressing forward to
Elath and conquering that city, while Pekah made a simultaneous
incursion into Judah from the north and smote Ahaz, so that it was not
till after the conquest of Elath that Rezin entered the land from the
south, and there joined Pekah for a common attack upon Jerusalem, as
Caspari supposes; or whether by advancing into Judah along with Pekah at
the very outset, and after he had defeated the army of Ahaz in a great
battle, sending a detachment of his own army to Idumaea, to wrest that
land from Judah and conquer Elath, while he marched with the rest of his
forces in combination with Pekah against Jerusalem.

"Rezin brought Elath to Aram and drove the Jews out of Elath, and
Aramaeans came to Elath and dwelt therein to this day." השׁיב does not
mean "to lead back" here, but literally to turn, to bring to a person;
for Elath had never belonged to Aram before this, but was an Edomitish
city, so that even if we were to read אדום for ארם, השׁיב could not mean
to bring back. But there is no ground whatever for altering לארם into
לאדום (Cler., Mich., Ew., Then., and others), whereas the form ארם is at
variance with such an alteration through the assumption of an exchange
of r and d, because אדום is never written defective אדם except in [Eze
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014). There are also no sufficient
reasons for altering וארומים into וארומים (Keri); ארומיּם is merely a
Syriac form for ארמּים with the dull Syriac u-sound, several examples of
which form occur in this very chapter, - e.g., הקּומים for הקּמים [Kg2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007), דּוּמשׂק for דּמּשׂק [Kg2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010), and אילות for אילת [Kg2
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#006), - whereas אדום, with additions,
is only written plene twice in the ancient books, and that in the
Chronicles, where the scriptio plena is generally preferred ([Ch2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014) and [Ch2
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#017)), but is always written
defective (אדמים). Moreover the statement that "אדומים (Edomites, not
the Edomites) came thither," etc., would be very inappropriate, since
Edomites certainly lived in this Idumaean city in perfect security, even
while it was under Judaean government. And there would be no sense in
the expression "the Edomites dwelt there to this day," since the
Edomites remained in their own land to the time of the captivity. All
this is applicable to Aramaeans alone. As soon as Rezin had conquered
this important seaport town, it was a very natural thing to establish an
Aramaean colony there, which obtained possession of the trade of the
town, and remained there till the time when the annals of the kings were
composed (for it is to this that the expression הזּה עד־היּום refers),
even after the kingdom of Rezin had long been destroyed by the
Assyrians, since Elath and the Aramaeans settled there were not affected
by that blow.

(Note: If we only observe that ארומים has not the article, and therefore
the words merely indicate the march of an Aramaean colony to Elath, it
is evident that אדומים would be unsuitable; for when the יהודים had been
driven from the city which the Syrians had conquered, it was certainly
not some Edomites but the Edomites who took possession again. Hence
Winer, Caspari, and others are quite right in deciding that ארומים is
the only correct reading.)

As soon as the Edomites had been released by Rezin from the control of
Judah, to which they had been brought back by Amaziah and Uzziah ([Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007), [Kg2
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#022)), they began plundering Judah
again ([Ch2 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#017)); and even the
Philistines took possession of several cities in the lowland, to avenge
themselves for the humiliation they had sustained at the hand of Uzziah
([Ch2 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 16:7</span></span>

In this distress Ahaz turned to Tiglath-pileser, without regarding
either the word of Isaiah in [Kg2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#004)., which promised salvation, or the
prophet's warning against an alliance with Assyria, and by sending the
gold and silver which were found in the treasures of the temple and
palace, purchased his assistance against Rezin and Pekah. Whether this
occurred immediately after the invasion of the land by the allied kings,
or not till after they had defeated the Judaean army and advanced
against Jerusalem, it is impossible to discover either from this verse
or from [Ch2 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#016); but probably it
was after the first great victory gained by the foe, with which Isa 7
and 8 agree. - On קומים for קמים see Ewald, 151, b.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 16:9</span></span>

Tiglath-pileser then marched against Damascus, took the city, slew
Rezin, and led the inhabitants away to Kir, as Amos had prophesied ([Amo
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003)). קיר, Kir, from which,
according to [Amo 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007), the Aramaeans
had emigrated to Syria, is no doubt a district by the river Kur (Κῦρος,
Κύῤῥος), which taking its rise in Armenia, unites with the Araxes and
flows into the Caspian Sea, although from the length of the river Kur it
is impossible to define precisely the locality in which they were
placed; and the statement of Josephus (Ant. ix. 13, 3), that the
Damascenes were transported εἰς τὴν ἄνω Μηδίαν, is somewhat indefinite,
and moreover has hardly been derived from early historical sources (see
M. v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Assurs, p. 158). Nothing is said here concerning
Tiglath-pileser's invasion of the kingdom of Israel, because this has
already been mentioned at [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029)
in the history of Pekah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 16:10</span></span>

Ahaz paid Tiglath-pileser a visit in Damascus, "to present to him his
thanks and congratulations, and possibly also to prevent a visit from
Tiglath-pileser to himself, which would not have been very welcome"
(Thenius). The form דּוּמשׂק is neither to be altered into דּמּשׂק nor
regarded as a copyist's error for דּרמשׂק, as we have several words in
this chapter that are formed with dull Syriac u-sound. The visit of Ahaz
to Damascus is simply mentioned on account of what follows, namely, that
Ahaz saw an altar there, which pleased him so much that he sent a
picture and model of it "according to all the workmanship thereof,"
i.e., its style of architecture, to Urijah the priest (see [Isa
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#002)), and had an altar made like it
for the temple, upon which, on his return to Jerusalem, he ordered all
the burnt-offerings, meat-offerings, and drink-offerings to be
presented. The allusion here is to the offerings which he commanded to
be presented for his prosperous return to Jerusalem.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 16:14</span></span>

Soon after this Ahaz went still further, and had "the copper altar
before Jehovah," i.e., the altar of burnt-offering in the midst of the
court before the entrance into the Holy Place, removed "from the front
of the (temple-) house, from (the spot) between the altar (the new one
built by Urijah) and the house of Jehovah (i.e., the temple-house(, and
placed at the north side of the altar." הקריב does not mean removit,
caused to be taken away, but admovit, and is properly to be connected
with הם על־ירך, notwithstanding the fact that אתו ויּתּן is inserted
between for the sake of greater clearness, as Maurer has already pointed
out.

(Note: There is nothing in the text to support the view of Thenius, that
Urijah had the brazen altar of burnt-offering erected by Solomon moved
farther forwards, nearer to the temple-house, and the new one put in its
place, whence it was afterwards shifted by Ahaz and the new one moved a
little farther to the south, that is to say, that he placed the two
altars close to one another, so that they now occupied the centre of the
court.)

On the use of the article with המּזבּח in the construct state, see
Ewald, 290, d.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 16:15</span></span>

He also commanded that the daily morning and evening sacrifice, and the
special offerings of the king and the people, should be presented upon
the new altar, and thereby put a stop to the use of the Solomonian
altar, "about which he would consider." The Chethb ויצוּהוּ is not to be
altered; the pron. suff. stands before the noun, as is frequently the
case in the more diffuse popular speech. The new altar is called "the
great altar," probably because it was somewhat larger than that of
Solomon. הקטר: used for the burning of the sacrifices. הערב מנחת is not
merely the meat-offering offered in the evening, but the whole of the
evening sacrifice, consisting of a burnt-offering and a meat-offering,
as in [Kg1 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#029), [Kg1
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#036). לבקּר יהיה־לי, the brazen altar
"will be to me for deliberation," i.e., I will reflect upon it, and then
make further arrangements. On בּקּר in this sense see [Pro
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#025). In the opinion of Ahaz, the
altar which had been built after the model of that of Damascus was not
to be an idolatrous altar, but an altar of Jehovah. The reason for this
arbitrary removal of the altar of Solomon, which had been sanctified by
the Lord Himself at the dedication of the temple by fire from heaven,
was, in all probability, chiefly that the Damascene altar pleased Ahaz
better; and the innovation was a sin against Jehovah, inasmuch as God
Himself had prescribed the form for His sanctuary (cf. [Exo
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040); [Exo
26:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#030); [Ch1
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#019)), so that any altar planned by
man and built according to a heathen model was practically the same as
an idolatrous altar. - The account of this altar is omitted from the
Chronicles; but in v. 23 we have this statement instead: "Ahaz offered
sacrifice to the gods of Damascus, who smote him, saying, The gods of
the kings of Aram helped them; I will sacrifice to them that they may
help me: and they were the ruin of him and of all Israel." Thenius and
Bertheau find in this account an alteration of our account of the
copying of the Damascene altar introduced by the chronicler as favouring
his design, namely, to give as glaring a description as possible of the
ungodliness of Ahaz. But they are mistaken. For even if the notice in
the Chronicles had really sprung from this alone, the chronicler would
have been able from the standpoint of the Mosaic law to designate the
offering of sacrifice upon the altar built after the model of an
idolatrous Syrian altar as sacrificing to these gods. But it is a
question whether the chronicler had in his mind merely the sacrifices
offered upon that altar in the temple-court, and not rather sacrifices
which Ahaz offered upon some bamah to the gods of Syria, when he was
defeated and oppressed by the Syrians, for the purpose of procuring
their assistance. As Ahaz offered his son in sacrifice to Moloch
according to [Kg2 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#003), he might just
as well have offered sacrifice to the gods of the Syrians.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 16:17</span></span>

Ahaz also laid his hand upon the other costly vessels of the court of
the temple. He broke off the panels of the Solomonian stands, which were
ornamented with artistic carving, and removed the basins from the
stands, and took the brazen sea from the brazen oxen upon which they
stood, and placed it upon a stone pavement. The ו before את־הכּיּר can
only have crept into the text through a copyist's error, and the
singular must be taken distributively: he removed from them (the stands)
every single basin. אבנים מרצפת (without the article) is not the stone
pavement of the court of the temple, but a pedestal made of stones
(βάσις λιθίνη, lxx) for the brazen sea. The reason why, or the object
with which Ahaz mutilated these sacred vessels, is not given. The
opinion expressed by Ewald, Thenius, and others, that Ahaz made a
present to Tiglath-pileser with the artistically wrought panels of the
stands, the basins, and the oxen of the brazen sea, is not only
improbable in itself, since you would naturally suppose that if Ahaz had
wished to make a "valuable and very welcome present" to the Assyrian
king, he would have chosen some perfect stands with their basins for
this purpose, and not merely the panels and basins; but it has not the
smallest support in the biblical text, - on the contrary, it has the
context against it. For, in the first place, if the objects named had
been sent to Tiglath-pileser, this would certainly have been mentioned,
as well as the sending of the temple and palace treasures. And, again,
the mutilation of these vessels is placed between the erection of the
new altar which was constructed after the Damascene model, and other
measures which Ahaz adopted as a protection against the king of Assyria
([Kg2 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#018)). Now if Ahaz, on his
return from visiting Tiglath-pileser at Damascus, had thought it
necessary to send another valuable present to that king in order to
secure his permanent friendship, he would hardly have adopted the
measures described in the next verse.

[Kg2 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#018)

"The covered Sabbath-stand, which they had built in the house (temple),
and the outer entrance of the king he turned (i.e., removed) into the
house of Jehovah before the king of Assyria." השּׁבּת מיסך (Keri מוּסך,
from סכך, to cover) is no doubt a covered place, stand or hall in the
court of the temple, to be used by the king whenever he visited the
temple with his retinue on the Sabbath or on feast-days; and "the outer
entrance of the king" is probably the special ascent into the temple for
the king mentioned in [Kg1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#005). In
what the removal of it consisted it is impossible to determine, from the
want of information as to its original character. According to Ewald
(Gesch. iii. p. 621) and Thenius, יהוה בּית הסב means, "he altered
(these places), i.e., he robbed them of their ornaments, in the house of
Jehovah." This is quite arbitrary. For even if יהוה בּית could mean "in
the house of Jehovah" in this connection, הסב does not mean to
disfigure, and still less "to deprive of ornaments." In [Kg2
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#034) and [Kg2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017) it signifies to alter the name,
not to disfigure it. Again, אשּׁוּר מלך מפּני, "for fear of the king of
Assyria," cannot mean, in this connection, "to make presents to the king
of Assyria." And with this explanation, which is grammatically
impossible, the inference drawn from it, namely, that Ahaz sent the
ornaments of the king's stand and king's ascent to the king of Assyria
along with the vessels mentioned in [Kg2
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#017), also falls to the ground. If
the alterations which Ahaz made in the stands and the brazen sea had any
close connection with his relation to Tiglath-pileser, which cannot be
proved, Ahaz must have been impelled by fear to make them, not that he
might send them as presents to him, but that he might hide them from him
if he came to Jerusalem, to which [Ch2
28:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#020) seems to refer. It is also
perfectly conceivable, as Zllich (Die Cherubimwagen, p. 56) conjectures,
that Ahaz merely broke off the panels from the stands and removed the
oxen from the brazen sea, that he might use these artistic works to
decorate some other place, possibly his palace. - Whether these artistic
works were restored or not at the time of Hezekiah's reformation or in
that of Josiah, we have no accounts to show. All that can be gathered
from [Kg2 25:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013); [Jer
52:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#017), and [Jer
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019), is, that the stands and the
brazen sea were still in existence in the time of Nebuchadnezzar, and
that on the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldaeans they were broken
in pieces and carried away to Babylonia as brass. The brazen oxen are
also specially mentioned in [Jer
52:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#020), which is not the case in the
parallel passage [Kg2 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#013); though
this does not warrant the conclusion that they were no longer in
existence at that time.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 16:19</span></span>

Conclusion of the reign of Ahaz. According to [Ch2
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#027), he was buried in the city of
David, but not in the sepulchres of the kings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 17](kg2017)

</div>
