<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2013)  [Next](kg2015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 14:1</span></span>

Reign of Amaziah of Judah (cf. 2 Chron 25). - [Kg2
14:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001). Length and spirit of his
reign, and his victory over the Edomites. - [Kg2
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001). Amaziah began to reign in the
second year of Joash of Israel. Now as Joash of Israel ascended the
throne, according to [Kg2 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#010), in
the thirty-seventh year of Joash of Judah, the latter cannot have
reigned thirty-nine full years, which might be reckoned as forty ([Kg2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#001)), according to the principle of
reckoning the current years as complete years, if the commencement of
his reign took place a month or two before Nisan, and his death occurred
a month or two after, without its being necessary to assume a regency.

[Kg2 14:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#002)

Amaziah reigned twenty-nine years in the same theocratical spirit as his
father Joash, only not like his ancestor David, i.e., according to the
correct explanation in [Ch2 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#002), not
with שׁלם לבב (see at [Kg1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004)),
since Amaziah, like his father Joash (see at [Kg2
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#003)), fell into idolatry in the
closing years of his reign (cf. [Ch2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014).). - Only the high places were
not taken away, etc.

[Kg2 14:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#005)

After establishing his own government, he punished the murderers of his
father with death; but, according to the law in [Deu
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016), he did not slay their children
also, as was commonly the custom in the East in ancient times, and may
very frequently have been done in Israel as well. The Chethb ימוּת is
correct, and the Keri ימת is an unnecessary alteration made after
Deuteronomy.

[Kg2 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007)

The brief account of the defeat of the Edomites in the Salt Valley and
of the taking of the city of Sela is completed by [Ch2
25:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#006). According to the latter,
Amaziah sought to strengthen his own considerable army by the addition
of 100,000 Israelitish mercenaries; but at the exhortation of a prophet
he sent the hired Israelites away again, at which they were so enraged,
that on their way home they plundered several of the cities of Judah and
put many men to death. The Edomites had revolted from Judah in the reign
of Joram ([Kg2 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020).); Amaziah now
sought to re-establish his rule over them, in which he was so far
successful, that he completely defeated them, slaying 10,000 in the
battle and then taking their capital, so that his successor Uzziah was
also able to incorporate the Edomitish port of Elath in his own kingdom
once more ([Kg2 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#022)). On the Salt
Valley (גּי־המּלח for גּיא־המּלח in the Chronicles), a marshy salt plain
in the south of the Dead Sea, see at [Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013). According to [Ch2
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#012) of the Chronicles, in addition
to the 10,000 who were slain in battle, 10,000 Edomites were taken
prisoners and cast headlong alive from the top of a rock. הסּלע (the
rock) with the article, because the epithet is founded upon the peculiar
nature of the city, was probably the capital of the Edomites, called by
the Greeks ἡ Πέτρα, and bore this name from its situation and the mode
in which it was built, since it was erected in a valley surrounded by
rocks, and that in such a manner that the houses were partly hewn in the
natural rock. Of this commercial city, which was still flourishing in
the first centuries of the Christian era, splendid ruins have been
preserved in a valley on the eastern side of the ghor which runs down to
the Elanitic Gulf, about two days' journey from the southern extremity
of the Dead Sea, on the east of Mount Hor, to which the Crusaders gave
the name of vallis Moysi, and which the Arabs still call Wady Musa (see
Robinson, Pal. ii. pp. 512ff., and for the history of this city, pp.
574ff., and Ritter's Erdkunde, xiv. pp. 1103ff.).

[Kg2 14:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#008)

War with Joash of Israel. - [Kg2 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#008).
Amaziah then sent a challenge to the Israelitish king Joash to go to war
with him. The outward reason for this was no doubt the hostile acts that
had been performed by the Israelitish troops, which had been hired for
the war with Edom and then sent back again ([Ch2
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#013)). But the inward ground was the
pride which had crept upon Amaziah in consequence of his victory over
the Edomites, and had so far carried him away, that he not only forgot
the Lord his God, to whom he was indebted for this victory, and brought
to Jerusalem the gods of the Edomites which he had taken in the war and
worshipped them, and silenced with threats the prophet who condemned
this idolatry ([Ch2 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014).), but in
his proud reliance upon his own power challenged the Israelitish king to
war.

[Kg2 14:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#009)

Jehoash (Joash) answered his insolent challenge, "Come, we will see one
another face to face," i.e., measure swords with one another in war,
with a similar fable to that with which Jotham had once instructed his
fellow-citizens ([Jdg 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#008).). "The
thorn-bush on Lebanon asked the cedar on Lebanon for its daughter as a
wife for his son, and beasts of the field went by and trampled down the
thorn-bush." This fable is, of course, not to be interpreted literally,
as though Amaziah were the thorn-bush, and Jehoash the cedar, and the
wild beasts the warriors; but the thorn-bush putting itself upon an
equality with the cedar is a figurative representation of a proud man
overrating his strength, and the desire expressed to the cedar of a wish
surpassing the bounds of one's condition; so that Thenius is not
warranted in inferring from this that Amaziah had in his mind the
subjugation of Israel to Judah again. The trampling down of the
thorn-bush by a wild beast is only meant to set forth the sudden
overthrow and destruction which may come unexpectedly upon the proud man
in the midst of his daring plans. [Kg2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#010) contains the application of the
parable. The victory over Edom has made thee high-minded. לבּך נשׂאך:
thy heart has lifted thee up, equivalent to, thou hast become
high-minded. הכּבד, "be honoured," i.e., be content with the fame thou
hast acquired at Edom, "and stay at home." Wherefore shouldst thou
meddle with misfortune? התגּרה, to engage in conflict or war. Misfortune
is thought of as an enemy, with whom he wanted to fight.

[Kg2 14:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#011)

But Amaziah paid not attention to this warning. A battle was fought at
Beth-shemesh (Ain-Shems, on the border of Judah and Dan, see at [Jos
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010)); Judah was smitten by Israel,
so that every one fled to his home.

[Kg2 14:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013)

Jehoash took king Amaziah prisoner, and then came to Jerusalem, and had
four hundred cubits of the wall broken down at the gate of Ephraim to
the corner gate, and then returned to Samaria with the treasures of the
palace and temple, and with hostages. the Chethb ויבאו is to be pointed
ויּאו, the vowel ו being placed after א, as in several other cases (see
Ewald, 18, b.). There is no ground for altering יביאהוּ after the
Chronicles (Thenius), although the reading in the Chronicles elucidates
the thought. For if Jehoash took Amaziah prisoner at Beth-shemesh and
then came to Jerusalem, he no doubt brought his prisoner with him, for
Amaziah remained king and reigned for fifteen years after the death of
Jehoash ([Kg2 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017)). The Ephraim
gate, which is generally supposed to be the same as the gate of Benjamin
([Jer 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#013); [Jer
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#007); [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010); compare [Neh
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016); [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039)), stood in the middle of the
north wall of Jerusalem, through which the road to Benjamin and Ephraim
ran; and the corner gate was at the north-western corner of the same
wall, as we may see from [Jer 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038)
and [Zac 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010). If, then, Jehoash had
four hundred cubits of the wall thrown down at the gate Ephraim to the
corner gate, the distance between the two gates was not more than four
hundred cubits, which applies to the northern wall of Zion, but not to
the second wall, which defended the lower city towards the north, and
must have been longer, and which, according to [Ch2
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005), was probably built for the first
time by Hezekiah (vid., Krafft, Topographie v. Jerus. pp. 117ff.).
Jehoash destroyed this portion of the Zion wall, that the city might be
left defenceless, as Jerusalem could be most easily taken on the level
northern side.

(Note: Thenius takes a different view. According to the description
which Josephus gives of this event (Ant. ix. 9, 3), he assumes that
Jehoash had the four hundred cubits of the city wall thrown down, that
he might get a magnificent gate (?) for himself and the invading army;
and he endeavours to support this assumption by stating that the space
between the Ephraim gate and the corner gate was much more than four
hundred cubits. But this assertion is based upon an assumption which
cannot be sustained, namely, that the second wall built by Hezekiah
([Ch2 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005)) was already in existence
in the time of Amaziah, and that the gates mentioned were in this wall.
The subjective view of the matter in Josephus has no more worth than
that of a simple conjecture.)

\- The treasures of the temple and palace, which Jehoash took away,
cannot, according to [Kg2 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#019), have
been very considerable. התּערבות בּני, sons of the citizenships, i.e.,
hostages (obsides, Vulg.). He took hostages in return for the release of
Amaziah, as pledges that he would keep the peace.

[Kg2 14:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#015)

The repetition of the notice concerning the end of the reign of Joash,
together with the formula from [Kg2
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#012) and [Kg2
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#013), may probably be explained from
the fact, that in the annals of the kings of Israel it stood after the
account of the war between Jehoash and Amaziah. This may be inferred
from the circumstance that the name of Joash is spelt invariably יהואשׁ
here, whereas in the closing notices in [Kg2
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#012) and [Kg2
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#013) we have the later form יואשׁ,
the one which was no doubt adopted by the author of our books. But he
might be induced to give these notices once more as he found them in his
original sources, from the statement in [Kg2
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017), that Amaziah outlived Jehoash
fifteen years, seeing therein a manifestation of the grace of God, who
would not destroy Amaziah notwithstanding his pride, but delivered him,
through the death of his victor, from further injuries at his hands. As
Amaziah ascended the throne in the second year of the sixteen years'
reign of Jehoash, and before his war with Israel made war upon the
Edomites and overcame them, the war with Israel can only fall in the
closing years of Jehoash, and this king cannot very long have survived
his triumph over the king of Judah.

[Kg2 14:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#018)

Conspiracy against Amaziah. - [Kg2
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#019). Amaziah, like his father Joash,
did not die a natural death. They made a conspiracy against him at
Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish, whither murderers were sent after
him, who slew him there. The earlier commentators sought for the cause
of this conspiracy in the unfortunate result of the war with Jehoash;
but this conjecture is at variance with the circumstance that the
conspiracy did not break out till fifteen years or more after that
event. It is true that in [Ch2 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#027)
we read "from the time that Amaziah departed from the Lord, they formed
a conspiracy against him;" but even this statement cannot be understood
in any other way than that Amaziah's apostasy gave occasion for
discontent, which eventually led to a conspiracy. For his apostasy began
with the introduction of Edomitish deities into Jerusalem after the
defeat of the Edomites, and therefore before the war with Jehoash, in
the first part of his reign, whereas the conspiracy cannot possibly have
lasted fifteen years or more before it came to a head. Lachish, in the
lowlands of Judah, has probably been preserved in the ruins of Um Lakis
(see at [Jos 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003)).

[Kg2 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#020)

"They lifted him upon the horses," i.e., upon the hearse to which the
king's horses had been harnessed, and brought him to Jerusalem, where he
was buried with his fathers, i.e., in the royal tomb.

[Kg2 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#021)

All the people of Judah, i.e., the whole nation, not the whole of the
men of war (Thenius), thereupon made his son Azariah (Uzziah) king, who
was only sixteen years old. עזריה or עזריהוּ is the name given to this
king here and [Kg2 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001), [Kg2
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#006),[Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008), [Kg2
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#017), [Kg2
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#023), and [Kg2
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#027), and [Ch1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#012); whereas in [Kg2
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#013), [Kg2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030), [Kg2
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#032), [Kg2
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#034); [Ch2
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#001), [Ch2
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#003),[Ch2
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#011), etc., and also [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001); [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001); [Hos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001); [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001), and [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005), he is called עזּיה or עזּיּהוּ
(Uzziah). This variation in the name is too constant to be attributable
to a copyist's error. Even the conjecture that Azariah adopted the name
Uzziah as king, or that it was given to him by the soldiers after a
successful campaign (Thenius), does not explain the use of the two names
in our historical books. We must rather assume that the two names, which
are related in meaning, were used promiscuously. עזריה signifies "in
Jehovah is help;" עזּיה, "whose strength is Jehovah." This is favoured
by the circumstance adduced by Bertheau, that among the descendants of
Kohath we also find an Uzziah who bears the name Azariah ([Ch1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#009) and [Ch1
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#021)), and similarly among the
descendants of Heman an Uzziel with the name Azarel ([Ch1
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#004) and [Ch1
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#018)).

[Kg2 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#022)

Immediately after his ascent of the throne, Uzziah built, i.e.,
fortified, Elath, the Idumaean port (see at [Kg1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#026)), and restored it to Judah again.
It is evident from this that Uzziah completed the renewed subjugation of
Edom which his father had begun. The position in which this notice
stands, immediately after his ascent of the throne and before the
account of the duration and character of his reign, may be explained in
all probability from the importance of the work itself, which not only
distinguished the commencement of his reign, but also gave evident of
its power.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 14:23</span></span>

Reign of Jeroboam II of Israel. - [Kg2
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023). The statement that Jeroboam the
son of Joash (Jehoash) ascended the throne in the fifteenth year of
Amaziah, agrees with [Kg2 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017),
according to which Amaziah outlived Jehoash fifteen years, since Amaziah
reigned twenty-nine years. On the other hand, the forty-one years'
duration of his reign does not agree with the statement in [Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008), that his son Zachariah did not
become king till the thirty-eighth year of Azariah (Uzziah); and
therefore Thenius proposes to alter the number 41 into 51, Ewald into
53. For further remarks, see [Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008). Jeroboam also adhered firmly to
the image-worship of his ancestors, but he raised his kingdom again to
great power.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 14:25</span></span>

He brought back (השׁיב), i.e., restored, the boundary of Israel from
towards Hamath in the north, to the point to which the kingdom extended
in the time of Solomon ([Kg1 8:65](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#065)), to
the sea of the Arabah (the present Ghor), i.e., to the Dead Sea (compare
[Deu 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#017), and [Deu
4:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#049), from which this designation of
the southern border of the kingdom of the ten tribes arose), "according
to the word of the Lord, which He had spoken through the prophet Jonah,"
who had probably used this designation of the southern boundary, which
was borrowed from the Pentateuch, in the announcement which he made. The
extent of the kingdom of Israel in the reign of Jeroboam is defined in
the same manner in [Amo 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#014), but
instead of הערבה ים the הערבה נחל is mentioned, i.e., in all probability
the Wady el Ashy, which formed the boundary between Moab and Edom; from
which we may see that Jeroboam had also subjugated the Moabites to his
kingdom, which is not only rendered probable by [Kg2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#006)., but is also implied in the words
that he restored the former boundary of the kingdom of Israel-On the
prophet Jonah, the son of Amittai, see the Comm. on [Jon
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001). Gath-hepher, in the tribe of
Zebulun, is the present village of Meshed, to the north of Nazareth (see
at [Jos 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#013)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 14:26</span></span>

The higher ground for this strengthening of Israel in the time of
Jeroboam was to be found in the compassion of God. The Lord saw the
great oppression and helpless condition of Israel, and had not yet
pronounced the decree of rejection. He therefore sent help through
Jeroboam. מאד מרה without the article, and governed by ישׂ אני (see
Ewald, 293, a.), signifies very bitter, מרה having taken the meaning of
מרר. This is the explanation adopted in all the ancient versions, and
also by Dietrich in Ges. Lex. וגו עצוּר ואפס, verbatim from [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036), to show that the kingdom of
Israel had been brought to the utmost extremity of distress predicted
there by Moses, and it was necessary that the Lord should interpose with
His help, if His people were not utterly to perish. דבּר לא: He had not
yet spoken, i.e., had not yet uttered the decree of rejection through
the mouth of a prophet. To blot out the name under the heavens is an
abbreviated expression for: among the nations who dwelt under the
heavens.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg2 14:28</span></span>

Of the rest of the history of Jeroboam we have nothing more than an
intimation that he brought back Damascus and Hamath of Judah to Israel,
i.e., subjugated it again to the kingdom of Israel. ליהוּדה is a
periphrastic form for the genitive, as proper names do not admit of any
form of the construct state, and in this case the simple genitive would
not have answered so well to the fact. For the meaning is: "whatever in
the two kingdoms of Damascus and Hamath had formerly belonged to Judah
in the times of David and Solomon." By Damascus and Hamath we are not to
understand the cities, but the kingdoms; for not only did the city of
Hamath never belong to the kingdom of Israel, but it was situated
outside the boundaries laid down by Moses for Israel (see at [Num
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008)). It cannot, therefore, have been
re-conquered (השׁיב) by Jeroboam. It was different with the city of
Damascus, which David had conquered and even Solomon had not permanently
lost (see at [Kg1 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#024)). Consequently
in the case of Damascus the capital is included in the kingdom.

[Kg2 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#029)

As Jeroboam reigned forty-one years, his death occurred in the
twenty-seventh year of Uzziah. If, then, his son did not begin to reign
till the thirty-eight year of Uzziah, as is stated in [Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008), he cannot have come to the
throne immediately after his father's death (see at [Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 15](kg2015)

</div>
