<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2005)  [Next](kg2007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 6:1</span></span>

Elisha Causes an Iron Axe to Float. - The following account gives us an
insight into the straitened life of the pupils of the prophets. [Kg2
6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001.md). As the common dwelling-place
had become too small for them, they resolved, with Elisha's consent, to
build a new house, and went, accompanied by the prophet, to the woody
bank of the Jordan to fell the wood that was required for the building.
The place where the common abode had become too small is not given, but
most of the commentators suppose it to have been Gilgal, chiefly from
the erroneous assumption that the Gilgal mentioned in [Kg2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#001.md) was in the Jordan valley to the
east of Jericho. Thenius only cites in support of this the reference in
לפניך ישׁבים (dwell with thee) to [Kg2
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#038.md); but this decides nothing, as the
pupils of the prophets sat before Elisha, or gathered together around
their master in a common home, not merely in Gilgal, but also in Bethel
and Jericho. We might rather think of Jericho, since Bethel and Gilgal
(Jiljilia) were so far distant from the Jordan, that there is very
little probability that a removal of the meeting-place to the Jordan,
such as is indicated by מקום שׁם נעשׂה־לּנוּ, would ever have been
thought of from either of these localities.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 6:5</span></span>

In the felling of the beams, the iron, i.e., the axe, of one of the
pupils of the prophets fell into the water, at which he exclaimed with
lamentation: "Alas, my lord (i.e., Elisha), and it was begged!" The
sorrowful exclamation implied a petition for help. ואת־הבּרזל: "and as
for the iron, it fell into the water;" so that even here את does not
stand before the nominative, but serves to place the noun in subjection
to the clause (cf. Ewald, 277, a.). שׁאוּל does not mean borrowed, but
begged. The meaning to borrow is attributed to שׁאל from a
misinterpretation of particular passages (see the Comm. on [Exo
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#022).md). The prophets' pupil had begged
the axe, because from his poverty he was unable to buy one, and hence
the loss was so painful to him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 6:6</span></span>

When he showed Elisha, in answer to his inquiry, the place where it had
fallen, the latter cut off a stick and threw it thither (into the water)
and made the iron flow, i.e., float (יצף from צוּף, to flow, as in [Deu
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#004).md); whereupon the prophets' pupil
picked the axe out of the water with his hand. The object of the miracle
was similar to that of the stater in the fish's mouth ([Mat
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027).md), or of the miraculous feeding,
namely, to show how the Lord could relieve earthly want through the
medium of His prophet. The natural interpretation of the miracle, which
is repeated by Thenius, namely, that "Elisha struck the eye of the axe
with the long stick which he thrust into the river, so that the iron was
lifted by the wood," needs no refutation, since the raising of an iron
axe by a long stick, so as to make it float in the water, is impossible
according to the laws of gravitation.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 6:8</span></span>

Elisha's Action in the War with the Syrians. - [Kg2
6:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#008.md). In a war which the Syrians
carried on against the Israelitish king Joram (not Jehoahaz, as Ewald,
Gesch. iii. p. 557, erroneously supposes), by sending flying parties
into the land of Israel (cf. [Kg2
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#023).md), Elisha repeatedly informed king
Joram of the place where the Syrians had determined to encamp, and
thereby frustrated the plans of the enemy. תּחנתי...אל־מקום: "at the
place of so and so shall my camp be." אלמני פּלני as in [Sa1
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#003.md) (see at [Rut
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001).md). תּחנות, the encamping or the
place of encampment (cf. Ewald, 161, a.), is quite appropriate, so that
there is no need either for the alteration into תּחבאוּ, "ye shall hide
yourselves" (Then.), or into תּנחתוּ, with the meaning which is
arbitrarily postulated, "ye shall place an ambush" (Ewald, Gesch. iii.
p. 558), or for the much simpler alteration into לי תּחנוּ, "pitch the
camp for me" (Bttcher). The singular suffix in תּחנתי refers to the king
as leader of the war: "my camp" = the camp of my army. "Beware of
passing over (עבר) this place," i.e., of leaving it unoccupied, "for
there have the Syrians determined to make their invasion." נחתּים, from
נחת, going down, with dagesh euphon., whereas Ewald (187, b.) is of
opinion that נחתּים, instead of being an intrans. part. Kal, might
rather be a part. Niph. of חת, which would not yield, however, any
suitable meaning. Thenius renders מעבר, "to pass by this place," which
would be grammatically admissible, but is connected with his conjecture
concerning תּחנתי, and irreconcilable with [Kg2
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#010.md). When the king of Israel,
according to [Kg2 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#010.md), sent to the
place indicated on account of Elisha's information, he can only have
sent troops to occupy it; so that when the Syrians arrived they found
Israelitish troops there, and were unable to attack the place. There is
nothing in the text about the Syrians bursting forth from their ambush.
הזהיר means to enlighten, instruct, but not to warn. נשׁמר־שׁם, "he took
care there," i.e., he occupied the place with troops, to defend it
against the Syrians, so that they were unable to do anything, "not once
and not twice," i.e., several times.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 6:11</span></span>

The king of the Syrians was enraged at this, and said to his servants,
"Do ye not show me who of our men (leans) to the king of Israel?" i.e.,
takes his part. משּׁלּנוּ = לנוּ מאשׁר, probably according to an
Aramaean dialect: see Ewald, 181, b., though he pronounces the reading
incorrect, and would read מכּלּנוּ, but without any ground and quite
unsuitably, as the king would thereby reckon himself among the traitors.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 6:12</span></span>

Then one of the servants answered, "No, my lord king," i.e., it is not
we who disclose thy plans to the king of Israel, "but Elisha the prophet
tells him what thou sayest in thy bed-chamber;" whereupon the king of
Syria inquired where the prophet lived, and sent a powerful army to
Dothan, with horses and chariots, to take him prisoner there. Dothan
(see [Gen 37:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#017).md), which according to
the Onom. was twelve Roman miles to the north of Samaria, has been
preserved under its old name in a Tell covered with ruins to the
south-west of Jenin, on the caravan-road from Gilead to Egypt (see Rob.
Bibl. Res. p. 158, and V. de Velde, Journey, i. pp. 273,274).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 6:15</span></span>

When Elisha's servant went out the next morning and saw the army, which
had surrounded the town in the night, he said to the prophet, "Alas, my
lord, how shall we do?" But Elisha quieted him, saying, "Fear not, for
those with us are more than those with them." He then prayed that the
Lord might open his servant's eyes, whereupon he saw the mountain upon
which Dothan stood full of fiery horses and chariots round about Elisha.
Opening the eyes was translation into the ecstatic state of
clairvoyance, in which an insight into the invisible spirit-world was
granted him. The fiery horses and chariots were symbols of the
protecting powers of Heaven, which surrounded the prophet. The fiery
form indicated the super-terrestrial origin of this host. Fire, as the
most ethereal of all earthly elements, was the most appropriate
substratum for making the spirit-world visible. The sight was based upon
Jacob's vision ([Gen 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#002).md), in which
he saw a double army of angels encamped around him, at the time when he
was threatened with danger from Esau.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 6:18</span></span>

When the enemy came down to Elisha, he prayed to the Lord that He would
smite them with blindness; and when this took place according to his
word, he said to them, This is not the way and this is not the city;
follow me, and I will lead you to the man whom ye are seeking; and led
them to Samaria, which was about four hours' distance from Dothan, where
their eyes were opened at Elisha's prayer, so that they saw where they
had been led. אליו ויּרדוּ cannot be understood as referring to Elisha
and his servant, who went down to the Syrian army, as J. H. Mich.,
Budd., F. v. Meyer, and Thenius, who wants to alter אליו into אליהם,
suppose, but must refer to the Syrians, who went down to the prophet, as
is evident from what followed. For the assumption that the Syrians had
stationed themselves below and round the mountain on which Dothan stood,
and therefore would have had to come up to Elisha, need not occasion an
unnatural interpretation of the words. It is true that Dothan stands
upon an isolated hill in the midst of the plain; but on the eastern side
it is enclosed by a ranger of hills, which project into the plain (see
V. de Velde, R. i. p. 273). The Syrians who had been sent against Elisha
had posted themselves on this range of hills, and thence they came down
towards the town of Dothan, which stood on the hill, whilst Elisha went
out of the town to meet them. It is true that Elisha's going out is not
expressly mentioned, but in [Kg2 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#019.md)
it is clearly presupposed. סנורים is mental blindness here, as in the
similar case mentioned in [Gen 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#011.md),
that is to say, a state of blindness in which, though a man has eyes
that can see, he does not see correctly. Elisha's untruthful statement,
"this is not the way," etc., is to be judged in the same manner as every
other ruse de guerre, by which the enemy is deceived.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 6:21</span></span>

Elisha forbade king Joram to slay the enemy that he had brought to him,
because he had not taken them prisoners in war, and recommended him to
treat them hospitably and then let them return to their lord. The object
of the miracle would have been frustrated if the Syrians had been slain.
For the intention was to show the Syrians that they had to do with a
prophet of the true God, against whom no human power could be of any
avail, that they might learn to fear the almighty God. Even when
regarded from a political point of view, the prophet's advice was more
likely to ensure peace than the king's proposal, as the result of [Kg2
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#023.md) clearly shows. The Syrians did
not venture any more to invade the land of Israel with flying parties,
from fear of the obvious protection of Israel by its God; though this
did not preclude a regular war, like that related in the following
account. For אבי see the Comm. on [Kg2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#013.md). וגו שׁבית האשׁר: "art thou
accustomed to slay that which thou hast taken captive with sword and
bow?" i.e., since thou dost not even slay those whom thou hast made
prisoners in open battle, how wouldst thou venture to put these to
death? כּרה להם יכרה, he prepared them a meal. כּרה is a denom. from
כּרה, a meal, so called from the union of several persons, like coena
from κοινή (vid., Dietr. on Ges. Lex. s. v. כרה).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 6:24</span></span>

After this there arose so fearful a famine in Samaria on the occasion of
a siege by Benhadad, that one mother complained to the king of another,
because she would not keep her agreement to give up her son to be eaten,
as she herself had already done.

[Kg2 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#025.md)

The famine became great - till an ass's head was worth eighty shekels of
silver, and a quarter of a cab of dove's dung was worth five shekels.
היה בּ, to become for = to be worth. The ass was an unclean animal, so
that it was not lawful to eat its flesh. Moreover the head of an ass is
the most inedible part of the animal. Eighty shekels were about seventy
thalers (10, 10s. - Tr.), or if the Mosaic bekas were called shekels in
ordinary life, thirty-five thalers (5, 5s.; see Bertheau, Zur Gesch. der
Isr. p. 49). According to Thenius, a quarter of a cab is a sixth of a
small Dresden measure (Msschen), not quite ten Parisian cubic inches.
Five shekels: more than four thalers (twelve shillings), or more than
two thalers (six shillings). The Chetbib חרייונים is to be read יונים,
excrementa columbarum, for which the Keri substitues the euphemistic
יונים, fluxus, profluvium columbarum. The expression may be taken
literally, since dung has been known to be collected for eating in times
of terrible famine (vid., Joseph. Bell. Jud. v. 13, 7); but it may also
be figuratively employed to signify a very miserable kind of food, as
the Arabs call the herba Alcali Arab. s̆nân, i.e., sparrow's dung, and
the Germans call Asa foetida Teufelsdreck. But there is no ground for
thinking of wasted chick-pease, as Bochart (Hieroz. ii. p. 582, ed.
Ros.) supposes (see, on the other hand, Celsii Hierobot. ii. p. 30ff.).

(Note: Clericus gives as a substantial parallel the following passage
from Plutarch (Artax. c. 24): "he only killed the beasts of burden, so
that the head of an ass was hardly to be bought for sixty drachmae;" and
Grotius quote the statement in Plin. h. n. viii. 57, that when Casalinum
was besieged by Hannibal a mouse was sold for 200 denaria.)

[Kg2 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#026.md)

As the king was passing by upon the wall to conduct the defence, a woman
cried to him for help; whereupon he replied: אל־יושׁעך יי, "should
Jehovah not help thee, whence shall I help thee? from the
threshing-floor or from the wine-press?" It is difficult to explain the
אל which Ewald (355, b.) supposes to stand for אם לא. Thenius gives a
simpler explanation, namely, that it is a subjective negation and the
sentence hypothetical, so that the condition would be only expressed by
the close connection of the two clauses (according to Ewald, 357). "From
the threshing-floor or from the wine-press?" i.e., I can neither help
thee with corn nor with wine, cannot procure thee either food or drink.
He then asked her what her trouble was; upon which she related to him
the horrible account of the slaying of her own child to appease her
hunger, etc.

[Kg2 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#030.md)

The king, shuddering at this horrible account, in which the curses of
the law in [Lev 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#029.md) and [Deu
28:53](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#053.md), [Deu
28:57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#057.md) had been literally fulfilled,
rent his clothes; and the people then saw that he wore upon his body the
hairy garment of penitence and mourning, מבּית, within, i.e., beneath
the upper garment, as a sign of humiliation before God, though it was
indeed more an opus operatum than a true bending of the heart before God
and His judgment. This is proved by his conduct in [Kg2
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#031.md). When, for example, the complaint
of the woman brought the heart-breaking distress of the city before him,
he exclaimed, "God do so to me ... if the head of Elisha remain upon him
to-day." Elisha had probably advised that on no condition should the
city be given up, and promised that God would deliver it, if they
humbled themselves before Him in sincere humility and prayed for His
assistance. The king thought that he had done his part by putting on the
hairy garment; and as the anticipated help had nevertheless failed to
come, he flew into a rage, for which the prophet was to pay the penalty.
It is true that this rage only proceeded from a momentary ebullition of
passion, and quickly gave place to a better movement of his conscience.
The king hastened after the messenger whom he had sent to behead Elisha,
for the purpose of preventing the execution of the murderous command
which he had given in the hurry of his boiling wrath ([Kg2
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#032).md); but it proves, nevertheless,
that the king was still wanting in that true repentance, which would
have sprung from the recognition of the distress as a judgment inflicted
by the Lord. the desperate deed, to which his violent wrath had impelled
him, would have been accomplished, if the Lord had not protected His
prophet and revealed to him the king's design, that he might adopt
defensive measures.

[Kg2 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#032.md)

The elders of the city were assembled together in Elisha's house,
probably to seek for counsel and consolation; and the king sent a man
before him (namely, to behead the prophet); but before the messenger
arrived, the prophet told the elders of the king's intention: "See ye
that this son of a murderer (Joram, by descent and disposition a genuine
son of Ahab, the murderer of Naboth and the prophets) is sending to cut
off my head?" and commanded them to shut the door against the messenger
and to force him back at the door, because he already heard the sound of
his master's feet behind him. These measures of Elisha, therefore, were
not dictated by any desire to resist the lawful authorities, but were
acts of prudence by which he delayed the execution of an unrighteous and
murderous command which had been issued in haste, and thereby rendered a
service to the king himself. - In [Kg2
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#033.md) we have to supply from the
context that the king followed close upon the messenger, who came down
to Elisha while he was talking with the elders; and he (the king) would
of course be admitted at once. For the subject to ויּאמר is not the
messenger, but the king, as is evident from [Kg2
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#002.md) and 2 Kings 17. The king said:
"Behold the calamity from the Lord, why shall I wait still further for
the Lord?" - the words of a dispairing man, in whose soul, however,
there was a spark of faith still glimmering. The very utterance of his
feelings to the prophet shows that he had still a weak glimmer of hope
in the Lord, and wished to be strengthened and sustained by the prophet;
and this strengthening he received.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 7](kg2007.md)

</div>
