<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2018)  [Next](kg2020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 19:1</span></span>

When Hezekiah had heard from his counsellors the report of Rabshakeh's
words, he rent his clothes with horror at his daring mockery of the
living God ([Kg2 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#004)), put on
mourning clothes as a sign of the trouble of his soul and went into the
temple, and at the same time sent Eliakim and Shebna with the oldest of
the priests in mourning costume to the prophet Isaiah, to entreat him to
intercede with the Lord in these desperate circumstances.

(Note: "But the most wise king did not meet his blasphemies with
weapons, but with prayer, and tears, and sackcloth, and entreated the
prophet Isaiah to be his ambassador." - Theodoret.)

The order of the words: Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, is unusual
(cf. [Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025); [Kg2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#001); [Kg1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#007), etc.), and is therefore altered
in Isaiah into Isaiah the son of Amoz, the prophet.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 19:3</span></span>

"A day of distress, and of chastisement, and of rejection is this day."
תּוכחה: the divine chastisement. נאצה: contemptuous treatment, or
rejection of the people on the part of God (compare נאץ, [Deu
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#019); [Jer
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#021); [Lam
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#006)). "For children have come to the
birth, and there is not strength to bring forth." A figure denoting
extreme danger, the most desperate circumstances. If the woman in
travail has not strength to bring forth the child which has come to the
mouth of the womb, both the life of the child and that of the mother are
exposed to the greatest danger; and this was the condition of the people
here (see the similar figure in [Hos
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#013)). For לדה instead of לדת, see
Ges. 69, 2 Anm.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 19:4</span></span>

Perhaps Jehovah thy God will hear the blasphemies of the living God on
the part of Rabshakeh. ישׁמע: hear, equivalent to observes, take notice
of, and in this case punish. חי אלהים: the living God, in contrast to
the gods of the heathen, who are only lifeless idols (cf. [Sa1
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026), [Sa1
17:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#036)). והוכיח is not to be taken in
connection with לחרף, as if it stood for להוכיח, "and to scold with
words" (Luth., Ges., etc.), but is a perf. rel. or a progressive perfect
(Ewald, 234, a.), and the continuation of ישׁמע: "and will chastise
(punish, sc. him) for the words which He has heard." תף ונשׂאת
"therefore lift up prayer (to heaven) for the (still) existing remnant,
sc. of the people of God;" nearly all Judah having come into the power
of Sennacherib since the carrying away of the ten tribes.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 19:5</span></span>

Isaiah replied with this comforting promise: Hezekiah was not to be
afraid of the blasphemous words of the Assyrian king; the Lord would
frighten him with a report, so that he would return to his own land, and
there would He cause him to fall by the sword. מלך א נערי, the servants
or young men of the Assyrian king, is a derogatory epithet applied to
the officials of Assyria. "Behold, I put a spirit into him, so that he
shall hear a report and return into his own land." שׁמוּעה does not
refer to the report of the destruction of his army ([Kg2
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)), as Thenius supposes, for
Sennacherib did not hear of this through the medium of an army, but was
with the army himself at the time when it was smitten by the angel of
the Lord; it refers to the report mentioned in [Kg2
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#009). For even if he made one last
attempt to secure the surrender of Jerusalem immediately upon hearing
this report, yet after the failure of this attempt to shake the firmness
of Hezekiah his courage must have failed him, and the thought of return
must have suggested itself, so that this was only accelerated by the
blow which fell upon the army. For, as O. v. Gerlach has correctly
observed, "the destruction of the army would hardly have produced any
decisive effect without the approach of Tirhakah, since the great power
of the Assyrian king, especially in relation to the small kingdom of
Judah, was not broken thereby. But at the prayer of the king the Lord
added this miracle to the other, which His providence had already
brought to pass. - For the fulfilment of the prophecy of Sennacherib's
death, see [Kg2 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 19:8</span></span>

In the meantime Rabshakeh had returned to his king at Libnah (see at
[Kg2 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#022)), to which he had gone from
Lachish, probably after having taken that fortress.

[Kg2 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#009)

There Sennacherib heard that Tirhakah was advancing to make war against
him. Tirhakah, Θαρακά (lxx), king of Cush, is the Ταρακός of Manetho,
the successor of Sevechus (Shebek II), the third king of the
twenty-fifth (Ethiopian) dynasty, described by Strabo (xv. 687), who
calls him Τεάρκων, as a great conqueror. His name is spelt Thlqa or
Tharqo upon the monuments, and on the Pylon of the great temple at
Medinet-Abu he is represented in the form of a king, cutting down
enemies of conquered lands (Egypt, Syria, and Tepop, an unknown land)
before the god Ammon (see Brugsch, hist. d'Egypte, i. pp. 244,245).

(Note: According to Jul. Afric. (in Syncell. i. p. 139, ed. Dind.) he
reigned eighteen years, according to Euseb. (in Syncell. p. 140) twenty
years. Both statements are incorrect; for, according to an Apis-stele
published by Mariette, the birth of an Apis who died in the twentieth
year of Psammetichus fell in the twenty-sixth year of Tirhakah, so that
the reign of Tirhakah may be supposed to have lasted twenty-eight years
(see Brugsch, l.c. p. 247). But the chronological conclusions respecting
the date of his reign are very uncertain. Whereas M. v. Niebuhr (Gesch.
Ass. p. 72) fixes his expedition against Sennacherib in the
thirty-seventh aer. Nab., i.e., 710 b.c., and the commencement of his
reign over Egypt in 45 aer. Nab., i.e., 702 b.c., and assumes that he
marched against Sennacherib before he was king of Egypt, which is
apparently favoured by the epithet king of Cush, not of Egypt; Brugsch
(l.c. p. 292) has given the year 693 b.c. as the commencement of his
reign. It is obvious that this statement is irreconcilable with the O.T.
chronology, since the fourteenth year of Hezekiah, in which Sennacherib
invaded Judah, corresponds to the year 714 or 713 b.c. These diversities
simply confirm our remark (p. 411), that the chronological data as to
the kings of Egypt before Psammetichus cannot lay any claim to
historical certainty. For an attempt to solve this discrepancy see M. v.
Niebuhr, pp. 458ff.)

\- On hearing the report of the advance of Tirhakah, Sennacherib sent
ambassadors again to Hezekiah with a letter ([Kg2
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#014)), in which he summoned him once
more to give up his confidence in his God, and his assurance that
Jerusalem would not be delivered into the hands of the king of Assyria,
since the gods of no other nation had been able to save their lands and
cities from the kings of Assyria who had preceded him. The letter
contained nothing more, therefore, than a repetition of the arguments
already adduced by Rabshakeh ([Kg2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#019).), though a larger number of the
lands conquered by the Assyrians are given, for the purpose of
strengthening the impression intended to be made upon Hezekiah of the
irresistible character of the Assyrian arms. - To offer a successful
resistance to Tirhakah and overcome him, Sennacherib wanted above all
things a firm footing in Judah; and for this the possession of Jerusalem
was of the greatest importance, since it would both cover his back and
secure his retreat. Fortifications like Lachish and Libnah could be
quickly taken by a violent assault. But it was very different with
Jerusalem. Salmanasar had stood before Samaria for three years before he
was able to conquer it; and Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem for two
years before the city was starved out and it was possible to take it
([Kg2 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001).). But as Tirhakah was
approaching, Sennacherib had no time now for so tedious a siege. He
therefore endeavoured to induce Hezekiah to surrender the city quietly
by a boastful description of his own power. Instead of ויּשׁלח ויּשׁב
([Kg2 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#009)), we have in Isaiah ויּשׁלח
ויּשׁמע, "when he heard this he sent," which is probably the more
original, and indicates that when Sennacherib received the intelligence
he sent at once (Drechsler).

[Kg2 19:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#010)

ישּׁיאך אל: "let not thy God deceive thee," i.e., do not allow yourself
to be deceived by your confidence in your God. לאמר, to say, i.e., to
think or believe, that Jerusalem will not be given, etc. To shatter this
confidence, Sennacherib reminds him of the deeds of the Assyrian kings.
להחרימם, to ban them, i.e., by smiting them with the ban. The verb החרים
is chosen with emphasis, to express the unsparing destruction. הנּצל
ואתּה: and thou shouldst be saved? - a question implying a strong
negative.

[Kg2 19:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#012)

"Have the gods of the nations delivered them?" אתם is not a pronoun used
in anticipation of the object, which follows in וגו גּוזן (Thenius), but
refers to כּל־הארצות in [Kg2 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#011), a
specification of which is given in the following enumeration. Gozan may
be the province of Gauzanitis in Mesopotamia, but it may just as well be
the country of Gauzania on the other side of the Tigris (see at [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006)). The combination with Haran does
not force us to the first assumption, since the list is not a
geographical but a historical one. - Haran (Charan), i.e., the Carrae of
the Greeks and Romans, where Abraham's father Terah died, a place in
northern Mesopotamia (see at [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)), is probably not merely the
city here, but the country in which the city stood. - Rezeph (רצף), the
Arabic rutsâfat, a very widespread name, since Jakut gives nine cities
of this name in his Geographical Lexicon, is probably the most
celebrated of the cities of that name, the Rusapha of Syria, called
̔Ρησάφα in Ptol. v. 15, in Palmyrene, on the road from Racca to Emesa, a
day's journey from the Euphrates (cf. Ges. Thes. p. 1308). - "The sons
of Eden, which (were in Telassar," were evidently a tribe whose chief
settlement was in Telassar. By עדן we might understand the בּית־עדן of
[Amo 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005), a city in a pleasant region
of Syria, called Παράδεισος by Ptol. (v. 15), since there is still a
village called Ehden in that locality (cf. Burckhardt, Syr. p. 66, and
v. Schubert, Reise, iii. p. 366), if we could only discover Telassar in
the neighbourhood, and if the village of Ehden could be identified with
Παράδεισος and the Eden of the Bible, as is done even by Gesenius on
Burckhardt, p. 492, and Thes. p. 195; but this Ehden is spelt ‛hdn in
Arabic, and is not to be associated with עדן (see Rob. Bibl. Res. pp.
586, 587). Moreover the Thelseae near Damascus (in the Itin. Ant. p.
196, ed. Wess.) is too unlike Telassar to come into consideration. There
is more to be said in favour of the identification of our עדן with the
Assyrian Eden, which is mentioned in [Eze
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023) along with Haran and Calneh as
an important place for trade, although its position cannot be more
certainly defined; and neither the comparison with the tract of land
called (Syr.) ma‛āden, Maadon, which Assemani (Biblioth. or. ii. p. 224)
places in Mesopotamia, towards the Tigris, in the present province of
Diarbekr (Ges., Win.), nor the conjecture of Knobel that the tribe-name
Eden may very probably have been preserved in the large but very
dilapidated village of Adana or Adna, some distance to the north of
Bagdad (Ker Porter, Journey, ii. p. 355, and Ritter, Erdk. ix. p. 493),
can be established as even a probability. תּלאשּׂר, Telassar, is also
quite unknown. The name applies very well to Thelser on the eastern side
of the Tigris (Tab. Peut. xi. e), where even the later Targums on [Gen
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#012) have placed it, interpreting
Nimrod's Resen by תלסר, תלאסר, though Knobel opposes this on the ground
that a place in Assyria proper is unsuitable in such a passage as this,
where the Assyrian feats of war outside Assyria itself are enumerated.
Movers (Phniz. ii. 3, p. 251) conjectures that the place referred to is
Thelassar in Terodon, a leading emporium for Arabian wares on the
Persian Gulf, and supposes that Terodon has sprung from Teledon with the
Persian pronunciation of the תל, which is very frequent in the names of
Mesopotamian cities. This conjecture is at any rate a more natural one
than that of Knobel on [Isa 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#012),
that the place mentioned in Assemani (Bib. or. iii. 2, p. 870), (Arabic)
tl b-ṣrṣr, Tel on the Szarszar, to the west of the present Bagdad, is
intended. - With regard to the places named in [Kg2
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#013), see at [Kg2
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#034).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 19:14</span></span>

Hezekiah's prayer. - [Kg2 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#014).
Hezekiah took the letter, read it, went into the temple and spread it
out before Jehovah, to lay open its contents before God. The contents of
the letter are given in [Kg2 19:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#010)
in the form of the message which the ambassadors delivered to Hezekiah
from their king, because the ambassadors communicated to Hezekiah by
word of mouth the essential contents of the writing which they conveyed,
and simply handed him the letter as a confirmation of their words.
ספרים, like litterae, means a letter; hence the singular suffix attached
to ויּפרשׂהוּ, whereas in the case of ויּקראם, which stands nearer, the
suffix follows the number of the noun to which it refers. The spreading
out of the letter before God was an embodiment of the wish, which sprang
from a child-like and believing trust, that the Lord would notice and
punish that defiance of the living God which it contained. What Hezekiah
meant by this action he expressed in the following prayer.

[Kg2 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#015)

In opposition to the delusion of the Assyrians, he describes Jehovah,
the God of Israel, as the only God of all the kingdoms of the earth,
since He was the Creator of heaven and earth. הכּרבים ישׁב (see at [Sa1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#004) and [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022)) indicates the covenant-relation
into which Jehovah, the almighty Creator and Ruler of the whole world,
had entered towards Israel. As the covenant God who was enthroned above
the cherubim the Lord was bound to help His people, if they turned to
Him with faith in the time of their distress and entreated His
assistance; and as the only God of all the world He had the power to
help. In Isaiah, צבאות, which is very rare in historical prose, but very
common in prophetical addresses, is added to the name יהוה, and thus
Jehovah at the very outset is addressed as the God of the universe. On
the meaning of צבאות, see at [Sa1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003).
On האלהים הוּא אתּה, see [Sa2 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#028) and
[Kg1 18:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#039).

[Kg2 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#016)

The accumulation of the words, "bow down Thine ear, Jehovah, and hear;
open, Jehovah, Thine eyes and see, and hear the words," etc., indicates
the earnestness and importunity of the prayer. The plural עיניך by the
side of the singular אזנך is the correct reading, since the expression
"to incline the ear" is constantly met with ([Psa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#006); [Psa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#003); [Psa
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#011), etc.); and even in the plural,
"incline ye your ear" ([Psa 78:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#001); [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003)), and on the other hand "to open
the eyes" ([Job 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#019); [Pro
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#013); [Zac
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#004); [Dan
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#018)), because a man always opens both
eyes to see anything, whereas he turns one ear to a person speaking. The
עינך of Isaiah is also plural, though written defectively, as the Masora
has already observed. The suffix in שׁלחו, which is wanting in Isaiah,
belongs to אשׁר, and refers with this to דּברי in the sense of speech:
the speech which Sennacherib had made in his letter.

[Kg2 19:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#017)

After the challenge, to observe the blasphemies of Sennacherib, Hezekiah
mentions the fact that the Assyrians have really devastated all lands,
and therefore that it is not without ground that they boast of their
mighty power; but he finds the explanation of this in the impotence and
nothingness of the gods of the heathen. אמנם, truly, indeed - the kings
of Asshur have devastated the nations and their land. Instead of this we
find in Isaiah: "they have devastated all lands and their (own) land" -
which is evidently the more difficult and also the more original
reading, and has been altered in our account, because the thought that
the Assyrians had devastated their own land by making war upon other
lands, that is to say, had depopulated it and thereby laid it waste, was
not easy to understand. "And have cast their gods into the fire, for
they are not gods, but works of human hands, wood and stone, and have
thus destroyed them." Hezekiah does not mention this as a sign of the
recklessness of the Assyrians (Knobel), but, because Sennacherib had
boasted that the gods of no nation had been able to resist him (vv. 12,
13), to put this fact in the right light, and attach thereto the prayer
that Jehovah, by granting deliverance, would make known to all the
kingdoms of the earth that He alone was God. Instead of ונתנוּ we have
in Isaiah ונתון, the inf. absol.; in this connection the more difficult
and more genuine reading. This also applies to the omission of אלהים
([Kg2 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#019)) in [Isa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#020), since the use of Jehovah as a
predicate, "that Thou alone art Jehovah," is very rare, and has
therefore been misunderstood even by Gesenius. By the introduction of
Elohim, the thought "that Thou Jehovah art God alone" is simplified.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 19:20</span></span>

The divine promise. - [Kg2 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#020), [Kg2
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#021). When Hezekiah had prayed, the
prophet Isaiah received a divine revelation with regard to the hearing
of this prayer, which he sent, i.e., caused to be handed over, to the
king. שׁמעתּי ([Kg2 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#021)) is omitted
in Isaiah, so that וגו התפּלּלתּ אשׁר is to be taken in the sense of
"with regard to that which thou hast prayed to me," whilst שׁמעתּי (I
have heard) elucidates the thought and simplifies the construction. The
word of the Lord announced to the king, (1) the shameful retreat of
Sennacherib as a just retribution for his mockery of the living God
([Kg2 19:21-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#021); [Isa
37:22-29](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#022)); (2) the confirmation of
this assurance through the indication of a sign by which Hezekiah was to
recognise the deliverance of Jerusalem ([Kg2
19:29-31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#029); [Isa
37:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030)), and through the distinct
promise, that the Assyrian would neither come into the city nor besiege
it, because the Lord was sheltering it ([Kg2
19:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#032); [Isa
37:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#033)). In the first part the words
are addressed with poetic vivacity directly to Sennacherib, and scourge
his haughty boastings by pointing to the ridicule and scorn which would
follow him on his departure from the land.

[Kg2 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#021)

"The virgin daughter Zion despises thee, the daughter Jerusalem shakes
the head behind thee." By daughter Zion, daughter Jerusalem, we are not
to understand the inhabitants of Zion, or of Jerusalem, as though בּת
stood for בּנים or בּני (Ges., Hitzig, and others); but the city itself
with its inhabitants is pictorially personified as a daughter and
virgin, and the construct state בּת־ציּון is to be taken, like פּרת נהר,
as in apposition: "daughter Zion," not daughter of Zion (vid., Ges. 116,
5; Ewald, 287, e.). Even in the case of בּתוּלת the construct state
expresses simply the relation of apposition. Zion is called a "virgin"
as being an inviolable city to the Assyrians, i.e., one which they
cannot conquer. Shaking the head is a gesture denoting derision and
pleasure at another's misfortune (cf. [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008); [Psa
109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025), etc.). "Behind thee," i.e.,
after thee as thou goest away, is placed first as a pictorial feature
for the sake of emphasis.

[Kg2 19:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#022)

This derision falls upon the Assyrian, for having blasphemed the Lord
God by his foolish boasting about his irresistible power. "Whom hast
thou despised and blasphemed, and against whom hast thou lifted up the
voice? and thou liftest up thine eyes against the Holy One of Israel."
Lifting up the voice refers to the tone of threatening assumption, in
which Rabshakeh and Sennacherib had spoken. Lifting up the eyes on high,
i.e., to the heavens, signifies simply looking up to the sky (cf. [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026)), not "directing proud looks
against God" (Ges.). Still less is מרום to be taken adverbially in the
sense of haughtily, as Thenius and Knobel suppose. The bad sense of
proud arrogance lies in the words which follow, "against the Holy One of
Israel," or in the case of Isaiah, where אל stands for על, in the
context, viz., the parallelism of the members. God is called the Holy
One of Israel as He who manifests His holiness in and upon Israel. This
title of the Deity is one of the peculiarities of Isaiah's range of
thought, although it originated with Asaph ([Psa
78:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#041); see at [Isa
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#004)). This insult to the holy God
consisted in the fact that Sennacherib had said through his servants
([Kg2 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#023), [Kg2
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024)): "With my chariots upon
chariots I have ascended the height of the mountains, the uttermost part
of Lebanon, so that I felled the tallness of its cedars, the choice of
its cypresses, and came to the shelter of its border, to the forest of
its orchard. I have dug and drunk strange water, so that I dried up all
the rivers of Egypt with the sole of my feet." The words put into the
mouth of the Assyrian are expressive of the feeling which underlay all
his blasphemies (Drechsler). The two verses are kept quite uniform, the
second hemistich in both cases expressing the result of the first, that
is to say, what the Assyrian intended still further to perform after
having accomplished what is stated in the first hemistich. When he has
ascended the heights of Lebanon, he devastates the glorious trees of the
mountain. Consequently in [Kg2 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024)
the drying up of the Nile of Egypt is to be taken as the result of the
digging of wells in the parched desert; in other words, it is to be
interpreted as descriptive of the devastation of Egypt, whose whole
fertility depended upon its being watered by the Nile and its canals. We
cannot therefore take these verses exactly as Drechsler does; that is to
say, we cannot assume that the Assyrian is speaking in the first
hemistichs of both verses of what he (not necessarily Sennacherib
himself, but one of his predecessors) has actually performed. For even
if the ascent of the uttermost heights of Lebanon had been performed by
one of the kings of Assyria, there is no historical evidence whatever
that Sennacherib or one of his predecessors had already forced his way
into Egypt. The words are therefore to be understood in a figurative
sense, as an individualizing picture of the conquests which the
Assyrians had already accomplished, and those which they were still
intending to effect; and this assumption does not necessarily exhibit
Sennacherib "as a mere braggart, who boastfully heaps up in ridiculous
hyperbole an enumeration of the things which he means to perform"
(Drechsler). For if the Assyrian had not ascended with the whole
multitude of his war-chariots to the loftiest summits of Lebanon, to
feel its cedars and its cypresses, Lebanon had set no bounds to his
plans of conquest, so that Sennacherib might very well represent his
forcing his way into Canaan as an ascent of the lofty peaks of this
mountain range. Lebanon is mentioned, partly as a range of mountains
that was quite inaccessible to war-chariots, and partly as the northern
defence of the land of Canaan, through the conquest of which one made
himself lord of the land. And so far as Lebanon is used synecdochically
for the land of which it formed the defence, the hewing down of its
cedars and cypresses, those glorious witnesses of the creation of God,
denotes the devastation of the whole land, with all its glorious works
of nature and of human hands. The chief strength of the early Asiatic
conquerors consisted in the multitude of their war-chariots: they are
therefore brought into consideration simply as signs of vast military
resources; the fact that they could only be used on level ground being
therefore disregarded. The Chethb רכבּי רכב, "my chariots upon
chariots," is used poetically for an innumerable multitude of chariots,
as גּובי גּוב for an innumerable host of locusts ([Nah
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#017)), and is more original than the
Keri רכבּי רב, the multitude of my chariots, which simply follows
Isaiah. The "height of the mountains" is more precisely defined by the
emphatic לבנון ירכּתי, the uttermost sides, i.e., the loftiest heights,
of Lebanon, just as בור ירכּתי in [Isa
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#015) and [Eze
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#023) are the uttermost depths of
Sheol. ארזיו קומת, his tallest cedars. בּרשׁיו מבחור, his most select or
finest cypresses. קצּה מלון, for which Isaiah has the more usual קצּו
מרום, "the height of his end," is the loftiest point of Lebanon on which
a man can rest, not a lodging built on the highest point of Lebanon
(Cler., Vitr., Ros.). כּרמלּו יער, the forest of his orchard, i.e., the
forest resembling an orchard. The reference is to the celebrated
cedar-forest between the loftiest peaks of Lebanon at the village of
Bjerreh.

[Kg2 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024)

[Kg2 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024) refers to the intended
conquest of Egypt. Just as Lebanon could not stop the expeditions of the
Assyrians, or keep them back from the conquest of the land of Canaan, so
the desert of et Tih, which separated Egypt from Asia, notwithstanding
its want of water (cf. Herod. iii. 5; Rob. Pal. i. p. 262), was no
hindrance to him, which could prevent his forcing his way through it and
laying Egypt waste. The digging of water is, of course, not merely "a
reopening of the wells that had been choked with rubbish, and the
cisterns that had been covered up before the approaching enemy"
(Thenius), but the digging of wells in the waterless desert. זרים מים,
strange water, is not merely water belonging to others, but water not
belonging to this soil (Drechsler), i.e., water supplied by a region
which had none at other times. By the perfects the thing is represented
as already done, as exposed to no doubt whatever; we must bear in mind,
however, that the desert of et Tih is not expressly named, but the
expression is couched in such general terms, that we may also assume
that it includes what the Assyrian had really effected in his
expeditions through similar regions. The drying up of the rivers with
the soles of the feet is a hyperbolical expression denoting the
omnipotence with which the Assyrian rules over the earth. Just as he
digs water in the desert where no water is to be had, so does he
annihilate it where mighty rivers exist.

(Note: Compare the similar boasting of Alarich, already quoted by
earlier commentators, in Claudian, de bello Geth. v. 526ff.:

cum cesserit omnis

Obsequiis natura meis? subsidere nostris

Sub pedibus montes, arescere vidimus amnes.

v\. 532. Fregi Alpes. galeis Padum victricibus hausi.)

יאורי are the arms and canals of the Yeor, i.e., of the Nile. מצור, a
rhetorical epithet for Egypt, used not only here, but also in [Isa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006) and [Mic
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#012).

[Kg2 19:25-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#025)

To this foolish boasting the prophet opposes the divine purpose which
had been formed long ago, and according to which the Assyrian, without
knowing it or being willing to acknowledge it, had acted simply as the
instrument of the Lord, who had given him the power to destroy, but who
would soon restrain his ranting against Him, the true God.

[Kg2 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#025)

"Hast thou not heard? Long ago have I done this, from the days of olden
time have I formed it! Now have I brought it to pass, that fortified
cities should be to be destroyed into waste heaps." [Kg2
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#026). "And their inhabitants, short
of hand, were dismayed and put to shame; they were herb of the field and
green of the turf, grass of the roofs and blighted corn before the
stalk." [Kg2 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#027). "And thy sitting
and thy going out and thy coming I know, and thy raging against me."
[Kg2 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#028). "Because of thy raging
against me and thy safety, which rise up into my ears, I put my ring
into thy nose, and my bridle into thy lips, and bring thee back by the
way by which thou hast come." The words are still addressed to the
Assyrian, of whom the Lord inquires whether he does not know that the
destructive deeds performed by him had been determined very long before.
"Hast thou not heart?" namely, what follows, what the Lord had long ago
made known through His prophets in Judah (cf. [Isa
7:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#007); [Isa
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001) and [Isa
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#007), etc.). למרחוק, from distant time
have I done it, etc., refers to the divine ordering and governing of the
events of the universe, which God has purposed and established from the
very beginning of time. The pronoun אתהּ, and the suffixes attached to
יצרתּיה and הביאתיה, do not refer with vague generality to the substance
of [Kg2 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#023) and [Kg2
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024), i.e., to the boastings of the
Assyrians quoted there (Drechsler), but to להשׁות וּתהי, i.e., to the
conquests and devastations which the Assyrian had really effected. The ו
before יצרתיה introduces the apodosis, as is frequently the case after a
preceding definition of time (cf. Ges. 155, a). להשׁות וּתהי, "that it
may be to destroy" (להשׁות, a contraction of להשׁאות, Keri and Isaiah,
from שׁאה; see Ewald, 73, c., and 245, b.), i.e., that it shall be
destroyed, - according to a turn which is very common in Isaiah, like
לבער היה, it is to burn = it shall be burned (cf. [Isa
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005); [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013); [Isa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015), and Ewald, 237, c.). The
rendering given by Ges., Knob., Then., and others, "that thou mayest be
for destruction," is at variance with this usage.

[Kg2 19:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#026)

[Kg2 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#026) is closely connected, so
far as the sense is concerned, with the last clause of [Kg2
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#025), but in form it is only loosely
attached: "and their inhabitants were," instead of "that their
inhabitants might be." יד קצרי, of short hand, i.e., without power to
offer a successful resistance (cf. [Num
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#023), and [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002); [Isa
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001)). - They were herbage of the
field, etc., just as perishable as the herbage, grass, etc., which
quickly fade away (cf. [Psa 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002); [Psa
90:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005); [Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)). The grass of the roofs fades
still more quickly, because it cannot strike deep roots (cf. [Psa
129:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#006)). Blighted corn before the
stalk, i.e., corn which is blighted and withered up, before it shoots up
into a stalk. In Isaiah we have שׁדמה instead of שׁדפה, with a change of
the labials, probably for the purpose of preserving an assonance with
קמה, which must not therefore be altered into שׁדמה. The thought in the
two verses is this: The Assyrian does not owe his victories and
conquests to his irresistible might, but purely to the fact that God had
long ago resolved to deliver the nations into his hands, so that it was
possible to overcome them without their being able to offer any
resistance. This the Assyrian had not perceived, but in his daring pride
had exalted himself above the living God. This conduct of his the Lord
was well acquainted with, and He would humble him for it. Sitting and
going out and coming denote all the actions of a man, like sitting down
and rising up in [Psa 139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002). Instead
of rising up, we generally find going out and coming in (cf. [Deu
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#006) and [Psa
121:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#008)). התרגּזך, thy raging, commotio
furibunda, quae ex ira nascitur superbiae mixta (Vitr.). We must repeat
רען before שׁאננך; and באזני עלה is to be taken in a relative sense: on
account of thy self-security, which has come to my ears. שׁאנן is the
security of the ungodly which springs from the feeling of great
superiority in power. The figurative words, "I put my ring into thy
nose," are taken from the custom of restraining wild animals, such as
lions ([Eze 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#004)) and other wild
beasts ([Eze 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#004) and [Isa
30:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#028)), in this manner. For "the
bridle in the lips" of ungovernable horses, see [Psa
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009). To lead a person back by the way
by which he had come, i.e., to lead him back disappointed, without
having reached the goal that he set before him.

[Kg2 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#029)

To confirm what he had said, the prophet gave to Hezekiah a sign ([Kg2
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#029).): "Eat this year what groweth
in the fallow, and in the second year what groweth wild, and in the
third year sow and reap and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit thereof."
That the words are not addressed to the king of Assyria as in [Kg2
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#028), but to Hezekiah, is evident
from their contents. This sudden change in the person addressed may be
explained from the fact that from [Kg2
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#029) the words contain a perfectly
fresh train of thought. For האות זה־לּך see [Exo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#012); [Sa1
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#034) and [Sa1
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#010); also [Jer
44:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#029). In all these passages אות,
σημεῖον, is not a (supernatural) wonder, a מופת as in [Kg1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#003), but consists simply in the
prediction of natural events, which serve as credentials to a
prediction, whereas in [Isa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014) and
[Isa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007) a miracle is given as an
אות. The inf. abs. אכול is not used for the pret. (Ges., Then., and
others), but for the imperf. or fut.: "one will eat." השּׁנה, the
(present) year. ספיח signifies the corn which springs up and grows from
the grains that have been shaken out the previous year ([Lev
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#005), [Lev
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#011)). סחישׁ (in Isa. שׁחיס) is
explained by Abulw. as signifying the corn which springs up again from
the roots of what has been sown. The etymology of the word is uncertain,
so that it is impossible to decide which of the two forms is the
original one. For the fact itself compare the evidence adduced in the
Comm. on [Lev 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#007), that in Palestine
and other lands two or three harvests can be reaped from one sowing. -
The signs mentioned do not enable us to determine with certainty how
long the Assyrians were in the land. All that can be clearly gathered
from the words, "in this and the following year will they live upon that
which has sprung up without any sowing," is that for two years, i.e., in
two successive autumns, the fields could not be cultivated because the
enemy had occupied the land and laid it waste. But whether the
occupation lasted two years, or only a year and a little over, depends
upon the time of the year at which the Assyrians entered the land. If
the invasion of Judah took place in autumn, shortly before the time for
sowing, and the miraculous destruction of the Assyrian forces occurred a
year after about the same time, the sowing of two successive years would
be prevented, and the population of Judah would be compelled to live for
two years upon what had sprung up without sowing. Consequently both the
prophecy of Isaiah and the fulfilment recorded in vv. 35, 36 would fall
in the autumn, when the Assyrians had ruled for a whole year in the
land; so that the prophet was able to say: in this year and in the
second (i.e., the next) will they eat after-growth and wild growth;
inasmuch as when he said this, the first year had not quite expired.
Even if the overthrow of the Assyrians took place immediately afterwards
(cf. [Kg2 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)), with the extent to
which they had carried out the desolation of the land, many of the
inhabitants having been slain or taken prisoners, and many others having
been put to flight, it would be utterly impossible in the same year to
cultivate the fields and sow them, and the people would be obliged to
live in the second or following year upon what had grown wild, until the
harvest of the second year, when the land could be properly cultivated,
or rather till the third year, when it could be reaped again.

(Note: There is no necessity, therefore, to explain the sign here given,
either by the assumption of a sabbatical year, with or without a year of
jubilee following, or by supposing that the Assyrians did not depart
immediately after the catastrophe described in [Kg2
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035), but remained till after they
had attempted an expedition into Egypt, or indeed by any other
artificial hypothesis.)

[Kg2 19:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#030)

The sign is followed in [Kg2 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#030),
[Kg2 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#031) by the distinct promise of
the deliverance of Judah and Jerusalem, for which Isaiah uses the sign
itself as a type. "And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah
will again strike roots downwards and bear fruit upwards; for from
Jerusalem will go forth a remnant, and that which is escaped from Mount
Zion; the zeal of Jehovah will do this." שׁרשׁ יסף, to add roots, i.e.,
to strike fresh roots. The meaning is, that Judah will not succumb to
this judgment. The remnant of the nation that has escaped from
destruction by the Assyrians will once more grow and flourish
vigorously; for from Jerusalem will a rescued remnant go forth. פּליטה
denotes those who have escaped destruction by the judgment (cf. [Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002); [Isa
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#020), etc.). The deliverance was
attached to Jerusalem or to Mount Zion, not so much because the power of
the Assyrians was to be destroyed before the gates of Jerusalem, as
because of the greater importance which Jerusalem and Mount Zion, as the
centre of the kingdom of God, the seat of the God-King, possessed in
relation to the covenant-nation, so that, according to [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003), it was thence that the Messianic
salvation was also to proceed. This deliverance is traced to the zeal of
the Lord on behalf of His people and against His foes (see at [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005)), like the coming of the Messiah
in [Isa 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006) to establish an
everlasting kingdom of peace and righteousness. The deliverance of Judah
out of the power of Asshur was a prelude and type of the deliverance of
the people of God by the Messiah out of the power of all that was
ungodly. The צבאות of Isaiah is omitted after יהוה, just as in [Kg2
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#015); though here it is supplied by
the Masora as Keri. - In [Kg2 19:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#032)
Isaiah concludes by announcing that Sennacherib will not come to
Jerusalem, nor even shoot at the city and besiege it, but will return
disappointed, because the Lord will defend and save the city for the
sake of His promise. The result of the whole prophecy is introduced with
לכן: therefore, because this is how the matter stands, viz., as
explained in what precedes. אל־מלך, with regard to the king, as in [Kg2
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#020). מגן יקדּמנּה לא, "he will not
attack it with a shield," i.e., will not advance with shields to make an
attack upon it. קדּם with a double accusative, as in [Psa
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#004). It only occurs here in a hostile
sense: to come against, as in [Psa
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019), i.e., to advance against a
city, to storm it. The four clauses of the verse stand in a graduated
relation to one another: not to take, not even to shoot at and attack,
yea, not even to besiege the city, will he come. In [Kg2
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#033) we have [Kg2
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#028) taken up again, and [Kg2
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#032) is repeated in [Kg2
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#033) for the purpose of strengthening
the promise. Instead of בּהּ יבוא we have in Isaiah בּהּ בּא: "by which
he has come." The perfect is actually more exact, and the imperfect may
be explained from the fact that Sennacherib was at that very time
advancing against Jerusalem. In [Kg2
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034) we have אל גּנּותי instead of
the על גּנּותי of Isaiah: על is more correct than אל. "For my sake," as
Hezekiah had prayed in v. 19; and "for my servant David's sake," because
Jehovah, as the unchangeably true One, must fulfil the promise which He
gave to David (sees at [Kg1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg2 19:35</span></span>

The fulfilment of the divine promise. - [Kg2
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035). "It came to pass in that night,
that the angel of the Lord went out and smote in the army of the
Assyrian 185,000 men; and when they (those that were left, including the
king) rose up in the morning, behold there were they all (i.e., all who
had perished) dead corpses," i.e., they had died in their sleep. מתים is
added to strengthen פּגרים: lifeless corpses. ההוּא בּלּילה is in all
probability the night following the day on which Isaiah had foretold to
Hezekiah the deliverance of Jerusalem. Where the Assyrian army was
posted at the time when this terrible stroke fell upon it is not stated,
since the account is restricted to the principal fact. One portion of it
was probably still before Jerusalem; the remainder were either in front
of Libnah ([Kg2 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#008)), or marching
against Jerusalem. From the fact that Sennacherib's second embassy ([Kg2
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#009).) was not accompanied by a body
of troops, it by no means follows that the large army which had come
with the first embassy ([Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017))
had withdrawn again, or had even removed to Libnah on the return of
Rabshakeh to his king ([Kg2 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#008)). The
very opposite may be inferred with much greater justice from [Kg2
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#032). And the smiting of 185,000 men
by an angel of the Lord by no means presupposes that the whole of
Sennacherib's army was concentrated at one spot. The blow could
certainly fall upon the Assyrians wherever they were standing or were
encamped. The "angel of the Lord" is the same angel that smote as
המּשׁחית the first-born of Egypt ([Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023), compared with [Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012) and [Exo
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#013)), and inflicted the pestilence
upon Israel after the numbering of the people by David ([Sa2
24:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#015)). The last passage renders
the conjecture a very probable one, that the slaying of the Assyrians
was also effected by a terrible pestilence. But the number of the
persons slain - 185,000 in a single night - so immensely surpasses the
effects even of the most terrible plagues, that this fact cannot be
interpreted naturally; and the deniers of miracle have therefore felt
obliged to do violence to the text, and to pronounce either the
statement that it was "the same night" or the number of the slain a
mythical exaggeration.

(Note: The assertion of Thenius, that [Kg2
19:35-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035) are borrowed from a different
source from [Kg2 18:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013), [Kg2
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#034) and 20:1-19, rests upon purely
arbitrary suppositions and groundless assumptions, and is only made in
the interest of the mythical interpretation of the miracle. And his
conclusion, that "since the catastrophe was evidently (?) occasioned by
the sudden breaking out of a pestilence, the scene of it was no doubt
the pestilential Egypt," is just as unfounded, - as if Egypt were the
only land in which a pestilence could suddenly have broken out. - The
account given by Herodotus (ii. 141), that on the prayer of king Sethon,
a priest of Vulcan, the deity promised him victory over the great
advancing army of Sennacherib, and that during the night mice spread
among the enemy (i.e., in the Assyrian camp at Pelusium), and ate up the
quivers and bows, and the leather straps of the shields, so that the
next morning they were obliged to flee without their weapons, and many
were cut down, is imply a legendary imitation of our account, i.e., an
Egyptian variation of the defeat of Sennacherib in Judah. The eating up
of the Assyrian weapons by mice is merely the explanation given to
Herodotus by the Egyptian priests of the hieroglyphical legend on the
standing figure of Sethos at Memphis, from which we cannot even gather
the historical fact that Sennacherib really advanced as far as
Pelusium.)

[Kg2 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#036)

This divine judgment compelled Sennacherib to retreat without delay, and
to return to Nineveh, as Isaiah 28 and 32, had predicted. The heaping up
of the verbs: "he decamped, departed, and returned," expresses the hurry
of the march home. בּנינוה ויּשׁב, "he sat, i.e., remained, in Nineveh,"
implies not merely that Sennacherib lived for some time after his
return, but also that he did not undertake any fresh expedition against
Judah. On Nineveh see at [Gen 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011).

[Kg2 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037)

[Kg2 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#037) contains an account of
Sennacherib's death. When he was worshipping in the temple of his god
Nisroch, his sons Adrammelech and Sharezer slew him, and fled into the
land of Ararat, and his son Esarhaddon became king in his stead. With
regard to נסרך, Nisroch, all that seems to be firmly established is that
he was an eagle-deity, and represented by the eagle-or vulture-headed
human figure with wings, which is frequently depicted upon the Assyrian
monuments, "not only in colossal proportions upon the walls and watching
the portals of the rooms, but also constantly in the groups upon the
embroidered robes. When it is introduced in this way, we see it
constantly fighting with other mythical animals, such as human-headed
oxen or lions; and in these conflicts it always appears to be
victorious," from which we may infer that it was a type of the supreme
deity (see Layard's Nineveh and its Remains). The eagle was worshipped
as a god by the Arabs (Pococke, Specim. pp. 94, 199), was regarded as
sacred to Melkarth by the Phoenicians (Nonnus, Dionys. xl. 495,528),
and, according to a statement of Philo. Bybl. (in Euseb. Praepar. evang.
i. 10), that Zoroaster taught that the supreme deity was represented
with an eagle's head, it was also a symbol of Ormuzd among the Persians;
consequently Movers (Phniz. i. pp. 68, 506, 507) regards Nisroch as the
supreme deity of the Assyrians. It is not improbable that it was also
connected with the constellation of the eagle (see Ideler, Ursprung der
Sternnamen, p. 416). On the other hand, the current interpretation of
the name from נשׁר (נשׁר, Chald.; nsr, Arab.), eagle, vulture, with the
Persian adjective termination ok or ach, is very doubtful, not merely on
account of the ס in נסרך, but chiefly because this name does not occur
in Assyrian, but simply Asar, Assar, and Asarak as the name of a deity
which is met with in many Assyrian proper names. The last is also
adopted by the lxx, who (ed. Aldin. Compl.) have rendered נסרך by Ἀσαράχ
in Isaiah, and Ἐσοράχ (cod. Vatic.) in 2 Kings, by the side of which the
various readings Μεσεράχ in our text (cod. Vat.) and Νασαράχ in Isaiah
are evidently secondary readings emended from the Hebrew, since Josephus
(Ant. x. 1, 5) has the form Ἀρασκής, which is merely somewhat
"Graecized." The meaning of these names is still in obscurity, even if
there should be some foundation for the assumption that Assar belongs to
the same root as the name of the people and land, Asshur. The connection
between the form Nisroch and Asarak is also still obscure. Compare the
collection which J. G. Mller has made of the different conjectures
concerning this deity in the Art. Nisroch in Herzog's Cycl. -
Adrammelech, according to [Kg2 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#031),
was the name of a deity of Sepharvaim, which was here borne by the
king's son. שׁראצר, Sharezer, is said to mean "prince of fire," and was
probably also borrowed from a deity. בּנין (Isa.) is wanting in our
text, but is supplied by the Masora in the Keri. The "land of Ararat"
was a portion of the high land of Armenia; according to Moses v.
Chorene, the central portion of it with the mountains of the same name
(see at [Gen 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004)). The slaying of
Sennacherib is also confirmed by Alex. Polyhistor, or rather Berosus (in
Euseb. Chr. Armen. i. p. 43), who simply names, however, a son
Ardumusanus as having committed the murder, and merely mentions a second
Asordanius as viceroy of Babylon.

(Note: With regard to the statement of Abydenus in Euseb. l. c. p. 53,
that Sennacherib was followed by Nergilus, who was slain by his son
Adrameles, who again was murdered by his brother Axerdis, and its
connection with Berosus and the biblical account, see M. v. Niebuhr,
Geschichte Assurs, pp. 361ff. Nergilus is probably the same person as
Sharezer, and Axerdis as Esarhaddon.)

The identity of the latter with Esarhaddon is beyond all doubt. The name
אסר־חדּן, Esar-cha-don, consisting of two parts with the guttural
inserted, the usual termination in Assyrian and Babylonian, Assar-ach,
is spelt Ἀσορδάν in the lxx, Σαχερδονός in Tobit - probably formed from
Ἀσερ-χ-δονοσορ by a transposition of the letters, - by Josephus
Ἀσσαραχόδδας, by Berosus (in the armen. Euseb.) Asordanes, by Abyden.
ibid. Axerdis, in the Canon Ptol. Ἀσαράδινος, and lastly in [Ezr
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010) mutilated into אסנפּר, Osnappar
(Chald.), and in the lxx Ἀσσεναφάρ; upon the Assyrian monuments,
according to Oppert, Assur-akh-iddin (cf. M. v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Ass. p.
38). The length of his reign is uncertain. The statements of Berosus,
that he was first of all viceroy of Babylon, and then for eight years
king of Assyria, and that of the Canon Ptol., that he reigned for
thirteen years in Babylon, are decidedly incorrect. Brandis (Rerum
Assyr. tempora emend. p. 41) conjectures that he reigned twenty-eight
years, but in his work Ueber den histor. Gewinn, pp. 73, 74, he suggests
seventeen years. M. v. Niebuhr (ut sup. p. 77), on the other hand,
reckons his reign at twenty-four years.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 20](kg2020)

</div>
