<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2017)  [Next](kg2019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 18:0</span></span>

III\. History of the Kingdom of Judah From the Destruction of the
Kingdom of the Ten Tribes to the Babylonian Captivity - 2 Kings 18-25

At the time when the kingdom of the ten tribes was destroyed, Judah
found itself in a state of dependence upon the imperial power of
Assyria, into which it had been brought by the ungodly policy of Ahaz.
But three years before the expedition of Salmanasar against Samaria, the
pious Hezekiah had ascended the throne of his ancestor David in
Jerusalem, and had set on foot with strength and zeal the healing of
Judah's wounds, by exterminating idolatry and by restoring the legal
worship of Jehovah. As Hezekiah was devoted to the Lord his God with
undivided heart and trusted firmly in Him, the Lord also acknowledged
him and his undertakings. When Sennacherib had overrun Judah with a
powerful army after the revolt of Hezekiah, and had summoned the capital
to surrender, the Lord heard the prayer of His faithful servant Hezekiah
and saved Judah and Jerusalem from the threatening destruction by the
miraculous destruction of the forces of the proud Sennacherib (2 Kings
18 and 19), whereby the power of Assyria was so weakened that Judah had
no longer much more to fear from it, although it did chastise Manasseh
([Ch2 33:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#011).). Nevertheless this
deliverance, through and in the time of Hezekiah, was merely a
postponement of the judgment with which Judah had been threatened by the
prophets (Isaiah and Micah), of the destruction of the kingdom and the
banishment of its inhabitants. Apostasy from the living God and moral
corruption had struck such deep and firm roots in the nation, that the
idolatry, outwardly suppressed by Hezekiah, broke out again openly
immediately after his death; and that in a still stronger degree, since
his son and successor Manasseh not only restored all the abominations of
idolatry which his father had rooted out, but even built altars to idols
in the courts of the temple of Jehovah, and filled Jerusalem with
innocent blood from one end to the other (2 Kings 21), and thereby
filled up the measure of sins, so that the Lord had to announce through
His prophets to the godless king and people His decree to destroy
Jerusalem and cast out the remaining portion of the people of His
inheritance among the heathen, and to show the severity of His judgments
in the fact that Manasseh was led away captive by the officers of the
Assyrian king. And even though Manasseh himself renounced all gross
idolatry and restored the legal worship in the temple after his release
and return to Jerusalem, as the result of this chastisement, this
alteration in the king's mind exerted no lasting influence upon the
people generally, and was completely neutralized by his successor Amon,
who did not walk in the way of Jehovah, but merely worshipped his
father's idols. In this state of things even the God-fearing Josiah,
with all the stringency with which he exterminated idolatry, more
especially after the discovery of the book of the law, was unable to
effect any true change of heart or sincere conversion of the people to
their God, and could only wipe out the outward signs and traces of
idolatry, and establish the external supremacy of the worship of
Jehovah. The people, with their carnal security, imagined that they had
done quite enough for God by restoring the outward and legal form of
worship, and that they were now quite sure of the divine protection; and
did not hearken to the voice of the prophets, who predicted the speedy
coming of the judgments of God. Josiah had warded off the bursting forth
of these judgments for thirty years, through his humiliation before God
and the reforms which he introduced; but towards the end of his reign
the Lord began to put away Judah from before His face for the sake of
Manasseh's sins, and to reject the city which He had chosen that His
name might dwell there (2 Kings 22-23:27). Necho king of Egypt advanced
to extend his sway to the Euphrates and overthrow the Assyrian empire.
Josiah marched to meet him, for the purpose of preventing the extension
of his power into Syria. A battle was fought at Megiddo, the Judaean
army was defeated, Josiah fell in the battle, and with him the last hope
of the sinking state ([Kg2 23:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029);
[Ch2 35:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#023)). In Jerusalem Jehoahaz
was made king by the people; but after a reign of three months he was
taken prisoner by Necho at Riblah in the land of Hamath, and led away to
Egypt, where he died. Eliakim, the elder son of Josiah, was appointed by
Necho as Egyptian vassal-king in Jerusalem, under the name of Jehoiakim.
He was devoted to idolatry, and through his love of show ([Jer
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013).) still further ruined the
kingdom, which was already exhausted by the tribute to be paid to Egypt.
In the fourth year of his reign Pharaoh-Necho succumbed at Carchemish to
the Chaldaean power, which was rising under Nebuchadnezzar upon the
ruins of the Assyrian kingdom. At the same time Jeremiah proclaimed to
the incorrigible nation that the Lord of Sabaoth would deliver Judah
with all the surrounding nations into the hand of His servant
Nebuchadnezzar, that the land of Judah would be laid waste and the
people serve the king of Babylon seventy years (Jer 25). Nebuchadnezzar
appeared in Judah immediately afterwards to follow up his victory over
Necho, took Jerusalem, made Jehoiakim his subject, and carried away
Daniel, with many of the leading young men, to Babylon ([Kg2
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001)). But after some years Jehoiakim
revolted; whereupon Nebuchadnezzar sent fresh troops against Jerusalem
to besiege the city, and after defeating Jehoiachin, who had in the
meantime followed his father upon the throne, led away into captivity to
Babylon, along with the kernel of the nation, nobles, warriors,
craftsmen, and smiths, and set upon the throne Mattaniah, the only
remaining son of Josiah, under the name of Zedekiah (2 Kings 24:2-17).
But when he also formed an alliance with Pharaoh-Hophra in the ninth
year of his reign, and revolted from the king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar
advanced immediately with all his forces, besieged Jerusalem, and having
taken the city and destroyed it, put an end to the kingdom of Judah by
slaying Zedekiah and his sons, and carrying away all the people that
were left, with the exception of a very small remnant of cultivators of
the soil (2 Kings 24:18-25:26), a hundred and thirty-four years after
the destruction of the kingdom of the ten tribes.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 18:1</span></span>

[Kg2 18:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)

Length and character of Hezekiah's reign.

(Note: On comparing the account of Hezekiah's reign given in our books
(2 Kings 18-20) with that in 2 Chron 29-32, the different plans of these
two historical works are at once apparent. The prophetic author of our
books first of all describes quite briefly the character of the king's
reign ([Kg2 18:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001)), and then gives an
elaborate description of the invasion of Judah by Sennacherib and of his
attempt to get Jerusalem into his power, together with the destruction
of the proud Assyrian force and Sennacherib's hasty return to Nineveh
and death ([Kg2 18:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013), [Kg2
18:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#037)); and finally, he also gives a
circumstantial account of Hezekiah's illness and recovery, and also of
the arrival of the Babylonian embassy in Jerusalem, and of Hezekiah's
conduct on that occasion (2 Kings 20). The chronicler, on the other
hand, has fixed his chief attention upon the religious reformation
carried out by Hezekiah, and therefore first of all describes most
elaborately the purification of the temple from all idolatrous
abominations, the restoration of the Jehovah-cultus and the feast of
passover, to which Hezekiah invited all the people, not only the
subjects of his own kingdom, but the remnant of the ten tribes also (2
Chron 29-31); and then simply gives in 2 Kings 32 the most summary
account of the attack made by Sennacherib upon Jerusalem and the
destruction of his army, of the sickness and recovery of Hezekiah, and
of his great riches, the Babylonian embassy being touched upon in only
the most casual manner. The historical character of the elaborate
accounts given in the Chronicles of Hezekiah's reform of worship and his
celebration of the passover, which Thenius follows De Wette and Gramberg
in throwing doubt upon, has been most successfully defended by Bertheau
as well as others. - On the disputed question, in what year of
Hezekiah's reign the solemn passover instituted by him fell, see the
thorough discussion of it by C. P. Caspari (Beitrr. z. Einleit. in d. B.
Jesaia, pp. 109ff.), and our Commentary on the Chronicles, which has yet
to appear.)

[Kg2 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#001), [Kg2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#002). In the third year of Hoshea of
Israel, Hezekiah became king over Judah, when he was twenty-five years
old. According to [Kg2 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009), [Kg2
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#010), the fourth and sixth years of
Hezekiah corresponded to the seventh and ninth of Hoshea; consequently
his first year apparently ran parallel to the fourth of Hoshea, so that
Josephus (Ant. ix. 13, 1) represents him as having ascended the throne
in the fourth year of Hoshea's reign. But there is no necessity for this
alteration. If we assume that the commencement of his reign took place
towards the close of the third year of Hoshea, the fourth and sixth
years of his reign coincided for the most part with the sixth and ninth
years of Hoshea's reign. The name הזקיּה or הזקיּהוּ ([Kg2
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009), [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013), etc.) is given in its complete
form יהזקיּהוּ, "whom Jehovah strengthens," in 2 Chr. 29ff. and [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001); and והזקיּה in [Hos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001) and [Mic
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001). On his age when he ascended the
throne, see the Comm. on [Kg2 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#002).
The name of his mother, אבי, is a strongly contracted form of אבי ([Ch2
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#001)).

[Kg2 18:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#003)

As ruler Hezekiah walked in the footsteps of his ancestor David. He
removed the high places and the other objects of idolatrous worship,
trusted in Jehovah, and adhered firmly to Him without wavering;
therefore the Lord made all his undertakings prosper. הבּמות, המּצּבית,
and האשׁרה (see at [Kg1 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#023)) embrace
all the objects of idolatrous worship, which had been introduced into
Jerusalem and Judah in the reigns of the former kings, and more
especially in that of Ahaz. The singular האשׁרה is used in a collective
sense = האשׁרים ([Ch2 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001)). The only
other idol that is specially mentioned is the brazen serpent which Moses
made in the wilderness ([Num 21:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008)),
and which the people with their leaning to idolatry had turned in the
course of time into an object of idolatrous worship. The words, "to this
day were the children of Israel burning incense to it," do not mean that
this took place without interruption from the time of Moses down to that
of Hezekiah, but simply, that it occurred at intervals, and that the
idolatry carried on with this idol lasted till the time of Hezekiah,
namely, till this king broke in pieces the brazen serpent, because of
the idolatry that was associated with it. For further remarks on the
meaning of this symbol, see the Comm. on [Num
21:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008). The people called (ויּקרא, one
called) this serpent נחשׁתּן, i.e., a brazen thing. This epithet does
not involve anything contemptuous, as the earlier commentators supposed,
nor the idea of "Brass-god" (Ewald).

[Kg2 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#005)

The verdict, "after him was none like him among all the kings of Judah,"
refers to Hezekiah's confidence in God (בּטח), in which he had no equal,
whereas in the case of Josiah his conscientious adherence to the Mosaic
law is extolled in the same words ([Kg2
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#025)); so that there is no ground for
saying that there is a contradiction between our verse and [Kg2
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#025) (Thenius).

[Kg2 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#006)

בּיי ידבּק: he adhered faithfully to Jehovah (דּבק as in [Kg1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#002)), and departed not from Him,
i.e., he never gave himself up to idolatry.

[Kg2 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007)

The Lord therefore gave him success in all his undertakings (השׂכּיל,
see at [Kg1 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#003)), and even in his
rebellion against the king of Assyria, whom he no longer served, i.e.,
to whom he paid no more tribute. It was through Ahaz that Judah had been
brought into dependence upon Assyria; and Hezekiah released himself from
this, by refusing to pay any more tribute, probably after the departure
of Salmanasar from Palestine, and possibly not till after the death of
that king. Sennacherib therefore made war upon Hezekiah to subjugate
Judah to himself again (see [Kg2
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013).).

[Kg2 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008)

Hezekiah smote the Philistines to Gaza, and their territory from the
tower of the watchmen to the fortified city, i.e., all the towns from
the least to the greatest (see at [Kg2
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#009)). He thus chastised these enemies
for their invasion of Judah in the time of Ahaz, wrested from them the
cities which they had taken at that time ([Ch2
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#018)), and laid waste all their
country to Gaza, i.e., Ghuzzeh, the most southerly of the chief cities
of Philistia (see at [Jos 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)). This
probably took place after the defeat of Sennacherib (cf. [Ch2
32:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#022)).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 18:9</span></span>

In [Kg2 18:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#009) the destruction of the
kingdom of the ten tribes by Salmanasar, which has already been related
according to the annals of the kingdom of Israel in [Kg2
17:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003), is related once more according
to the annals of the kingdom of Judah, in which this catastrophe is also
introduced as an event that was memorable in relation to all the
covenant-nation.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 18:13</span></span>

Sennacherib invades Judah and threatens Jerusalem.

(Note: We have a parallel and elaborate account of this campaign of
Sennacherib and his defeat (2 Kings 18:13-19:37), and also of Hezekiah's
sickness and recovery and the arrival of the Babylonian embassy in
Jerusalem (2 Kings 20:1-19), in Isa 36-39, and a brief extract, with
certain not unimportant supplements, in 2 Chron 32. These three
narratives, as is now generally admitted, are drawn independently of one
another from a collection of the prophecies of Isaiah, which was
received into the annals of the kingdom ([Ch2
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#032)), and serve to confirm and
complete one another.)

\- Sennacherib, סנחריב (Sanchērı̄bh), Σενναχηρίμ (lxx), Σεναχήριβος
(Joseph.), Σαναχάριβος (Herodot.), whose name has not yet been
deciphered with certainty upon the Assyrian monuments or clearly
explained (see J. Brandis uber den histor. Gewinn aus der Entzifferung
der assyr. Inschriften, pp. 103ff., and M. v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Assurs, p.
37), was the successor of Salmanasar (Sargina according to the
monuments). He is called βασιλεὺς Ἀραβίων τε καὶ Ἀσσυρίων by Herodotus
(ii. 141), and reigned, according to Berosus, eighteen years. He took
all the fortified cities in Judah (יפּשׂם, with the masculine suffix
instead of the feminine: cf. Ewald, 184, c.). The כּל, all, is not to be
pressed; for, beside the strongly fortified capital Jerusalem, he had
not yet taken the fortified cities of Lachish and Libnah ([Kg2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017) and [Kg2
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#008)) at the time, when, according to
[Kg2 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014)., he sent a division of his
army against Jerusalem, and summoned Hezekiah to surrender that city.
According to Herodotus (l.c.), the real object of his campaign was
Egypt, which is also apparent from [Kg2
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#024), and is confirmed by [Isa
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#024); for which reason Tirhaka
marched against him ([Kg2 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#008); cf. M.
v. Niebuhr, Gesch. Assurs, pp. 171, 172).

[Kg2 18:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014)

On the report of Sennacherib's approach, Hezekiah made provision at once
for the safety of Jerusalem. He had the city fortified more strongly,
and the fountain of the upper Gihon and the brook near the city stopped
up (see at [Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017)), to cut off the
supply of water from the besiegers, as is stated in [Ch2
32:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#002), and confirmed by [Isa
22:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#008). In the meantime Sennacherib
had pressed forward to Lachish, i.e., Um Lakis, in the plain of Judah,
on the south-west of Jerusalem, seven hours to the west of
Eleutheropolis on the road to Egypt (see at [Jos
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003)); so that Hezekiah, having doubts
as to the possibility of a successful resistance, sent ambassadors to
negotiate with him, and promised to pay him as much tribute as he might
demand if he would withdraw. The confession "I have sinned" is not to be
pressed, inasmuch as it was forced from Hezekiah by the pressure of
distress. Since Asshur had made Judah tributary by faithless conduct on
the part of Tiglath-pileser towards Ahaz, there was nothing really wrong
in the shaking off of this yoke by the refusal to pay any further
tribute. But Hezekiah certainly did wrong, when, after taking the first
step, he was alarmed at the disastrous consequences, and sought to
purchase once more the peace which he himself had broken, by a fresh
submission and renewal of the payment of tribute. This false step on the
part of the pious king, which arose from a temporary weakness of faith,
was nevertheless turned into a blessing through the pride of Sennacherib
and the covenant-faithfulness of the Lord towards him and his kingdom.
Sennacherib demanded the enormous sum of three hundred talents of silver
and thirty talents of gold (more than two and a half million thalers, or
375,000); and Hezekiah not only gave him all the gold and silver found
in the treasures of the temple and palace, but had the gold plates with
which he had covered the doors and doorposts of the temple ([Ch2
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)) removed, to send them to the
king of Assyria. האמנות, lit., the supports, i.e., the posts, of the
doors.

These negotiations with Sennacherib on the part of Hezekiah are passed
over both in the book of Isaiah and also in the Chronicles, because they
had no further influence upon the future progress of the war.

[Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017)

For though Sennacherib did indeed take the money, he did not depart, as
he had no doubt promised, but, emboldened still further by this
submissiveness, sent a detachment of his army against Jerusalem, and
summoned Hezekiah to surrender the capital. "He sent Tartan, Rabsaris,
and Rabshakeh." Rabshakeh only is mentioned in Isaiah, as the chief
speaker in the negotiations which follow, although in [Isa
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#006) and [Isa
37:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#024) allusion is evidently made to
the other two. Tartan had no doubt the chief command, since he is not
only mentioned first here, but conducted the siege of Ashdod, according
to [Isa 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001). The three names are
probably only official names, or titles of the offices held by the
persons mentioned. For רב־סריס means princeps eunuchorum, and רבשׁקה
chief cup-bearer. תּרתּן is explained by Hitzig on [Isa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001) as derived from the Persian
tr-tan, "high person or vertex of the body," and in [Jer
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003) as "body-guard;" but this is
hardly correct, as the other two titles are Semitic. These generals took
up their station with their army "at the conduit of the upper pool,
which ran by the road of the fuller's field," i.e., the conduit which
flowed from the upper pool - according to [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030), the basin of the upper Gihon
(Birket el Mamilla) - into the lower pool (Birket es Sultn: see at [Kg1
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#033)). According to [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003), this conduit was in existence as
early as the time of Ahaz. The "end" of it is probably the locality in
which the conduit began at the upper pool or Gihon, or where it first
issued from it. This conduit which led from the upper Gihon into the
lower, and which is called in [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030) "the outflow of the upper
Gihon," Hezekiah stopped up, and conducted the water downwards, i.e.,
the underground, towards the west into the city of David; that is to
say, he conducted the water of the upper Gihon, which had previously
flowed along the western side of the city outside the wall into the
lower Gihon and so away down the valley of Ben-hinnom, into the city
itself by means of a subterranean channel,

(Note: We may get some idea of the works connected with this aqueduct
from the description of the "sealed fountain" of the Solomon's pool at
Ain Saleh in Tobler, Topogr. v. Jerus. ii. pp. 857ff., Dritte
Wanderung.)

that he might retain this water for the use of the city in the event of
a siege of Jerusalem, and keep it from the besiegers.

This water was probably collected in the cistern (הבּרכה) which Hezekiah
made, i.e., order to be constructed ([Kg2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020)), or the reservoir "between the
two walls for the waters of the old pool," mentioned in [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011), i.e., most probably the
reservoir still existing at some distance to the east of the Joppa gate
on the western side of the road which leads to the Church of the Holy
Sepulchre, the so-called "pool of Hezekiah," which the natives call
Birket el Hamman, "Bathing-pool," because it supplies a bath in the
neighbourhood, or B. el Batrak, "Patriarch's pool" (see Robinson, Pal.
i. p. 487, and Fresh Researches into the Topography of Jerusalem, pp.
111ff.), since this is still fed by a conduit from the Mamilla pool (see
E. G. Schultz, Jerusalem, p. 31, and Tobler, Denkbltter, pp. 44ff.).

(Note: The identity of the ברכה, which Hezekiah constructed as a
reservoir for the overflow of the upper Gihon that was conducted into
the city ([Kg2 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020)), with the
present "pool of Hezekiah" is indeed very probable, but not quite
certain. For in very recent times, on digging the foundation for the
Evangelical church built on the northern slope of Zion, they lighted
upon a large well-preserved arched channel, which was partly cut in the
rock, and, where this was not the case, built in level layers and coated
within with a hard cement about an inch thick and covered with large
stones (Robinson, New Inquiries as to the Topography of Jerusalem, p.
113, and Bibl. Res. p. 318), and which might possibly be connected with
the channel made by Hezekiah to conduct the water of the upper Gihon
into the city, although this channel does not open into the pool of
Hezekiah, and the walls, some remains of which are still preserved, may
belong to a later age. The arguments adduced by Thenius in support of
the assumption that the "lower" or "old pool" mentioned in [Isa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009) and [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011) is different from the lower
Gihon-pool, and to be sought for in the Tyropoeon, are inconclusive. It
by no means follows from the expression, "which lies by the road of the
fuller's field," i.e., by the road which runs past the fuller's field,
that there was another upper pool in Jerusalem beside the upper pool
(Gihon); but this additional clause simply serves to define more
precisely the spot by the conduit mentioned where the Assyrian army took
its stand; and it by no means follows from the words of [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011), "a gathering of waters have ye
made between the two walls for the waters of the old pool," that this
gathering of waters was made in the Tyropoeon, and that this "old pool,"
as distinguished from the lower pool ([Isa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009)), was an upper pool, which was
above the king's pool mentioned in [Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015). For even if החמתים בין occurs in
[Kg2 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004); [Jer
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004); [Jer
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007), in connection with a locality on
the south-east side of the city, the Old Testament says nothing about
two pools in the Tyropoeon at the south-east corner of Jerusalem, but
simply mentions a fountain gate, which probably derived its name from
the present fountain of the Virgin, and the king's pool, also called
Shelach in [Neh 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#014); [Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015), which was no doubt fed from that
fountain like the present Siloam, and watered the royal gardens.
(Compare Rob. Pal. i. pp. 565ff., and Bibl. Res. p. 189, and Tobler, Die
Siloah-quelle u. der Oelberg, pp. 1ff.). The two walls, between which
Hezekiah placed the reservoir, may very well be the northern wall of
Zion and the one which surrounded the lower city (Acra) on the
north-west, according to which the words in [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011) would admirably suit the "pool
of Hezekiah." Again, Hezekiah did not wait till the departure of
Sennacherib before he built this conduit, which is also mentioned in
Wis. 48:17, as Knobel supposes (on [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)), but he made it when he first
invaded Judah, before the appearance of the Assyrian troops in front of
Jerusalem, when he made the defensive preparations noticed at v. 14, as
is evident from [Ch2 32:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#003), compared
with [Kg2 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#030), since the stopping up
of the fountain outside the city, to withdraw the water from the
Assyrians, is expressly mentioned in [Kg2
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#003), [Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004) among the measures of defence;
and in the concluding notices concerning Hezekiah in [Kg2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020), and [Ch2
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#030), there is also a brief allusion
to this work, without any precise indication of the time when he had
executed it.)

[Kg2 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#018)

Hezekiah considered it beneath his dignity to negotiate personally with
the generals of Sennacherib. He sent three of his leading ministers out
to the front of the city: Eliakim the son of Hilkiah, the captain of the
castle, who had only received the appointment to this office a short
time before in Shebna's place ([Isa
22:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#020)); Shebna, who was still
secretary of state (ספר: see at [Sa2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017)); and Joach the son of Asaph, the
chancellor (מזכּיר: see at [Sa2 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#016)).

Rabshakeh made a speech to these three ([Kg2
18:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#019)), in which he tried to show
that Hezekiah's confidence that he would be able to resist the might of
the king of Assyria was perfectly vain, since neither Egypt ([Kg2
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#021)), nor his God ([Kg2
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#022)), nor his forces ([Kg2
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#023)), would be able to defend him.

[Kg2 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#019)

"The great king:" the Assyrian, Babylonian, and Persian kings all
assumed this title (cf. [Eze 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#007);
[Dan 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#037)), because kings of conquered
lands were subject to them as vassals (see at [Isa
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#008)). "What is this confidence that
thou cherishest?" i.e., how vain or worthless is this confidence!

[Kg2 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#020)

"Thou sayest ... it is only a lip-word...: counsel and might for
battle;" i.e., if thou speakest of counsel and might for battle, that is
only שׂפתים דּבר, a word that merely comes from the lips, not from the
heart, the seat of the understanding, i.e., a foolish and inconsiderate
saying (cf. [Pro 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#023); [Job
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#002)). - עמרתּ is to be preferred to
the אמרתּי of Isaiah as the more original of the two. עתּה, now, sc. we
will see on whom thou didst rely, when thou didst rebel against me.

[Kg2 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#021)

On Egypt? "that broken reed, which runs into the hand of any one who
would lean upon it (thinking it whole), and pierces it through." This
figure, which is repeated in [Eze
29:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#006), is so far suitably chosen,
that the Nile, representing Egypt, is rich in reeds. What Rabshakeh says
of Egypt here, Isaiah had already earnestly impressed upon his people
([Isa 30:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#003)), to warn them against
trusting in the support of Egypt, from which one party in the nation
expected help against Assyria.

[Kg2 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#022)

Hezekiah (and Judah) had a stronger ground of confidence in Jehovah his
God. Even this Rabshakeh tried to shake, availing himself very
skilfully, from his heathen point of view, of the reform which Hezekiah
had made in the worship, and representing the abolition of the altars on
the high places as an infringement upon the reverence that ought to be
shown to God. "And if ye say, We trust in Jehovah our God, (I say:) is
it not He whose high places and altars Hezekiah has taken away and has
said to Judah and Jerusalem, Ye shall worship before this altar (in the
temple) in Jerusalem?" Instead of האמרוּ כּי, according to which
Rabshakeh turned to the deputies, we have in [Isa
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#007) תאמר כּי, according to which the
words are addressed to Hezekiah, as in [Kg2
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#020). האמרוּ is preferred by Thenius,
Knobel, and others, because in what follows Hezekiah is addressed in the
third person. but the very circumstance that האמרוּ is apparently more
suitable favours the originality of תאמר, according to which the king is
still addressed in the person of his ambassadors, and Rabshakeh only
speaks directly to the ambassadors when this argument is answered. The
attack upon the confidence which the Judaeans placed in their God
commences with הוּא הלוא. The opinion of Thenius, that the second clause
of the verse is a continuation of the words supposed to be spoken by the
Judaeans who trusted in God, and that the apodosis does not follow till
[Kg2 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#023), is quite a mistake. The
ambassadors of Hezekiah could not regard the high places and idolatrous
altars that had been abolished as altars of Jehovah; and the apodosis
could not commence with ועתּה.

[Kg2 18:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#023)

Still less could Hezekiah rely upon his military resources. נא התערב:
enter, I pray thee, (into contest) with my lord, and I will give thee
2000 horses, if thou canst set the horsemen upon them. The meaning, of
course, is not that Hezekiah could not raise 2000 soldiers in all, but
that he could not produce so many men who were able to fight as
horsemen. "How then wilt thou turn back a single one of the smallest
lieutenants of my lord?" פל את־פּני השׁיב, to repulse a person's face,
means generally to turn away a person with his petition ([Kg1
2:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#016)), here to repulse an
assailant. אחד פּחת is one pasha; although אחד hguo, which is
grammatically subordinate to פּחת, is in the construct state, that the
genitives which follow may be connected (for this subordination of אחד
see Ewald, 286, a.). פּחה (see at [Kg1
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#015)), lit., under-vicegerent, i.e.,
administrator of a province under a satrap, in military states also a
subordinate officer. ותּבטח: and so (with thy military force so small)
thou trustest in Egypt וגו לרכב, so far as war-chariots and horsemen are
concerned.

[Kg2 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#025)

After Rabshakeh had thus, as he imagined, taken away every ground of
confidence from Hezekiah, he added still further, that the Assyrian king
himself had also not come without Jehovah, but had been summoned by Him
to effect the destruction of Judah. It is possible that some report may
have reached his ears of the predictions of the prophets, who had
represented the Assyrian invasion as a judgment from the Lord, and these
he used for his own purposes. Instead of הזּה המּקום על, against this
place, i.e., Jerusalem, we have הזּאת הארץ על in Isaiah, - a reading
which owes its origin simply to the endeavour to bring the two clauses
into exact conformity to one another.

[Kg2 18:26-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#026)

It was very conceivable that Rabshakeh's boasting might make an
impression upon the people; the ambassadors of Hezekiah therefore
interrupted him with the request that he would speak to them in
Aramaean, as they understood that language, and not in Jewish, on
account of the people who were standing upon the wall. ארמית was the
language spoken in Syria, Babylonia, and probably also in the province
of Assyria, and may possibly have been Rabshakeh's mother-tongue, even
if the court language of the Assyrian kings was an Aryan dialect. With
the close affinity between the Aramaean and the Hebrew, the latter could
not be unknown to Rabshakeh, so that he made use of it, just as the
Aramaean language was intelligible to the ministers of Hezekiah, whereas
the people in Jerusalem understood only יהוּדיה, Jewish, i.e., the
Hebrew language spoken in the kingdom of Judah. It is evident from the
last clause of the verse that the negotiations were carried on in the
neighbourhood of the city wall of Jerusalem.

[Kg2 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#027)

But Rabshakeh rejected this proposal with the scornful remark, that his
commission was not to speak to Hezekiah and his ambassadors only, but
rather to the people upon the wall. The variation of the preposition על
and אל in אדניך על אדני, to thy lord (Hezekiah), and אליך, to thee
(Eliakim as chief speaker), is avoided in the text of Isaiah. על is
frequently used for אל, in the later usage of the language, in the sense
of to or at. In the words "who sit upon the wall to eat their dung and
drink their urine," Rabshakeh points to the horrors which a siege of
Jerusalem would entail upon the inhabitants. For חריהם = חראיהם,
excrementa sua, and שׁיניהם, urinas suas, the Masoretes have substituted
the euphemisms צואתם, going forth, and רגליהם מימי, water of their feet.

[Kg2 18:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#028)

ויּעמוד: not, he stood up, raised himself (Ges.), or came forward
(Then.), but he stationed himself, assumed an attitude calculated for
effect, and spoke to the people with a loud voice in the Jewish
language, telling them to listen to the king of Assyria and not to be
led astray by Hezekiah, i.e., to be persuaded to defend the city any
longer, since neither Hezekiah nor Jehovah could defend them from the
might of Sennacherib. אל־ישּׁיא: let not Hezekiah deceive you, sc. by
pretending to be able to defend or save Jerusalem. In מיּדו, "out of his
(the Assyrian's) hand," the speaker ceases to speak in the name of his
king. On the construction of the passive תּנּתן with את־העיר, see Ewald,
277, d., although in the instance before us he proposes to expunge the
את after [Isa 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#015).

[Kg2 18:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#031)

"Make peace with me and come out to me (sc., out of your walls, i.e.,
surrender to me), and ye shall eat every one his vine, ... till I come
and bring you into a land like your own land..." בּרכה is used here to
signify peace as the concentration of weal and blessing. The imperative
ועכלוּ expresses the consequence of what goes before (vid., Ewald, 347,
b.). To eat his vine and fig-tree and to drink the water of his well is
a figure denoting the quiet and undisturbed enjoyment of the fruits of
his own possession (cf. [Kg1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#005)).
Even in the event of their yielding, the Assyrian would transport the
Jewish people into another land, according to the standing custom of
Asiatic conquerors in ancient times (for proofs see Hengstenberg, De
rebus Tyriis, pp. 51, 52). To make the people contented with this
thought, the boaster promised that the king of Assyria would carry them
into a land which was quite as fruitful and glorious as the land of
Canaan. The description of it as a land with corn and new wine, etc.,
recalls the picture of the land of Canaan in [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008) and [Deu
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028). יצהר זית is the olive-tree
which yields good oil, in distinction from the wild olive-tree. וגו
וחיוּ: and ye shall live and not die, i.e., no harm shall befall you
from me (Thenius). This passage is abridged in [Isa
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#017).

[Kg2 18:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#033)

Even Jehovah could not deliver them any more than Hezekiah. As a proof
of this, Rabshakeh enumerated a number of cities and lands which the
king of Assyria had conquered, without their gods' being able to offer
any resistance to his power. "Where are the gods of Hamath, etc., that
they might have delivered Samaria out of my hand?" Instead of הצּילוּ
כּי we have הץ וכי and that they might have, which loosens the
connection somewhat more between this clause and the preceding one, and
makes it more independent. "Where are they?" is equivalent to they are
gone, have perished (cf. [Kg2 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#018));
and "that they might have delivered" is equivalent to they have not
delivered. The subject to הצּילוּ כּי is הגּוים אלהי, which includes the
God of Samaria. Sennacherib regards himself as being as it were one with
his predecessors, as the representative of the might of Assyria, so that
he attributes to himself the conquests of cities and lands which his
ancestors had made. The cities and lands enumerated in [Kg2
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#034) have been mentioned already in
[Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024) as conquered territories,
from which colonists had been transplanted to Samaria, with the
exception of Arpad and Hena. ארפּד, which is also mentioned in [Kg2
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#013); [Isa
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#009); [Isa
36:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#019); [Isa
37:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#013), and [Jer
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023), in connection with Hamath, was
certainly situated in the neighbourhood of that city, and still exists,
so far as the name is concerned, in the large village of rfd, Arfd
(mentioned by Maraszid, i. 47), in northern Syria in the district of
Azz, which was seven hours to the north of Haleb, according to Abulf.
Tab. Syr. ed. Khler, p. 23, and Niebuhr, Reise, ii. p. 414 (see
Roediger, Addenda ad Ges. thes. p. 112). הנע, Hena, which is also
combined with 'Ivvah in [Kg2 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#013) and
[Isa 37:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#013), is probably the city of
'nt Ana, on the Euphrates, mentioned by Abulf., and עוּה is most likely
the same as עוּא in [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024). The
names ועוּה הנע are omitted from the text of Isaiah in consequence of
the abridgment of Rabshakeh's address.

[Kg2 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#035)

[Kg2 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#035) contains the conclusion
drawn from the facts already adduced: "which of all the gods of the
lands are they who have delivered their land out of my hand, that
Jehovah should deliver Jerusalem out of my hand?" i.e., as not one of
the gods of the lands named have been able to rescue his land from
Assyria, Jehovah also will not be able to defend Jerusalem.

[Kg2 18:36-37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#036)

The people were quite silent at this address ("the people," העם, to whom
Rabshakeh had wished to address himself); for Hezekiah had forbidden
them to make any answer, not only to prevent Rabshakeh from saying
anything further, but that the ambassadors of Sennacherib might be left
in complete uncertainty as to the impression made by their words. The
deputies of Hezekiah returned to the king with their clothes rent as a
sign of grief at the words of the Assyrian, by which not only Hezekiah,
but still more Jehovah, had been blasphemed, and reported what they had
heard.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 19](kg2019)

</div>
