<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Lamentations Index](lam)  
  [Previous](jer052)  [Next](lam001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 0:0</span></span>

The Lamentations of Jeremiah

Introduction

1\. The Name, Contents, and Arrangement of the Book

The Name

The five Lamentations composed on the fall of Jerusalem and the kingdom
of Judah, which have received their position in the canon of the Old
Testament among the Hagiographa, have for their heading, in Hebrew MSS
and in printed editions of the Hebrew Bible, the word איכה ("alas!
how..."), which forms the characteristic initial word of three of these
pieces ([Lam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001); [Lam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#001), and [Lam
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001)). The Rabbis name the collection
קינות (Lamentations), from the nature of its contents: so in the Talmud
(Tract. Baba Bathra, f. 14b); cf. Jerome in the Prol. galeat, and in the
prologue to his translation: "incipiunt Threni, i.e., lamentationes,
quae Cynoth hebraice inscribuntur." With this agree the designations
Θρῆνοι (lxx), and Threni or Lamentationes, also Lamenta in the Vulgate
and among the Latin writers.

Contents

The ancient custom of composing and singing lamentations over deceased
friends (of which we find proof in the elegies of David on Saul and
Jonathan, [Sa2 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#017)., and on Abner,
[Sa2 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033)., and in the notice given in
[Ch2 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#025)) was even in early times
extended so as to apply to the general calamities that befell countries
and cities; hence the prophets often speak of taking up lamentations
over the fall of nations, countries, and cities; cf. [Amo
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#001); [Jer
7:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#029); [Jer
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#009), [Jer
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017)., [Eze
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#001); [Eze
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#017); [Eze
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#002), etc. The five lamentations of
the book now before us all refer to the destruction of Jerusalem and of
the kingdom of Judah by the Chaldeans; in them are deplored the
unutterable misery that has befallen the covenant people in this
catastrophe, and the disgrace which the fallen daughter of Zion has
thereby suffered. This subject is treated of in the five poems from
different points of view. In the first, the lamentation is chiefly made
over the carrying away of the people into captivity, the desolation of
Zion, the acts of oppression, the plundering and the starvation
connected with the taking of Jerusalem, the scoffing and contempt shown
by the enemy, and the helpless and comfortless condition of the city,
now fallen so low. In the second, the destruction of Jerusalem and Judah
is set forth as an act of God's wrath against the sins of the people,
the impotency of human comfort in the midst of the terrible calamity is
shown, and the people are exhorted to seek help from the Lord. In the
third, the deep spiritual sufferings of God's people in the midst of the
general distress form the subject of grievous complaint, out of which
the soul endeavours to rise, and to see the compassion of the Lord, and
the justice of His dealings on earth generally, as well as in this
visitation of judgment; and on this is founded the confident expectation
of help. In the fourth, the dreadful misery that has befallen Zion's
citizens of every class is represented as a punishment for the grievous
sins of the people and their leaders. And lastly, in the fifth, the Lord
is entreated to remove the disgrace from His people and restore them to
their former state of grace. According to this view, one may readily
perceive in these poems a well-cogitated plan in the treatment of the
material common to the whole, and a distinct progress in the execution
of this plan. There is no foundation, on the other hand, for the opinion
of De Wette, that a gradation may be traced in the description given of
the condition of the city; and the attempt of earlier expositors
(Horrer, Pareau, Jahn, etc.) to explain and apply the contents of the
different poems to different leading features in the Chaldean
catastrophe - such as the siege, the capture, the destruction of the
city and the temple - has entirely failed. Ewald, again, assumes that
the five poems were composed for a time to be solemnly spent in sorrow
and penitence, and that in the five lamentations the prophet-writer
presents a kind of changing act (drama), making five different acts
follow each other progressively; and further, that it is only with the
changing series of these that the entire great act of real lamentation
and divine sorrow concludes. But neither in the design nor in the
execution of these poems are any points to be found which form a safe
foundation for this assumption. Ewald is so far correct, however, in his
general remark, that the prophetic composer sought to present to the
community, in their deep sorrow, words which were meant to direct the
grieving heart to the only source of true comfort; and that he
understood how "to lead the deeply sorrowing ones imperceptibly to a
proper knowledge of themselves and of their own great guilt, and
thereby, in the first place, to true sorrow and sighing; that he also
knew how to resolve the wildest grief at last into true prayer for
divine retribution, and to change new strength into rejoicing over the
everlasting Messianic hope, and into the most touching request for the
divine compassion" (Die Dichter des Alt. Bundes, 3 Ausg. i. 2, S. 322).

Form

In order to give an air of continuity as well as of exhaustive
completeness to the lamentation, which constantly assumes new figures
and turns of thought, the poems, with the exception of the last
(Lamentations 5), are alphabetically arranged, and in such a form that
the first three consist of long stanzas, each of three lines, which are
for the most part further divided about the middle by a caesura into two
portions of unequal length. These poems are so arranged in accordance
with the letters of the alphabet, that in the first two, every verse of
three lines, and in the third, every line in the verse, begins with the
letters of the alphabet in their order. In this last third poem,
moreover, all the letters of the alphabet occur thrice in succession,
for which reason the Masoretes have divided these lines of the verses as
if each formed a complete verse. In the fourth poem, the verses, which
are also arranged and marked alphabetically, consist only of lines which
are likewise divided into two by a caesura; in the fifth, the alphabetic
arrangement of the verses is departed from, and it is only in their
number that the verses of the poem are made like the letters of the
alphabet. This alphabetic arrangement of the verses is exactly carried
out in the four poems, but with the remarkable difference, that in the
first only does the order of the letters entirely agree with the
traditional arrangement of the alphabet, while, in the other three, the
verse beginning with פ stands before that beginning with ע. This
deviation from the rule does not admit of being explained by the
assumption that the verses in question were afterwards transposed in
consequence of an oversight on the part of the copyist, nor by the
supposition that the order of the letters had not yet been absolutely
fixed. The former assumption, adopted by Kennicott, Jahn, etc., is shown
to be utterly incorrect, by the circumstance that the supposed
transmutation cannot be reconciled with the course of thought in the
poems; while the latter, which has been maintained by C. B. Michaelis,
Ewald, etc., is disproved by the fact that no change has taken place in
the order of the letters in the Shemitic alphabets (cf. Sommer, Bibl.
Abhandll. i. S. 145; Gesenius, 5, Rem. 2; Ewald, 12, a); and other
alphabetic poems, such as [Psa
111:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001), [Psa
112:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001); 119, and Prov 31:10-31,
exactly preserve the common arrangement of the letters. Still less does
the irregularity in question permit of being attributed to an oversight
on the part of the composer (which is Bertholdt's view), for the
irregularity is repeated in three poems. It is rather connected with
another circumstance. For we find in other alphabetic poems also,
especially the older ones, many deviations from the rule, which
undeniably prove that the composers bound themselves rigorously by the
order of the alphabet only so long as it fitted in to the course of
thought without any artificiality. Thus, for instance, in Ps 145 the Nun
verse is wanting; in Ps 34 the Vav verse; while, at the close, after ת,
there follows another verse with פ. Just such another closing verse is
found in Ps 25, in which, besides, the first two verses begin with א,
while ב is wanting; two verses, moreover, begin with ר instead of ק and
ר: in Ps 37 ע is replaced by צ, which is again found after פ in its
proper order. It is also to be considered that, in may of these poems,
the division of the verses into strophes is not continuously and
regularly carried out; e.g., in these same Lam; [Lam
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007) and [Lam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019), verses of four lines occur among
those with three. Attempts have, indeed, been made to attribute these
irregularities to later reviewers, who mistook the arrangement into
strophes; but the arguments adduced will not stand the test; see details
in Hvernick's Einl. iii. S. 51ff.

If we gather all these elements together, we shall be obliged to seek
for the reason of most, if not all of these deviations from the norm, in
the free use made of such forms by the Hebrew poets. Gerlach here
objects that, "in view of the loose connection of thought in alphabetic
poems generally, and in these Lamentations particularly, and considering
the evident dexterity with which the poet elsewhere uses the form,
another arrangement of the series would not have caused him any
difficulty." We reply that there is no want in these poems of a careful
arrangement of thought; but that the skill of the poet, in making use of
this arrangement, was not always sufficient to let him put his thoughts,
corresponding to things, into the alphabetic form, without using
artificial means or forced constructions; and that, in such cases, the
form was rather sacrificed to the thought, than rigorously maintained
through the adoption of forced and unnatural forms of expression.

Finally, the reason for the absence of the alphabetic arrangement from
the fifth poem is simply, that the lamentation there resolves itself
into a prayer, in which the careful consideration indispensable for the
carrying out of the alphabetic arrangement must give place to the free
and natural outcome of the feelings.

2\. The Author, Time of Composition, and Position in the Canon

Author

In the Hebrew text no one is named as the author of the Lamentations;
but an old tradition affirms that the prophet Jeremiah composed them.
Even so early as in the Alexandrine version, we find prefixed to [Jer
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001), the words, Καὶ ἐγένετο μετὰ
αἰχμαλωτισθῆναι τὸν ̓Ισραὴλ καὶ ̔Ιερουσαλὴμ ἐρημωθῆναι, ἐκάθισεν
̔Ιερεμίας κλαίων καὶ ἐθρήνησε τὸν θρῆνον τοῦτον ἐπὶ ̔Ιερουσαλὴμ, καὶ ει.
These words are also found in the Vulgate; only, instead of et dixit,
there is the amplification, et amaro animo suspirans et ejulans dixit.
The Syriac is without this notice; but the Arabic exactly reproduces the
words of the lxx, and the Targum begins with the words, Dixit Jeremias
propheta et sacerdos magnus. After this, both in the Talmud (Baba bathr.
f. 51. 1) and by the Church Fathers (Origen in Euseb. hist. eccl. iv.
25, Jerome in prolog. gal., etc.), as well as the later theologians, the
Jeremianic authorship was assumed as certain. The learned but eccentric
Hermann von der Hardt was the first to call in question the Jeremianic
composition of the book, in a "Programm" published in 1712 at Helmstdt;
he attributed the five poems to Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, Abednego, and
King Jehoiachin (!). This doubt was resumed at a later period by an
unknown writer in the Tbingen Theol. Quartalschr. 1819, part i.; it was
mentioned by Augusti (Einl.), and further carried out by Conz in
Bengel's Archiv, iv. p. 161f. and 422ff. Kalkar was the next to question
the traditional belief, and urged against it the position of the book
among the כּתוּבים, and the difference existing between the Greek
translation of the Lamentations and that of the prophecies of Jeremiah;
these objections he held to be not inconsiderable, yet not decisive.
Then Ewald (Poet. Bcher des A. B. i. S. 145, and in the third edition of
the same book, i. 2, S. 326; cf. Bibl. Jahrbb. vii. S. 151f., and
History of the People of Israel, iv. p. 22) decidedly refused to ascribe
the book to the prophet, and rather attributed it to one of his pupils,
Baruch or some other; in this opinion he is followed by Bunsen, as is
usual in questions regarding the criticism of the Old Testament.
Finally, Ngelsbach (in Lange's series, see Clark's For. Theol. Lib.),
with the help of the Concordance, has prepared a table of those words
and forms of words found in the Lamentations, but not occurring in the
prophecies of Jeremiah; by this means he has endeavoured to set forth
the difference of language in the two books, which he accepts as a
decisive reason for rejecting the Jeremianic authorship of the
Lamentations. And Thenius assures us that, "in consequence of pretty
long and conscientious examination, he has become convinced" that
Lamentations 2 and 4, judging from their contents and form, undeniably
proceeded from Jeremiah; while Lamentations 1 and 3 were composed by one
who was left behind in the country, some time after the destruction of
Jerusalem, and shortly before the last deportation; but Lamentations 5
is from a man "who was probably wandering about everywhere, as the
leader of a band of nobles seeking a safe asylum, but unwilling to
attach themselves to the caravan going to Egypt."

Schrader, in his late revision of De Wette's Introduction, 339, has thus
condensed the results of these critical investigations: In support of
the old tradition, which mentions Jeremiah as the author, "one might
appeal to the affinity in contents, spirit, tone, and language (De W.).
Nevertheless, this same style of language, and the mode of
representation, exhibit, again, so much that is peculiar; the
artificiality of form, especially in Lamentations 1, 2, and 4, is so
unlike Jeremiah's style; the absence of certain specific Jeremianic
peculiarities, and the contradiction between some expressions of the
prophet and those of the author of the Lamentations, is again so
striking, that one must characterize the authorship of Jeremiah as very
improbable, if not quite impossible, especially since the points of
likeness to the language used by Jeremiah, on the one hand, are
sufficiently accounted for in general by the fact that both works were
composed at the same time; and on the other hand, are nullified by other
points of likeness to Ezekiel's style, which show that use has already
been made of his prophecies." Again: "The hypothesis of Thenius, that
the poems are by different authors, is refuted by the similarity in the
fundamental character of the poems, and in the character of the
language." We may therefore dispense with a special refutation of this
hypothesis, especially since it will be shown in the exposition that the
points which Thenius has brought forward in support of his view are all
founded on a wretchedly prosaic style of interpretation, which fails to
recognise the true nature of poetry, and regards mere poetic figures as
actual history. Of the considerations, however, which Schrader has
adduced against the Jeremianic authorship, the last two that are
mentioned would, of course, have decided influence, if there were any
real foundation for them, viz., the contradiction between some
expressions of Jeremiah and those of the author of the Lamentations. But
they have no foundation in fact.

The only instance of a contradiction is said to exist between [Lam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#007) and [Jer
31:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#029). It is quoted by Schrader,
who refers to Nldeke, die alttest. Literat. S. 146. But the expression,
"Our fathers have sinned, they are no more, we bear their iniquities"
([Lam 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#007)), does not stand in
contradiction to what is said in Jer. 39:29f. against the current
proverb, "The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's teeth
have become blunt," viz., that in the future, after the restoration of
Israel, "every one shall die for his own iniquity, and the teeth of
every one who eats sour grapes shall become blunt." One statement would
contradict the other only if the latter meant that those who bear the
punishment were guiltless, or thought themselves such. But how far this
thought was from the mind of the suppliant in [Lam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#007), is shown by what he says in [Lam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#016) : "Woe unto us, for we have
sinned." According to these words, those in [Lam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#007) can only mean, "We atone not
merely for our own sins, but also the sins of our fathers," or, "The
sins of our fathers as well as our own are visited on us." This
confession accords with Scripture (cf. [Exo
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#005); [Jer
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#011), etc.), and is radically
different from the proverb, "The fathers have eaten sour grapes," etc.,
which was constantly in the mouth of those who considered themselves
innocent, and who thereby perverted the great truth, that God visits the
sins of the fathers upon the children who hate Him, into the false
statement, that innocent children must atone for the sins of their
fathers. On this, cf. also the exposition of [Lam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#007). But when Schrader, following
Nldeke, further remarks, "that Jeremiah would hardly have said nothing
whatever about God's having foretold all this suffering through him,"
there lies at the foundation of this remark the preposterous notion,
that Jeremiah ought to have brought himself prominently forward in the
Lamentations (supposing him to have written them), as one who ought not
to suffer the evil under which the people were groaning. Such gross
Pelagianism was foreign to the prophet Jeremiah. No one need speak,
therefore, of a contradiction between the Lamentations and the
prophecies of Jeremiah.

As little proof is there for the assertion that the author of the
Lamentations made use of the prophecies of Ezekiel. Ngelsbach and
Schrader, in support of this allegation, have adduced only [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014), compared with [Eze
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024); [Eze
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#005).; and [Lam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015), compared with [Eze
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003); [Eze
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#012). Ngelsbach says: "The words,
נביאיך חזוּ לך, in [Lam 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014), are no
doubt a quotation from [Eze 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#024);
[Eze 13:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#006), [Eze
13:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#014), [Eze
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#023); [Eze
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#028), 34; [Eze
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#028). For it is only in these
passages, and nowhere else in the Old Testament, that the expression
חזוּ occurs, and in combination with תפל. Moreover, כּלילת יפי, in [Lam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015), is an expression decidedly
peculiar to Ezekiel, for it occurs only in [Eze
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003) (cf. [Eze
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#012)), and nowhere else." But the
three expressions of these two passages form really too weak a proof
that the author of the Lamentations made use of the prophecies of
Ezekiel. Of course, as regards the mere form of the words, it is true
that the expression כּלילת יפי, "she who is perfect in beauty," is
found, besides [Lam 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015), only in [Eze
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003), where the prophet says of Tyre,
"Thou sayest, I am perfect in beauty," and in [Eze
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#012), where it is said of the king of
Tyre, "Thou art... כּליל;" but the thing occurs also in [Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002), with the unimportant change in
the form of the words מכלל יפי, "perfection of beauty," where Zion is so
designated. Now, if we not merely gather out of the Concordance the
expressions of like import, but also keep in view the idea presented in
[Lam 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015), "Is this the city
שׁיּאמרוּ?" and at the same time consider that the poet says this of
Jerusalem, there cannot be the least doubt that he did not take these
epithets, which are applied to Jerusalem, from Ezekiel, who used them to
designate Tyre, but that he had [Psa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#002) in view, just as the other
epithet, "a joy of the whole earth," points to [Psa
48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003). Only on the basis of these
passages in the Psalms could he employ the expression sheשׁיּאמרוּ,
"which they call." Or are we to believe that the word כּליל, כּלילה was
originally unknown to the author of the Lamentations, and that he first
became acquainted with it through Ezekiel? Nor, again, can we say that
the words taken by Ngelsbach out of [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014) are "undoubtedly a quotation from
Ezekiel," because they do not occur in this way in any of the passages
cited from Ezekiel. All that we can found on this assertion is, that in
the prophecies of Jeremiah neither חזה שׁוא or the word-form תּפל
occurs; while Ezekiel not only uses חזון שׁוא, [Eze
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#014), חזה שׁוא, and מחזה שׁוא, as
synonymous with דּבּר שׁוא, קסם שׁוא, and חזה כזב ([Eze
13:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#006), [Eze
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#023)), but also says of the false
prophets, [Eze 13:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009), "They build a
wall, and plaster it over with lime" (טחים, [Eze
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#010), cf. [Eze
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#014), [Eze
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#015), [Eze
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#018)). These same false prophets are
also called, in [Eze 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#011), טחי תפל,
"those who plaster with lime." But Ezekiel uses the word תפל only in the
meaning of "lime," while the writer of these Lamentations employs it in
the metaphorical sense, "absurdity, nonsense," in the same way as Jer;
[Jer 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#013), uses תּפלה, "absurdity,"
of the prophets of Samaria. Now, just as Jeremiah has not taken תּפלה
from Ezekiel, where it does not occur at all (but only in [Job
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#022); [Job
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012)), so there is as little
likelihood in the opinion that the word תפל, in [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014), has been derived from Ezekiel,
because [Job 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#006) shows that it was far
from rarely used by the Hebrews.

Nor does the non-occurrence of חזה שׁוא in Jeremiah afford any tenable
ground for the opinion that the expression, as found in [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014), was taken from Ezekiel. The idea
contained in חזה was not unknown to Jeremiah; for he speaks, [Jer
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014), of חזון שׁקר, and in [Jer
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#016) of חזון מלבּם, referring to the
false prophets, whose doings he characterizes as שׁקר sa sezi; cf. [Jer
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013); [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010); [Jer
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#014); [Jer
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#025)., 32, [Jer
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#010), [Jer
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#015); [Jer
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#016); [Jer
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#009), [Jer
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#023), [Jer
29:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#031). Further, if we consult only the
text of the Bible instead of the Concordance, and ponder the connection
of thought in the separate passages, we can easily perceive why, instead
of שׁקר (חזון) חזה, which is so frequent in Jeremiah, there is found in
[Lam 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014), חזה שׁוא and חזה משּׂאות
שׁוא dna . In the addresses in which Jeremiah warns the people of the
lying conduct of the false prophets, who spoke merely out of their own
heart, שׁקר was the most suitable expression; in [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014), on the contrary, where complaint
is made that the prophecies of their prophets afford no comfort to the
people in their present distress, שׁוא was certainly the most
appropriate word which the composer could select, even without a
knowledge of Ezekiel. There can be no question, then, regarding a
quotation from that prophet. but even though it were allowed that 2:14
implied an actual acquaintance with Lamentations 12 and 13 of Ezekiel,
still, nothing would follow from that against the Jeremianic authorship
of the Lamentations. For Jeremiah uttered these prophecies in the sixth
year of the captivity of Jehoiachin, i.e., in the third year before the
last siege, and the fifth before the destruction of Jerusalem; and
considering the frequent intercourse carried on between the captives in
Babylon and those who still remained in Judah and Jerusalem, in virtue
of which the former even sent letters to Jerusalem (cf. [Jer
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#025)), some of Ezekiel's prophecies
might have become known in the latter city a considerable time before
the final catastrophe, and even reached the ears of Jeremiah.

With the demolition of these two arguments, the main strength of our
opponents, in the bringing forward of proof, has been broken. Schrader
has not adduced a single instance showing "the absence of certain
specific Jeremianic peculiarities." For "the comparatively less emphasis
given to the sins of the people," which is alleged in Nldeke's note,
cannot be applied in support of that position, even if it were correct,
in view of the prominence so frequently assigned to grievous sin, [Lam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#005), [Lam
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008),[Lam
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#014), [Lam
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#018), [Lam
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#022); [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014); [Lam
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039), [Lam
3:42](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#042); [Lam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006), [Lam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013); [Lam
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#007); because the Lamentations were not
composed with the design of punishing the people for their sin, but were
intended to comfort in their misery, and to raise up again, the people
who had been severely chastised for the guilt of their sin, which was
greater than the sin of Sodom ([Lam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006)). Add to this, that Schrader, by
using this argument, contradicts himself; for he has shortly before
adduced the affinity in contents, spirit, tone, and language as an
argument to which one might appeal in support of the Jeremianic
authorship, and this affinity he has established by a long series of
quotations.

(Note: The passages are the following: [Lam
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008)., cf. with [Jer
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030); [Jer
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#021)., 26; [Lam
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#020); [Lam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#013)., with [Jer
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#007), [Jer
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#018); [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014) with [Jer
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#013); [Lam
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#016); [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011); [Lam
3:48-49](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048), with [Jer
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#021)., [Jer
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#016)., [Jer
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017); [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017);[Lam
3:52](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#052) with Jer. 15:26f.; Lamentations 3
with [Jer 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)., [Jer
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)., 14ff., [Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007)., 14ff. (De Wette). Further,
בּתוּלת בּת , [Lam 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#015); [Lam
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#013), cf. [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017); [Jer
46:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#011); מגור, [Lam
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#022), cf. [Jer
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#025); [Jer
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003), [Jer
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010); זולל, [Lam
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#011), cf. [Jer
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019); מחמוּדים instead of מחמדּים,
[Lam 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#011); נידה instead of נדּה, [Lam
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008); לוא instead of לא; אכל ל, [Lam
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005); גּאל, [Lam
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#014); תּפל, [Lam
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#014). Finally, Chaldaizing forms:
שׁוממין, [Lam 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004); ישׁנא instead of
ישׁנה, [Lam 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#001); מטּרא, [Lam
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#012); העיב, [Lam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#001); שׂרג, [Lam
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#014).)

Further, the remark that "the artificiality of form, especially in
Lamentations 1, 2, and 4, is unlike Jeremiah," is correct only in so far
as no alphabetic poems are to be found in the prophetic book of
Jeremiah. But are we then to look for poetic compositions in prophetic
addresses and historical narratives? The remark now quoted is based on
the assertion made by other critics, that the alphabetic arrangement of
poetic compositions generally is a mere rhetorical work of art, and the
production of a later but degenerate taste (Ed. Reuss and others), or a
piece of trifling unworthy of the prophet. This view has long ago been
shown groundless; cf. Hvernick's Einl. iii. S. 46ff. Even Hupfeld, who
calls the alphabetical arrangement "artificiality or trifling,"
considers that it is of a kindred nature with collections of proverbs,
and with small poems of a didactic character but deficient in close
connection of thought; he thinks, too, that it may be comparatively
ancient as a style of composition, and that it was not applied till
later to other species of writing (as Lamentations). To this, Ed. Riehm,
in the second edition of Hupfeld on the Psalms, i. p. 31, has added a
very true remark: "In lyric poetry proper, the employment of this
artificial form is naturally and intrinsically justified only when a
single fundamental strain, that fills the whole soul of the poet, -
deep, strong, and sustained, - seeks to die away in many different forms
of chords; hence its employment in the elegy." The application of this
artificial form to such a purpose is perfectly justified in these
Lamentations; and the attempt to deny that these poems are the work of
Jeremiah, on the ground of their artificial construction, would be as
great an exhibition of arbitrary conduct, as if any one refused to
ascribe the hymn "Befiehl du deine Wege" to Paul Gerhardt, or "Wie schn
leucht uns der Morgenstern" to Philip Nicolai, on the ground of the
"artificiality" that manifests itself in the beginning of the verses.

Finally, the language and the mode of representation in these poems
certainly exhibit much that is peculiar; and we find in them many words,
word-forms, and modes of expression, which do not occur in the
prophecies of Jeremiah. But it must also be borne in mind that the
Lamentations are not prophetic addresses intended to warn, rebuke, and
comfort, but lyric poetry, which has its own proper style of language,
and this different from prophetic address. Both the subject-matter and
the poetic form of these poems, smooth though this is in general,
necessarily resulted in this, - that through the prevalence of peculiar
thoughts, modes of representation, and feelings, the language also
received an impress, in words and modes of expression, that was peculiar
to itself, and different from the prophetic diction of Jeremiah. The
mere collection of the words, word-forms, and expressions peculiar to
the Lamentations, and not occurring in the prophecies of Jeremiah,
cannot furnish irrefragable proof that the authors of the two writings
were different, unless it be shown, at the same time, that the character
of the language in both writings is essentially different, and that for
the ideas, modes of representation, and thoughts common to both, other
words and expressions are used in the Lamentations than those found in
the prophecies of Jeremiah. But neither the one nor the other has been
made out by Ngelsbach. After giving the long list he has prepared, which
occupies five and a half columns, and which gives the words occurring in
the different verses of the five chapters, he explains that he does not
seek to lay any weight on the ἅπαξ λεγόμενα, probably because Jeremiah
also has many such words; but then he raises the question, "How is the
fact to be accounted for, that Jeremiah never uses עליון or אדני except
as divine names, while the latter, nevertheless, occurs fourteen times
in the Lamentations; that Jeremiah never uses הבּיט, יגה, אנח, זנח, חטא,
מחמד, בּלּע, לא חמל, עפר, עטף, חזה, חשׁך, נגינה, יחל, נשׂא פּנים, nor
למו, the relative שׁ, or בּקרב without a suffix, while all these
expressions occur more or less frequently in the Lamentations? And it
has been well remarked that these expressions are not of so specific a
kind, that the fact of their not being used in the prophetic book, but
employed in the Lamentations, might be explained from the nature of the
contents; but they belong, in great measure, to what I may call the
house-dress of the author, which he constantly wears, - which he more or
less unconsciously and unintentionally uses." We answer that the simile
of the house-dress has been most unhappily chosen. Although the style of
a writer may possibly be compared to his coat, yet nobody is in the
habit of wearing his house-coat always, on Sundays and week-days, in the
house and out of it; so, too, no writer is in the habit of using always
the same words in prose and poetry. When we investigate the matter
itself, we find we must, first of all, deduct fully one-third of the
words enumerated, although these have evidently been collected and
arranged as the most convincing proof; the words thus rejected are also
found in the prophetic book of Jeremiah, though not quite in the same
grammatical form, as the note shows.

(Note: For בּקרב, without a suffix, [Lam
3:45](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#045), exactly corresponds to מקּרב,
[Jer 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001) : cf. besides, בּקרבּי, [Lam
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#015), [Lam
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#020), with [Jer
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009); בּקרבּהּ, [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013), and [Jer
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#006); [Jer
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#021). לא, [Lam
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#002), [Lam
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#017), [Lam
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#021); [Lam
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043), is found five times in Jeremiah
([Jer 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#014); [Jer
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005); [Jer
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007); [Jer
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#014); [Jer
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#003)), not only in the 3rd pers.
perfect, but also in the imperfect. Of בּלע there occurs the Kal, [Jer
51:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#034), and the noun בּלע, [Jer
51:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#044); from חשׁך, the noun חשׁך
certainly is not found, but perhaps the verb is used in the Hiphil, [Jer
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016), as the Kal in [Lam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008); [Lam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#016). With חטא, [Lam
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008) and [Lam
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#039), alternates חטּאת, [Lam
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006), [Lam
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#022), which Jeremiah frequently uses.
Of שׁמם, the participle שׁומם certainly is not found in Jeremiah, but
the adj. שׁמם is found in [Jer 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011),
as in [Lam 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#008); and the Niphal of the
verb in [Jer 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009) and [Jer
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#010), as in [Lam
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#005). Lastly, neither is ענה wholly
wanting in Jeremiah; for in [Jer 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#016)
we are to read עני, miser, although the noun עני and the verb are not
met with in his book.)

Then we ask the counter question, whether words which one who composed
five poems employs only in one of these pieces, or only once or twice
throughout the whole, ought to be reckoned as his house-dress? Of the
words adduced, we do not find a single on in all the five poems, but
חשׁך only in [Lam 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#002), נשׂא פּנים only
in [Lam 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#016), נגינה only in [Lam
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014) and [Lam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#014), פּצה פה only in [Lam
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016) and [Lam
3:46](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046), עליון only in [Lam
3:35](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#035) and [Lam
3:38](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#038), אנח (Niphal) only in
Lamentations 1 (four times). Moreover, we ask whether Jeremiah might not
also, in lyric poems, use poetic words which could not be employed in
homely address? But of the words enumerated, למו, עליון, and אדני alone
as a name of God, together with נגינה, belong to the poetic style.

(Note: עליון as a name of God (3:35 and 38), besides [Isa
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#014), is found only in poetic pieces,
[Num 26:16](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#016); [Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008), and about twenty times in the
Psalms; אדני used by itself, except in direct addresses to God and
interviews with Him, occurs in the Psalms about forty times, and also in
the addresses of particular prophets, composed in the loftier style,
particularly Isaiah and Amos; lastly, נגינה, in [Amo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#014), occurs as a reminiscence of [Job
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009), and in the Psalms and hymns,
[Isa 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020), and [Hab
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010).)

They are therefore not found in Jeremiah, simply because his prophetic
addresses are neither lyric poems, nor rise to the lyric height of
prophetic address. The rest of the words mentioned are also found in the
Psalms especially, and in Job, as will be shown in the detailed
exposition. And when we go deeper into the matter, we find that, in the
Lamentations, there is the same tendency to reproduce the thoughts and
language of the Psalms (especially those describing the psalmist's
sufferings) and of the book of Job, that characterizes the prophecies of
Jeremiah, in the use he makes of Deuteronomy and the writings of earlier
prophets. Another peculiarity of Jeremiah's style is seen in the fact
that the composer of the Lamentations, like Jeremiah in his addresses,
repeats himself much, not merely in his ideas, but also in his words:
e.g., לא חמל occurs four times, of which three instances are in
Lamentations 2 ([Lam 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#002), [Lam
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#017), [Lam
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#021)) and one in [Lam
3:43](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#043); מחמד (and מחמוד) also occurs
four times ([Lam 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#007), [Lam
1:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#010); [Lam
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#004)), and נאנה as frequently ([Lam
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004), [Lam
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#008),[Lam
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#011), [Lam
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#021)); יגה is found five times ([Lam
1:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#004), [Lam
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#012); [Lam
3:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#032)), but in all the other Old
Testament writings only thrice; and Jeremiah also uses יגון four times,
while, of all the other prophets, Isaiah is the only one who employs it,
and this he does twice.

These marks may be sufficient of themselves to show unmistakeably that
the peculiarity of the prophet as an author is also found in the
Lamentations, and that nothing can be discovered showing a difference of
language in the expression of thoughts common to both writings. But this
will be still more evident if we consider, finally, the similarity, both
as regards the subjects of thought and the style of expression,
exhibited in a considerable number of instances in which certain
expressions characteristic of Jeremiah are also found in Lamentations:
e.g., the frequent employment of שׁבר and שׁבר בּת עמּי, [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011), [Lam
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#013); [Lam
3:47-48](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047); [Lam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010), cf. with [Jer
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006), [Jer
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#020); [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001), [Jer
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014); [Jer
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011), [Jer
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#021); [Jer
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019); [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017), etc.; מגוּרי, [Lam
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#022), with מגור מסּביב, [Jer
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#025); [Jer
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#003), [Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010); [Jer
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005); [Jer
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#029); (מים, or) עין, [Lam
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#016); [Lam
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#018); [Lam
3:48](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#048); [Lam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011), cf. with Jer. 8:23; [Jer
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017); [Jer
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017); [Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017); הייתי שׂחק, [Jer
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014), with הייתי לשׂחק, [Jer
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007); פּחד ופחת, [Lam
3:47](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#047), as in [Jer
48:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#043). Cf. also the note on p. 471,
after the passages quoted by De Wette. Pareau, then, had good reason
when, long ago, he pointed out the peculiarities of Jeremiah in the
style of the Lamentations; and only a superficial criticism can assert
against this, that the existing coincidences find a sufficient
explanation in the assumption that, speaking generally, the two books
were composed at the same period.

(Note: Pareau has discussed this question very well in the Observatt.
general., prefixed to his Commentary, 6-8, and concludes with this
result: Non tantum regnant in Threnis varii illi characteres, quos stilo
Jeremiae proprios esse vidimus, verum etiam manifesto cernitur in eorum
scriptore animus tener, lenis, ad quaevis tristia facile commotus ac
dolorem aegre ferens. Quod autem in iis frequentius observetur, quam in
sermonibus Jeremiae propheticis, dictionis sublimitas et brevitas
majorque imaginum copia et pulchritudo, atque conceptuum vis et
intentio: illud vix aliter fieri potuisse agnoscemus, si ad argumenti
naturam attendamus, quo vehementur affici debuerit Jeremias; etc., p.
40.)

We therefore close this investigation, after having proved that the
tradition which ascribes the Lamentations to the prophet Jeremiah as
their author is as well-founded as any ancient historical tradition
whatever.

Time of Composition

From the organic connection of the five poems, as shown above, it
follows of itself that they cannot have proceeded from different
authors, nor originated at different periods, but were composed at brief
intervals, one after the other, not long after the destruction of
Jerusalem and the fall of the kingdom of Judah, and in the order in
which they have been transmitted to us. What gives special support to
this conclusion is the circumstance that, throughout these Lamentations,
there is no possibility of mistaking the expression of grief, still
fresh in the writer's mind, over the horrors of that fearful
catastrophe. The assumption, however, that the prophet, in the picture
he draws, had before his eyes the ruins of the city, and the misery of
those who had been left behind, cannot be certainly made out from a
consideration of the contents of the poems. But there seems to be no
doubt that Jeremiah composed them in the interval between the
destruction of Jerusalem and his involuntary departure to Egypt. There
is no tenable ground for the confident assertion of Ewald, that they
were composed in Egypt; for the passages, [Jer
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#003); [Jer
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#018)., [Lam
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#005), [Lam
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#009), do not mean that the writer was
then living among the fugitives who had fled in such vast multitudes to
Egypt, partly before and partly after the destruction of the city.

Position of the Lamentations in the Canon

The separation of the Lamentations from the book of the prophecies of
Jeremiah, and their reception into the third division of the Old
Testament canon (the Kethubim), - which Kalkschmidt and Thenius, in
complete misunderstanding of the principle on which the tripartition of
the canon is founded, would bring to bear as an argument against their
having been composed by Jeremiah, - are fully accounted for by their
subjective, lyric contents; in consequence of this they differ
essentially from the prophecies, and take their place alongside of the
Psalms and other productions of sacred poesy. This position of theirs
among the Kethubim must be considered (against Bleek) as the original
one; their arrangement by the side of the prophetic writings of Jeremiah
in the lxx and Vulgate, which Luther as well as the translators of the
"authorized" English version has retained, must have originated with the
Alexandrine translators, who could not understand the arrangement of the
Hebrew canon, and who afterwards, in order to make the number of the
books of the Bible the same as that of the letters of the alphabet
(twenty-two), counted the Lamentations as forming one book with the
prophecies of Jeremiah. That this arrangement and enumeration of the
Lamentations, observed by the Hellenists, deviated from the tradition of
the Jews of Palestine, may be perceived from the remark of Jerome, in
his Prol. galeat., regarding this mode of reckoning: quamquam nonnulli
Ruth et Cynoth inter hagiographa scriptitent, et hos libros in suo
putent numero supputandos. Their arrangement in the series of the five
Megilloth (rolls appointed to be read on certain annual feast-days and
memorial-days) in our editions of the Hebrew Bible was not fixed till a
later period, when, according to the ordinance in the synagogal liturgy,
the Lamentations were appointed to be read on the ninth of the month Ab,
as the anniversary of the destruction of the temples of Solomon and of
Herod. (Cf. Herzog's Real-Encykl. xv. 310.)

The importance of the Lamentations, as a part of the canon, does not so
much consists in the mere fact that they were composed by Jeremiah, and
contain outpourings of sorrow on different occasions over the misery of
his people, as rather in their being an evidence of the interest with
which Jeremiah, in the discharge of his functions as a prophet,
continued to watch over the ruins of Jerusalem. In these Lamentations he
seeks not merely to give expression to the sorrow of the people that he
may weep with them, but by his outpour of complaint to rouse his
fellow-countrymen to an acknowledgement of God's justice in this
visitation, to keep them from despair under the burden of unutterable
woe, and by teaching them how to give due submission to the judgment
that has befallen them, to lead once more to God those who would not let
themselves be brought to Him through his previous testimony regarding
that judgment while it was yet impending. The Jewish synagogue has
recognised and duly estimated the importance of the Lamentations in
these respects, by appointing that the book should be read on the
anniversary of the destruction of the temple. A like appreciation has
been made by the Christian Church, which, rightly perceiving that the
Israelitish community is the subject in these poems, attributed to them
a reference to the church militant; and, viewing the judgment on the
people of God as a prophecy of the judgment that came on Him who took
the sins of the whole world upon Himself, it has received a portion of
the Lamentations into the ritual for the Passion Week, and concludes
each of these lessons with the words, "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, convertere
ad Dominum, deum tuum." Cf. The Passion Week in its Ceremonies and
Prayers, Spires 1856, and the Officium hebdomadae sanctae, a reprinted
extract from Dr. Reischl's Passionale, Mnich 1857. The motives for this
choice are so far set forth by Allioli (in Neumann, ii. S. 486) in the
following terms: "The church wished believers to see, in the great
punishments which God had ordained against Jerusalem by the
instrumentality of Nebuchadnezzar, the still more severe chastisement
that God has brought on Israel after the dreadful murder of the Messias.
She seeks to bewail the unhappy condition of the blinded nation, once
favoured with the divine revelation. In the fall of Jerusalem, she seeks
to deplore the evil that has come on herself from external and internal
foes, the persecution of brother by brother, the havoc made by false
teachers, the looseness of opinions, the sad advances made by
indifference in matters of faith and by the corruption of morals. In the
devastation and the penalties inflicted on Jerusalem, she wishes to
present for consideration the destruction which comes on every soul that
dies the death in sins. In the condition of the ruined city and the
homeless nation, she seeks to make men bewail the homeless condition of
the whole race, who have fallen into decay and disorder through Adam's
sin. And lastly, in the nation visited with punishment, she seeks to set
forth Jesus Christ Himself, in so far as He has become the substitute of
all men, and suffered for their sins." This display of all these
references is sadly deficient in logical arrangement; but it contains a
precious kernel of biblical truth, which the Evangelical Church

(Note: i.e., the "United Evangelical Church" of Germany, the National
Protestant Church, which was formed by the coalition of the Lutheran and
Reformed (or Calvinistic) communions. This union began in Prussia in
1817, and was gradually effected in other German states. But many
staunch adherents of the old distinctive (Augsburg and Helvetic)
Confessions endured persecution rather than consent to enter the
"United" Church. The liturgy was framed under the special direction of
the Prussian king in 1821, and after some alterations were made on it,
appointed by a royal decree, in 1830, to be used in all the churches. -
Tr.)

has endeavoured in many ways to turn to advantage. Regarding the
adaptations of the Lamentations made for liturgical use in the
Evangelical Church, see particulars in Schberlein, Schatz des
liturgischen Chor-und Gemeindegesanges, ii. S. 444ff.

As to the commentaries on the Lamentations, see Keil's Manual of
Introduction to the Old Testament, vol. i. p. 508 Clark's Foreign Theol.
Library. To the list of works therein given are to be appended, as later
productions, Ewald's recent treatment of the book in the third edition
of the Dichter des A. Bundes (1866), i. 2, where the Lamentations have
been inserted among the Psalms, S. 321ff.; Wilh. Engelhardt, die Klagel.
Jerem. bersetzt. 1867; Ernst Gerlach, die Klagel. erkl. 1868; and
Ngelsbach, in Lange's series of commentaries (Clark's English edition),
1868.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Chapter 1](lam001)

</div>
