<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev020)  [Next](lev022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 21:0</span></span>

Holiness of the Priests, of the Holy Gifts, and of Sacrifices -
Leviticus 21-22

The Sanctification of the Priests. - As the whole nation was to strive
after sanctification in all the duties of life, on account of its
calling as a nation of God, the priests, whom Jehovah had chosen out of
the whole nation to be the custodians of His sanctuary, and had
sanctified to that end, were above all to prove themselves the
sanctified servants of the Lord in their domestic life and the duties of
their calling. (1) They were not to defile themselves by touching the
dead or by signs of mourning ([Lev
21:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001) and [Lev
21:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010)); (2) they were to contract
and maintain a spotless marriage ([Lev
21:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007) and [Lev
21:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013)); and (3) those members of
the priesthood who had any bodily failings were to keep away from the
duties of the priests' office ([Lev
21:16-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#016)).

[Leviticus 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 21:1</span></span>

The priest was not to defile himself on account of a soul, i.e., a dead
person (nephesh, as in [Lev 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#028)),
among his countrymen, unless it were of his kindred, who stood near to
him (i.e., in the closest relation to him), formed part of the same
family with him (cf. [Lev 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#003)), such
as his mother, father, son, daughter, brother, or a sister who was still
living with him as a virgin and was not betrothed to a husband (cf. [Eze
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#025)). As every corpse not only
defiled the persons who touched it, but also the tent or dwelling in
which the person had died ([Num 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011),
[Num 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014)); in the case of death
among members of the family or household, defilement was not to be
avoided on the part of the priest as the head of the family. It was
therefore allowable for him to defile himself on account of such persons
as these, and even to take part in their burial. The words of [Lev
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#004) are obscure: "He shall not defile
himself בּעמּיו בּעל, i.e., as lord (pater-familias) among his
countrymen, to desecrate himself;" and the early translators have
wandered in uncertainty among different renderings. In all probability
בּעל denotes the master of the house or husband. But, for all that, the
explanation given by Knobel and others, "as a husband he shall not
defile himself on the death of his wife, his mother-in-law and
daughter-in-law, by taking part in their burial," is decidedly to be
rejected. For, apart from the unwarrantable introduction of the
mother-in-law and daughter-in-law, there is sufficient to prevent our
thinking of defilement on the death of a wife, in the fact that the wife
is included in the "kin that is near unto him" in [Lev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#002), though not in the way that many
Rabbins suppose, who maintain that שׁאר signifies wife, but implicite,
the wife not being expressly mentioned, because man and wife form one
flesh ([Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)), and the wife stands
nearer to the husband than father and mother, son and daughter, or
brother and sister. Nothing is proved by appealing to the statement made
by Plutarch, that the priests of the Romans were not allowed to defile
themselves by touching the corpses of their wives; inasmuch as there is
no trace of this custom to be found among the Israelites, and the
Rabbins, for this very reason, suppose the death of an illegitimate wife
to be intended. The correct interpretation of the words can only be
arrived at by considering the relation of the fourth verse to what
precedes and follows. As [Lev 21:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001)
stand in a very close relation to [Lev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005) and [Lev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006), - the defilement on account of a
dead person being more particularly explained in the latter, or rather,
strictly speaking, greater force being given to the prohibition, - it is
natural to regard [Lev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#004) as
standing in a similar relation to [Lev
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007), and to understand it as a
general prohibition, which is still more clearly expounded in [Lev
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007) and [Lev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009). The priest was not to defile
himself as a husband and the head of a household, either by marrying a
wife of immoral or ambiguous reputation, or by training his children
carelessly, so as to desecrate himself, i.e., profane the holiness of
his rank and office by either one or the other (cf. [Lev
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009) and [Lev
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#015)). - In [Lev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005) desecration is forbidden in the
event of a death occurring. He was not to shave a bald place upon his
head. According to the Chethib יקרחה is to be pointed with ה- attached,
and the Keri יקרחוּ is a grammatical alteration to suit the plural
suffix in בּראשׁם, which is obviously to be rejected on account of the
parallel יגלּחוּ לא זקנם וּפאת. In both of the clauses there is a
constructio ad sensum, the prohibition which is addressed to individuals
being applicable to the whole: upon their head shall no one shave a bald
place, namely, in front above the forehead, "between the eyes" ([Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001)). We may infer from the context
that reference is made to a customary mode of mourning for the dead; and
this is placed beyond all doubt by [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001), where it is forbidden to all the
Israelites "for the dead." According to Herodotus, 2, 36, the priests in
Egypt were shaven, whereas in other places they wore their hair long. In
other nations it was customary for those who were more immediately
concerned to shave their heads as a sign of mourning; but the Egyptians
let their hair grow both upon their head and chin when any of their
relations were dead, whereas they shaved at other times. The two other
outward signs of mourning mentioned, namely, cutting off the edge of the
beard and making incisions in the body, have already been forbidden in
[Lev 19:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027), and the latter is
repeated in [Deu 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001). The reason for
the prohibition is given in [Lev 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006)
- "they shall be holy unto their God," and therefore not disfigure their
head and body by signs of passionate grief, and so profane the name of
their God when they offer the firings of Jehovah; that is to say, when
they serve and approach the God who has manifested Himself to His people
as the Holy One. On the epithet applied to the sacrifices, "the food of
God," see at [Lev 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011) and [Lev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016).

[Leviticus 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 21:7</span></span>

Their marriage and their domestic life were also to be in keeping with
their holy calling. They were not to marry a whore (i.e., a public
prostitute), or a fallen woman, or a woman put away (divorced) from her
husband, that is to say, any person of notoriously immoral life, for
this would be irreconcilable with the holiness of the priesthood, but
(as may be seen from this in comparison with [Lev
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#014)) only a virgin or widow of
irreproachable character. She need not be an Israelite, but might be the
daughter of a stranger living among the Israelites; only she must not be
an idolater or a Canaanite, for the Israelites were all forbidden to
marry such a woman ([Exo 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016); [Deu
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003)).

[Lev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#008)

"Thou shalt sanctify him therefore," that is to say, not merely "respect
his holy dignity" (Knobel), but take care that he did not desecrate his
office by a marriage so polluted. The Israelites as a nation are
addressed in the persons of their chiefs. The second clause of the
verse, "he shall be holy unto thee," contains the same thought. The
repetition strengthens the exhortation. The reason assigned for the
first clause is the same as in [Lev
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#006); and that for the second, the
same as in [Lev 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#008), [Lev
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#026); [Exo
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#013), etc.

[Lev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009)

The priests's family was also to lead a blameless life. If a priest's
daughter began to play the whore, she profaned her father, and was to be
burned, i.e., to be stoned and then burned (see [Lev
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#014)). כּהן אישׁ, a man who is a
priest, a priest-man.

[Leviticus 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 21:10</span></span>

The high priest was to maintain a spotless purity in a higher degree
still. He, whose head had been anointed with oil, and who had been
sanctified to put on the holy clothes (see [Lev
8:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#007) and [Lev
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#037)), was not to go with his hair
flying loose when a death had taken place, nor to rend his clothes (see
[Lev 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#006)), nor to go in to any dead
body (מת נפשׁת souls of a departed one, i.e., dead persons); he was not
to defile himself (cf. [Lev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#002)) on
account of his father and mother (i.e., when they were dead), nor to go
out of the sanctuary funeris nempe causa (Ros.), to give way to his
grief or attend the funeral. We are not to understand by this, however,
that the sanctuary was to be his constant abode, as Bhr and Baumgarten
maintain (cf. [Lev 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#007)). "Neither
shall he profane the sanctuary of his God," sc., by any defilement of
his person which he could and ought to avoid; "for the consecration of
the anointing oil of his God is upon him" (cf. [Lev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#007)), and defilement was incompatible
with this. נזר does not mean the diadem of the high priest here, as in
[Exo 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#006); [Exo
39:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#030), but consecration (see at [Num
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#007)).

[Leviticus 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 21:13</span></span>

He was only to marry a woman in her virginity, not a widow, a woman put
away, or a fallen woman, a whore (זונה without a copulative is in
apposition to חללה a fallen girl, who was to be the same to him as a
whore), but "a virgin of his own people," that is to say, only an
Israelitish woman.

[Leviticus 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 21:15</span></span>

"Neither shall he profane his seed (posterity) among his people," sc.,
by contracting a marriage that was not in keeping with the holiness of
his rank.

[Leviticus 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 21:16</span></span>

Directions for the sons (descendants) of Aaron who were afflicted with
bodily imperfections. As the spiritual nature of a man is reflected in
his bodily form, only a faultless condition of body could correspond to
the holiness of the priest; just as the Greeks and Romans required, for
the very same reason, that the priests should be ὁλόκληροι, integri
corporis (Plato de legg. 6, 759; Seneca excerpt. controv. 4, 2; Plutarch
quaest. rom. 73). Consequently none of the descendants of Aaron,
"according to their generations," i.e., in all future generations (see
[Exo 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)), who had any blemish (mum,
μῶμος, bodily fault) were to approach the vail, i.e., enter the holy
place, or draw near to the altar (in the court) to offer the food of
Jehovah, viz., the sacrifices. No blind man, or lame man, or charum,
κολοβόριν (from κολοβός and ῥίν), naso mutilus (lxx), i.e., one who had
sustained any mutilation, especially in the face, on the nose, ears,
lips, or eyes, not merely one who had a flat or stunted nose; or שׂרוּע,
lit., stretched out, i.e., one who had anything beyond what was normal,
an ill-formed bodily member therefore; so that a man who had more than
ten fingers and ten toes might be so regarded ([Sa2
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#020)).

[Leviticus 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 21:19</span></span>

Whoever had a fracture in his foot or hand.

[Leviticus 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 21:20</span></span>

גּבּן a hump-backed man. דּק, lit., crushed to powder, fine: as
distinguished from the former, it signified one how had an unnaturally
thin or withered body or member, not merely consumptive or wasted away.
בּעינו תּבלּל mixed, i.e., spotted in his eye, one who had a white speck
in his eye (Onk., Vulg., Saad.), not blear-eyed (lxx). גּרב, which
occurs nowhere else except in [Lev
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#022) and [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027), signifies, according to the
ancient versions, the itch; and ילּפת, which only occurs here and in
[Lev 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#022), the ring-worm (lxx, Targ.,
etc.). אשׁך מרוח, crushed in the stones, one who had crushed or softened
stones; for in [Isa 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#021), the only
other place where מרח occurs, it signifies, not to rub to pieces, but to
squeeze out, to lay in a squeezed or liquid form upon the wound: the
Sept. rendering is μόνορχις, having only one stone. Others understand
the word as signifying ruptured (Vulg., Saad.), or with swollen
testicles (Juda ben Karish). All that is certain is, that we are not to
think of castration of any kind (cf. [Deu
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#002)), and that there is not
sufficient ground for altering the text into מרוח extension.

[Leviticus 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 21:22</span></span>

Persons afflicted in the manner described might eat the bread of their
God, however, the sacrificial gifts, the most holy and the holy, i.e.,
the wave-offerings, the first-fruits, the firstlings, tithes and things
laid under a ban ([Num 18:11-19](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#011) and
[Num 18:26-29](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#026)), - that is to say, they
might eat them like the rest of the priests; but they were not allowed
to perform any priestly duty, that they might not desecrate the
sanctuary of the Lord ([Lev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#023), cf.
[Lev 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#012)).

[Leviticus 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 21:24</span></span>

Moses communicated these instructions to Aaron and his sons.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 22](lev022)

</div>
