<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev024)  [Next](lev026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)

[Leviticus 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 25:1</span></span>

The law for the sabbatical and jubilee years brings to a close the laws
given to Moses by Jehovah upon Mount Sinai. This is shown by the words
of the heading ([Lev 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#001)), which
point back to [Exo 34:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#032), and bind
together into an inward unity the whole round of laws that Moses
received from God upon the mountain, and then gradually announced to the
people. The same words are repeated, not only in [Lev
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#038) at the close of the laws of
sacrifice, but also at [Lev 26:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#046), at
the close of the promises and threats which follow the law for the
sabbatical and jubilee years, and lastly, at [Lev
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#034), after the supplementary law
concerning vows. The institution of the jubilee years corresponds to the
institution of the day of atonement (ch. 16). Just as all the sins and
uncleannesses of the whole congregation, which had remained unatoned for
and uncleansed in the course of the year, were to be wiped away by the
all-embracing expiation of the yearly recurring day of atonement, and an
undisturbed relation to be restored between Jehovah and His people; so,
by the appointment of the year of jubilee, the disturbance and confusion
of the divinely appointed relations, which had been introduced in the
course of time through the inconstancy of all human or earthly things,
were to be removed by the appointment of the year of jubilee, and the
kingdom of Israel to be brought back to its original condition. The next
chapter (ch. 26) bears the same relation to the giving of the law upon
Sinai as [Exo 23:20-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020) to the covenant
rights in Ex 20:22-23:19.

[Leviticus 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 25:2</span></span>

The Sabbatical Year. - When Israel had come into the land which the Lord
gave to it, it was to sanctify it to the Lord by the observance of a
Sabbath. As the nation at large, with its labourers and beasts of
burden, was to keep a Sabbath or day of rest every seventh day of the
week, so the land which they filled was to rest (to keep, שׁבּי שׁבת as
in [Lev 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#032)) a Sabbath to the Lord.
Six years they were to sow the field and cut the vineyard, i.e.,
cultivate the corn-fields, vineyards, and olive-yards ([Exo
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011) : see the remarks on cerem at
[Lev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010)), and gather in their
produce; but in the seventh year the land was to keep a Sabbath of rest
(Sabbath sabbathon, [Exo 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#015)), a
Sabbath consecrated to the Lord (see [Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010)); and in this year the land was
neither to be tilled nor reaped (cf. [Exo
23:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010)). זמר in Kal applies only to
the cutting of grapes, and so also in Niphal, [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006); hence zemorah, a vine-branch
([Num 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#023)), and mazmerah, a
pruning-knife ([Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004), etc.).

(Note: The meaning to sin and play, which is peculiar to the Piel, and
is derived from zamar, to hum, has hardly anything to do with this. At
all events the connection has not yet been shown to be a probable one.
See Hupfeld, [Psa 4:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001) pp. 421-2,
note.)

The omission of sowing and reaping presupposed that the sabbatical year
commenced with the civil year, in the autumn of the sixth year of
labour, and not with the ecclesiastical year, on the first of Abib
(Nisan), and that it lasted till the autumn of the seventh year, when
the cultivation of the land would commence again with the preparation of
the ground and the sowing of the seed for the eighth year; and with this
the command to proclaim the jubilee year on "the tenth day of the
seventh month" throughout all the land ([Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009)), and the calculation in [Lev
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#021), [Lev
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#022), fully agree.

[Leviticus 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 25:5</span></span>

"That which has fallen out (been shaken out) of thy harvest (i.e., the
corn which had grown from the grains of the previous harvest that had
fallen out) thou shalt not reap, and the grapes of thine uncut thou
shalt not gather." נזיר, the Nazarite, who let his hair grow freely
without cutting it ([Num 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005)), is used
figuratively, both here and in [Lev
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#011), to denote a vine not pruned,
since by being left to put forth all its productive power it was
consecrated to the Lord. The Roman poets employ a similar figure, and
speak of the viridis coma of the vine (Tibull. i. 7, 34; Propert. ii.
15, 12).

[Leviticus 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 25:6</span></span>

"And the Sabbath of the land (i.e., the produce of the sabbatical year
or year of rest, whatever grew that year without cultivation) shall be
to you for food, for thee and thy servant,...and for the beasts that are
in thy land shall all its produce be for food." The meaning is, that
what grew of itself was not to be reaped by the owner of the land, but
that masters and servants, labourers and visitors, cattle and game, were
to eat thereof away from the field (cf. [Lev
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#012)). The produce arising without
tilling or sowing was to be a common good for man and beast. According
to [Exo 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#011), it was to belong to the
poor and needy; but the owner was not forbidden to partake of it also,
so that there can be no discrepancy discovered between this passage and
the verse before us. The produce referred to would be by no means
inconsiderable, particularly if there had not been a careful gleaning
after the harvest, or the corn had become over-ripe. In the fertile
portions of Palestine, especially in the plain of Jezreel and on the
table-land of Galilee, as well as in other parts, large quantities of
wheat and other cereals are still self-sown from the ripe ears, the
over-flowing of which is not gathered by any of the inhabitants of the
land. Strabo gives a similar account of Albania, viz., that in many
parts a field once sown will bear fruit twice and even three times, the
first yield being as much as fifty-fold. The intention of his law was
not so much to secure the physical recreation of both the land and
people, however useful and necessary this might be for men, animals, and
land in this sublunary world; but the land was to keep Sabbath to the
Lord in the seventh year. In the sabbatical year the land, which the
Lord had given to His people, was to observe a period of holy rest and
refreshment to its Lord and God, just as the congregation did on the
Sabbath-day; and the hand of man was to be withheld from the fields and
fruit-gardens from working them, that they might yield their produce for
his use. The earth was to be saved from the hand of man exhausting its
power for earthly purposes as his own property, and to enjoy the holy
rest with which God had blessed the earth and all its productions after
the creation. From this, Israel, as the nation of God, was to learn, on
the one hand, that although the earth was created for man, it was not
merely created for him to draw out its powers for his own use, but also
to be holy to the Lord, and participate in His blessed rest; and on the
other hand, that the great purpose for which the congregation of the
Lord existed, did not consist in the uninterrupted tilling of the earth,
connected with bitter labour in the sweat of his brow ([Gen
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#017), [Gen
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)), but in the peaceful enjoyment
of the fruits of the earth, which the Lord their God had given them, and
would give them still without the labour of their hands, if they strove
to keep His covenant and satisfy themselves with His grace. This
intention of the sabbatical year comes out still more plainly in the
year of jubilee, in which the idea of the sanctification of the whole
land as the Lord's property is still more strongly expressed, and whose
inward connection with the sabbatical year is indicated by the fact that
the time for observing it was regulated by the sabbatical years ([Lev
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)).

[Leviticus 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 25:8</span></span>

The law for the Year of Jubilee refers first of all to its observance
([Lev 25:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)), and secondly to its
effects (a) upon the possession of property (vv. 13-34), and (b) upon
the personal freedom of the Israelites (vv. 35-55).

[Lev 25:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)

Keeping the year of jubilee. [Lev
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008), [Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009). Seven Sabbaths of years - i.e.,
year-Sabbaths or sabbatical years, or seven times seven years, the time
of seven year-Sabbaths, that is to say, 49 years - they were to count,
and then at the expiration of that time to cause the trumpet of jubilee
to go (sound) through the whole land on the tenth of the seventh month,
i.e., the day of atonement, to proclaim the entrance of the year of
jubilee. This mode of announcement was closely connected with the idea
of the year itself. The blowing of trumpets, or blast of the
far-sounding horn (shophar, see at [Lev
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024)), was the signal of the descent
of the Lord upon Sinai, to raise Israel to be His people, to receive
them into His covenant, to unite them to Himself, and bless them through
His covenant of grace ([Exo 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013),
[Exo 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016), [Exo
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019); [Exo
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#018)). Just as the people were to
come up to the mountain at the sounding of the יובל, or the voice of the
shophar, to commemorate its union with the Lord, so at the expiration of
the seventh sabbatical year the trumpet-blast was to announce to the
covenant nation the gracious presence of its God, and the coming of the
year which was to bring "liberty throughout the land to all that dwelt
therein" ([Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010)), - deliverance
from bondage ([Lev 25:40](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#040).), return to
their property and family ([Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010),
[Lev 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#013)), and release from the
bitter labour of cultivating the land ([Lev
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#011), [Lev
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#012)). This year of grace as
proclaimed and began with the day of atonement of every seventh
sabbatical year, to show that it was only with the full forgiveness of
sins that the blessed liberty of the children of God could possibly
commence. This grand year of grace was to return after seven times seven
years; i.e., as is expressly stated in [Lev
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010), every fiftieth year was to be
sanctified as a year of jubilee. By this regulation of the time, the
view held by R. Jehuda, and the chronologists and antiquarians who have
followed him, that every seventh sabbatical year, i.e., the 49th year,
was to be kept as the year of jubilee, is proved to be at variance with
the text, and the fiftieth year is shown to be the year of rest, in
which the sabbatical idea attained its fullest realization, and reached
its earthly temporal close.

[Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010)

The words, "Ye shall proclaim liberty throughout all the land unto all
the inhabitants thereof," are more closely defined by the two clauses
commencing with היא יובל in [Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010)
and [Lev 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#011). "A trumpet-blast shall
it be to you, that ye return every one to his own possession, and every
one to his family:" a still further explanation is given in [Lev
25:23-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023) and 39-55. This was to be the
fruit or effect of the blast, i.e., of the year commencing with the
blast, and hence the year was called "the year of liberty," or free
year, in [Eze 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#017). יובל, from יבל to
flow with a rushing noise, does not mean jubilation or the time of
jubilation (Ges., Kn., and others); but wherever it is not applied to
the year of jubilee, it signifies only the loud blast of a trumpet ([Exo
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013); [Jos
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#005)). This meaning also applies here
in [Lev 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010), [Lev
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#011) and [Lev
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#012); whilst in [Lev
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#015), [Lev
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#028), [Lev
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#030), [Lev
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#031), [Lev
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#033), [Lev
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#018), and [Num
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#004), it is used as an abbreviated
expression for יובל שׁנת, the year of the trumpet-blast.

[Lev 25:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#011)

The other effect of the fiftieth year proclaimed with the trumpet-blast
consisted in the fact that the Israelites were not to sow or reap, just
as in the sabbatical year (see [Lev
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#004), [Lev
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#005)). "For it is יובל," i.e., not
"jubilation or time of jubilation," but "the time or year of the
trumpet-blast, it shall be holy to you," i.e., a sabbatical time, which
is to be holy to you like the day of the trumpet-blast ([Lev
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023), [Lev
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#024)).

Leviticus 25:13-34

One of the effects of the year of freedom is mentioned here, viz., the
return of every man to his own possession; and the way is prepared for
it by a warning against overreaching in the sale of land, and the
assignment of a reason for this.

[Lev 25:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#014)

In the purchase and sale of pieces of land no one was to oppress
another, i.e., to overreach him by false statements as to its value and
produce. הונה applies specially to the oppression of foreigners ([Lev
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#033); [Exo
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)), of slaves ([Deu
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#017)), of the poor, widows, and
orphans ([Jer 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#003); [Eze
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#008)) in civil matters, by
overreaching them or taking their property away. The inf. abs. קנה: as
in [Gen 41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043). The singular suffix in
עמיתך is to be understood distributively of a particular Israelite.

[Lev 25:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#015)

The purchase and sale were to be regulated by the number of years that
had elapsed since the year of jubilee, so that they were only to sell
the produce of the yearly revenues up to the next jubilee year, and made
the price higher or lower according to the larger or smaller number of
the years.

[Lev 25:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#017)

Overreaching and oppression God would avenge; they were therefore to
fear before Him. On the other hand, if they kept His commandments and
judgments, He would take care that they should dwell in the land in
safety (secure, free from anxiety), and be satisfied with the abundance
of its produce. In this way [Lev
25:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#018) fit on exceedingly well to
what precedes.

(Note: To prove that this verse is an interpolation made by the Jehovist
into the Elohistic writings, Knobel is obliged to resort to two
groundless assumptions: viz., (1) to regard [Lev
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023) and [Lev
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#024), which belong to what follows
([Lev 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025).) and lay down the general
rule respecting the possession and redemption of land, as belonging to
what precedes and connected with [Lev
25:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#014); and (2) to explain [Lev
25:18-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#018) in the most arbitrary manner,
as a supplementary clause relating to the sabbatical year, whereas the
promise that the sixth year should yield produce enough for three years
([Lev 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#021), [Lev
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#022)) shows as clearly as possible
that they treat of the year of jubilee together with the seventh
sabbatical year which preceded it, and in [Lev
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#020) the seventh year is mentioned
simply as the beginning of the two years' Sabbath which the land was to
keep without either sowing or reaping.)

[Lev 25:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#020)

Jehovah would preserve them from want, without their sowing or reaping.
He would bestow His blessing upon them in the sixth year, so that it
should bear the produce of three (עשׂת for עשׂתה as in [Gen
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#011)); and when they sowed in the
eighth year, they should eat the produce of the old year up to the ninth
year, that is to say, till the harvest of that year. It is quite evident
from [Lev 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#021) and [Lev
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#022), according to which the sixth
year was to produce enough for three years, and the sowing for the ninth
was to take place in the eighth, that not only the year of jubilee, but
the sabbatical year also, commenced in the autumn, when they first began
to sow for the coming year; so that the sowing was suspended from the
autumn of the sixth year till the autumn of the seventh, and even till
the autumn of the eighth, whenever the jubilee year came round, in which
case both sowing and reaping were omitted for two years in succession,
and consequently the produce of the sixth year, which was harvested in
the seventh month of that year, must have sufficed for three years, not
merely till the sowing in the autumn of the eight or fiftieth year, but
till the harvest of the ninth or fifty-first year, as the Talmud and
Rabbins of every age have understood the law.

[Lev 25:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023)

What was already implied in the laws relating to the purchase and sale
of the year's produce ([Lev 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#015),
[Lev 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#016)), namely, that the land
could not be alienated, is here clearly expressed; and at the same time
the rule is laid down, showing how a man, who had been compelled by
poverty to sell his patrimony, was to recover possession of it by
redemption. In the first place, [Lev
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#023) contains the general rule, "the
land shall not be sold לצמיתת" (lit., to annihilation), i.e., so as to
vanish away from, or be for ever lost to, the seller. For "the land
belongs to Jehovah:" the Israelites, to whom He would give it ([Lev
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#002)), were not actual owners or full
possessors, so that they could do what they pleased with it, but
"strangers and sojourners with Jehovah" in His land. Consequently ([Lev
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#024)) throughout the whole of the
land of their possession they were to grant גּאלּה release, redemption
to the land. There were three ways in which this could be done. The
first case ([Lev 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025)) was this: if a
brother became poor and sold his property, his nearest redeemer was to
come and release what his brother had sold, i.e., buy it back from the
purchaser and restore it to its former possessor. The nearest redeemer
was the relative upon whom this obligation rested according to the
series mentioned in [Lev 25:48](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#048), [Lev
25:49](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#049). - The second case ([Lev
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#026), [Lev
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#027)) was this: if any one had no
redeemer, either because there were no relatives upon whom the
obligation rested, or because they were all too poor, and he had earned
and acquired sufficient to redeem it, he was to calculate the years of
purchase, and return the surplus to the man who had bought it, i.e., as
much as he had paid for the years that still remained up to the next
year of jubilee, that so he might come into possession of it again. As
the purchaser had only paid the amount of the annual harvests till the
next year of jubilee, all that he could demand back was as much as he
had paid for the years that still remained.

[Lev 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#028)

The third case was this: if a man had not earned as much as was required
to make compensation for the recovery of the land, what he had sold was
to remain in the possession of the buyer till the year of jubilee, and
then it was to "go out," i.e., to become free again, so that the
impoverished seller could enter into possession without compensation.
The buyer lost nothing by this, for he had fully recovered all that he
paid for the annual harvests up to the year of jubilee, from the amount
which those harvests yielded. Through these legal regulations every
purchase of land became simply a lease for a term of years.

[Lev 25:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029)

Alienation and redemption of houses. - [Lev
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029), [Lev
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#030). On the sale of a dwelling-house
in a wall-town (a town surrounded by a wall) there was to be redemption
till the completion of the year of its purchase. ימים, "days (i.e., a
definite period) shall its redemption be;" that is to say, the right of
redemption or repurchase should be retained. If it was not redeemed
within the year, it remained to the buyer for ever for his descendants,
and did not go out free in the year of jubilee. קם to arise for a
possession, i.e., to become a fixed standing possession, as in [Gen
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017). לא אשׁר for לו אשׁר as in [Lev
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021) (see at [Exo
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008)). This law is founded upon the
assumption, that the houses in unwalled towns are not so closely
connected with the ownership of the land, as that the alienation of the
houses would alter the portion originally assigned to each family for a
possession. Having been built by men, they belonged to their owners in
full possession, whether they had received them just as they were at the
conquest of the land, or had erected them for themselves. This last
point of view, however, was altogether a subordinate one; for in the
case of "the houses of the villages" (i.e., farm-buildings and villages,
see [Jos 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#023), etc.), which had no
walls round them, it was not taken into consideration at all.

[Lev 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#031)

Such houses as these were to be reckoned as part of the land, and to be
treated as landed property, with regard to redemption and restoration at
the year of jubilee.

[Lev 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#032)

On the other hand, so far as the Levitical towns, viz., the houses of
the Levites in the towns belonging to them, were concerned, there was to
be eternal redemption for the Levites; that is to say, when they were
parted with, the right of repurchase was never lost. עולם (eternal) is
to be understood as a contrast to the year allowed in the case of other
houses ([Lev 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029), [Lev
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#030)).

[Lev 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#033)

"And whoever (if any one) redeems, i.e., buys, of the Levites, the house
that is sold and (indeed in) the town of his possession is to go out
free in the year of jubilee; for the houses of the Levitical towns are
their (the Levites') possession among the children of Israel." The
meaning is this: If any one bought a Levite's house in one of the
Levitical towns, the house he had bought was to revert to the Levite
without compensation in the year of jubilee. The difficulty connected
with the first clause is removed, if we understand the word גּאל (to
redeem, i.e., to buy back), as the Rabbins do, in the sense of קנה to
buy, acquire. The use of גּאל for קנה may be explained from the fact,
that when the land was divided, the Levites did not receive either an
inheritance in the land, or even the towns appointed for them to dwell
in as their own property. The Levitical towns were allotted to the
different tribes in which they were situated, with the simple obligation
to set apart a certain number of dwelling-houses for the Levites,
together with pasture-ground for their cattle in the precincts of the
towns (cf. [Num 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001). and my
Commentary on Joshua, p. 453 translation). If a non-Levite, therefore,
bought a Levite's house, it was in reality a repurchase of property
belonging to his tribe, or the redemption of what the tribe had
relinquished to the Levites as their dwelling and for their necessities.

(Note: This is the way in which it is correctly explained by Hiskuni:
Utitur scriptura verbo redimendi non emendi, quia quidquid Levitae
vendunt ex Israelitarum haereditate est, non ex ipsorum haerediatate.
Nam ecce non habent partes in terra, unde omnis qui accipit aut emit ab
illis est acsi redimeret, quoniam ecce initio ipsius possessio fuit. On
the other hand, the proposal made by Ewald, Knobel, etc., after the
example of the Vulgate, to supply לא before גּאל is not only an
unnecessary conjecture, but is utterly unsuitable, inasmuch as the words
"if one of the Levites does not redeem it" would restrict the right to
the Levites without any perceptible reason; just as if a blood-relation
on the female side, belonging to any other tribe, might not have done
this.)

The words אח ועיר are an explanatory apposition - "and that in the town
of his possession," - and do not mean "whatever he had sold of his
house-property or anything else in his town," for the Levites had no
other property in the town besides the houses, but "the house which he
had sold, namely, in the town of his possession." This implies that the
right of reversion was only to apply to the houses ceded to the Levites
in their own towns, and not to houses which they had acquired in other
towns either by purchase or inheritance. The singular היא is used after
a subject in the plural, because the copula agrees with the object (see
Ewald, 319c). As the Levites were to have no hereditary property in the
land except the houses in the towns appointed for them, it was necessary
that the possession of their houses should be secured to them for all
time, if they were not to fall behind the other tribes.

[Lev 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034)

The field of the pasture-ground of the Levitical towns was not to be
sold. Beside the houses, the Levites were also to receive מגרשׁ
pasturage for their flocks (from גּרשׁ to drive, to drive out the
cattle) round about these cities ([Num
35:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#002)). These meadows were not to be
saleable, and not even to be let till the year of jubilee; because, if
they were sold, the Levites would have nothing left upon which to feed
their cattle.

Leviticus 25:35-55

The second effect of the jubilee year, viz., the return of an Israelite,
who had become a slave, to liberty and to his family, is also introduced
with an exhortation to support an impoverished brother ([Lev
25:35-38](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)), and preserve to him his
personal freedom.

[Lev 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)

"If thy brother (countryman, or member of the same tribe) becomes poor,
and his hand trembles by thee, thou shalt lay hold of him;" i.e., if he
is no longer able to sustain himself alone, thou shalt take him by the
arm to help him out of his misfortune. "Let him live with thee as a
stranger and sojourner." וחי introduces the apodosis (see Ges. 126, note
1).

[Lev 25:36-41](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036)

If he borrowed money, they were not to demand interest; or if food, they
were not to demand any addition, any larger quantity, when it was
returned (cf. [Exo 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#024); [Deu
23:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#020)), from fear of God, who had
redeemed Israel out of bondage, to give them the land of Canaan. In [Lev
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#037) וחי is an abbreviation of וחי,
which only occurs here. - From [Lev
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039) onwards there follow the laws
relating to the bondage of the Israelite, who had been obliged to sell
himself from poverty. [Lev 25:36-46](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036)
relate to his service in bondage to an (other) Israelite. The man to
whom he had sold himself as servant was not to have slave-labour
performed by him ([Exo 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#014)), but to
keep him as a day-labourer and sojourner, and let him serve with him
till the year of jubilee. He was then to go out free with his children,
and return to his family and the possession of his fathers (his
patrimony). This regulation is a supplement to the laws relating to the
rights of Israel ([Exo 21:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#002)), though
without a contradiction arising, as Knobel maintains, between the
different rules laid down. In Ex 21 nothing at all is determined
respecting the treatment of an Israelitish servant; it is simply stated
that in the seventh year of his service he was to recover his liberty.
This limit is not mentioned here, because the chapter before us simply
treats of the influence of the year of jubilee upon the bondage of the
Israelites. On this point it is decided, that the year of jubilee was to
bring freedom even to the Israelite who had been brought into slavery by
his poverty, - of course only to the man who was still in slavery when
it commenced and had not served seven full years, provided, that is to
say, that he had not renounced his claim to be set free at the end of
his seven years' service, according to [Exo
21:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#005). We have no right to expect
this exception to be expressly mentioned here, because it did not
interfere with the idea of the year of jubilee. For whoever voluntarily
renounced the claim to be set free, whether because the year of jubilee
was still so far off that he did not expect to live to see it, or
because he had found a better lot with his master than he could secure
for himself in a state of freedom, had thereby made a voluntary
renunciation of the liberty which the year of jubilee might have brought
to him (see Oehler's art. in Herzog's Cycl., where the different views
on this subject are given).

[Lev 25:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#042)

Because the Israelites were servants of Jehovah, who had redeemed them
out of Pharaoh's bondage and adopted them as His people ([Exo
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); [Exo
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#010), etc.), they were not to be sold
"a selling of slaves," i.e., not to be sold into actual slavery, and no
one of them was to rule over another with severity ([Lev
25:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#043), cf. [Exo
1:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#013)). "Through this principle
slavery was completely abolished, so far as the people of the theocracy
were concerned"' (Oehler).

[Lev 25:44-46](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#044)

As the Israelites could only hold in slavery servants and maid-servants
whom they had bought of foreign nations, or foreigners who had settled
in the land, these they might leave as an inheritance to their children,
and "through them they might work," i.e., have slave-labour performed,
but not through their brethren the children of Israel ([Lev
25:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#046), cf. [Lev
25:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#043)).

[Lev 25:47-50](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#047)

The servitude of an Israelite to a settler who had come to the
possession of property, or a non-Israelite dwelling in the land, was to
be redeemable at any time. If an Israelite had sold himself because of
poverty to a foreign settler (תּושׁב גּר, to distinguish the
non-Israelitish sojourner from the Israelitish, [Lev
25:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#035)), or to a stock of a foreigner,
then one of his brethren, or his uncle, or his uncle's son or some one
of his kindred, was to redeem him; or if he came into the possession of
property, he was to redeem himself. When this was done, the time was to
be calculated from the year of purchase to the year of jubilee, and "the
money of his purchase was to be according to the number of the years,"
i.e., the price at which he had sold himself was to be distributed over
the number of years that he would have to serve to the year of jubilee;
and "according to the days of a day-labourer shall he be with him,"
i.e., the time that he had worked was to be estimated as that of a
day-labourer, and be put to the credit of the man to be redeemed.

[Lev 25:51-52](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#051)

According as there were few or many years to the year of jubilee would
the redemption-money be paid be little or much. בּשּׁנים רבּות much in
years: רבּות neuter, and בּ as in [Gen
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021); [Gen
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#017) etc. לפיחן according to the
measure of the same.

[Lev 25:53](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#053)

During the time of service the buyer was to keep him as a day-labourer
year by year, i.e., as a labourer engaged for a term of years, and not
rule over him with severe oppression. "In thine eyes," i.e., so that
thou (the nation addressed) seest it.

[Lev 25:54-55](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#054)

If he were not redeemed by these (the relations mentioned in [Lev
25:48](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#048), [Lev
25:49](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#049)), he was to go out free in the
year of jubilee along with his children, i.e., to be liberated without
compensation. For ([Lev 25:55](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#055)) he was
not to remain in bondage, because the Israelites were the servants of
Jehovah (cf. [Lev 25:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#042)).

But although, through these arrangements, the year of jubilee helped
every Israelite, who had fallen into poverty and slavery, to the
recovery of his property and personal freedom, and thus the whole
community was restored to its original condition as appointed by God,
through the return of all the landed property that had been alienated in
the course of years to its original proprietor the restoration of the
theocratical state to its original condition was not the highest or
ultimate object of the year of jubilee. The observance of sabbatical
rest throughout the whole land, and by the whole nation, formed part of
the liberty which it was to bring to the land and its inhabitants. In
the year of jubilee, as in the sabbatical year, the land of Jehovah was
to enjoy holy rest, and the nation of Jehovah to be set free from the
bitter labour of cultivating the soil, and to live and refresh itself in
blessed rest with the blessing which had been given to it by the Lord
its God. In this way the year of jubilee became to the poor, oppressed,
and suffering, in fact to the whole nation, a year of festivity and
grace, which not only brought redemption to the captives and deliverance
to the poor out of their distresses, but release to the whole
congregation of the Lord from the bitter labour of this world; a time of
refreshing, in which all oppression was to cease, and every member of
the covenant nation find his redeemer in the Lord, who brought every one
back to his own property and home. Because Jehovah had brought the
children of Israel out of Egypt to give them the land of Canaan, where
they were to live as His servants and serve Him, in the year of jubilee
the nation and land of Jehovah were to celebrate a year of holy rest and
refreshing before the Lord, and in this celebration to receive foretaste
of the times of refreshing from the presence of the Lord, which were to
be brought to all men by One anointed with the Spirit of the Lord, who
would come to preach the Gospel to the poor, to bind up the
broken-hearted, to bring liberty to the captives and the opening of the
prisons to them that were bound, to proclaim to all that mourn a year of
grace from the Lord ([Isa 61:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001); [Luk
4:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#017)); and who will come again from
heaven in the times of the restitution of all things to complete the
ἀποκατάστασις τῆς βασιλείας τοῦ Θεοῦ, to glorify the whole creation into
a kingdom of God, to restore everything that has been destroyed by sin
from the beginning of the world, to abolish all the slavery of sin,
establish the true liberty of the children of God, emancipate every
creature from the bondage of vanity, under which it sighs on account of
the sin of man, and introduce all His chosen into the kingdom of peace
and everlasting blessedness, which was prepared for their inheritance
before the foundation of the world ([Act
3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019); [Rom
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#019).; [Mat
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034); [Col
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012); [Pe1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#004)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 26](lev026)

</div>
