<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev013)  [Next](lev015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)

[Leviticus 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 14:1</span></span>

Purification of the leper, after his recovery from his disease. As
leprosy, regarded as a decomposition of the vital juices, and as
putrefaction in a living body, was an image of death, and like this
introduced the same dissolution and destruction of life into the
corporeal sphere which sin introduced into the spiritual; and as the
leper for this very reason as not only excluded from the fellowship of
the sanctuary, but cut off from intercourse with the covenant nation
which was called to sanctification: the man, when recovered from
leprosy, was first of all to be received into the fellowship of the
covenant nation by a significant rite of purification, and then again to
be still further inducted into living fellowship with Jehovah in His
sanctuary. Hence the purification prescribed was divided into two acts,
separated from one another by an interval of seven days.

[Lev 14:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#002)

The first act ([Lev 14:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#002)) set forth
the restoration of the man, who had been regarded as dead, into the
fellowship of the living members of the covenant nation, and was
therefore performed by the priest outside the camp.

[Lev 14:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#002)

On the day of his purification the priest was to examine the leper
outside the camp; and if he found the leprosy cured and gone (מן נרפּא,
const. praegnans, healed away from, i.e., healed and gone away from), he
was to send for (lit., order them to fetch or bring) two living (חיּות,
with all the fulness of their vital power) birds (without any precise
direction as to the kind, not merely sparrows), and (a piece of)
cedar-wood and coccus (probably scarlet wool, or a little piece of
scarlet cloth), and hyssop (see at [Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)).

[Lev 14:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005)

The priest was to have one of the birds killed into an earthen vessel
upon fresh water (water drawn from a fountain or brook, [Lev
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#013); [Gen
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#019)), that is to say, slain in such
a manner that its blood should flow into the fresh water which was in a
vessel, and should mix with it. He was then to take the (other) live
bird, together with the cedar-wood, scarlet, and hyssop, and dip them
(these accompaniments) along with the bird into the blood of the one
which had been killed over the water. With this the person cured of
leprosy was to be sprinkled seven times (see [Lev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#006)) and purified; after which the
living bird was to be "let loose upon the face of the field," i.e., to
be allowed to fly away into the open country. The two birds were symbols
of the person to be cleansed. The one let loose into the open country is
regarded by all the commentators as a symbolical representation of the
fact, that the former leper was now imbued with new vital energy, and
released from the fetters of his disease, and could now return in
liberty again into the fellowship of his countrymen. But if this is
established, the other must also be a symbol of the leper; and just as
in the second the essential point in the symbol was its escape to the
open country, in the first the main point must have been its death. Not,
however, in this sense, that it was a figurative representation of the
previous condition of the leper; but that, although it was no true
sacrifice, since there was no sprinkling of blood in connection with it,
its bloody death was intended to show that the leper would necessarily
have suffered death on account of his uncleanness, which reached to the
very foundation of his life, if the mercy of God had not delivered him
from this punishment of sin, and restored to him the full power and
vigour of life again. The restitution of this full and vigorous life was
secured to him symbolically, by his being sprinkled with the blood of
the bird which was killed in is stead. But because his liability to
death had assumed a bodily form in the uncleanness of leprosy, he was
sprinkled not only with blood, but with the flowing water of
purification into which the blood had flowed, and was thus purified from
his mortal uncleanness. Whereas one of the birds, however, had to lay
down its life, and shed its blood for the person to be cleansed, the
other was made into a symbol of the person to be cleansed by being
bathed in the mixture of blood and water; and its release, to return to
its fellows and into its nest, represented his deliverance from the ban
of death which rested upon leprosy, and his return to the fellowship of
his own nation. This signification of the rite serves to explain not
only the appointment of birds for the purpose, since free unfettered
movement in all directions could not be more fittingly represented by
anything than by birds, which are distinguished from all other animals
by their freedom and rapidity of motion, but also the necessity for
their being alive and clean, viz., to set forth the renewal of life and
purification; also the addition of cedar-wood, scarlet wool, and hyssop,
by which the life-giving power of the blood mixed with living (spring)
water was to be still further strengthened. The cedar-wood, on account
of its antiseptic qualities (ἔχει ἄσηπτον ἡ κέδρος, Theodor. on [Eze
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022)), was a symbol of the
continuance of life; the coccus colour, a symbol of freshness of life,
or fulness of vital energy; and the hyssop (βοτάνη ῥυπτική, herba
humilis, medicinalis, purgandis pulmonibus apta: August. on Ps 51), a
symbol of purification from the corruption of death. The sprinkling was
performed seven times, because it referred to a readmission into the
covenant, the stamp of which was seven; and it was made with a mixture
of blood and fresh water, the blood signifying life, the water
purification.

[Lev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008)

After this symbolical purification from the mortal ban of leprosy, the
person cleansed had to purify himself bodily, by washing his clothes,
shaving off all his hair - i.e., not merely the hair of his head and
beard, but that of his whole body (cf. [Lev
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#009)), - and bathing in water; and he
could then enter into the camp. But he had still to remain outside his
tent for seven days, not only because he did not yet feel himself at
home in the congregation, or because he was still to retain the
consciousness that something else was wanting before he could be fully
restored, but, as the Chaldee has explained it by adding the clause, et
non accedat ad latus uxoris suae, that he might not defile himself again
by conjugal rights, and so interrupt his preparation for readmission
into fellowship with Jehovah.

[Lev 14:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#009)

The second act ([Lev 14:9-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#009)) effected
his restoration to fellowship with Jehovah, and his admission to the
sanctuary. It commenced on the seventh day after the first with a fresh
purification; viz., shaving off all the hair from the head, the beard,
the eyebrows - in fact, the whole body, - washing the clothes, and
bathing the body. On the eighth day there followed a sacrificial
expiation; and for this the person to be expiated was to bring two sheep
without blemish, a ewe-lamb of a year old, three-tenths of an ephah of
fine flour mixed with oil as a meat-offering, and a log (or one-twelfth
of a hin, i.e., as much as six hens' eggs, or 1562 Rhenish cubic inches)
of oil; and the priest was to present him, together with these gifts,
before Jehovah, i.e., before the altar of burnt-offering. The one lamb
was then offered by the priest as a trespass-offering, together with the
log of oil; and both of these were waves by him. By the waving, which
did not take place on other occasions in connection with sin-offerings
and trespass-offerings, the lamb and oil were transferred symbolically
to the Lord; and by the fat that these sacrificial gifts represented the
offerer, the person to be consecrated to the Lord by means of them was
dedicated to His service again, just as the Levites were dedicated to
the Lord by the ceremony of waving ([Num
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011), [Num
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#015)). But a trespass-offering was
required as the consecration-offering, because the consecration itself
served as a restoration to all the rights of the priestly covenant
nation, which had been lost by the mortal ban of leprosy.

(Note: Others, e.g., Riehm and Oehler, regard this trespass-offering
also as a kind of mulcta, or satisfaction rendered for the fact, that
during the whole period of his sickness, and so long as he was excluded
from the congregation, the leper had failed to perform his theocratical
duties, and Jehovah had been injured in consequence. But if this was the
idea upon which the trespass-offering was founded, the law would
necessarily have required that trespass-offerings should be presented on
the recovery of persons who had been affected with diseased secretions;
for during the continuance of their disease, which often lasted a long
time, even as much as 12 years ([Luk
8:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#043)), they were precluded from
visiting the sanctuary or serving the Lord with sacrifices, because they
were unclean, and therefore could not perform their theocratical
duties.)

[Lev 14:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#013)

After the slaying of the lamb in the holy place, as the
trespass-offering, like the sin-offering, was most holy and belonged to
the priest (see at [Lev 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#006)), the
priest put some of its blood upon the tip of the right ear, the right
thumb, and the great toe of the right foot of the person to be
consecrated, in order that the organ of hearing, with which he hearkened
to the word of the Lord, and those used in acting and walking according
to His commandments, might thereby be sanctified through the power of
the atoning blood of the sacrifice; just as in the dedication of the
priests ([Lev 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#024)).

[Lev 14:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#015)

The priest then poured some oil out of the log into the hollow of his
left hand, and dipping the finger of his right hand in the oil,
sprinkled it seven times before Jehovah, i.e., before the altar of
burnt-offering, to consecrate the oil to God, and sanctify it for
further use. With the rest of the oil he smeared the same organs of the
person to be consecrated which he had already smeared with blood,
placing it, in fact, "upon the blood of the trespass-offering," i.e.,
upon the spots already touched with blood; he then poured the remainder
upon the head of the person to be consecrated, and so made atonement for
him before Jehovah. The priests were also anointed at their
consecration, not only by the pouring of oil upon their head, but by the
sprinkling of oil upon their garments ([Lev
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012), [Lev
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030)). But in their case the anointing
of their head preceded the consecration-offering, and holy anointing oil
was used for the purpose. Here, on the contrary, it was ordinary oil,
which the person to be consecrated had offered as a sacrificial gift;
and this was first of all sanctified, therefore, by being sprinkled and
poured upon the organs with which he was to serve the Lord, and then
upon the head, which represented his personality. Just as the anointing
oil, prepared according to divine directions, shadowed forth the power
and gifts of the Spirit, with which God endowed the priests for their
peculiar office in His kingdom; so the oil, which the leper about to be
consecrated presented as a sacrifice out of his own resources,
represented the spirit of life which he had received from God, and now
possessed as his own. This property of his spirit was presented to the
Lord by the priestly waving and sprinkling of the oil before Jehovah, to
be pervaded and revived by His spirit of grace, and when so
strengthened, to be not only applied to those organs of the person to be
consecrated, with which he fulfilled the duties of his vocation as a
member of the priestly nation of God, but also poured upon his head, to
be fully appropriated to his person. And just as in the sacrifice the
blood was the symbol of the soul, so in the anointing the oil was the
symbol of the spirit. If, therefore, the soul was established in
gracious fellowship with the Lord by being sprinkled with the atoning
blood of sacrifice, the anointing with oil had reference to the spirit,
which gives life to soul and body, and which was thereby endowed with
the power of the Spirit of God. In this way the man cleansed from
leprosy was reconciled to Jehovah, and reinstated in the covenant
privileges and covenant grace.

[Lev 14:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#019)

It was not till all this had been done, that the priest could proceed to
make expiation for him with the sin-offering, for which the ewe-lamb was
brought, "on account of his uncleanness," i.e., on account of the sin
which still adhered to him as well as to all the other members of the
covenant nation, and which had come outwardly to light in the
uncleanness of his leprosy; after which he presented his burnt-offering
and meat-offering, which embodied the sanctification of all his members
to the service of the Lord, and the performance of works well-pleasing
to Him. The sin-offering, burnt-offering, and meat-offering were
therefore presented according to the general instructions, with this
exception, that, as a representation of diligence in good works, a
larger quantity of meal and oil was brought than the later law in [Num
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#004) prescribed for the
burnt-offering.

[Lev 14:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#021)

In cases of poverty on the part of the person to be consecrated, the
burnt-offering and sin-offering were reduced to a pair of turtle-doves
or young pigeons, and the meat-offering to a tenth of an ephah of meal
and oil; but no diminution was allowed in the trespass-offering as the
consecration-offering, since this was the conditio sine qua non of
reinstatement in full covenant rights. On account of the importance of
all the details of this law, every point is repeated a second time in
[Lev 14:21-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#021).

[Leviticus 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 14:33</span></span>

The law concerning the leprosy of houses was made known to Moses and
Aaron, as intended for the time when Israel should have taken possession
of Canaan and dwell in houses. As it was Jehovah who gave His people the
land for a possession, so "putting the plague of leprosy in a house of
the land of their possession" is also ascribed to Him ([Lev
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#034)), inasmuch as He held it over
them, to remind the inhabitants of the house that they owed not only
their bodies but also their dwelling-places to the Lord, and that they
were to sanctify these to Him. By this expression, "I put," the view
which Knobel still regards as probable, viz., that the house-leprosy was
only the transmission of human leprosy to the walls of the houses, is
completely overthrown; not to mention the fact, that throughout the
whole description there is not the slightest hint of any such
transmission, but the inhabitants, on the contrary, are spoken of as
clean, i.e., free from leprosy, and only those who went into the house,
or slept in the house after it had been shut up as suspicious, are
pronounced unclean ([Lev 14:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#046), [Lev
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#047)), though even they are not said
to have been affected with leprosy. The only thing that can be gathered
from the signs mentioned in [Lev 14:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#037)
is, that the house-leprosy was an evil which calls to mind "the
vegetable formations and braid-like structures that are found on
mouldering walls and decaying walls, and which eat into them so as to
produce a slight depression in the surface."

(Note: Cf. Sommer (p. 220), who says, "The crust of many of these
lichens is so marvellously thin, that they simply appear as coloured
spots, for the most part circular, which gradually spread in a
concentric form, and can be rubbed off like dust. Some species have a
striking resemblance to eruptions upon the skin. There is one genus
called spiloma (spots); and another very numerous genus bears the name
of lepraria.")

[Leviticus 14:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">lev 14:35</span></span>

When the evil showed itself in a house, the owner was to send this
message to the priest, "A leprous evil has appeared in my house," and
the priest, before entering to examine it, was to have the house
cleared, lest everything in it should become unclean. Consequently, as
what was in the house became unclean only when the priest had declared
the house affected with leprosy, the reason for the defilement is not to
be sought for in physical infection, but must have been of an ideal or
symbolical kind.

[Leviticus 14:37](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">lev 14:37</span></span>

If the leprous spot appeared in "greenish or reddish depressions, which
looked deeper than the wall," the priest was to shut up the house for
seven days. If after that time he found that the mole had spread on the
walls, he was to break out the stones upon which it appeared, and remove
them to an unclean place outside the town, and to scrape the house all
round inside, and throw the dust that was scraped off into an unclean
place outside the town. He was then to put other stones in their place,
and plaster the house with fresh mortar.

[Leviticus 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">lev 14:43</span></span>

If the mole broke out again after this had taken place, it was a
malicious leprosy, and the house was to be pulled down as unclean,
whilst the stones, the wood, and the mortar were to be taken to an
unclean place outside the town.

[Leviticus 14:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">lev 14:46</span></span>

Whoever went into the house during the time that it was closed, became
unclean till the evening and had to wash himself; but whoever slept or
ate therein during this time, was to wash his clothes, and of course was
unclean till the evening. אתו הסגּיר ([Lev
14:46](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#046)) may be a perfect tense, and a
relative clause dependent upon ימי, or it may be an infinitive for
הסגּיר as in [Lev 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#043).

[Leviticus 14:48](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">lev 14:48</span></span>

If the priest should find, however, that after the fresh plastering the
mole had not appeared again, or spread (to other places), he was to
pronounce the house clean, because the evil was cured, and ([Lev
14:49-53](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#049)) to perform the same rite of
purification as was prescribed for the restoration of a man, who had
been cured of leprosy, to the national community ([Lev
14:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004)). The purpose was also the
same, namely, to cleanse (חטּא cleanse from sin) and make atonement for
the house, i.e., to purify it from the uncleanness of sin which had
appeared in the leprosy. For, although it is primarily in the human body
that sin manifests itself, it spreads from man to the things which he
touches, uses, inhabits, though without our being able to represent this
spread as a physical contagion.

[Leviticus 14:54](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">lev 14:54</span></span>

[Lev 14:54-57](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#054) contain the concluding
formula to ch. 13 and 14. The law of leprosy was given "to teach in the
day of the unclean and the clean," i.e., to give directions for the time
when they would have to do with the clean and unclean.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 15](lev015)

</div>
