<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev008)  [Next](lev010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001)

[Leviticus 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 9:1</span></span>

And it came to pass on the eighth day, that Moses called Aaron and his
sons, and the elders of Israel; Entrance of Aaron and his Sons upon
their Office. - [Lev 9:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001). On the
eighth day, i.e., on the day after the seven days' consecration, Aaron
and his sons entered upon their duties with a solemn sacrifice for
themselves and the nation, to which the Lord had made Himself known by a
special revelation of His glory, to bear solemn witness before the whole
nation that their service at the altar was acceptable to Him, and to
impress the divine seal of confirmation upon the consecration they had
received. To this end Aaron and his sons were to bring to the front of
the tabernacle a young calf as a sin-offering for themselves, and a ram
for a burnt-offering; and the people were to bring through their elders
a he-goat for a sin-offering, a yearling calf and yearling sheep for a
burnt-offering, and an ox and ram for a peace-offering, together with a
meat-offering of meal mixed with oil; and the congregation (in the
persons of its elders) was to stand there before Jehovah, i.e., to
assemble together at the sanctuary for the solemn transaction ([Lev
9:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001)). If, according to this, even
after the manifold expiation and consecration, which Aaron had received
through Moses during the seven days, he had still to enter upon his
service with a sin-offering and burnt-offering, this fact clearly showed
that the offerings of the law could not ensure perfection ([Heb
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#001).). It is true that on this
occasion a young calf was sufficient for a sin-offering for the priests,
not a mature ox as in [Lev 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014) and
[Lev 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003); and so also for the
burnt-offerings and peace-offerings of the people smaller sacrifices
sufficed, either smaller in kind or fewer in number than at the leading
feasts ([Num 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011).). Nevertheless,
not one of the three sacrifices could be omitted; and if no special
peace-offering was required of Aaron, this may be accounted for from the
fact, that the whole of the sacrificial ceremony terminated with a
national peace-offering, in which the priests took part, uniting in this
instance with the rest of the nation in the celebration of a common
sacrificial meal, to make known their oneness with them.

[Leviticus 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 9:6</span></span>

After everything had been prepared for the solemn ceremony, Moses made
known to the assembled people what Jehovah had commanded them to do in
order that His glory might appear (see at [Exo
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010)). Aaron was to offer the
sacrifices that had been brought for the reconciliation of himself and
the nation.

[Leviticus 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 9:8</span></span>

Accordingly, he offered first of all the sin-offering and burnt-offering
for himself, and then ([Lev 9:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#015))
the offerings of the people. The sin-offering always went first, because
it served to remove the estrangement of man from the holy God arising
from sin, by means of the expiation of the sinner, and to clear away the
hindrances to his approach to God. Then followed the burnt-offering, as
an expression of the complete surrender of the person expiated to the
Lord; and lastly the peace-offering, on the one hand as the utterance of
thanksgiving for mercy received, and prayer for its further continuance,
and on the other hand, as a seal of covenant fellowship with the Lord in
the sacrificial meal. But when Moses says in [Lev
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#007), that Aaron is to make atonement
for himself and the nation with his sin-offering and burnt-offering, the
atoning virtue which Aaron's sacrifice was to have for the nation also,
referred not to sins which the people had committed, but to the guilt
which the high priest, as the head of the whole congregation, had
brought upon the nation by his sin ([Lev
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#003)). In offering the sacrifices,
Aaron was supported by his sons, who handed him the blood to sprinkle,
and the sacrificial portions to burn upon the altar. The same course was
adopted with Aaron's sin-offering ([Lev
9:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#008)) as Moses had pursued with the
sin-offering at the consecration of the priests ([Lev
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#014)). The blood was not taken into
the sanctuary, but only applied to the horns of the altar of
burnt-offering; because the object was not to expiate some particular
sin of Aaron's, but to take away the sin which might make his service on
behalf of the congregation displeasing to God; and the communion of the
congregation with the Lord was carried on at the altar of
burnt-offering. The flesh and skin of the animal were burnt outside the
camp, as in the case of all the sin-offerings for the priesthood ([Lev
4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#011)).

[Leviticus 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 9:12</span></span>

The burnt-offering was presented according to the general rule ([Lev
1:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003)), as in [Lev
8:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#018). המציא ([Lev
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#012)): to cause to attain; here, and
in [Lev 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#018), to present, hand over.
לנתחיה, according to its pieces, into which the burnt-offering was
divided ([Lev 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006)), and which they
offered to Aaron one by one. No meat-offering was connected with Aaron's
burnt-offerings, partly because the law contained in [Num
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#002). had not yet been given, but more
especially because Aaron had to bring the special meat-offering
commanded in [Lev 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013), and had
offered this in connection with the morning burnt-offering mentioned in
[Lev 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#017); though this offering, as
being a constant one, and not connected with the offerings especially
belonging to the consecration of the priests, is not expressly
mentioned.

[Leviticus 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 9:15</span></span>

Of the sacrifices of the nation, Aaron presented the sin-offering in the
same manner as the first, i.e., the one offered for himself ([Lev
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#008).). The blood of this sin-offering,
which was presented for the congregation, was not brought into the holy
place according to the rule laid down in [Lev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#016)., but only applied to the horns
of the altar of burnt-offering; for the same reason as in the previous
case ([Lev 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#008).), viz., because the
object was not to expiate any particular sin, or the sins of the
congregation that had been committed in the course of time and remained
unatoned for, but simply to place the sacrificial service of the
congregation in its proper relation to the Lord. Aaron was reproved by
Moses, however, for having burned the flesh ([Lev
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016).), but was able to justify it
(see at [Lev 10:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#016)). The
sin-offering ([Lev 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#016)) was also
offered "according to the right" (as in [Lev
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010)). Then followed the meat-offering
([Lev 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#017)), of which Aaron burned a
handful upon the altar (according to the rule in [Lev
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001)). He offered this in addition to
the morning burnt-offering ([Exo
29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039)), to which a meat-offering also
belonged ([Exo 29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040)), and with which,
according to [Lev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012)., the special
meat-offering of the priests was associated. Last of all ([Lev
9:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#018)) there followed the
peace-offering, which was also carried out according to the general
rule. In המכסּה, "the covering" ([Lev
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#019)), the two fat portions mentioned
in [Lev 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003) are included. The fat
portions were laid upon the breast-pieces by the sons of Aaron, and then
handed by them to Aaron, the fat to be burned upon the altar, the breast
to be waved along with the right leg, according to the instructions in
[Lev 7:30-36](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#030). The meat-offering of
pastry, which belonged to the peace-offering according to [Lev
7:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#012), is not specially mentioned.

[Leviticus 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 9:22</span></span>

When the sacrificial ceremony was over, Aaron blessed the people from
the altar with uplifted hands (cf. [Num
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#022).), and then came down: sc., from
the bank surrounding the altar, upon which he had stood while offering
the sacrifice (see at [Exo 27:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#004)).

[Lev 9:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#023)

After this Moses went with him into the tabernacle, to introduce him
into the sanctuary, in which he was henceforth to serve the Lord, and to
present him to the Lord: not to offer incense, which would undoubtedly
have been mentioned; nor yet for the special purpose of praying for the
manifestation of the glory of Jehovah, although there can be no doubt
that they offered prayer in the sanctuary, and prayed for the blessing
of the Lord for the right discharge of the office entrusted to them in a
manner well-pleasing to Him. On coming out again they united in
bestowing that blessing upon the people which they had solicited for
them in the sanctuary. "Then the glory of Jehovah appeared to all the
people, and fire came out from before the face of Jehovah and consumed
the burnt-offering and fat portions upon the altar" (i.e., the sin and
peace-offerings, not the thank-offerings merely, as Knobel supposes,
according to his mistaken theory). The appearance of the glory of
Jehovah is probably to be regarded in this instance, and also in [Num
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019); [Num
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#007), and [Num
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#006), as the sudden flash of a
miraculous light, which proceeded from the cloud that covered the
tabernacle, probably also from the cloud in the most holy place, or as a
sudden though very momentary change of the cloud, which enveloped the
glory of the Lord, into a bright light, from which the fire proceeded in
this instance in the form of lightning, and consumed the sacrifices upon
the altar. The fire issued "from before the face of Jehovah," i.e., from
the visible manifestation of Jehovah. It did not come down from heaven,
like the fire of Jehovah, which consumed the sacrifices of David and
Solomon ([Ch1 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#026); [Ch2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#001)).

The Rabbins believe that this divine fire was miraculously sustained
upon the altar until the building of Solomon's temple, at the dedication
of which it fell from heaven afresh, and then continued until the
restoration of the temple-worship under Manasseh ([Ch2
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#016); cf. Buxtorf exercitatt. ad
histor. ignis sacri, c. 2); and the majority of them maintain still
further, that it continued side by side with the ordinary altar-fire,
which was kindled by the priests ([Lev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#007)), and, according to [Lev
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006), kept constantly burning by them.
The earlier Christian expositors are for the most part of opinion, that
the heavenly fire, which proceeded miraculously from God and burned the
first sacrifices of Aaron, was afterwards maintained by the priests by
natural means (see J. Marckii sylloge diss. philol. theol. ex. vi. ad
[Lev 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013)). But there is no foundation
in the Scriptures for either of these views. There is not a syllable
about any miraculous preservation of the heavenly fire by the side of
the fire which the priests kept burning by natural means. And even the
modified opinion of the Christian theologians, that the heavenly fire
was preserved by natural means, rests upon the assumption, which there
is nothing to justify, that the sacrifices offered by Aaron were first
burned by the fire which issued from Jehovah, and therefore that the
statements in the text, with reference to the burning of the fat
portions and burnt-offerings, or causing them to ascend in smoke ([Lev
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#010), [Lev
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#013), [Lev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#017), and [Lev
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#020)), are to be regarded as
anticipations (per anticipationem accipienda, C. a Lap.), i.e., are to
be understood as simply meaning, that when Aaron officiated at the
different sacrifices, he merely laid upon the altar the pieces intended
for it, but without setting them on fire. The fallacy of this is proved,
not only by the verb הקטיר but by the fact implied in [Lev
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#017), that the offering of these
sacrifices, with which Aaron entered upon his office, was preceded by
the daily morning burnt-offering, and consequently that at the time when
Aaron began to carry out the special sacrifices of this day there was
fire already burning upon the altar, and in fact a continual fire, that
was never to be allowed to go out ([Lev
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006)). Even, therefore, if we left out
of view the fire of the daily morning and evening sacrifice, which had
been offered from the first day on which the tabernacle was erected
([Exo 40:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#029)), there were sacrifices
presented every day during the seven days of the consecration of the
priests (ch. 8); and according to [Lev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#007), Moses must necessarily have
prepared the fire for these. If it had been the intention of God,
therefore, to originate the altar-fire by supernatural means, this would
no doubt have taken place immediately after the erection of the
tabernacle, or at least at the consecration of the altar, which was
connected with that of the priests, and immediately after it had been
anointed ([Lev 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#011)). But as God did
not do this, the burning of the altar-sacrifices by a fire which
proceeded from Jehovah, as related in this verse, cannot have been
intended to give a sanction to the altar-fire as having proceeded from
God Himself, which was to be kept constantly burning, either by
miraculous preservation, or by being fed in a natural way. The legends
of the heathen, therefore, about altar-fires which had been kindled by
the gods themselves present no analogy to the fact before us (cf. Serv.
ad Aen. xii. 200; Solin. v. 23; Pausan. v. 27, 3; Bochart, Hieroz. lib.
ii. c. 35, pp. 378ff.; Dougtaei analect. ss. pp. 79ff.).

The miracle recorded in this verse did not consist in the fact that the
sacrificial offerings placed upon the altar were burned by fire which
proceeded from Jehovah, but in the fact that the sacrifices, which were
already on fire, were suddenly consumed by it. For although the verb
תּאכל admits of both meanings, setting on fire and burning up (see [Jdg
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#021), and [Kg1
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038)), the word literally denotes
consuming or burning up, and must be taken in the stricter and more
literal sense in the case before us, inasmuch as there was already fire
upon the altar when the sacrifices were placed upon it. God caused this
miracle, not to generate a supernatural altar-fire, but ut ordinem
sacerdotalem legis veteris a se institutum et suas de sacrificio leges
hoc miraculo confirmaret et quasi obsignaret (C. a Lap.), or to express
it bore briefly, to give a divine consecration to the altar, or
sacrificial service of Aaron and his sons, through which a way was to be
opened for the people to His throne of grace, and whereby, moreover, the
altar-fire was consecrated eo ipso into a divine, i.e., divinely
appointed, means of reconciliation to the community. The whole nation
rejoiced at this glorious manifestation of the satisfaction of God with
this the first sacrifice of the consecrated priests, and fell down upon
their faces to give thanks to the Lord for His mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 10](lev010)

</div>
