<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev016)  [Next](lev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 17:0</span></span>

II\. Laws for the Sanctification of Israel in the Covenant - Fellowship
of Its God - Leviticus 17-25

Holiness of Conduct on the Part of the Israelites - Leviticus 17-20

The contents of these four chapters have been very fittingly summed up
by Baumgarten in the following heading: "Israel is not to walk in the
way of the heathen and of the Canaanites, but in the ordinances of
Jehovah," as all the commandments contained in them relate to holiness
of life.

Holiness of Food. - The Israelites were not to slaughter domestic
animals as food either within or outside the camp, but before the door
of the tabernacle, and as slain-offerings, that the blood and fat might
be offered to Jehovah. They were not to sacrifice any more to
field-devils ([Lev 17:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003)), and were
to offer all their burnt-offerings or slain-offerings before the door of
the tabernacle ([Lev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008),\_ 9); and
they were not to eat either blood or carrion ([Lev
17:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)). These laws are not intended
simply as supplements to the food laws in ch. 11; but they place the
eating of food on the part of the Israelites in the closest relation
with their calling as the holy nation of Jehovah, on the one hand to
oppose an effectual barrier to the inclination of the people to
idolatrous sacrificial meals, on the other hand to give a consecrated
character to the food of the people in harmony with their calling, that
it might be received with thanksgiving and sanctified with prayer ([Ti1
4:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004)).

[Leviticus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 17:1</span></span>

The directions are given to "Aaron and his sons, and all the children of
Israel," because they were not only binding upon the nation generally,
but upon the priesthood also; whereas the instructions in ch. 18-20 are
addressed to "the children of Israel," or "the whole congregation" ([Lev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#002); [Lev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002); [Lev
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#002)), just as special laws are laid
down for the priests in ch. 20 and 21 with reference to the
circumstances mentioned there.

[Leviticus 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 17:3</span></span>

Whoever of the house of Israel slaughtered an ox, sheep, or goat, either
within or outside the camp, without bringing the animal to the
tabernacle, to offer a sacrifice therefrom to the Lord, "blood was to be
reckoned to him;" that is to say, as the following expression, "he hath
shed blood," shows, such slaughtering was to be reckoned as the shedding
of blood, or blood-guiltiness, and punished with extermination (see [Gen
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014)). The severity of this
prohibition required some explanation, and this is given in the reason
assigned in [Lev 17:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005), viz., "that
the Israelites may bring their slain-offerings, which they slay in the
open field, before the door of the tabernacle, as peace-offerings to
Jehovah," and "no more offer their sacrifices to the שׂעירים, after whom
they go a whoring" ([Lev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007)). This
reason presupposes that the custom of dedicating the slain animals as
sacrifices to some deity, to which a portion of them was offered, was
then widely spread among the Israelites. It had probably been adopted
from the Egyptians; though this is not expressly stated by ancient
writers: Herodotus (i. 132) and Strabo (xv. 732) simply mentioning it as
a Persian custom, whilst the law book of Manu ascribes it to the
Indians. To root out this idolatrous custom from among the Israelites,
they were commanded to slay every animal before the tabernacle, as a
sacrificial gift to Jehovah, and to bring the slain-offerings, which
they would have slain in the open field, to the priest at the
tabernacle, as shelamim (praise-offerings and thank-offerings), that he
might sprinkle the blood upon the altar, and burn the fat as a
sweet-smelling savour for Jehovah (see [Lev
3:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002)). "The face of the field" ([Lev
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005), as in [Lev
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#007), [Lev
14:53](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#053)): the open field, in distinction
from the enclosed space of the court of Jehovah's dwelling. "The altar
of Jehovah" is spoken of in [Lev 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#006)
instead of "the altar" only ([Lev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005);
[Lev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#015), etc.), on account of the
contrast drawn between it and the altars upon which they offered
sacrifice to Seirim. שׂעירים, literally goats, is here used to signify
daemones (Vulg.), "field-devils" (Luther), demons, like the שׂדים in
[Deu 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#017), who were supposed to
inhabit the desert ([Isa 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021); [Isa
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014)), and whose pernicious influence
they sought to avert by sacrifices. The Israelites had brought this
superstition, and the idolatry to which it gave rise, from Egypt. The
Seirim were the gods whom the Israelites worshipped and went a whoring
after in Egypt ([Jos 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014); [Eze
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#007); [Eze
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#003), [Eze
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#008), [Eze
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#019), [Eze
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#021), [Eze
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#027)). Both the thing and the name
were derived from the Egyptians, who worshipped goats as gods (Josephus
c. Ap. 2, 7), particularly Pan, who was represented in the form of a
goat, a personification of the male and fertilizing principle in nature,
whom they called Mendes and reckoned among the eight leading gods, and
to whom they had built a splendid and celebrated temple in Thmuis, the
capital of the Mendesian Nomos in Lower Egypt, and erected statues in
the temples in all directions (cf. Herod. 2, 42, 46; Strabo, xvii. 802;
Diod. Sic. i. 18). The expression "a statute for ever" refers to the
principle of the law, that sacrifices were to be offered to Jehovah
alone, and not to the law that every animal was to be slain before the
tabernacle, which was afterwards repealed by Moses, when they were about
to enter Canaan, where it could no longer be carried out ([Deu
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#015)).

[Leviticus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 17:8</span></span>

To this there are appended three laws, which are kindred in their
nature, and which were binding not only upon the Israelites, but also
upon the foreigners who dwelt in the midst of them.

[Lev 17:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008)

[Lev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008), [Lev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#009) contain the command, that whoever
offered a burnt-offering of slain-offering, and did not bring it to the
tabernacle to prepare it for Jehovah there, was to be exterminated; a
command which involved the prohibition of sacrifice in any other place
whatever, and was given, as the further extension of this law in Deut 12
clearly proves, for the purpose of suppressing the disposition to offer
sacrifice to other gods, as well as in other places. In [Lev
17:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010) the prohibition of the eating
of blood is repeated, and ordered to be observed on pain of
extermination; it is also extended to the strangers in Israel; and after
a more precise explanation of the reason for the law, is supplemented by
instructions for the disposal of the blood of edible game. God threatens
that He will inflict the punishment Himself, because the eating of blood
was a transgression of the law which might easily escape the notice of
the authorities. "To set one's face against:" i.e., to judge. The reason
for the command in [Lev 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011), "For
the soul of the flesh (the soul which gives life to the flesh) is in the
blood, and I have given it to you upon the altar, to make an atonement
for your souls," is not a double one, viz., (1) because the blood
contained the soul of the animal, and (2) because God had set apart the
blood, as the medium of expiation for the human soul, for the altar,
i.e., to be sprinkled upon the altar. The first reason simply forms the
foundation for the second: God appointed the blood for the altar, as
containing the soul of the animal, to be the medium of expiation for the
souls of men, and therefore prohibited its being used as food. "For the
blood it expiates by virtue of the soul," not "the soul" itself. בּ with
כּפּר has only a local or instrumental signification ([Lev
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#023); [Lev
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017), [Lev
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#027); also [Lev
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#007); [Exo
29:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#033); [Num
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#008)). Accordingly, it was not the
blood as such, but the blood as the vehicle of the soul, which possessed
expiatory virtue; because the animal soul was offered to God upon the
altar as a substitute for the human soul. Hence every bleeding sacrifice
had an expiatory force, though without being an expiatory sacrifice in
the strict sense of the word.

[Lev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013)

The blood also of such hunted game as was edible, whether bird or beast,
was not to be eaten either by the Israelite or stranger, but to be
poured out and covered with earth. In [Deu
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#016) and [Deu
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#024), where the command to slay all
the domestic animals at the tabernacle as slain-offerings is repealed,
this is extended to such domestic animals as were slaughtered for food;
their blood also was not to be eaten, but to be poured upon the earth
"like water," i.e., not quasi rem profanam et nullo ritu sacro
(Rosenmller, etc.), but like water which is poured upon the earth,
sucked in by it, and thus given back to the womb of the earth, from
which God had caused the animals to come forth at their creation ([Gen
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024)). Hence pouring it out upon the
earth like water was substantially the same as pouring it out and
covering it with earth (cf. [Eze
24:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#007)); and the purpose of the
command was to prevent the desecration of the vehicle of the soulish
life, which was sanctified as the medium of expiation.

[Lev 17:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014)

"For as for the soul of all flesh...its blood makes out its soul:" i.e.,
"this is the case with the soul of all flesh, that it is its blood which
makes out its soul." בּנפשׁו is to be taken as a predicate in its
meaning, introduced with beth essentiale. It is only as so understood,
that the clause supplies a reason at all in harmony with the context.
Because the distinguishing characteristic of the blood as, that it was
the soul of the being when living in the flesh; therefore it was not to
be eaten in the case of any animal: and even in the case of animals that
were not proper for sacrifice, it was to be allowed to run out upon the
ground, and then covered with earth, or, so to speak, buried.

(Note: On the truth which lay at the foundation of this idea of the
unity of the soul and blood, which others of the ancients shared with
the Hebrews, particularly the early Greek philosophers, see Delitzsch's
bibl. Psychol. pp. 242ff. "It seems at first sight to be founded upon no
other reason, than that a sudden diminution of the quantity of the blood
is sure to cause death. But this phenomenon rests upon the still deeper
ground, that all the activity of the body, especially that of the
nervous and muscular systems, is dependent upon the circulation of the
blood; for if the flow of blood is stopped from any part of the body,
all its activity ceases immediately; a sensitive part loses all
sensation in a very few minutes, and muscular action is entirely
suspended... The blood is really the basis of the physical life; and so
far the soul, as the vital principle of the body, is pre-eminently in
the blood" (p. 245).)

\- Lastly ([Lev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015), [Lev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#016)), the prohibition against eating
"that which died" ([Lev 11:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#039)), or
"that which was torn" ([Exo 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030)), is
renewed and supplemented by the law, that whoever, either of the natives
or of foreigners, should eat the flesh of that which had fallen (died a
natural death), or had been torn in pieces by wild beasts (sc.,
thoughtlessly or in ignorance; cf. [Lev
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002)), and neglected the legal
purification afterwards, was to bear his iniquity ([Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)). Of course the flesh intended is
that of animals which were clean, and therefore allowable as food, when
properly slaughtered, and which became unclean simply from the fact,
that when they had died a natural death, or had been torn to pieces by
wild beasts, the blood remained in the flesh, or did not flow out in a
proper manner. According to [Exo
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030), the נבלה (that which had
fallen) was to be thrown to the dogs; but in [Deu
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021) permission is given either to
sell it or give it to a stranger or alien, to prevent the plea that it
was a pity that such a thing should be entirely wasted, and so the more
effectually to secure the observance of the command, that it was not to
be eaten by an Israelite.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 18](lev018)

</div>
