<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev015)  [Next](lev017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 16:0</span></span>

The Day of Atonement - Leviticus 16

The sacrifices and purifications enjoined thus far did not suffice to
complete the reconciliation between the congregation of Israel, which
was called to be a holy nation, but in its very nature was still
altogether involved in sin and uncleanness, and Jehovah the Holy
One-that is to say, to restore the perfect reconciliation and true vital
fellowship of the nation with its God, in accordance with the idea and
object of the old covenant - because, even with the most scrupulous
observance of these directions, many sins and defilements would still
remain unacknowledged, and therefore without expiation, and would
necessarily produce in the congregation a feeling of separation from its
God, so that it would be unable to attain to the true joyousness of
access to the throne of grace, and to the place of reconciliation with
God. This want was met by the appointment of a yearly general and
perfect expiation of all the sins and uncleanness which had remained
unatoned for and uncleansed in the course of the year. In this respect
the laws of sacrifice and purification received their completion and
finish in the institution of the festival of atonement, which provided
for the congregation of Israel the highest and most comprehensive
expiation that was possible under the Old Testament. Hence the law
concerning the day of atonement formed a fitting close to the ordinances
designed to place the Israelites in fellowship with their God, and raise
the promise of Jehovah, "I will be your God," into a living truth. This
law is described in the present chapter, and contains (1) the
instructions as to the performance of the general expiation for the year
(vv. 2-28), and (2) directions for the celebration of this festival
every year ([Lev 16:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029)). From the
expiation effected upon this day it received the name of "day of
expiations," i.e., of the highest expiation ([Lev
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027)). The Rabbins call it briefly
יומא, the day κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν.

[Leviticus 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 16:1</span></span>

The chronological link connecting the following law with the death of
the sons of Aaron ([Lev 10:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001)) was
intended, not only to point out the historical event which led to the
appointment of the day of atonement, but also to show the importance and
holiness attached to an entrance into the inmost sanctuary of God. The
death of Aaron's sons, as a punishment for wilfully "drawing near before
Jehovah," was to be a solemn warning to Aaron himself, "not to come at
all times into the holy place within the vail, before the mercy-seat
upon the ark," i.e., into the most holy place (see [Exo
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010).), but only at the time to be
appointed by Jehovah, and for the purposes instituted by Him, i.e.,
according to [Lev 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029)., only once a
year, on the day of atonement, and only in the manner prescribed in [Lev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003)., that he might not die. - "For I
will appear in the cloud above the capporeth." The cloud in which
Jehovah appeared above the capporeth, between the cherubim ([Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022)), was not the cloud of the
incense, with which Aaron was to cover the capporeth on entering ([Lev
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#013)), as Vitringa, Bhr, and others
follow the Sadducees in supposing, but the cloud of the divine glory, in
which Jehovah manifested His essential presence in the most holy place
above the ark of the covenant. Because Jehovah appeared in this cloud,
not only could no unclean and sinful man go before the capporeth, i.e.,
approach the holiness of the all-holy God; but even the anointed and
sanctified high priest, if he went before it at his own pleasure, or
without the expiatory blood of sacrifice, would expose himself to
certain death. The reason for this prohibition is to be found in the
fact, that the holiness communicated to the priest did not cancel the
sin of his nature, but only covered it over for the performance of his
official duties, and so long as the law, which produced only the
knowledge of sin and not its forgiveness and removal, was not abolished
by the complete atonement, the holy God was and remained to mortal and
sinful man a consuming fire, before which no one could stand.

[Leviticus 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 16:3</span></span>

Only בּזאת, "with this," i.e., with the sacrifices, dress,
purifications, and means of expiation mentioned afterwards, could he go
into "the holy place," i.e., according to the more precise description
in [Lev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002), into the inmost division
of the tabernacle, which is called Kodesh hakkadashim, "the holy of
holies," in [Exo 26:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#033). He was to
bring an ox (bullock) for a sin-offering and a ram for a burnt-offering,
as a sacrifice for himself and his house (i.e., the priesthood, [Lev
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#006)), and two he-goats for a
sin-offering and a ram for a burnt-offering, as a sacrifice for the
congregation. For this purpose he was to put on, not the state-costume
of the high priest, but a body-coat, drawers, girdle, and head-dress of
white cloth (bad: see [Exo 28:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#042)),
having first bathed his body, and not merely his hands and feet, as he
did for the ordinary service, to appear before Jehovah as entirely
cleansed from the defilement of sin (see at [Lev
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006)) and arrayed in clothes of
holiness. The dress of white cloth was not the plain official dress of
the ordinary priests, for the girdle of that dress was coloured (see at
[Exo 28:39-40](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#039)); and in that case the
high priest would not have appeared in the perfect purity of his
divinely appointed office as chief of the priesthood, but simply as the
priest appointed for this day (v. Hoffmann). Nor did he officiate (as
many of the Rabbins, and also C. a Lapide, Grotius, Rosenmller, and
Knobel suppose) as a penitent praying humbly for the forgiveness of sin.
For where in all the world have clear white clothes been worn either in
mourning or as a penitential garment? The emphatic expression, "these
are holy garments," is a sufficient proof that the pure white colour of
all the clothes, even of the girdle, was intended as a representation of
holiness. Although in [Exo 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#002), [Exo
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#004), etc., the official dress not
only of Aaron, but of his sons also, that is to say, the priestly
costume generally, is described as "holy garments," yet in the present
chapter the word kodesh, "holy," is frequently used in an emphatic sense
(for example, in [Lev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002), [Lev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003), [Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016), of the most holy place of the
dwelling), and by this predicate the dress is characterized as most
holy. Moreover, it was in baddim ("linen") that the angel of Jehovah was
clothed ([Eze 9:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002), [Eze
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011); [Eze
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002), [Eze
10:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#006), and [Dan
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005); [Dan
12:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006)), whose whole appearance, as
described in [Dan 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006), resembled the
appearance of the glory of Jehovah, which Ezekiel saw in the vision of
the four cherubim (ch. 1), and was almost exactly like the glory of
Jesus Christ, which John saw in the Revelation ([Rev
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013)). The white material,
therefore, of the dress which Aaron wore, when performing the highest
act of expiation under the Old Testament, was a symbolical shadowing
forth of the holiness and glory of the one perfect Mediator between God
and man, who, being the radiation of the glory of God and the image of
His nature, effected by Himself the perfect cleansing away of our sin,
and who, as the true High Priest, being holy, innocent, unspotted, and
separate from sinners, entered once by His own blood into the holy place
not made with hands, namely, into heaven itself, to appear before the
face of God for us, and obtain everlasting redemption ([Heb
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003); [Heb
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026); [Heb
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#012), [Heb
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#024)).

[Leviticus 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 16:6</span></span>

With the bullock Aaron was to make atonement for himself and his house.
The two he-goats he was to place before Jehovah (see [Lev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005)), and "give lots over them," i.e.,
have lots cast upon them, one lot for Jehovah, the other for Azazel. The
one upon which the lot for Jehovah fell (עלה, from the coming up of the
lot out of the urn, [Jos 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011); [Jos
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#010)), he was to prepare as a
sin-offering for Jehovah, and to present the one upon which the lot for
Azazel fell alive before Jehovah, עליו לכפּר, "to expiate it," i.e., to
make it the object of expiation (see at [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021)), to send it (them) into the
desert to Azazel. עזאזל, which only occurs in this chapter, signifies
neither "a remote solitude," nor any locality in the desert whatever (as
Jonathan, Rashi, etc., suppose); nor the "he-goat" (from עז goat, and
עזל to turn off, "the goat departing or sent away," as Symm., Theodot.,
the Vulgate, Luther, and others render it); nor "complete removal" (Bhr,
Winer, Tholuck, etc.). The words, one lot for Jehovah and one for
Azazel, require unconditionally that Azazel should be regarded as a
personal being, in opposition to Jehovah. The word is a more intense
form of עזל removit, dimovit, and comes from עזלזל by absorbing the
liquid, like Babel from balbel ([Gen
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#009)), and Golgotha from gulgalta
(Ewald, 158c). The Septuagint rendering is correct, ὁ ἀποπομπαῖος;
although in [Lev 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#010) the rendering
ἀποπομπή is also adopted, i.e., "averruncus, a fiend, or demon whom one
drives away" (Ewald). We have not to think, however, of any demon
whatever, who seduces men to wickedness in the form of an evil spirit,
as the fallen angel Azazel is represented as doing in the Jewish
writings (Book of Enoch 8:1; 10:10; 13:1ff.), like the terrible field
Shibe, whom the Arabs of the peninsula of Sinai so much dread (Seetzen,
i. pp. 273-4), but of the devil himself, the head of the fallen angels,
who was afterwards called Satan; for no subordinate evil spirit could
have been placed in antithesis to Jehovah as Azazel is here, but only
the ruler or head of the kingdom of demons. The desert and desolate
places are mentioned elsewhere as the abode of evil spirits ([Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021); [Isa
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014); [Mat
12:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#043); [Luk
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#024); [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002)). The desert, regarded as an
image of death and desolation, corresponds to the nature of evil
spirits, who fell away from the primary source of life, and in their
hostility to God devastated the world, which was created good, and
brought death and destruction in their train.

[Leviticus 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 16:11</span></span>

He was then to slay the bullock of the sin-offering, and make atonement
for himself and his house (or family, i.e., for the priests, [Lev
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#033)). But before bringing the blood
of the sin-offering into the most holy place, he was to take "the
filling of the censer (machtah, a coal-pan, [Exo
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#038)) with fire-coals," i.e., as many
burning coals as the censer would hold, from the altar of
burnt-offering, and "the filling of his hands," i.e., two hands full of
"fragrant incense" ([Exo 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034)), and
go with this within the vail, i.e., into the most holy place, and there
place the incense upon the fire before Jehovah, "that the cloud of
(burning) incense might cover the capporeth above the testimony, and he
might not die." The design of these instructions was not that the
holiest place, the place of Jehovah's presence, might be hidden by the
cloud of incense from the gaze of the unholy eye of man, and so he might
separate himself reverentially from it, that the person approaching
might not be seized with destruction. But as burning incense was a
symbol of prayer, this covering of the capporeth with the cloud of
incense was a symbolical covering of the glory of the Most Holy One with
prayer to God, in order that He might not see the sin, nor suffer His
holy wrath to break forth upon the sinner, but might graciously accept,
in the blood of the sin-offering, the souls for which it was presented.
Being thus protected by the incense from the wrath of the holy God, he
was to sprinkle (once) some of the blood of the ox with his finger,
first upon the capporeth in front, i.e., not upon the top of the
capporeth, but merely upon or against the front of it, and then seven
times before the capporeth, i.e., upon the ground in front of it. It is
here assumed as a matter of course, that when the offering of incense
was finished, he would necessarily come out of the most holy place
again, and go to the altar of burnt-offering to fetch some of the blood
of the ox which had been slaughtered there.

[Leviticus 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 16:15</span></span>

After this he was to slay the he-goat as a sin-offering for the nation,
for which purpose, of course, he must necessarily come back to the court
again, and then take the blood of the goat into the most holy place, and
do just the same with it as he had already done with that of the ox. A
double sprinkling took place in both cases, first upon or against the
capporeth, and then seven times in front of the capporeth. The first
sprinkling, which was performed once only, was for the expiation of the
sins, first of the high priest and his house, and then of the
congregation of Israel ([Lev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007), and
[Lev 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#018)); the second, which was
repeated seven times, was for the expiation of the sanctuary from the
sins of the people. This is implied in the words of [Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016), "and so shall he make expiation
for the most holy place, on account of the uncleanness of the children
of Israel, and on account of their transgressions with regard to all
their sins," which refer to both the sacrifices; since Aaron first of
all expiated the sins of the priesthood, and the uncleanness with which
the priesthood had stained the sanctuary through their sin, by the blood
of the bullock of the sin-offering; and then the sins of the nation, and
the uncleannesses with which it had defiled the sanctuary, by the
he-goat, which was also slain as a sin-offering.

(Note: V. Hoffmann's objection to this rests upon the erroneous
supposition that a double act of expiation was required for the
congregation, and only a single one for the priesthood, whereas,
according to the distinct words of the text, a double sprinkling was
performed with the blood of both the sin-offerings, and therefore a
double expiation effected.)

[Lev 16:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016)

"And so shall he do to the tabernacle of the congregation that dwelleth
among them." (i.e., has its place among them, [Jos
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019)) "in the midst of their
uncleanness." The holy things were rendered unclean, not only by the
sins of those who touched them, but by the uncleanness, i.e., the bodily
manifestations of the sin of the nation; so that they also required a
yearly expiation and cleansing through the expiatory blood of sacrifice.
By ohel moed, "the tabernacle of the congregation," in [Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016) and [Lev
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017), as well as [Lev
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020) and [Lev
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#033), we are to understand the holy
place of the tabernacle, to which the name of the whole is applied on
account of its occupying the principal space in the dwelling, and in
distinction from kodesh (the holy), which is used in this chapter to
designate the most holy place, or the space at the back of the dwelling.
It follows still further from this, that by the altar in [Lev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018), and also in [Lev
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020) and [Lev
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#033), which is mentioned here as the
third portion of the entire sanctuary, we are to understand the altar of
burnt-offering in the court, and not the altar of incense, as the
Rabbins and most of the commentators assume. This rabbinical view cannot
be sustained, either from [Exo 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010)
or from the context. [Exo 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010) simply
prescribes a yearly expiation of the altar of incense on the day of
atonement; and this is implied in the words "so shall he do," in [Lev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#016). For these words can only mean,
that in the same way in which he had expiated the most holy place he was
also to expiate the holy place of the tabernacle, in which the altar of
incense took the place of the ark of the covenant of the most holy
place; so that the expiation was performed by his putting blood, in the
first place, upon the horns of the altar, and then sprinkling it seven
times upon the ground in front of it. The expression "go out" in [Lev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018) refers, not to his going out of
the most holy into the holy place, but to his going out of the ohel moed
(or holy place) into the court.

[Leviticus 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 16:17</span></span>

There was to be no one in the ohel moed when Aaron went into it to make
expiation in the most holy place, until he came out (of the tabernacle)
again; not because no one but the chief servant of Jehovah was worthy to
be near or present either as spectator or assistant at this sacred act
before Jehovah (Knobel), but because no unholy person was to defile by
his presence the sanctuary, which had just been cleansed; just as no
layman at all was allowed to enter the holy place, or could go with
impunity into the presence of the holy God.

[Leviticus 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 16:18</span></span>

After he had made atonement for the dwelling, Aaron was to expiate the
altar in the court, by first of all putting some of the blood of the
bullock and he-goat upon the horns of the altar, and then sprinkling it
seven times with his finger, and thus cleansing and sanctifying it from
the uncleannesses of the children of Israel. The application of blood to
the horns of the altar was intended to expiate the sins of the priests
as well as those of the nation; just as in the case of ordinary
sin-offerings it expiated the sins of individual members of the nation
([Lev 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#025), [Lev
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#030), [Lev
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#034)), to which the priests also
belonged; and the sevenfold sprinkling effected the purification of the
place of sacrifice from the uncleannesses of the congregation.

The meaning of the sprinkling of blood upon the capporeth and the horns
of the two altars was the same as in the case of every sin-offering. The
peculiar features in the expiatory ritual of the day of atonement were
the following. In the first place, the blood of both sacrifices was
taken not merely into the holy place, but into the most holy, and
sprinkled directly upon the throne of God. This was done to show that
the true atonement could only take place before the throne of God
Himself, and that the sinner was only then truly reconciled to God, and
placed in the full and living fellowship of peace with God, when he
could come directly to the throne of God, and not merely to the place
where, although the Lord indeed manifested His grace to him, He was
still separated from him by a curtain. In this respect, therefore, the
bringing of the blood of atonement into the most holy place had a
prophetic signification, and was a predictive sign that the curtain,
which then separated Israel from its God, would one day be removed, and
that with the entrance of the full and eternal atonement free access
would be opened to the throne of the Lord. The second peculiarity in
this act of atonement was the sprinkling of the blood seven times upon
the holy places, the floor of the holy of holies and holy place, and the
altar of the court; also the application of blood to the media of
atonement in the three divisions of the tabernacle, for the cleansing of
the holy places from the uncleanness of the children of Israel. As this
uncleanness cannot be regarded as consisting of physical defilement, but
simply as the ideal effluence of their sins, which had been transferred
to the objects in question; so, on the other hand, the cleansing of the
holy places can only be understood as consisting in an ideal
transference of the influence of the atoning blood to the inanimate
objects which had been defiled by sin. If the way in which the
sacrificial blood, regarded as the expiation of souls, produced its
cleansing effects was, that by virtue thereof the sin was covered over,
whilst the sinner was reconciled to God and received forgiveness of sin
and the means of sanctification, we must regard the sin-destroying
virtue of the blood as working in the same way also upon the objects
defiled by sin, namely, that powers were transferred to them which
removed the effects proceeding from sin, and in this way wiped out the
uncleanness of the children of Israel that was in them. This
communication of purifying powers to the holy things was represented by
the sprinkling of the atoning blood upon and against them, and indeed by
their being sprinkled seven times, to set forth the communication as
raised to an efficiency corresponding to its purpose, and to impress
upon it the stamp of a divine act through the number seven, which was
sanctified by the work of God in creation.

[Leviticus 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 16:20</span></span>

After the completion of the expiation and cleansing of the holy things,
Aaron was to bring up the live goat, i.e., to have it brought before the
altar of burnt-offering, and placing both his hands upon its head, to
confess all the sins and transgressions of the children of Israel upon
it, and so put them upon its head. He was then to send the goat away
into the desert by a man who was standing ready, that it might carry all
its sins upon it into a land cut off; and there the man was to set the
goat at liberty. עתּי, ἁπάξ λεγ. from עת an appointed time, signifies
opportune, present at the right time, or ready. גּזרה, which is also met
with in this passage alone, from גּזר to cut, or cut off, that which is
severed, a country cut off from others, not connected by roads with any
inhabited land. "The goat was not to find its way back" (Knobel). To
understand clearly the meaning of this symbolical rite, we must start
from the fact, that according to the distinct words of [Lev
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#005), the two goats were to serve as a
sin-offering (לחטּאת). They were both of them devoted, therefore, to one
and the same purpose, as was pointed out by the Talmudists, who laid
down the law on that very account, that they were to be exactly alike,
colore, statura, et valore. The living goat, therefore, is not to be
regarded merely as the bearer of the sin to be taken away, but as quite
as truly a sin-offering as the one that was slaughtered. It was
appointed עליו לכפּר ([Lev 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#010)),
i.e., not that an expiatory rite might be performed over it, for על with
כּפּר always applies to the object of the expiation, but properly to
expiate it, i.e., to make it the object of the expiation, or make
expiation with it. To this end the sins of the nation were confessed
upon it with the laying on of hands, and thus symbolically laid upon its
head, that it might bear them, and when sent into the desert carry them
away thither. The sins, which were thus laid upon its head by
confession, were the sins of Israel, which had already been expiated by
the sacrifice of the other goat. To understand, however, how the sins
already expiated could still be confessed and laid upon the living goat,
it is not sufficient to say, with Bhr, that the expiation with blood
represented merely a covering or covering up of the sin, and that in
order to impress upon the expiation the stamp of the greatest possible
completeness and perfection, a supplement was appended, which
represented the carrying away and removal of the sin. For in the case of
every sin-offering for the congregation, in addition to the covering or
forgiveness of sin represented by the sprinkling of blood, the removal
or abolition of it was also represented by the burning of the flesh of
the sacrifice; and this took place in the present instance also. As both
goats were intended for a sin-offering, the sins of the nation were
confessed upon both, and placed upon the heads of both by the laying on
of hands; though it is of the living goat only that this is expressly
recorded, being omitted in the case of the other, because the rule laid
down in [Lev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#004). was followed.

(Note: The distinction, that in the case of all the other sacrifices the
(one) hand is ordered to be laid upon the victim, whilst here both hands
are ordered to be laid upon the goat, does not constitute an essential
difference, as Hoffmann supposes; but the laying on of both hands
rendered the act more solemn and expressive, in harmony with the
solemnity of the whole proceeding.)

By both Israel was delivered from all sins and transgressions; but by
the one, upon which the lot "for Jehovah" fell, it was so with regard to
Jehovah; by the other, upon which the lot "for Azazel" fell, with regard
to Azazel. With regard to Jehovah, or in relation to Jehovah, the sins
were wiped away by the sacrifice of the goat; the sprinkling of the
blood setting forth their forgiveness, and the burning of the animal the
blotting of them out; and with this the separation of the congregation
from Jehovah because of its sin was removed, and living fellowship with
God restored. But Israel had also been brought by its sin into a
distinct relation to Azazel, the head of the evil spirits; and it was
necessary that this should be brought to an end, if reconciliation with
God was to be perfectly secured. This complete deliverance from sin and
its author was symbolized in the leading away of the goat, which had
been laden with the sins, into the desert. This goat was to take back
the sins, which God had forgiven to His congregation, into the desert to
Azazel, the father of all sin, in the one hand as a proof that his evil
influences upon men would be of no avail in the case of those who had
received expiation from God, and on the other hand as a proof to the
congregation also that those who were laden with sin could not remain in
the kingdom of God, but would be banished to the abode of evil spirits,
unless they were redeemed therefrom. This last point, it is true, is not
expressly mentioned in the test; but it is evident from the fate which
necessarily awaited the goat, when driven into the wilderness in the
"land cut off." It would be sure to perish out there in the desert, that
is to say, to suffer just what a winner would have to endure if his sins
remained upon him; though probably it is only a later addition, not
founded in the law, which we find in the Mishnah, Joma vi. 6, viz., that
the goat was driven headlong from a rock in the desert, and dashed to
pieces at the foot. There is not the slightest idea of presenting a
sacrifice to Azazel. This goat was a sin-offering, only so far as it was
laden with the sins of the people to carry them away into the desert;
and in this respect alone is there a resemblance between the two goats
and the two birds used in the purification of the leper ([Lev
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004).), of which the one to be set
free was bathed in the blood of the one that was killed. In both cases
the reason for making use of two animals is to be found purely in the
physical impossibility of combining all the features, that had to be set
forth in the sin-offering, in one single animal.

[Leviticus 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 16:23</span></span>

After the living goat had been sent away, Aaron was to go into the
tabernacle, i.e., the holy place of the dwelling, and there take off his
white clothes and lay them down, i.e., put them away, because they were
only to be worn in the performance of the expiatory ritual of this day,
and then bathe his body in the holy place, i.e., in the court, in the
laver between the altar and the door of the dwelling, probably because
the act of laying the sins upon the goat rendered him unclean. He was
then to put on his clothes, i.e., the coloured state-dress of the high
priest, and to offer in this the burnt-offerings, for an atonement for
himself and the nation (see [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004)),
and to burn the fat portions of the sin-offerings upon the altar.

[Leviticus 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 16:26</span></span>

The man who took the goat into the desert, and those who burned the two
sin-offerings outside the camp (see at [Lev
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#011), [Lev
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#021)), had also to wash their clothes
and bathe their bodies before they returned to the camp, because they
had been defiled by the animals laden with sin.

[Leviticus 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 16:29</span></span>

General directions for the yearly celebration of the day of atonement. -
It was to be kept on the tenth day of the seventh month, as an
"everlasting statute" (see at [Exo
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#014)). On that day the Israelites
were to "afflict their souls," i.e., to fast, according to [Lev
23:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#032), from the evening of the 9th
till the evening of the 10th day. Every kind of work was to be suspended
as on the Sabbath ([Exo 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010)), by
both natives and foreigners (see [Exo
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049)), because this day was a high
Sabbath ([Exo 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#015)). Both fasting and
sabbatical rest are enjoined again in [Lev
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#027). and [Num
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#007), on pain of death. The fasting
commanded for this day, the only fasting prescribed in the law, is most
intimately connected with the signification of the feast of atonement.
If the general atonement made on this day was not to pass into a dead
formal service, the people must necessarily enter in spirit into the
signification of the act of expiation, prepare their souls for it with
penitential feelings, and manifest this penitential state by abstinence
from the ordinary enjoyments of life. To "afflict (bow, humble) the
soul," by restraining the earthly appetites, which have their seat in
the soul, is the early Mosaic expression for fasting (צוּם). The latter
word came first of all into use in the time of the Judges ([Jdg
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026); [Sa1
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006); cf. [Psa
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013) : "I afflicted my soul with
fasting"). "By bowing his soul the Israelite was to place himself in an
inward relation to the sacrifice, whose soul was given for his soul; and
by this state of mind, answering to the outward proceedings of the day,
he was to appropriate the fruit of it to himself, namely, the
reconciliation of his soul, which passed through the animal's death"
(Baumgarten).

[Leviticus 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 16:32</span></span>

In the future, the priest who was anointed and set apart for the duty of
the priesthood in his father's stead, i.e., the existing high priest,
was to perform the act of expiation in the manner prescribed, and that
"once a year." The yearly repetition of the general atonement showed
that the sacrifices of the law were not sufficient to make the servant
of God perfect according to this own conscience. And this imperfection
of the expiation, made with the blood of bullocks and goats, could not
fail to awaken a longing for the perfect sacrifice of the eternal High
Priest, who has obtained eternal redemption by entering once, through
His own blood, into the holiest of all ([Heb
9:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#007)). And just as this was effected
negatively, so by the fact that the high priest entered on this day into
the holiest of all, as the representative of the whole congregation, and
there, before the throne of God, completed its reconciliation with Him,
was the necessity exhibited in a positive manner for the true
reconciliation of man, and his introduction into a perfect and abiding
fellowship with Him, and the eventual realization of this by the blood
of the Son of God, our eternal High Priest and Mediator, prophetically
foreshadowed. The closing words in [Lev
16:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#034), "and he (i.e., Aaron, to whom
Moses was to communicate the instructions of God concerning the feast of
atonement, [Lev 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#002)) did as the Lord
commanded Moses," are anticipatory in their character, like [Exo
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#050). For the law in question could
not be carried out till the seventh month of the current year, that is
to say, as we find from a comparison of [Num
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011) with [Exo
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017), not till after the departure of
Israel from Sinai.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 17](lev017)

</div>
