<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](mal001)  [Next](mal003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)

[Malachi 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 2:1</span></span>

The rebuke administered to the priests for their wicked doings is
followed by an announcement of the punishment which they will bring upon
themselves in case they should not observe the admonition, or render to
the Lord the reverence due to His name when discharging the duties of
their office. [Mal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001). "And now, ye
priests, this commandment comes to you. [Mal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002). If ye do not hear and lay it to
heart, to give glory to my name, saith Jehovah of hosts, I send against
you the curse and curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them, because
ye will not lay it to heart. [Mal 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#003).
Behold I rebuke your arm, and scatter dung upon your face, the dung of
your feasts, and they will carry you away to it. [Mal
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#004). And ye will perceive that I have
sent this commandment to you, that it may be my covenant with Levi,
saith Jehovah of hosts." [Mal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001).
introduces the threat; this is called mitsvâh, a command, not as a
commission which the prophet received, for the speaker is not the
prophet, but Jehovah Himself; nor as "instruction, admonition, or
warning," for mitsvâh has no such meaning. Mitsvâh is rather to be
explained from tsivvâh in [Nah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#014).
The term command is applied to that which the Lord has resolved to bring
upon a person, inasmuch as the execution or accomplishment is effected
by earthly instruments by virtue of a divine command.

The reference is to the threat of punishment which follows in [Mal
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#002) and [Mal
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#003), but which is only to be carried
out in case the priests do not hear and lay to heart, namely, the
warning which the Lord has addressed to them through Malachi ([Mal
1:6-13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)), and sanctify His name by
their service. If they shall not do this, God will send the curse
against them, and that in two ways. In the first place He will curse
their blessings; in fact, He has already done so. Berâkhōth, blessings,
are obviously not the revenues of the priests, tithes, atonement-money,
and portions of the sacrifices (L. de Dieu, Ros., Hitzig), but the
blessings pronounced by the priests upon the people by virtue of their
office. These God will curse, i.e., He will make them ineffective, or
turn them into the very opposite. וגם ארותיה is not a simple, emphatic
repetition, but ארותי is a perfect, which affirms that the curse has
already taken effect. The emphatic vegam, and also, and indeed, also
requires this. The suffix ה attached to ארותי is to be taken
distributively: "each particular blessing." In the second place God will
rebuke את־הזּרע, i.e., the seed. But since the priests did not practise
agriculture, it is impossible to see how rebuking the seed, i.e.,
causing a failure of the corps, could be a punishment peculiar to the
priests. We must therefore follow the lxx, Aquila, Vulg., Ewald, and
others, and adopt the pointing הזּרע, i.e., the arm. Rebuking the arm
does not mean exactly "laming the arm," nor manifesting His displeasure
in any way against the arm, which the priests raised to bless (Koehler).
For it was not the arm but the hand that was raised to bless ([Lev
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022); [Luk
24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050)), and rebuking signifies
something more than the manifestation of displeasure. It is with the arm
that a man performs his business or the duties of his calling; and
rebuking the arm, therefore, signifies the neutralizing of the official
duties performed at the altar and in the sanctuary. Moreover, God will
also deliver them up to the most contemptuous treatment, by scattering
dung in their faces, namely, the dung of their feasts. Chaggı̄m, feasts,
is used metonymically for festal sacrifices, or the sacrificial animals
slain at the festivals (cf. [Psa
118:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#027)). The dung of the sacrificial
animals was to be carried away to an unclean place outside the camp and
burned there, in the case of the sin-offerings, upon an ash-heap ([Lev
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#012); [Lev
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#027); [Exo
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#014)). Scattering dung in the face
was a sign and figurative description of the most ignominious treatment.
Through the expression "dung of your festal sacrifices," the festal
sacrifices offered by these priests are described as being themselves
dung; and the thought is this: the contempt of the Lord, which they show
by offering blind or lame animals, or such as are blemished in other
ways, He will repay to them by giving them up to the greatest ignominy.
The threat is strengthened by the clause ונשׂא אתכם אליו, which has been
interpreted, however, in different ways. The Vulgate, Luther ("and shall
remain sticking to you"), Calvin, and others take peresh as the subject
to נשׂא: "the dung will draw the priests to itself, so that they will
also become dung." But נשׂא has no such meaning; we must therefore leave
the subject indefinite: they (man) will carry you away, or sweep you
away to it, i.e., treat you as dung. When they should be treated in this
ignominious manner, then would they perceive that the threatening had
come from the Lord. "This commandment (mitsvâh) is the mitsvâh mentioned
in [Mal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001). The infinitive clause
which follows announces the purpose of God, in causing this threat to
come to pass. But the explanation of these words is a disputed point,
since we may either take berı̄thı̄ (my covenant) as the subject, or supply
hammitsvâh (the commandment) from the previous clause. In the first case
("that my covenant may be with Levi") the meaning could only be, that
the covenant with Levi may continue. But although hâyâh does indeed mean
to exist, it does not mean to continue, or be maintained. We must
therefore take hammitsvâh as the subject, as Luther, Calvin, and others
have done ("that it, viz., my purpose, may be my covenant with Levi").
Koehler adopts this, and has explained it correctly thus: "They will
perceive that just as Jehovah has hitherto regulated His conduct towards
Levi by the terms of His covenant, which was made with it at the time of
its departure from Egypt, so will He henceforth let it be regulated by
the terms of the decree of punishment which He has resolved upon now, so
that this decree of punishment takes the place, as it were, of the
earlier covenant." Lēvı̄ is the tribe of Levi, which culminated in the
priesthood. The attitude of God towards the priests is called a
covenant, inasmuch as God placed them in a special relation to Himself
by choosing them for the service of the sanctuary, which not only
secured to them rights and promises, but imposed duties upon them, on
the fulfilment of which the reception of the gifts of divine grace
depended (vid., [Deu 10:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008); [Deu
33:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008); [Num
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#001)., [Num
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#010).).

[Malachi 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 2:5</span></span>

To explain and show the reason for this thought, the real nature of the
covenant made with Levi is described in [Mal
2:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005); and [Mal
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008) and [Mal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#009) then show how the priests have
neutralized this covenant by forsaking the way of their fathers, so that
God is obliged to act differently towards them now, and deliver them up
to shame and ignominy. [Mal 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005). "My
covenant was with him life and salvation, and I lent them to him for
fear, and he feared me and trembled before my name. [Mal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006). Law of truth was in his mouth and
there was no perversity on his lips, he walked with me in salvation and
integrity, and brought back many from guilt. [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007). For the priest's lips should keep
knowledge, and men seek law from his mouth, because he is a messenger of
Jehovah." In [Mal 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005) החיּים והשּׁלום
are the nominative of the predicate. "My covenant was with him life,"
etc., means, my covenant consisted in this, that life and salvation were
guaranteed and granted to him. The elliptical mode of explaining it,
viz., "my covenant was a covenant of life and salvation," gives the same
sense, only there is no analogous example by which this ellipsis can be
vindicated, since such passages as [Num
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#012); [Gen
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#024), and [Hos
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003), which Hitzig adduces in support
of it, are either of a different character, or different in their
meaning. Shâlōm, salvation (peace), is the sum of all the blessings
requisite for wellbeing. Jehovah granted life and salvation to Levi,
i.e., to the priesthood, for fear, viz., as the lever of the fear of
God; and Levi, i.e., the priesthood of the olden time, responded to this
divine intention. "He feared me." Nichath is the niphal not of nâchath,
he descended, i.e., humbled himself (Ewald, Reincke), but of châthath,
to terrify, to shake, which is frequently met with in connection with
(e.g., [Deu 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#008); [Jos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#009); [Jer
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017)). [Hos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005) and [Hos
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#006) state how Levi preserved this
fear both officially and in life. Tōrath 'ĕmeth (analogous to mishpat
'ĕmeth in [Zac 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009)) is instruction in
the law consisting in truth. Truth, which had its roots in the law of
Jehovah, was the rule not only of his own conduct, but also and more
especially of the instruction which he had to give to the people (cf.
[Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007)). The opposite of 'ĕmeth is
‛avlâh, perversity, conduct which is not regulated by the law of God,
but by selfishness or sinful self-interest. Grammatically considered,
the feminine ‛avlâh is not the subject to נמצא, but is construed as the
object: "they found not perversity" (cf. Ges. 143, 1, b; Ewald, 295, b).
Thus he walked in peace (salvation) and integrity before God. Beshâlōm
is not merely in a state of peace, or in peaceableness, nor even
equivalent to בּלבב שׁלם ([Kg2 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#003)),
but according to [Mal 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005), "equipped
with the salvation bestowed upon him by God." The integritas vitae is
affirmed in בּמישׁור. הלך את־יי, to walk with Jehovah, denotes the most
confidential intercourse with God, or walking as it were by the side of
God (see at [Gen 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#022)). Through this
faithful discharge of the duties of his calling, Levi (i.e., the
priesthood) brought many back from guilt or iniquity, that is to say,
led many back from the way of sin to the right way, viz., to the fear of
God (cf. [Dan 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)). But Levi did
nothing more than what the standing and vocation of the priest required.
For the lips of the priest should preserve knowledge. דעת is the
knowledge of God and of His will as revealed in the law. These the lips
of the priest should keep, to instruct the people therein; for out of
the mouth of the priest men seek tōrâh, law, i.e., instruction in the
will of God, because he is a messenger of Jehovah to the people. מלאך,
the standing epithet for the angels as the heavenly messengers of God,
is here applied to the priests, as it is in [Hag
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013) to the prophet. Whilst the
prophets were extraordinary messengers of God, who proclaimed to the
people the will and counsel of the Lord, the priests, by virtue of their
office, were so to speak the standing or ordinary messengers of God. But
the priests of that time had become utterly untrue to this vocation.

[Malachi 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mal 2:8</span></span>

[Mal 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#008). "But ye have departed from
the way, have made many to stumble at the law, have corrupted the
covenant of Levi, saith Jehovah of hosts. [Mal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#009). Thus I also make you despised and
base with all the people, inasmuch as ye do not keep my ways, and
respect person in the law." הדּרך is the way depicted in [Mal
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006) and [Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007), in which the priests ought to
have walked. הכשׁלתּם בּתּורה does not mean "ye have caused to fall by
instruction" (Koehler); for, in the first place, hattōrâh (with the
article) is not the instruction or teaching of the priests, but the law
of God; and secondly, ב with כּשׁל denotes the object against which a
man stumbles and which causes him to fall. Hitzig has given the correct
explanation: ye have made the law to many a מכשׁול, instead of the light
of their way, through your example and through false teaching, as though
the law allowed or commanded things which in reality are sin. In this
way they have corrupted or overthrown the covenant with Levi. הלּוי,
with the article, is not the patriarch Levi, but his posterity, really
the priesthood, as the kernel of the Levites. Hence Jehovah also is no
longer bound by the covenant, but withdraws from the priests what He
granted to the Levi who was faithful to the covenant, viz., life and
salvation ([Mal 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#005)), and makes them
contemptible and base with all the people. This is simply a just
retribution for the fact, that the priests depart from His ways and have
respect to men. Battōrâh, in the law, i.e., in the administration of the
law, they act with partiality. For the fact itself compare [Mic
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#011).

[Malachi 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 2:10</span></span>

[Mal 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010). "Have we not all one
father? hath not one God created us? wherefore are we treacherous one
towards another, to desecrate the covenant of our fathers? [Mal
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#011). Judah acts treacherously, and
abomination has taken place in Israel and in Jerusalem; for Judah has
desecrated the sanctuary of Jehovah, which He loves, and marries the
daughter of a strange god. [Mal 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012).
Jehovah will cut off, to the man that doeth this, wakers and answerers
out of the tents of Jacob, and him that offereth sacrifices to Jehovah
of hosts." Malachi adopts the same course here as in the previous
rebuke, and commences with a general clause, from which the wrongfulness
of marriages with heathen women and of frivolous divorces necessarily
followed. The one father, whom all have, is neither Adam, the progenitor
of all men, nor Abraham, the father of the Israelitish nation, but
Jehovah, who calls Himself the Father of the nation in [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006). God is the Father of Israel as
its Creator; not, however, in the general sense, according to which He
made Israel the people of His possession. By the two clauses placed at
the head, Malachi intends not so much to lay emphasis upon the common
descent of all the Israelites, by virtue of which they form one united
family in contrast with the heathen, as to say that all the Israelites
are children of God, and as such spiritual brethren and sisters.
Consequently every violation of the fraternal relation, such as that of
which the Israelite was guilty who married a heathen woman, or put away
an Israelitish wife, was also an offence against God, a desecration of
His covenant. The idea that the expression "one father" refers to
Abraham as the ancestor of the nation (Jerome, Calvin, and others), is
precluded by the fact, that not only the Israelites, but also the
Ishmaelites and Edomites were descended from Abraham; and there is no
ground whatever for thinking of Jacob, because, although he had indeed
given his name to Israel, he is never singled out as its ancestor.
Nibhgad is the first pers. plur. imperf. kal, notwithstanding the fact
that in other cases bâgad has cholem in the imperfect; for the niphal of
this verb is never met with. The Israelite acted faithlessly towards his
brother, both when he contracted a marriage with a heathen woman, and
when he put away his Israelitish wife, and thereby desecrated the
covenant of the fathers, i.e., the covenant which Jehovah made with the
fathers, when He chose them from among the heathen, and adopted them as
His covenant nation ([Exo 19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005); [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008)).

The reason for this rebuke is given in [Mal
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#011), in a statement of what has taken
place. In order the more emphatically to describe this as reprehensible,
bâgedâh (hath dealt treacherously) is repeated and applied to the whole
nation. Yehūdâh (Judah), construed as a feminine, is the land acting in
its inhabitants. Then what has taken place is described as תּועבה,
abomination, like idolatry, witchcraft, and other grievous sins (cf.
[Deu 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#015); [Deu
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009).), in which the name Israel is
intentionally chosen as the holy name of the nation, to indicate the
contrast between the holy vocation of Israel and its unholy conduct. In
addition to Israel as the national name (= Judah) Jerusalem is also
mentioned, as is frequently the case, as the capital and centre of the
nation. What has occurred is an abomination, because Judah desecrates
קדשׁ יי, i.e., neither the holiness of Jehovah as a divine attribute,
nor the temple as the sanctuary, still less the holy state of marriage,
which is never so designated in the Old Testament, but Israel as the
nation which Jehovah loved. Israel is called qōdesh, a sanctuary or holy
thing, as עם קדושׁ, which Jehovah has chosen out of all nations to be
His peculiar possession ([Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006);
[Deu 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#002); [Jer
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#003); [Psa
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002); [Ezr
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002) : see Targ., Rashi, Ab. Ezra,
etc.). Through the sin which it had committed, Judah, i.e., the
community which had returned from exile, had profaned itself as the
sanctuary of God, or neutralized itself as a holy community chosen and
beloved of Jehovah (Koehler). To this there is appended, though not till
the last clause, the statement of the abomination: Judah, in its
individual members, has married the daughter of a strange god (cf. [Ezr
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002).; [Neh
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#023).). By the expression בּת אל נכר
the person married is described as an idolatress (bath, daughter =
dependent). This involved the desecration of the holy calling of the
nation. It is true that in the law it is only marriages with Canaanites
that are expressly forbidden ([Exo
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016); [Deu
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003)), but the reason assigned for this
prohibition shows, that all marriages with heathen women, who did not
give up their idolatry, were thereby denounced as irreconcilable with
the calling of Israel (see at [Kg1
11:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001)). This sin may God punish by
cutting off every one who commits it. This threat of punishment ([Mal
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#012)) is indeed only expressed in the
form of a wish, but the wish has been created by the impulse of the Holy
Spirit. Very different and by no means satisfactory explanations have
been given of the expression ער וענה, the waking one (ער the participle
of עוּר) and the answering one, a proverbial description of the wicked
man formed by the combination of opposites (on the custom of expressing
totality by opposites, see Dietrich, Abhandlung zur hebr. Gramm. p.
201ff.), in which, however, the meaning of the word ער still continues a
matter of dispute. The rabbinical explanation, which is followed by
Luther, viz., teacher and scholar, is founded upon the meaning excitare
given to the verb עוּר, and the excitans is supposed to be the teacher
who stimulates by questioning and admonishing. But apart from all other
reasons which tell against this explanation, it does not suit the
context; for there is not a single word to indicate that the prophet is
speaking only of priests who have taken foreign wives; on the contrary,
the prophet accuses Judah and Jerusalem, and therefore the people
generally, of being guilty of this sin. Moreover, it was no punishment
to an Israelite to have no rabbi or teacher of the law among his sons.
The words are at any rate to be taken more generally than this. The best
established meaning is vigil et respondens, in which ער is taken
transitively, as in [Job 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#002) in the
chethib, and in the Chaldee ער, watcher ([Dan
4:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#010) and [Dan
4:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#014)), in the sense of vivus
quisque. In this case the proverbial phrase would be taken from the
night-watchman (J. D. Mich., Ros., Ges. Thes. p. 1004). It is no
conclusive objection to this, that the words which follow, וּמגּישׁ
מנחה, evidently stand upon the same line as ער וענה and must form part
of the same whole, and therefore that ער וענה cannot of itself embrace
the whole. For this conclusion is by no means a necessary one. If the
two expressions referred to portions of the same whole, they could not
well be separated from one another by מאהלי יעקב. Moreover, the
limitation of ער וענה to the age of childhood founders upon the
artificial interpretation which it is necessary to give to the two
words. According to Koehler ער denotes the child in the first stage of
its growth, in which it only manifests its life by occasionally waking
up from its ordinary state of deep, death-like slumber, and ענה the more
advanced child, which is able to speak and answer questions. But who
would ever think of calling a child in the first weeks of its life, when
it sleeps more than it wakes, a waker? Moreover, the sleep of an infant
is not a "deep, death-like slumber." The words "out of the tents of
Jacob," i.e., the houses of Israel, belong to יכרת. The last clause adds
the further announcement, that whoever commits such abominations shall
have no one to offer a sacrificial gift to the Lord. These words are not
to be taken as referring to the priestly caste, as Hitzig supposes; but
Jerome has given the correct meaning: "and whoever is willing to offer a
gift upon the altar for men of this description." The meaning of the
whole verse is the following: "May God not only cut off every descendant
of such a sinner out of the houses of Israel, but any one who might
offer a sacrifice for him in expiation of his sin."

[Malachi 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 2:13</span></span>

[Mal 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013). "And this ye do a second
time: cover the altar of Jehovah with tears, with weeping and signs, so
that He does not turn any more to the sacrifice, and accept the
well-pleasing thing at your hand. [Mal
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014). And ye say, Wherefore? Because
Jehovah has been witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, towards
whom thou hast acted treacherously; whereas she is nevertheless thy
companion, and the wife of thy covenant. [Mal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015). And not one did so who had still
a remnant of spirit. And what (did) the one? He sought seed of God.
Therefore shall ye take heed for your spirit, and deal not faithlessly
to the wife of thy youth. [Mal 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#016).
For I hate divorce, saith Jehovah, the God of Israel; and he will cover
wickedness over his garment, saith Jehovah of hosts. Thus shall ye take
heed to your spirit, and not deal treacherously." In these verses the
prophet condemns a second moral transgression on the part of the people,
viz., the putting away of their wives. By shēnı̄th (as a second thing,
i.e., for the second time) this sin is placed in the same category as
the sin condemned in the previous verses. Here again the moral
reprehensibility of the sin is described in [Mal
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#011), before the sin itself is named.
They cover the altar of Jehovah with tears, namely, by compelling the
wives who have been put away to lay their trouble before God in the
sanctuary. The inf. constr. introduces the more minute definition of
זאת; and בּכי ואנקה is a supplementary apposition to דּמעה ot , added to
give greater force to the meaning. מאין עוד, so that there is no more a
turning (of Jehovah) to the sacrifice, i.e., so that God does not
graciously accept your sacrifice any more (cf. [Num
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#015)). The following infinitive ולקחת
is also dependent upon מאין, but on account of the words which intervene
it is attached with ל . רצון , the good pleasure or satisfaction, used
as abstractum pro concreto for the well-pleasing sacrifice. [Mal
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014). This sin also the persons
addressed will not recognise. They inquire the reason why God will no
more graciously accept their sacrifices, whereupon the prophet discloses
their sin in the plainest terms. על־כּי = על־אשׁר, as in [Deu
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#017); [Jdg
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012), etc. The words, "because Jehovah
was a witness between thee and the wife of thy youth," cannot be
understood as Ges., Umbreit, and Koehler assume, in accordance with [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005), as signifying that Jehovah had
interposed between them as an avenging witness; for in that case העיד
would necessarily be construed with ב, but they refer to the fact that
the marriage took place before the face of God, or with looking up to
God; and the objection that nothing is known of any religious
benediction at the marriage, or any mutual vow of fidelity, is merely an
argumentum a silentio, which proves nothing. If the marriage was a
berı̄th 'Elōhı̄m (a covenant of God), as described in [Pro
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#017), it was also concluded before the
face of God, and God was a witness to the marriage. With the expression
"wife of thy youth" the prophet appeals to the heart of the husband,
pointing to the love of his youth with which the marriage had been
entered into; and so also in the circumstantial clause, through which he
brings to the light the faithless treatment of the wife in putting her
away: "Yet she was thy companion, who shared thy joy and sorrow, and the
wife of thy covenant, with whom thou didst made a covenant for life."

In [Mal 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015) the prophet shows still
further the reprehensible character of the divorce, by rebutting the
appeal to Abraham's conduct towards Hagar as inapplicable. The true
interpretation of this hemistich, which has been explained in very
different, and to some extent in very marvellous ways, is obvious enough
if we only bear in mind that the subordinate clause וּשׁאר רוּח לו, from
its very position and from the words themselves, can only contain a more
precise definition of the subject of the principal clause. The
affirmation "a remnant of spirit is (was) to him" does not apply to God,
but only to man, as L. de Dieu has correctly observed. Rūăch denote
here, as in [Num 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#018); [Jos
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001); [Kg1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#005), not so much intelligence and
consideration, as the higher power breathed into man by God, which
determines that moral and religious life to which we are accustomed to
give the name of virtue. By 'echâd (one), therefore, we cannot
understand God, but only a man; and לא אחד (not any one = no one, not
one man) is the subject of the sentence, whilst the object to עשׂה must
be supplied from the previous sentence: "No man, who has even a remnant
of reason, or of sense for right and wrong, has done," sc. what ye are
doing, namely, faithlessly put away the wife of his youth. To this there
is appended the objection: "And what did the one do?" which the prophet
adduces as a possible exception that may be taken to his statement, for
the purpose of refuting it. The words וּמה האחד are elliptical, the verb
עשׂה, which may easily be supplied from the previous clause, being
omitted (cf. [Ecc 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#012)). האחד, not
unus aliquis, but the well-known one, whom it was most natural to think
of when the question in hand was that of putting away a wife, viz.,
Abraham, who put away Hagar, by whom he had begotten Ishmael, and who
was therefore also his wife (Genesis 21). The prophet therefore replies,
that Abraham sought to obtain the seed promised him by God, i.e., he
dismissed Hagar, because God promised to give him the desired posterity,
not in Ishmael through the maid Hagar, but through Sarah in Isaac, so
that in doing this he was simply acting in obedience to the word of God
([Gen 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)). After meeting this
possible objection, Malachi warns his contemporaries to beware of
faithlessly putting away their wives. The Vav before nishmartem is the
Vav rel., through which the perfect acquires the force of a cohortative
as a deduction from the facts before them, as in ועשׂית in [Kg1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#006) (see Ewald, 342, c). נשׁמר בּרוּחו
is synonymous with נשׁמר בּנפשׁו in [Jer
17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021), and this is equivalent to נשׁמר
לנפשׁו in [Deu 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015) and [Jos
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#011). The instrumental view of ב ("by
means of the Spirit:" Koehler) is thus proved to be inadmissible. "Take
heed to your spirit," i.e., beware of losing your spirit. We need not
take rūăch in a different sense here from that in which it is used in
the clause immediately preceding; for with the loss of the spiritual and
moral vis vitae, which has been received from God, the life itself
perishes. What it is that they are to beware of is stated in the last
clause, which is attached by the simple copula (Vav), and in which the
address passes from the second person into the third, to express what is
affirmed as applying to every man. This interchange of thou (in wife of
thy youth) and he (in יבגּד) in the same clause appears very strange to
our mode of thought and speech; but it is not without analogy in Hebrew
(e.g., in [Isa 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#029); cf. Ewald, 319,
a), so that we have no right to alter יבגּד into תּבגּד, since the
ancient versions and the readings of certain codices do not furnish
sufficient critical authority for such a change. The subject in יבגּד is
naturally thought of as indefinite: any one, men. This warning is
accounted for in [Mal 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#016), first of
all in the statement that God hates putting away. שׁלּח is the inf.
constr. piel and the object to שׂנא: "the sending away (of a wife),
divorce." שׂנא is a participle, the pronominal subject being omitted, as
in maggı̄d in [Zac 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012), because it may
easily be inferred from the following words: אמר יי (saith the Lord of
hosts). The thought is not at variance with [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)., where the putting away of a
wife is allowed; for this was allowed because of the hardness of their
hearts, whereas God desires that a marriage should be kept sacred (cf.
[Mat 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003). and the comm. on [Deu
24:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)). A second reason for
condemning the divorce is given in the words וכסּה חמס על ל, which do
not depend upon כּי שׂנא, but form a sentence co-ordinate to this. We
may either render these words, "he (who puts away his wife) covers his
garment with sin," or "sin covers his garment." The meaning is the same
in either case, namely, that wickedness will adhere irremoveably to such
a man. The figurative expression may be explained from the idea that the
dress reflects the inward part of a man, and therefore a soiled garment
is a symbol of uncleanness of heart (cf. [Zac
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#004); [Isa
64:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#005); [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004); [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014)). With a repetition of the
warning to beware of this faithlessness, the subject is brought to a
close.

[Malachi 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mal 2:17</span></span>

"Ye weary Jehovah with your words, and say, Wherewith do we weary? In
that ye say, Every evil-doer is good in the eyes of Jehovah, and He
takes pleasure in them, or where is the God of judgment?" The persons
who are introduced as speaking here are neither the pious Israelites,
who were not only pressed down by the weight of their heavy afflictions,
but indignant at the prosperity of their godless countrymen, and were
thus impelled to give utterance to despairing complaints, and doubts as
to the justice of God (Theodoret); nor a middle class between the truly
pious and perfectly godless, consisting of those who were led by a
certain instinctive need to adopt the faith inherited from the fathers,
and sought to fulfil the commandments of the moral law of God, but the
foundations of whose faith and piety were not deep enough for them
humbly to submit themselves to the marvellous ways of God, so that
whenever the dealings of God did not correspond to their expectations,
they lost their faith in Him and turned their backs upon Him (Koehler).
The whole of the contents of this section are opposed to the first
assumption. Those who murmured against God were, according to [Mal
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#007)., such as had departed like the
fathers from the law of God and defrauded God in the tithes and
heave-offerings, and with whom those who feared God are contrasted in
[Mal 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#016). Moreover, the reproach
brought against them in [Mal 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017), "Ye
weary Jehovah with your words," and in [Mal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#013), "Your words put constraint upon
me," show that they do not belong to the righteous, who, while bending
under the burden of temptation, appear to have raised similar
complaints; as we read for example in Psalm 37; 49, 73. The second view
is precluded by the absence, not only of every trace of the nation being
divided into three classes, but also of every indication that those who
murmured thus had endeavoured to fulfil the commandments of the moral
law of God. The answer of the Lord to this murmuring is addressed to the
whole nation as one which had departed from His commandments, and
defrauded God with the tithes and sacrifices ([Mal
3:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#007)). The judgment which they wanted
to see would fall, according to [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005), upon the sorcerers, adulterers,
and other gross sinners; and in [Mal
3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016) the only persons distinguished
from these are the truly righteous who remember the name of the Lord. It
clearly follows from this, that the feelings expressed in [Mal
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017) and [Mal
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#013) were not cherished by the whole
nation without exception, but only by the great mass of the people, in
contrast with whom the small handful of godly men formed a vanishing
minority, which is passed over in the attack made upon the spirit
prevailing in the nation. This disposition vents itself in the words:
Every one who does evil is good in the eyes of God, and Jehovah takes
pleasure in the wicked. By עשׂה רע the murmurers mean, not notorious
sinners in their midst, but the heathen who enjoyed undisturbed
prosperity. To give a reason for this fancy, they inquire, Where is the
God of judgment? או, "or," i.e., if this be not the case, as in [Job
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#003); [Job
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#011), why does not God punish the
ungodly heathen? why does He not interpose as judge, if He has no
pleasure in the wicked? Such speeches as these the prophet calls הוגע, a
wearying of God (cf. [Isa 43:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#023)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 3](mal003)

</div>
