<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic000)  [Next](mic002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

I. Israel's Banishment into Exile, and Restoration - Micah 1 and [Mic
2:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001)

The prophet's first address is throughout of a threatening and punitive
character; it is not till quite the close, that the sun of divine grace
breaks brightly shining through the thunder clouds of judgment. The
announcement of the judgment upon Samaria as well as upon the kingdom of
Judah and Jerusalem forms the first part ([Mic
1:2-16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002)); the reproof of the sins,
especially of the unrighteousness of the great and mighty of the nation,
the second part ([Mic 2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001)); and a
brief but very comprehensive announcement of the salvation that will
dawn upon the remnant of all Israel after the judgment, the conclusion
of the address ([Mic 2:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#012)).

The Judgment upon Samaria and Judah - Micah 1

Micah, commencing with the appeal to all nations to observe the coming
of the Lord for judgment upon the earth ([Mic
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002)), announces to the people of
Israel, on account of its sins and its apostasy from the Lord, the
destruction of Samaria ([Mic 1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005))
and the spreading of the judgment over Judah; and shows how, passing
from place to place, and proceeding to Jerusalem, and even farther, it
will throw the kingdom into deep lamentation on account of the carrying
away of its inhabitants.

[Micah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 1:1</span></span>

The heading in [Mic 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001) has been
explained in the introduction. [Mic
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002) form the introduction to the
prophet's address. [Mic 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002). "Hear,
all ye nations: observe, O earth, and that which fills it: and let the
Lord Jehovah be a witness against you, the Lord out of His holy palace.
[Mic 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003). For, behold, Jehovah cometh
forth from His place, and cometh down, and marcheth over the high places
of the earth. [Mic 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004). And the
mountains will melt under Him, and the valleys split, like wax before
the fire, like water poured out upon a slope." The introductory words,
"Hear, ye nations all," are taken by Micah from his earlier namesake the
son of Imlah ([Kg1 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028)). As the
latter, in his attack upon the false prophets, called all nations as
witnesses to confirm the truth of his prophecy, so does Micah the
Morashite commence his prophetic testimony with the same appeal, so as
to announce his labours at the very outset as a continuation of the
activity of his predecessor who had been so zealous for the Lord. As the
son of Imlah had to contend against the false prophets as seducers of
the nation, so has also the Morashtite (compare [Mic
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#006), [Mic
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011); [Mic
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005), [Mic
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#011)); and as the former had to
announce to both kingdoms the judgment that would come upon them on
account of their sins, so has also the latter; and he does it by
frequently referring to the prophecy of the elder Micah, not only by
designating the false prophets as those who walk after the rūăch and
lie, sheqer ([Mic 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#011)), which recals
to mind the rūăch sheqer of the prophets of Ahab ([Kg1
22:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#022)), but also in his use of the
figures of the horn of iron in [Mic
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013) (compare the horns of iron of the
false prophet Zedekiah in [Kg1 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011)),
and of the smiting upon the cheek in [Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001) (compare [Kg1
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#014)). ‛Ammı̄m kullâm does not mean
all the tribes of Israel; still less does it mean warlike nations.
‛Ammı̄m never has the second meaning, and the first it has only in the
primitive language of the Pentateuch. But here both these meanings are
precluded by the parallel ארץ וּמלאהּ; for this expression invariably
signifies the whole earth, with that which fills it, except in such a
case as [Jer 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016), where 'erets is
restricted to the land of Israel by the preceding hâ'ârets, or [Eze
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#019), where it is so restricted by
the suffix 'artsâh. The appeal to the earth and its fulness is similar
to the appeals to the heaven and the earth in [Isa
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002) and [Deu
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#001). All nations, yea the whole
earth, and all creatures upon it, are to hear, because the judgment
which the prophet has to announce to Israel affects the whole earth
([Mic 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003), [Mic
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004)), the judgment upon Israel being
connected with the judgment upon all nations, or forming a portion of
that judgment. In the second clause of the verse, "the Lord Jehovah be
witness against you," it is doubtful who is addressed in the expression
"against you." The words cannot well be addressed to all nations and to
the earth, because the Lord only rises up as a witness against the man
who has despised His word and transgressed His commandments. For being a
witness is not equivalent to witnessing or giving testimony by words, -
say, for example, by the admonitory and corrective address of the
prophet which follows, as C. B. Michaelis supposes, - but refers to the
practical testimony given by the Lord in the judgment ([Mic
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003) ff), as in [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005) and [Jer
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#005). Now, although the Lord is
described as the Judge of the world in [Mic
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003) and [Mic
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004), yet, according to [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005)., He only comes to execute
judgment upon Israel. Consequently we must refer the words "to you" to
Israel, or rather to the capitals Samaria and Jerusalem mentioned in
[Mic 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001), just as in [Nah
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008) the suffix simply refers to the
Nineveh mentioned in the heading, to which there has been no further
allusion in [Nah 1:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#002). This view is
also favoured by the fact that Micah summons all nations to hear his
word, in the same sense as his earlier namesake in [Kg1
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028). What the prophet announces in
word, the Lord will confirm by deed, - namely, by executing the
predicted judgment, - and indeed "the Lord out of His holy temple,"
i.e., the heaven where He is enthroned ([Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004)); for ([Kg1
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#003)) the Lord will rise up from
thence, and striding over the high places of the earth, i.e., as
unbounded Ruler of the world (cf. [Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013) and [Deu
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#013)), will come down in fire, so
that the mountains melt before Him, that is to say, as Judge of the
world. The description of this theophany is founded upon the idea of a
terrible storm and earthquake, as in [Psa
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#008). The mountains melt ([Jdg
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004) and [Psa
68:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#009)) with the streams of water, which
discharge themselves from heaven ([Jdg
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004)), and the valleys split with the
deep channels cut out by the torrents of water. The similes, "like wax,"
etc. (as in [Psa 68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003)), and "like
water," etc., are intended to express the complete dissolution of
mountains and valleys. The actual facts answering to this description
are the destructive influences exerted upon nature by great national
judgments.

[Micah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 1:5</span></span>

This judicial interposition on the part of God is occasioned by the sin
of Israel. [Mic 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005). "For the apostasy
of Jacob (is) all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel. Who is
Jacob's apostasy? is it not Samaria? And who Judah's high places? is it
not Jerusalem? [Mic 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006). Therefore I
make Samaria into a stone-heap of the field, into plantations of vines;
and I pour her stones into the valley, and I will lay bare her
foundations. [Mic 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#007). And all her
stone images will be beaten to pieces, and all her lovers' gifts be
burned with fire, and all her idols will I make into a waste: for she
has gathered them of prostitute's hire, and to prostitute's hire shall
they return." "All this" refers to the coming of Jehovah to judgment
announced in [Mic 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003), [Mic
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004). This takes place on account of
the apostasy and the sins of Israel. ב (for) used to denote reward or
wages, as in [Sa2 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#027) compared with
[Sa2 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#030). Jacob and Israel in [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005) are synonymous, signifying the
whole of the covenant nation, as we may see from the fact that in [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005) Jacob and not Israel is the
epithet applied to the ten tribes in distinction from Judah. מי, who? -
referring to the author. The apostasy of Israel originates with Samaria;
the worship on the high places with Jerusalem. The capitals of the two
kingdoms are the authors of the apostasy, as the centres and sources of
the corruption which has spread from them over the kingdoms. The
allusion to the bâmōth of the illegal worship of the high places, which
even the most godly kings were unable to abolish (see at [Kg1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#014)), shows, moreover, that פּשׁע
denotes that religious apostasy from Jehovah which was formally
sanctioned in the kingdom of the ten tribes by the introduction of the
calf-worship. But because this apostasy commenced in the kingdom of the
ten tribes, the punishment would fall upon this kingdom first, and
Samaria would be utterly destroyed. Stone-heaps of the field and
vineyard plantations harmonize badly, in Hitzig's view: he therefore
proposes to alter the text. But there is no necessity for this. The
point of comparison is simply that Samaria will be so destroyed, that
not a single trace of a city will be left, and the site thereof will
become like a ploughed field or plain. השּׂדה is added to עי, a heap of
ruins or stones, to strengthen it. Samaria shall become like a heap, not
of ruins of building stones, but of stones collected from the field.
למטּעי כרם, i.e., into arable land upon which you can plant vineyards.
The figure answers to the situation of Samaria upon a hill in a very
fruitful region, which was well adapted for planting vineyards (see at
[Amo 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#009)). The situation of the city
helps to explain the casting of its stones into the valley. Laying bare
the foundations denotes destruction to the very foundation (cf. [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007)). On the destruction of the city
all its idols will be annihilated. Pesı̄lı̄m, idols, as in [Isa
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010); not wooden idols, however, to
which the expression yukkattū, smitten to pieces, would not apply, but
stone idols, from pâsal ([Exo 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001)).
By the lovers' gifts ('ethnân, see at [Hos
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001)) we are to understand, not "the
riches of the city or their possessions, inasmuch as the idolaters
regarded their wealth and prosperity as a reward from their gods,
according to [Hos 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007), [Hos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014)" (Rashi, Hitzig, and others), but
the temple gifts, "gifts suspended in the temples and sacred places in
honour of the gods" (Rosenmller), by which the temple worship with its
apparatus were maintained; so that by 'ethnân we may understand the
entire apparatus of religious worship. For the parallelism of the
clauses requires that the word should be restricted to this. עצבּים are
also idolatrous images. "To make them into a waste," i.e., not only to
divest them of their ornament, but so utterly to destroy them that the
place where they once stood becomes waste. The next clause, containing
the reason, must not be restricted to the ‛ătsabbı̄m, as Hitzig supposes,
but refers to the two clauses of the first hemistich, so that pesı̄lı̄m
and ‛ătsabbı̄m are to be supplied as objects to qibbâtsâh (she gathered),
and to be regarded as the subject to yâshūbhū (shall return). Samaria
gathered together the entire apparatus of her idolatrous worship from
prostitute's gifts (the wages of prostitution), namely, through gifts
presented by the idolaters. The acquisition of all this is described as
the gain of prostitute's wages, according to the scriptural view that
idolatry was spiritual whoredom. There is no ground for thinking of
literal wages of prostitution, or money which flowed into the temples
from the voluptuous worship of Aphrodite, because Micah had in his mind
not literal (heathenish) idolatry, but simply the transformation of the
Jehovah-worship into idolatry by the worship of Jehovah under the
symbols of the golden calves. These things return back to the wagers of
prostitution, i.e., they become this once more (cf. [Gen
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019)) by being carried away by the
enemies, who conquer the city and destroy it, and being applied to their
idolatrous worship. On the capture of cities, the idols and temple
treasures were carried away (cf. [Isa
46:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001); [Dan
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#003)).

[Micah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 1:8</span></span>

The judgment will not stop at Samaria, however, but spread over Judah.
The prophet depicts this by saying that he will go about mourning as a
prisoner, to set forth the misery that will come upon Judah ([Mic
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008), [Mic
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009)); and then, to confirm this, he
announces to a series of cities the fate awaiting them, or rather
awaiting the kingdom, by a continued play upon words founded upon their
names ([Mic 1:10-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010)); and finally he
summons Zion to deep mourning ([Mic
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016)). [Mic
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008). "Therefore will I lament and
howl, I will go spoiled and naked: I will keep lamentation like the
jackals, and mourning like the ostriches. [Mic
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009). For her stripes are malignant;
for it comes to Judah, reaches to the gate of my people, to Jerusalem."
על־זאת points back to what precedes, and is then explained in [Mic
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009). The prophet will lament over the
destruction of Samaria, because the judgment which has befallen this
city will come upon Judah also. Micah does not speak in his own name
here as a patriot (Hitzig), but in the name of his nation, with which he
identifies himself as being a member thereof. This is indisputably
evident from the expression אילכה שׁילל וערום, which describes the
costume of a prisoner, not that of a mourner. The form אילכה with י
appears to have been simply suggested by אילילה. שׁילל is formed like
הידד in [Isa 16:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009), and other
similar words (see Olshausen, Gramm. p. 342). The Masoretes have
substituted שׁלל, after [Job 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#017),
but without the slightest reason. It does not mean "barefooted,"
ἀνυπόδετος (lxx), for which there was already יחף in the language ([Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030); [Isa
20:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002); [Jer
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025)), but plundered, spoiled. ערום,
naked, i.e., without upper garment (see my comm. on [Sa1
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#024)), not merely vestitu solido et
decente privatus. Mourners do indeed go barefooted (yâchēph, see [Sa2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030)), and in deep mourning in a
hairy garment (saq, [Sa2 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#031); [Gen
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#034), etc.), but not plundered and
naked. The assertion, however, that a man was called ̀ârōm when he had
put on a mourning garment (saq, sackcloth) in the place of his upper
garment, derives no support from [Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002), but rather a refutation. For
there the prophet does not go about ‛ârōm veyâchēph, i.e., in the dress
of a prisoner, to symbolize the captivity of Egypt, till after he has
loosened the hairy garment (saq) from his loins, i.e., taken it off. And
here also the plundering of the prophet and his walking naked are to be
understood in the same way. Micah's intention is not only to exhibit
publicly his mourning fore the approaching calamity of Judah, but also
to set forth in a symbolical form the fate that awaits the Judaeans. And
he can only do this by including himself in the nation, and exhibiting
the fate of the nation in his own person. Wailing like jackals and
ostriches is a loud, strong, mournful cry, those animals being
distinguished by a mournful wail; see the comm. on [Job
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029), which passage may possibly have
floated before the prophet's mind. Thus shall Judah wail, because the
stroke which falls upon Samaria is a malignant, i.e., incurable (the
suffix attached to מכּותיה refers to Shōmerōn, Samaria, in [Mic
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006) and [Mic
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#007). For the singular of the predicate
before a subject in the plural, see Ewald, 295, a, and 317, a). It
reaches to Judah, yea, to Jerusalem. Jerusalem, as the capital, is
called the "gate of my people," because in it par excellence the people
went out and in. That עד is not exclusive here, but inclusive, embracing
the terminus ad quem, is evident from the parallel "even to Judah;" for
if it only reached to the border of Judah, it would not have been able
to come to Jerusalem; and still more clearly so from the description in
[Mic 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010). The fact that Jerusalem is
not mentioned till after Judah is to be interpreted rhetorically, and
not geographically. Even the capital, where the temple of Jehovah stood,
would not be spared.

[Micah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 1:11</span></span>

The penetration of the judgment into Judah is now clearly depicted by an
individualizing enumeration of a number of cities which will be smitten
by it. [Mic 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010). "Go not to Gath to
declare it; weeping, weep not. At Beth-Leafra (dust-home) I have strewed
dust upon myself. [Mic 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011). Pass thou
away, O inhabitress of Shafir (beautiful city), stripped in shame. The
inhabitress of Zaanan (departure) has not departed; the lamentation of
Beth-Hazel (near-house) takes from you the standing near it. [Mic
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012). For the inhabitress of Maroth
(bitterness) writhes for good; for evil has come down from Jehovah to
the gate of Jerusalem." The description commences with words borrowed
from David's elegy on the death of Saul and Jonathan ([Sa2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#020)), "Publish it not in Gath," in
which there is a play upon the words in begath and taggı̄dū. The
Philistines are not to hear of the distress of Judah, lest they should
rejoice over it. There is also a play upon words in בּכו אל־תּבכּוּ. The
sentence belongs to what precedes, and supplies the fuller definition,
that they are not to proclaim the calamity in Gath with weeping, i.e.,
not to weep over it there.

(Note: On the ground of the Septuagint rendering, καὶ οἱ Ἐνακεὶμ μὴ
ἀνοικοδομεῖτε, most of the modern expositors follow Reland (Palaest.
ill. p. 534ff.) in the opinion that בּכו is the name of a city, a
contraction of בּעכּו, "and weep not at Acco." There is no force in the
objection brought against this by Caspari (Mich. p. 110), namely, that
in that case the inhabitants of both kingdoms must have stood out before
the prophet's mind in hemistich a, which, though not rendered actually
impossible by [Mic 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009), and the
expression על־זאת in [Mic 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008), is
hardly reconcilable with the fact that from [Mic
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011) onwards Judah only stands out
before his mind, and that in [Mic
1:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008) the distress of his people, in
the stricter sense (i.e., of Judah), is obviously the pre-eminent object
of his mourning. For Acco would not be taken into consideration as a
city of the kingdom of Israel, but as a city inhabited by heathen,
since, according to [Jdg 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#031), the
Canaanites were not driven out of Acco, and it cannot be shown from any
passage of the Old Testament that this city ever came into the actual
possession of the Israelites. It is evidently a more important objection
to the supposed contraction, that not a single analogous case can be
pointed out. The forms נשׁקה for נשׁקעה ([Amo
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008)) and בּלה for בּעלה ([Jos
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#003) and [Jos
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#029)) are of a different kind; and
the blending of the preposition ב with the noun עכּו, by dropping the ע,
so as to form one word, is altogether unparalleled. The Septuagint
translation furnishes no sufficient authority for such an assumption.
All that we can infer from the fact that Eusebius has adopted the
reading Ἐναχείμ in his Onom. (ed. Lars. p. 188), observing at the same
time that this name occurs in Micah, whilst Aq. and Symm. have ἐν
κλαυθμῶ (in fletu) instead, is that these Greek fathers regarded the
Ἐναχείμ of the lxx as the name of a place; but this does not in the
smallest degree prove the correctness of the lxx rendering. Nor does the
position of בּכו before אל furnish any tenable ground for maintaining
that this word cannot be the inf. abs. of בּכה, but must contain the
name of a place. The assertion of Hitzig, that "if the word were
regarded as an inf. abs., neither the inf. itself nor אל for לא would be
admissible in a negative sentence ([Jer
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#010))," has no grammatical
foundation. It is by no means a necessary consequence, that because אל
cannot be connected with the inf. abs. (Ewald, 350, a), therefore the
inf. abs. could not be written before a finite verb with אל for the sake
of emphasis.)

After this reminiscence of the mourning of David for Saul, which
expresses the greatness of the grief, and is all the more significant,
because in the approaching catastrophe Judah is also to lose its king
(cf. [Mic 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009)), so that David is to
experience the fate of Saul (Hengstenberg), Micah mentions places in
which Judah will mourn, or, at any rate, experience something very
painful. From [Mic 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010) to [Mic
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015) he mentions ten places, whose
names, with a very slight alteration, were adapted for jeux de mots,
with which to depict what would happen to them or take place within
them. The number ten (the stamp of completeness, pointing to the fact
that the judgment would be a complete one, spreading over the whole
kingdom) is divided into twice five by the statement, which is repeated
in [Mic 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012), that the calamity would
come to the fate of Jerusalem; five places being mentioned before
Jerusalem ([Mic 1:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010)), and five
after ([Mic 1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013)). This division
makes Hengstenberg's conjecture a very natural one, viz., that the five
places mentioned before Jerusalem are to be sought for to the north of
Jerusalem, and the others to the south or south-west, and that in this
way Micah indicates that the judgment will proceed from the north to the
south. On the other hand, Caspari's opinion, that the prophet simply
enumerates certain places in the neighbourhood of Moresheth, his own
home, rests upon no firm foundation.

בּית לעפרה is probably the Ophrah of Benjamin (עפרה, [Jos
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#023)), which was situated, according
to Eusebius, not far from Bethel (see comm. on Josh. l.c.). It is
pointed with pathach here for the sake of the paronomasia with עפר. The
chethib התפּלּשׁתּי is the correct reading, the keri התפּלּשׁי being
merely an emendation springing out of a misunderstanding of the true
meaning. התפּלּשׁ does not mean to revolve, but to bestrew one's self.
Bestrewing with dust or ashes was a sign of deep mourning ([Jer
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#026); [Sa2
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#019)). The prophet speaks in the name
of the people of what the people will do. The inhabitants of Shafir are
to go stripped into captivity. עבר, to pass by, here in the sense of
moving forwards. The plural לכם is to be accounted for from the fact
that yōshebheth is the population. Shâphı̄r, i.e., beautiful city, is not
the same as the Shâmı̄r in [Jos 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048),
for this was situated in the south-west of the mountains of Judah; nor
the same as the Shâmı̄r in the mountains of Ephraim ([Jdg
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#001)), which did not belong to the
kingdom of Judah; but is a place to the north of Jerusalem, of which
nothing further is known. The statement in the Onomast. s.v. Σαφείρ ἐν
γῆ ὀρεινῆ between Eleutheropolis and Askalon - is probably intended to
apply to the Shâmı̄r of Joshua; but this is evidently erroneous, as the
country between Eleutheropolis and Askalon did not belong to the
mountains of Judah, but to the Shephelah. עריה־בשׁת, a combination like
ענוה־צדק in [Psa 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005), equivalent to
stripping which is shame, shame-nakedness = ignominious stripping. עריה
is an accusative defining the manner in which they would go out. The
next two clauses are difficult to explain. צאנן, a play upon words with
יצאה, is traceable to this verb, so far as its meaning is concerned. The
primary meaning of the name is uncertain; the more modern commentators
combine it with צאן, in the sense of rich in flocks. The situation of
Zaanan is quite unknown. The supposed identity with Zenân see at [Jos
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#037)) must be given up, as Zenân was
in the plain, and Zaanan was most probably to the north of Jerusalem.
The meaning of the clause can hardly be any other than this, that the
population of Zaanan had not gone out of their city to this war from
fear of the enemy, but, on the contrary, had fallen back behind their
walls (Ros., Casp., Hitzig). בּית האצל is most likely the same as אצל in
[Zac 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005), a place in the
neighbourhood of Jerusalem, to the east of the Mount of Olives, as Beth
is frequently omitted in the names of places (see Ges. Thes. p. 193).
Etsel signifies side, and as an adverb or preposition, "by the side of."
This meaning comes into consideration there. The thought of the words
mispad bēth, etc., might be: "The lamentation of Beth-Haezel will take
away its standing (the standing by the side of it, 'etslō) from you
(Judaeans), i.e., will not allow you to tarry there as fugitives (cf.
[Jer 48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045)). The distress into which
the enemy staying there has plunged Beth-Haezel, will make it impossible
for you to stop there" (Hitzig, Caspari). But the next clause, which is
connected by כּי, does not suit this explanation ([Mic
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012)). The only way in which this
clause can be made to follow suitably as an explanation is by taking the
words thus: "The lamentation of Beth-Haezel will take its standing (the
stopping of the calamity or judgment) from you, i.e., stop near it, as
we should expect from its name; for ([Mic
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012)) Maroth, which stands further
off, will feel pain," etc. With this view, which Caspari also suggests,
Hengstenberg (on [Zac 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005)) agrees in
the main, except that he refers the suffix in עמדּתו to מספּד, and
renders the words thus: "The lamentation of Beth-Haezel will take its
stopping away from you, i.e., the calamity will not stop at Beth-Haezel
(at the near house), i.e., stop near it, as we should expect from its
name; for ([Mic 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012)) Maroth, which
stands further off, will feel pain," etc. With this view, which Caspari
also suggests, Hengstenberg (on [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005)) agrees in the main, except that
he refers the suffix in עמדתו to מספּד, and renders the words thus: "The
lamentation of Beth-Haezel will take its stopping away from you, i.e.,
will not allow you the stopping of the lamentation." Grammatically
considered, this connection is the more natural one; but there is this
objection, that it cannot be shown that עמד is used in the sense of the
stopping or ceasing of a lamentation, whereas the supposition that the
suffix refers to the calamity simply by constructio ad sensum has all
the less difficulty, inasmuch as the calamity has already been hinted at
in the verb נגע in [Mic 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009), and in
[Mic 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010) also it forms the object to
be supplied in thought. Maroth (lit., something bitter, bitternesses) is
quite unknown; it is simply evident, from the explanatory clause כּי ירד
וגו, that it was situated in the immediate neighbourhood of Jerusalem.
The inhabitants of Maroth writhe (châlâh, from chūl, to writhe with
pain, like a woman in child-birth), because they are also smitten with
the calamity, when it comes down to the gate of Jerusalem. לטוב, "on
account of the good," which they have lost, or are about to lose.

[Micah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 1:13</span></span>

And the judgment will not even stop at Jerusalem, but will spread still
further over the land. This spreading is depicted in [Mic
1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013) in the same manner as before.
[Mic 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013). "Harness the horse to the
chariot, O inhabitress of Lachish! It was the beginning of sin to the
daughter Zion, that the iniquities of Israel were found in her. [Mic
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014). Therefore wilt thou give
dismissal-presents to Moresheth-gath (i.e., the betrothed of Gath); the
houses of Achzib (lying fountain) become a lying brook for Israel's
kings. [Mic 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015). I will still bring
thee the heir, O inhabitress of Mareshah (hereditary city); the nobility
of Israel will come to Adullam. [Mic
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016). Make thyself bald, and shave
thyself upon the sons of thy delights: spread out thy baldness like the
eagle; for they have wandered away from thee." The inhabitants of
Lachish, a fortified city in the Shephelah, to the west of
Eleutheropolis, preserved in the ruins of Um Lakis (see at [Jos
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#003)), are to harness the horses to
the chariot (rekhesh, a runner; see at [Kg1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#008) : the word is used as ringing with
lâkhı̄sh), namely, to flee as rapidly as possible before the advancing
foe. רתם, ἁπ. λεγ. "to bind ... the horse to the chariot," answering to
the Latin currum jungere equis. Upon this city will the judgment fall
with especial severity, because it has grievously sinned. It was the
beginning of sin to the daughter of Zion, i.e., to the population of
Jerusalem; it was the first to grant admission to the iniquities of
Israel, i.e., to the idolatry of the image-worship of the ten tribes
(for פּשׁעי ישׂראל, see [Mic 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005) and
[Amo 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#014)), which penetrated even to
the capital. Nothing more is known of this, as the historical books
contain no account of it. For this reason, namely, because the sin of
Israel found admission into Jerusalem, she (the daughter Zion) will be
obliged to renounce Moresheth-gath. This is the thought of [Mic
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014), the drapery of which rests upon
the resemblance in sound between Moresheth and me'orâsâh, the betrothed
([Deu 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023)). Shillūchı̄m, dismissal,
denotes anything belonging to a man, which he dismisses or gives up for
a time, or for ever. It is applied in [Exo
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#002) to the sending away of wife and
children to the father-in-law for a time; and in [Kg1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#016) to a dowry, or the present which
a father gives to his daughter when she is married and leaves his house.
The meaning "divorce," i.e., sēpher kerı̄thuth ([Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001), [Deu
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#003)), has been arbitrarily forced
upon the word. The meaning is not to be determined from shillēăch in
[Jer 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008), as Hitzig supposes, but from
[Kg1 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#016), where the same expression
occurs, except that it is construed with ל, which makes no material
difference. For נתן אל signifies to give to a person, either to lay upon
him or to hand to him; נתן ל, to give to him. The object given by Zion
to Moresheth as a parting present is not mentioned, but it is really the
city itself; for the meaning is simply this: Zion will be obliged to
relinquish all further claim to Moresheth, to give it up to the enemy.
Mōresheth is not an appellative, as the old translators suppose, but the
proper name of Micah's home; and Gath is a more precise definition of
its situation - "by Gath," viz., the well-known Philistian capital,
analogous to Bethlehem-Judah in [Jdg
17:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg017.htm#007); [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001), or Abel-maim (Abel by the water)
in [Ch2 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#004). According to Jerome
(comm. in Mich. Prol.), Morasthi, qui usque hodie juxta Eleutheropolin,
urbem Palaestinae, haud grandis est viculus (cf. Robinson, Pal. ii. p.
423). The context does not admit of our taking the word in an
appellative sense, "possession of Gath," since the prophet does not mean
to say that Judah will have to give up to the enemy a place belonging to
Gath, but rather that it will have to give up the cities of its own
possession. For, as Maurer correctly observes, "when the enemy is at the
gate, men think of defending the kingdom, not of enlarging it." But if
the addition of the term Gath is not merely intended to define the
situation of Moresheth with greater minuteness, or to distinguish it
from other places of the same name, and if the play upon words in
Moresheth was intended to point to a closer relation to Gath, the
thought expressed could only be, that the place situated in the
neighbourhood of Gath had frequently been taken by the Philistines, or
claimed as their property, and not that they were in actual possession
of Gath at this time.

The play upon words in the second clause of the verse also points to the
loss of places in Judaea: "the houses of Achzib will become Achzab to
the kings of Israel." אכזב, a lie, for נחל אכזב, is a stream which dries
up in the hot season, and deceives the expectation of the traveller that
he shall find water ([Jer 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018); cf.
[Job 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#015).). Achzib, a city in the
plain of Judah, whose name has been preserved in the ruins of Kussabeh,
to the south-west of Beit-Jibrin (see at [Jos
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044)). The houses of Achzib are
mentioned, because they are, properly speaking, to be compared to the
contents of the river's bed, whereas the ground on which they stood,
with the wall that surrounded them, answered to the river's bed itself
(Hitzig), so that the words do not denote the loss or destruction of the
houses so much as the loss of the city itself. The "kings of Israel" are
not the kings of Samaria and Judah, for Achzib belonged to the kingdom
of Judah alone, but the kings of Judah who followed one another (cf.
[Jer 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013)); so that the plural is to
be understood as relating to the monarchy of Israel (Judah). Mareshah
will also pass into other hands. This is affirmed in the words, "I will
bring the heir to thee again" (אבי for אביא, as in [Kg1
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029)). The first heir of Mareshah was
the Israelites, who received the city, which had been previously
occupied by the Canaanites, for their possession on the conquest of the
land. The second heir will be the enemy, into whose possession the land
is now to pass. Mareshah, also in the lowland of Judah, has been
preserved, so far as the name is concerned, in the ruins of Marash (see
at [Jos 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044), and Tobler, Dritte
Wanderung, pp. 129, 142-3). To the north of this was Adullam (see at
[Jos 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#015)), which has not yet been
discovered, but which Tobler (p. 151) erroneously seeks for in Bêt Dûla.
Micah mentions it simply on account of the cave there ([Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001)), as a place of refuge, to which
the great and glorious of Israel would flee ("the glory of Israel," as
in [Isa 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#013)). The description is
rounded off in [Mic 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016), by returning
to the thought that Zion would mourn deeply over the carrying away of
the people, with which it had first set out in [Mic
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008). In קרחי וגזּי Zion is addressed
as the mother of the people. קרח, to shave smooth, and גּזז, to cut off
the hair, are synonyms, which are here combined to strengthen the
meaning. The children of thy delights, in whom thou hast thy pleasure,
are the members of the nation. Shaving the head bald, or shaving a bald
place, was a sing of mourning, which had been handed down as a
traditional custom in Israel, in spite of the prohibition in [Deu
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#001) (see at [Lev
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#028)). The bald place is to be made
to spread out like that of a nesher, i.e., not the true eagle, but the
vulture, which was also commonly classed in the eagle family, - either
the bearded vulture, vultur barbatus (see Oedmann, Verm. Samml. i. p.
54ff.), or more probably the carrion vulture, vultur percnopterus L.,
common in Egypt, and also in Palestine, which has the front part of the
head completely bald, and only a few hairs at the back of the head, so
that a bald place may very well be attributed to it (see Hasselquist,
Reise, p. 286ff.). The words cannot possibly be understood as referring
to the yearly moulting of the eagle itself.

If we inquire still further as to the fulfilment of the prophecy
concerning Judah ([Mic 1:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008)), it
cannot be referred, or speaking more correctly, it must not be
restricted, to the Assyrian invasion, as Theod., Cyril, Marck, and
others suppose. For the carrying away of Judah, which is hinted at in
[Mic 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011), and clearly expressed in
[Mic 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016), was not effected by the
Assyrians, but by the Chaldeans; and that Micah himself did not expect
this judgment from the Assyrians, but from Babel, is perfectly obvious
from [Mic 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010), where he mentions
Babel as the place to which Judah was to be carried into exile. At the
same time, we must not exclude the Assyrian oppression altogether; for
Sennacherib had not only already conquered the greater part of Judah,
and penetrated to the very gates of Jerusalem ([Kg2
18:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013), [Kg2
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#019); Isaiah 36:1-38:22), but would
have destroyed the kingdom of Judah, as his predecessor Shalmaneser had
destroyed the kingdom of Israel, if the Lord had not heard the prayer of
His servant Hezekiah, and miraculously destroyed Sennacherib's army
before the walls of Jerusalem. Micah prophesies throughout this chapter,
not of certain distinct judgment, but of judgment in general, without
any special allusions to the way in which it would be realized; so that
the proclamation embraces all the judgments that have fallen upon Judah
from the Assyrian invasion down to the Roman catastrophe.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 2](mic002)

</div>
