<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic006)  [Next](nah000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 7:0</span></span>

The Church's Penitential Prayer, and the Divine Promise - Micah 7

The prophet responds to the threatening of the Lord ([Mic
6:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009)) in the name of the believing
church with a penitential prayer, in which it sorrowfully confesses the
universality of the deep moral corruption, and painfully bemoans the
necessity for the visitation of God ([Mic
7:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)); after which it rises, through
belief in the fidelity of God, to the confidential hope that the Lord
will cause the light of His grace to rise again upon the church, which
is bearing the merited punishment, and will not let its enemies triumph
over it, but will procure it justice, and deeply humble the foe ([Mic
7:7-13](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007)); and to this it appends a
prayer fore the renewal of the former manifestations of grace ([Mic
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014)). The Lord answers this prayer
with the promise that He will renew for His people the wonders of the
olden time ([Mic 7:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015)); whereupon
the prophet closes by praising the mercy and grace of the Lord ([Mic
7:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018)).

[Micah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 7:1</span></span>

That the prophet is speaking in [Mic
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001) ff. not in his own name, but in
the name of the church, which confesses and bemoans its rebellion
against the Lord, is indisputably evident from [Mic
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007) ff., where, as all the expositors
admit, the church speaks of itself in the first person, and that not
"the existing corrupt Israelitish church," as Caspari supposes, but the
penitential, believing church of the future, which discerns in the
judgment the chastising hand of its God, and expresses the hope that the
Lord will conduct its conflict with its foe, etc. The contents of [Mic
7:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001), also, do not point to the
prophet in distinction from the congregation, but may be understood
throughout as the confession of sin on the part of the latter. [Mic
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001). "Woe to me! for I have become
like a gathering of fruit, like a gleaning of the vintage: Not a grape
to eat! an early fig, which my soul desired." אללי, which only occurs
again in [Job 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#015), differs from הוי,
and is "vox dolentis, gementis, et ululantis magis quam minantis"
(March); and כּי is not "that," but "for," giving the reason for אללי.
The meaning of הייתי כאס is not, "it has happened to me as it generally
happens to those who still seek for early figs at the fruit gathering,
or for bunches of grapes at the gleaning of the vintage" (Caspari and
others); for כּאספי קיץ does not mean as at the fruit-gathering, but
like the fruit-gathering. The nation or the church resembles the
fruit-gathering and gleaning of the vineyard, namely, in this fact, that
the fruit-gathering yields not more early figs, and the gleaning of the
vintage yields no more grapes to eat; that is to say, its condition
resembles that of an orchard in the time of the fruit-gathering, when
you may find fruit enough indeed, but not a single early fig, since the
early figs ripen as early as June, whereas the fruit-gathering does not
take place till August (see at [Isa
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#004)). The second simile is a still
simpler one, and is very easily explained. אספי is not a participle, but
a noun - אסף the gathering ([Isa
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#010)); and the plural is probably
used simply because of עוללת, the gleaning, and not with any allusion to
the fact that the gleaning lasts several days, as Hitzig supposes, but
because what is stated applies to all gatherings of fruit. קיץ, fruit;
see at [Amo 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#001). אוּתה is to be taken
in a relative sense, and the force of אין still extends to בּכּוּרה
(compare [Gen 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#033)). The figure is
explained in [Mic 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002) ff.

[Micah 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 7:2</span></span>

"The godly man has disappeared from the earth, and there is no more a
righteous man among men. All lie in wait for blood, they hunt every man
his brother with the net. [Mic 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#003).
Their hands are after evil, to make it good. The prince asks, and the
judge is for reward; and the great man, he speaks the evil of his soul:
and they twist it together." The grape and the early fig signify the
good and the righteous man. חסיד is not the God-fearing man, but,
according to the context, the man who cherishes love and fidelity. אבד,
not "to have perished," but to be lost, to have disappeared. מן הארץ,
not "out of the land," but, as the parallel בּאדם shows, from the earth,
out of the world. For the fact itself, compare [Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002) and [Isa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001). They all lie in wait for blood,
i.e., not that they all go about committing murder, but simply that they
set their minds upon quarrels, cheating, and treachery, that they may
rob their neighbour of his means of existence, so that he must perish
(cf. [Mic 3:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#002); [Mic
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#001)); at the same time, even
murderous thoughts are not excluded. The same thing is implied in the
hunting with the net. אח, the brother, is the fellow-countryman (for
this figure, compare [Psa 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#009); [Psa
35:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#007), etc.). In [Mic
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#003) the words from על הרע to להיטיב
are not to be joined to what follows so as to form one sentence. Such a
combination is not only opposed to the accents, but is at variance with
the structure of the whole verse, which consists of several short
clauses, and it does not even yield a natural thought; consequently
Ewald proposes to alter the text (שׁואל). הרע is hardly the inf. hiph.
"to do evil," but most likely a noun with the article, "the evil;" and
the thought is therefore either "both hands are (sc., busy) with evil,"
or "both hands are stretched out to evil," to make it good, i.e., to
carry out the evil well (היטיב as in [Jer
2:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#033)), or to give evil such a form
that it shall appear to be good, or right. This thought is then made
special: the prince, the judge, and the great man, i.e., the rich man
and mighty man ([Lev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015); [Sa1
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002)), weave a thing to make evil
good. עבּת, to weave, to twist together, after עבות, twist or string.
The subject to ויעבּתוּה is to be found in the three classes already
named, and not merely in the judge and the great man. There is just as
little reason for this limitation as for the assumption that the great
man and the prince are one person. The way in which the three twist the
thing or the evil plan together is indicated in the statements of the
three previous clauses. The prince asks, sc. for the condemnation of a
righteous or innocent man; and the judge grants this for recompense
against compensation; and the rich man co-operates by speaking havvath
napshō. Havvâh in most passages is universally allowed to signify hurt,
mischief, destruction; and the only question is, whether this meaning is
to be traced to הוה = אוה, to breathe (Hupfeld on [Psa
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010)), or to הוה, to occur, an
occurrence, then specially an evil occurrence (Hengstenberg, Diss. on
the Pentateuch, vol. i. p. 252). Only in [Pro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003) and the passage before us is
havvâh said to signify desire in a bad sense, or evil lust. But, as
Caspari has shown, the meaning is neither necessary nor established in
either of these two passages. In [Pro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003) the meaning aerumna activa
aliisque inferenda is quite sufficient; and C. B. Michaelis has adopted
it for the present passage: "The great man speaks the mischief of his
soul," i.e., the injury or destruction of another, for which he
cherishes a desire. Nephesh, the soul as the seat of desire. הוּא is not
introduced to strengthen the suffix attached to נפשׁו, "of his, yea of
his soul" (Ewald, Hitzig, Umbreit); for not only are the accents against
this, but also the thought, which requires no such strengthening. It is
an emphatic repetition of the subject haggâdōl. The great man weaves
evil with the king and judge, by desiring it, and expressing the desire
in the most open manner, and thereby giving to the thing an appearance
of right.

[Micah 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 7:4</span></span>

And even the best men form no exception to the rule. [Mic
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#004). "Their best man is like a briar;
the upright man more than a hedge: the day of thy spies, thy visitation
cometh, then will their confusion follow. [Mic
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005). Trust not in the neighbour, rely
not upon the intimate one; keep the doors of thy mouth before her that
is thy bosom friend. [Mic 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006). For the
son despiseth the father, the daughter rises up against her mother, the
daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law; a man's enemies are the
people of his own house." טובם, the good man among them, i.e., the best
man, resembles the thorn-bush, which only pricks, hurts, and injures. In
ישׁר the force of the suffix still continues: the most righteous man
among them; and מן before ממּסוּכה is used in a comparative sense: "is
more, i.e., worse, than a thorn-hedge." The corruption of the nation has
reached such a terrible height, that the judgment must burst in upon
them. This thought comes before the prophet's mind, so that he
interrupts the description of the corrupt condition of things by
pointing to the day of judgment. The "day of thy watch-men," i.e., of
thy prophets ([Jer 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#017); [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017); [Eze
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#007)), is explained in the apposition
peqŭddâthekhâ (thy visitation). The perfect בּאה is prophetic of the
future, which is as certain as if it were already there. עתּה, now,
i.e., when this day has come (really therefore = "then"), will their
confusion be, i.e., then will the wildest confusion come upon them, as
the evil, which now envelopes itself in the appearance of good, will
then burst forth without shame and without restraint, and everything
will be turned upside down. In the same sense as this Isaiah also calls
the day of divine judgment a day of confusion ([Isa
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#005)). In the allusion to the day of
judgment the speaker addresses the people, whereas in the description of
the corruption he speaks of them. This distinction thus made between the
person speaking and the people is not at variance with the assumption
that the prophet speaks in the name of the congregation, any more than
the words "thy watchmen, thy visitation," furnish an objection to the
assumption that the prophet was one of the watchmen himself. This
distinction simply proves that the penitential community is not
identical with the mass of the people, but to be distinguished from
them. In [Mic 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005) the description of
the moral corruption is continued, and that in the form of a warning not
to trust one another any more, neither companion (רע) with whom one has
intercourse in life, nor the confidential friend ('allūph), nor the most
intimate friend of all, viz., the wife lying on the husband's bosom.
Even before her the husband was to beware of letting the secrets of his
heart cross his lips, because she would betray them. The reason for this
is assigned in [Mic 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006), in the fact
that even the holiest relations of the moral order of the world, the
deepest ties of blood-relationship, are trodden under foot, and all the
bonds of reverence, love, and chastity are loosened. The son treats his
father as a fool (nibbēl, as in [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)). "The men of his house" (the
subject of the last clause) are servants dwelling in the house, not
relations (cf. [Gen 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#023), [Gen
17:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#027); [Gen
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#014); [Sa2
12:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#017)). This verse is applied by
Christ to the period of the κρίσις which will attend His coming, in His
instruction to the apostles in [Mat
10:35-36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035) (cf. [Luk
12:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#053)). It follows from this, that we
have not to regard [Mic 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#005) and [Mic
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006) as a simple continuation of the
description in [Mic 7:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#002), but that
these verses contain the explanation of עתּה תהיה מבוּכתם, in this
sense, that at the outbreak of the judgment and of the visitation the
faithlessness will reach the height of treachery to the nearest friends,
yea, even of the dissolution of every family tie (cf. [Mat
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#010), [Mat
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)).

[Micah 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 7:7</span></span>

"This confession of sin is followed by a confession of faith on the part
of the humiliated people of God" (Shlier.) [Mic
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#007). "But I, for Jehovah will I look
out; I will wait for the God of my salvation; my God will hear me. [Mic
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#008). Rejoice not over me, O mine
enemy! for am I fallen, I rise again; for do I sit in darkness, Jehovah
is light to me." By ואני what follows is attached adversatively to the
preceding words. Even though all love and faithfulness should have
vanished from among men, and the day of visitation should have come, the
church of the faithful would not be driven from her confidence in the
Lord, but would look to Him and His help, and console itself with the
assurance that its God would hear it, i.e., rescue it from destruction.
As the looking out (tsâphâh) for the Lord, whether He would not come,
i.e., interpose to judge and aid, involves in itself a prayer for help,
though it is not exhausted by it, but also embraces patient waiting, or
the manifestation of faith in the life; so the hearing of God is a
practical hearing, in other words, a coming to help and to save. The God
of my salvation, i.e., from whom all my salvation comes (cf. [Psa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#009); [Isa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#010)). Her enemy, i.e., the heathen
power of the world, represented in Micah's time by Asshur, and
personified in thought as daughter Asshur, is not to rejoice over Zion.
כּי, for, not "if:" the verb nâphaltı̄ is rather to be taken
conditionally, "for have I fallen;" nâphal being used, as in [Amo
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#002), to denote the destruction of the
power and of the kingdom. The church is here supposed to be praying out
of the midst of the period when the judgment has fallen upon it for its
sins, and the power of the world is triumphing over it. The prophet
could let her speak thus, because he had already predicted the
destruction of the kingdom and the carrying away of the people into
exile as a judgment that was inevitable ([Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012); [Mic
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016)). Sitting in darkness, i.e.,
being in distress and poverty (cf. [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001); [Isa
42:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#007); [Psa
107:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010)). In this darkness the Lord is
light to the faithful, i.e., He is their salvation, as He who does
indeed chasten His own people, but who even in wrath does not violate
His grace, or break the promises which He has given to His people.

[Micah 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 7:9</span></span>

"The wrath of Jehovah shall I bear, for I have sinned against Him, till
He shall fight my fight, and secure my right. He will bring me forth to
the light; I shall behold His righteousness. [Mic
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#010). And may my enemy see it, and
shame cover her, who hath said to me, Where is Jehovah thy God? Mine
eyes will see it; now will she be for a treading down, like mire of the
streets." Confidence in the help of the Lord flows from the
consciousness, that the wretchedness and sufferings are a merited
punishment for the sins. This consciousness and feeling generate
patience and hope: patience to bear the wrath of God manifesting itself
in the sufferings; hope that the sufferings, as inflicted by the
righteous God, will cease as soon as the divine justice has been
satisfied. Za‛aph: lit., the foaming up of wrath ([Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030)); hence strong wrath. This the
church will bear, till the Lord conducts its conflict and secures its
rights. ריבי is the judicial conflict between Israel and the heathen
power of the world. Although, for example, God had given up His nation
to the power of its enemies, the nations of the world, on account of its
sins, so that they accomplished the will of God, by destroying the
kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and carrying away the people into exile;
yet they grew proud of their own might in so doing, and did not
recognise themselves as instruments of punishment in the hand of the
Lord, but attributed their victories to the power of their own arm, and
even aimed at the destruction of Israel, with scornful defiance of the
living God (cf. [Isa 10:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005); [Hab
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011)). Thus they violated the rights
of Israel, so that the Lord was obliged to conduct the contest of His
people with the heathen, and secure the rights of Israel by the
overthrow of the heathen power of the world. For ריב ריבי, see [Psa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001); for עשׂה משׁפּט, [Psa
9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004); and for the fact itself, [Isa
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#025); [Isa
51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022). Mishpât is Israel's right, in
opposition to the powers of the world, who would destroy it. The
following word יוציאני is not governed by עד אשׁר, as the absence of the
copula Vav shows. With these words the hope takes the form of the
certain assurance that the Lord will remove the distress, and let Israel
see His righteousness. Tsedâqâh is the righteousness of God revealing
itself in the forgiveness and restoration of Israel to favour; like
tsedâqōth in [Mic 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#005) : in actual
fact, the salvation of Israel about to be secured, regarded as an
emanation of the righteousness of the covenant God; hence parallel to
אור. ראה with ב, to look at, so that one penetrates, as it were, into an
object, seeing with feasting of the eyes (so also in [Mic
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#010)). This exaltation of Israel to
new salvation it is hoped that the enemy will see (ותרא, opt.), and be
covered with shame; for the power of the world is overthrown, in order
that Israel may be redeemed out of its power. This desire is a just one,
because the enemy has despised the Lord God. For the expression, "Where
is Jehovah thy God?" compare [Joe
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017). And Israel will see its
fulfilment (תּראינּה with Nun doubled after a sharpened ; see Ewald,
198, a). ‛Attâh, now (seeing the future in spirit, as having already
come), the enemy will be trodden down like mire of the streets (for this
figure, see [Isa 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006)).

[Micah 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 7:11</span></span>

The confident expectation rises in [Mic
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#011) ff. into an assurance of the
promise; the words of the prophet in the name of the church rising into
an address to Zion, confirm its hope by the promise of the restoration
of Zion, and the entrance of crowds of people into the city of God. [Mic
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#011). "A day to build thy walls
(cometh); in that day will the ordinance be far away. [Mic
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#012). In that day will they come to
thee from Asshur and the cities of Egypt, and from Egypt to the river,
and (to) sea from sea, and (from) mountain to mountain. [Mic
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#013). And the earth will become a
desert because of its inhabitants, for the fruit of their doings." [Mic
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#011) consists of two clauses; for we
may easily supply to yōm "is" or "will be" = come. The daughter Zion is
addressed (cf. [Mic 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008)) not as a
church, but as a city, as the centre and representative of the kingdom
of God. As such, she is compared to a vineyard, as in [Isa
5:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001); [Isa
27:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002); [Psa
80:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009). The word gâdēr, which is
generally used for the hedge or wall around a vineyard, points to this
(see [Isa 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005); [Num
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#024); [Ecc
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008)). יון ההוּא is an adverbial
accusative; in that day will חק be far away. The meaning of this word is
very difficult to find, and can hardly be settled with any certainty.
The explanation of chōq, as signifying the law imposed upon Israel by
the heathen oppressors (Chald., Hengstenberg, etc.), cannot be
sustained, as this meaning cannot be established from [Psa
104:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#020), and is not suggested by the
context. So, again, the explanation, "On that day will the goal set (for
Israel), or the boundary fixed (for it), be a far distant one (i.e.,
then will the boundaries of the land of Israel lie in the far distance,
or be advanced to the remotest distance:" Hitzig, Caspari, and others),
introduces a meaning into the words which they do not possess. Even if
chōq does denote a fixed point or a limit of either space or time, it
never signifies the boundary of a nation; and râchaq, to be far off, is
not equivalent to being advanced to a great distance. Chōq is apparently
used here for the ordinance or limit which God has appointed to separate
Israel from the nations; not a land-boundary, but the law of Israel's
separation from the nations.

This law will be far away, i.e., will be removed or set aside (yirach is
only chosen for the sake of the assonance with chōq), inasmuch as
numerous crowds, as is added in [Mic
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#012) by way of explanation, will then
stream to Zion, or come to the people of God, out of all lands (cf. [Mic
4:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)). For this is what [Mic
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#012) refers to, and not the return to
Zion of the Israelites who have been scattered in the heathen lands.
יבוא (impersonal), one comes, they come: not "return," ישׁוּב, which
must have been the expression used if the return of the Israelites out
of their captivity had been meant. The heathen who cherish a desire for
the God of Zion and His law ([Mic 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002))
will come to Israel; not to Israel as still living in their midst
(Caspari), but to the Israel that has already returned, and whose walls
have been rebuilt ([Mic 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#011)). The
building of the walls of Zion involves the gathering together of the
dispersed nation, or rather presupposes it. Heathen will come "from
Asshur and the cities of Egypt," i.e., from the two mightiest empires in
the time of the prophet. Mâtsōr, the poetical name of Egypt, as in [Isa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#006); [Isa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#025); and "cities of Egypt," because
that land or kingdom was especially rich in cities. The further
definitions individualize the idea of the totality of the lands and
provinces, the correlative members being transposed and incomplete in
the last two sentences, so that the preposition עד must be supplied to
וים, and the preposition מן to ההר. From Egypt to the river (Euphrates)
includes the lands lying between these two terminal points; and in the
expressions, "sea from sea, and mountain to mountain," seas and
mountains are mentioned in the most general manner, as the boundaries of
lands and nations; so that we have not to think of any particular seas
and mountains, say the Western (or Mediterranean) Sea, and the Eastern
(the Dead or the Galilean) Sea, as being the western and eastern
boundaries of Palestine, and of Lebanon and Sinai as the northern and
southern boundaries, but must adhere firmly to the general character of
the expression: "from one sea and one mountain to another sea and
mountain," i.e., from every land situated between seas and mountains,
that is to say, from all the lands and provinces of the earth. The
coming out of all lands is not to be understood as denoting simply
passing visits to Canaan or Zion, but as coming to connect themselves
with the people of God, to be received into fellowship with them. There
is a parallel to this promise in the promise contained in [Isa
19:18-25](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018), that in the Messianic times
Egypt and Asshur will turn to Jehovah. This takes place because the
earth will become a desert, on account of the evil deeds of its
inhabitants. Whilst Zion is rebuilt, and the people of God are
multiplied, by the addition of the godly Gentiles out of all the
countries of the earth, the judgment falls upon the sinful world. This
statement of [Mic 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#013) is simply
attached to what precedes it by והיתה, in order to complete the promise
of the restoration of Zion, by adding the fate which will befal the
earth (i.e., the earth outside Canaan); but it actually contains the
motive for the coming of the crowds to Zion. הארץ cannot be the land of
Israel (Canaan) here, in support of which appeal has been made to [Lev
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033) and [Isa
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#007); for the context neither leads to
any such limitation as that הארץ could be taken in the sense of ארצכן
(in Leviticus and Isaiah), nor allows of our thinking of the devastation
of Canaan. When the day shall have come for the building of the walls of
Zion, the land of Israel will not become a desert then; but, on the
contrary, the devastation will cease. If the devastation of Canaan were
intended here, we should have either to take והיתה as a pluperfect, in
violation of the rules of the language, or arbitrarily to interpolate
"previously," as Hitzig proposes. על ישׁביה is defined more precisely by
מפּרי מעלליהם. The doings are of course evil ones, and the deeds
themselves are the fruit (cf. [Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)).

[Micah 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mic 7:14</span></span>

The promise of salvation impels the congregation to pray that it may be
granted ([Mic 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014)); whereupon the
Lord assures it that His covenant mercies shall be renewed, and promises
the thorough humiliation of the hostile nations of the world ([Mic
7:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015)). [Mic
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014). "Feed thy people with thy staff,
the sheep of thine inheritance, dwelling apart, in the wood, in the
midst of Carmel: let them feed in Bashan and Gilead, as in the days of
the olden time." The question in dispute among commentators, whether
this prayer is addressed to the Lord by the prophet on behalf of the
nation, or whether the prophet is still speaking in the name of the
believing church, is decided in favour of the latter by the answer
addressed to the church in [Mic 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015).
The Lord is addressed as the shepherd of Israel, the title by which
Jacob addressed Him in [Gen 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024) (cf.
[Psa 80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002); [Psa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001) ff.). The prayer is related to
the promise in [Mic 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003) ff., viz.,
that the ruler coming forth out of Bethlehem will feed in the strength
of Jehovah, and involves the prayer for the sending of this ruler. "With
this staff," i.e., the shepherd's staff (cf. [Lev
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#032); [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004)), is added pictorially; and as a
support to the prayer, it designates the people as the sheep of
Jehovah's inheritance. צאן נחלה, instead of עם נחלה, which occurs more
frequently, is occasioned by the figure of the shepherd. As the sheep
need the protection of the shepherd, lest they should perish, so Israel
needs the guidance of its God, that it may not be destroyed by its foes.
The following apposition שׁכני לבדד determines the manner of the feeding
more precisely; so that we may resolve it into the clause, "so that thy
people may dwell apart." The words contain an allusion to [Num
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#009), where Balaam describes Israel as
a people separated from the rest of the nations; and to [Deu
33:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#028), where Moses congratulates it,
because it dwells in safety and alone (bâdâd, separate), under the
protection of its God, in a land full of corn, new wine, etc. The church
asks for the fulfilment of this blessing from Jehovah its shepherd, that
it may dwell separate from the nations of the world, so that they may
not be able to do it any harm; and that "in the wood in the midst of
Carmel," that promontory abounding in wood and pasture land (laetis
pascuis abundat: Jerome on [Amo 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002)).
The wood is thought of here as shutting off the flock from the world
without, withdrawing it from its sight, and affording it security; and
the fact that dangerous wild beasts have their home in the forest ([Jer
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#006); [Psa
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014)) is overlooked here, because
Israel is protected from them by its own shepherd. ירעוּ, which follows,
is not future, but optative, corresponding to the imperative רעה. Gilead
and Bashan are also named as portions of the land that were rich in
pasture (cf. [Num 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001) ff.), namely,
of the land to the east of the Jordan, Carmel belonging to the western
portion of Canaan. These three portions individualize the whole of the
territory which Israel received for its inheritance, and not merely the
territory of the kingdom of the ten tribes. The simple reason why no
districts in the kingdom of Judah are mentioned, is that Judah possessed
no woody districts abounding in grass and pasture resembling those
named. Moreover, the prayer refers to the whole of Israel, or rather to
the remnant of the whole nation that has been rescued from the judgment,
and which will form an undivided flock under the Messiah (cf. [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002); [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013); [Eze
37:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#015) ff.). ימי עולם, "the days of
old," are the times of Moses and Joshua, when the Lord brought Israel
with His mighty arm into the possession of the promised land. The Lord
answers this prayer, by promising, according to His abundant goodness,
more than the church has asked. [Mic
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015). "As in the days of thy going out
of the land of Egypt will I cause it to see wonders. [Mic
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#016). Nations will see it, and be
ashamed of all their strength: they will lay the hand upon the mouth,
their ears will become deaf. [Mic
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#017). They will lick dust like the
snake, like the reptiles of the earth they come trembling out of their
castles: they will go trembling to Jehovah our God, and before thee will
they fear." The wonders (niphlâ'ōth; cf. [Exo
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#020); [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011); [Psa
78:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011)) with which the Lord formerly
smote Egypt, to redeem His people out of the bondage of that kingdom of
the world, will the Lord renew for His people. In צאתך the nation is
addressed, whilst the suffix of the third pers. attached to אראנּוּ
points back to עמּך in [Mic 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014). The
miraculous deeds will make such an impression, that the heathen nations
who see them will stand ashamed, dumb and deaf with alarm and horror.
Ashamed of all their strength, i.e., because all their strength becomes
impotence before the mighty acts of the Almighty God. Laying the hand
upon the mouth is a gesture expressive of reverential silence from
astonishment and admiration (cf. [Jdg
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#019); [Job
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#005), etc.). Their ears shall become
deaf "from the thunder of His mighty acts, [Job
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014), the qōl hâmōn of [Isa
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#008)" (Hitzig). With this description
of the impression made by the wonderful works of God, the words of God
pass imperceptibly into words of the prophet, who carries out the divine
answer still further in an explanatory form, as we may see from [Isa
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#017). The heathen will submit
themselves to Jehovah in the humblest fear. This is stated in [Mic
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#017). Licking the dust like the
serpent contains an allusion to [Gen
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014) (cf. [Psa
72:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009) and [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023)). זחלי ארץ, earth-creepers,
i.e., snakes, recals the זחלי עפר of [Deu
32:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#024). Like snakes, when they are
driven out of their hiding-place, or when charmers make them come out of
their holes, so will the nations come trembling out of their castles
(misgerōth as in [Psa 18:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#046)), and
tremble to Jehovah, i.e., flee to Him with trembling, as alone able to
grant help (see [Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005)), and fear
before thee. With ממּךּ the prayer passes into an address to Jehovah, to
attach to this the praise of God with which he closes his book.

[Micah 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mic 7:18</span></span>

"Who is a God like Thee? removing guilt and passing over iniquity to the
remnant of His inheritance. He retaineth not His anger for ever, for He
delighteth in mercy. [Mic 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#019). He
will have compassion upon us again, tread down our transgressions; and
Thou wilt cast all their sins into the depths of the sea. [Mic
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#020). Mayest Thou show truth to Jacob,
mercy to Abraham, which Thou hast sworn to our fathers from the days of
old." מי אל כּמוך looks back to [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011); but whether Micah also plays
upon his own name is doubtful. Like the first redemption of Israel out
of Egypt, the second or still more glorious redemption of the people of
God furnishes an occasion for praising the incomparable nature of the
Lord. But whereas in the former Jehovah merely revealed Himself in His
incomparable exaltation above all gods, in the restoration of the nation
which had been cast out among the heathen because of its sins, and its
exaltation among the nations, He now reveals His incomparable nature in
grace and compassion. The words נשׂא עון וגו are formed after [Exo
34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006), where the Lord, after the
falling away of Israel from Him by the worship of the golden calf,
reveals Himself to Moses as a gracious and merciful God, who forgives
guilt and sin. But this grace and compassion are only fully revealed in
the restoration and blessing of the remnant of His nation by Jesus
Christ. (For [Mic 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018), see [Psa
103:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#009).) As One who delighteth in
mercy, He will have compassion upon Israel again (yâshūbh used
adverbially, as in [Hos 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#008), etc.),
will tread down its sins, i.e., conquer their power and tyranny by His
compassion, and cast them into the depths of the sea, as He once
conquered the tyrant Pharaoh and drowned him in the depths of the sea
([Exo 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#005), [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010)). This believing assurance then
closes with the prayer (tittēn is optative) that the Lord will give His
rescued nation truth and mercy ('ĕmeth and chesed, after [Eze
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#006)), i.e., give them to enjoy, or
bestow upon them, what He had sworn to the patriarchs ([Gen
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016)). Abraham and Jacob are
mentioned instead of their family (cf. [Isa
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008)).

With this lofty praise of the Lord, Micah closes not only the last
words, but his whole book. The New Testament parallel, as Hengstenberg
has correctly observed, is [Rom
11:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033); and the μυστήριον made known
by the apostle in [Rom 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025). gives us
a view of the object and end of the ways of the Lord with His people.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Introduction](nah000)

</div>
