<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nahum Index](nah)  
  [Previous](nah001)  [Next](nah003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)

[Nahum 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">nah 2:1</span></span>

With [Nah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001) the prophecy turns to
Nineveh. [Nah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001). "A dasher in pieces
comes against thee. Keep thy fortress! Look out upon the way, fortify
the loins, exert thy strength greatly! [Nah
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002). For Jehovah returneth to the
eminence of Jacob as to the eminence of Israel; for plunderers have
plundered them, and their vines have they thrown to the ground."
על־פּניך cannot be addressed to Judah, as in [Nah
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015) (Chald., Rashi, etc.). It cannot
indeed be objected that in [Nah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015)
the destruction of Asshur has already been announced, since the prophet
might nevertheless have returned to the time when Asshur had made war
upon Judah, in order to depict its ruin with greater precision. But such
an assumption does not agree with the second clause of the verse as
compared with [Nah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002), and still less
with the description of the approaching enemy which follows in [Nah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003), since this is unquestionably,
according to [Nah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005), the power
advancing against Nineveh, and destroying that city. We must therefore
assume that we have here a sudden change in the person addressed, as in
[Nah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#011) and [Nah
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#012), [Nah
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#013) and [Nah
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#014). The enemy is called מפיץ, "a
dasher in pieces;" not a war-hammer (cf. [Pro
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#018)), because עלה, the standing
expression for the advance of a hostile army, does not agree with this.
על־פּניך, against thy face, i.e., pitching his tent opposite to the city
(there is no good reason for altering the suffix into פּניך, as Ewald
and Hitzig propose). Against this enemy Nineveh is to bring all possible
power of resistance. This is not irony, but simply a poetical turn given
to the thought, that Nineveh will not be able to repulse this enemy any
more. The inf. abs. nâtsōr stands emphatically for the imperative, as is
frequently the case, and is continued in the imperative. Metsūrâh is the
enclosure of a city, hence the wall or fortification. צפּה־דרך, looking
watchfully upon the way by which the enemy comes, to repulse it or
prevent it from entering the city. הזּק מ, make the loins strong, i.e.,
equip thyself with strength, the loins being the seat of strength. The
last clause expresses the same thought, and is merely added to
strengthen the meaning. The explanatory kı̄ in [Nah
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002) (3) does not follow upon [Nah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001) in the sense of "summon up all thy
strength, for it is God in whose strength the enemy fights" (Strauss),
but to [Nah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001) or [Nah
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015). The train of thought is the
following: Asshur will be utterly destroyed by the enemy advancing
against Nineveh, for Jehovah will re-establish the glory of Israel,
which Asshur has destroyed. שׁב (perf. proph.) has not the force of the
hiphil, reducere, restituere, either here or in [Psa
85:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#005) and [Isa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#008), and other passages, where the
modern lexicons give it, but means to turn round, or return to a person,
and is construed with the accusative, as in [Num
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#036); [Exo
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#020), and [Gen
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#014), although in actual fact the
return of Jehovah to the eminence of Jacob involves its restoration.
גּאון יעקב, that of which Jacob is proud, i.e., the eminence and
greatness or glory accruing to Israel by virtue of its election to be
the nation of God, which the enemy into whose power it had been given up
on account of its rebellion against God had taken away (see at [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008)). Jacob does not stand for Judah,
nor Israel for the ten tribes, for Nahum never refers to the ten tribes
in distinction from Judah; and [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018), where Jacob is distinguished
from the house of Joseph, is of a totally different character. Both
names stand here for the whole of Israel (of the twelve tribes), and, as
Cyril has shown, the distinction is this: Jacob is the natural name
which the people inherited from their forefather, and Israel the
spiritual name which they had received from God. Strauss gives the
meaning correctly thus: Jehovah will so return to the eminence of His
people, who are named after Jacob, that this eminence shall become the
eminence of Israel, i.e., of the people of God; in other words, He will
exalt the nation once more to the lofty eminence of its divine calling
(כּ used in the same manner as in [Sa1
25:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#036)). This will He do, because
plunderers have plundered (bâqaq, evacuare) them (the Israelites), and
destroyed their vines, cast them to the ground; that He may avenge the
reproach cast upon His people. The plunderers are the heathen nations,
especially the Assyrians. The vines are the Israelites; Israel as a
people or kingdom is the vineyard ([Isa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001); [Jer
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010); [Psa
80:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#009).); the vines are the families,
and the branches (zemōrı̄m from zemōrâh) the members.

[Nahum 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">nah 2:3</span></span>

After assigning this reason for the divine purpose concerning Asshur,
the prophet proceeds in [Nah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003). to
depict the army advancing towards Nineveh, viz., in [Nah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003) its appearance, and in [Nah
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004) the manner in which it sets itself
in motion for battle. [Nah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003). "The
shield of His heroes is made red, the valiant men are clothed in
crimson: in the fire of the steel-bosses are the chariots, on the day of
His equipment; and the cypresses are swung about. [Nah
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004). The chariots rave in the streets,
they run over one another on the roads; their appearance is like the
torches, they run about like lightning." The suffix attached to
gibbōrēhū (His heroes) might be taken as referring to mēphı̄ts in [Nah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001) (2); but it is more natural to
refer it to Jehovah in [Nah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#002) (3),
as having summoned the army against Nineveh (cf. [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003)). The shields are reddened, i.e.,
not radiant (Ewald), but coloured with red, and that not with the blood
of enemies who have been slain (Abarbanel and Grotius), but either with
red colour with which they are painted, or what is still more probable,
with the copper with which they are overlaid: see Josephus, Ant. xiii.
12, 5 (Hitzig). אנשׁי־חיל are not fighting men generally, i.e.,
soldiers, but brave men, heroes (cf. [Jdg
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#029); [Sa1
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#012); [Sa2
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#016), equivalent to benē chayil in
[Sa1 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017), etc.). מתלּעים, ἁπ. λεγ.,
a denom. of תּולע, coccus: clothed in coccus or crimson. The fighting
dress of the nations of antiquity was frequently blood-red (see Aeliani,
Var. hist. vi. 6).

(Note: Valerius observes on this: "They used Poenic tunics in battle, to
disguise and hide the blood of their wounds, not lest the sight of it
should fill them with alarm, but lest it should inspire the enemy with
confidence.")

The ἁπ. λεγ. pelâdōth is certainly not used for lappı̄dı̄m, torches; but
in both Arabic and Syriac paldâh signifies steel (see Ges. Lex.). But
pelâdōth are not scythes, which would suggest the idea of
scythe-chariots (Michaelis, Ewald, and others); for scythe-chariots were
first introduced by Cyrus, and were unknown before his time to the
Medes, the Syrians, the Arabians, and also to the ancient Egyptians (see
at [Jos 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016)). Pelâdōth probably
denotes the steel covering of the chariots, as the Assyrian war-chariots
were adorned according to the monuments with ornaments of metal.

(Note: "The chariots of the Assyrians," says Strauss, "as we see them on
the monuments, glare with shining things, made either of iron or steel,
battle-axes, bows, arrows, and shields, and all kinds of weapons; the
horses are also ornamented with crowns and red fringes, and even the
poles of the carriages are made resplendent with shining suns and moons:
add to these the soldiers in armour riding in the chariots; and it could
not but be the case, that when illumined by the rays of the sun above
them, they would have all the appearance of flames as they flew hither
and thither with great celerity." Compare also the description of the
Assyrian war-chariots given by Layard in his Nineveh and its Remains,
vol. ii. p. 348.)

The army of the enemy presents the appearance described בּיום הכינו, in
the day of his equipment. הכין, to prepare, used of the equipping of an
army for an attack or for battle, as in [Jer
46:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#014); [Eze
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#014); [Eze
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#007). The suffix refers to Jehovah,
like that in גּבּוריהוּ; compare [Isa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004), where Jehovah raises an army for
war with Babylon. Habberōshı̄m, the cypresses, are no doubt lances or
javelins made of cypress-wood (Grotius and others), not magnates
(Chald., Kimchi, and others), or viri hastati. הרעלוּ, to be swung, or
brandished, in the hands of the warriors equipped for battle. The army
advances to the assault ([Nah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004)),
and presses into the suburbs. The chariots rave (go mad) in the streets.
התהולל, to behave one's self foolishly, to rave, used here as in [Jer
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#009) for mad driving, or driving with
insane rapidity (see [Kg2 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#020)).
השׁתּקשׁק, hithpalel of שׁקק, to run ([Joe
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#009)); in the intensive form, to run
over one another, i.e., to run in such a way that they appear as though
they would run over one another. חוּצות and רחבות are roads and open
spaces, not outside the city, but inside (cf. [Amo
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016); [Psa
144:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013); [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020)), and, indeed, as we may see from
what follows, in the suburbs surrounding the inner city of citadel.
Their appearance (viz., that of the chariots as they drive raving about)
is like torches. The feminine suffix to מראיהן can only refer to הרכב,
notwithstanding the fact that elsewhere רכב is always construed as a
masculine, and that it is so here in the first clauses. For the suffix
cannot refer to רחבות (Hoelem. and Strauss), because הרכב is the subject
in the following clause as well as in the two previous ones. The best
way probably is to take it as a neuter, so that it might refer not to
the chariots only, but to everything in and upon the chariots. The
appearance of the chariots, as they drove about with the speed of
lightning, richly ornamented with bright metal (see on [Nah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003)), and occupied by warriors in
splendid clothes and dazzling armour, might very well be compared to
torches and flashing lightning. רצץ, pilel of רוּץ (not poel of רצץ,
[Jdg 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#008)), cursitare, used of their
driving with lightning-speed.

[Nahum 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">nah 2:5</span></span>

The Assyrian tries to repel this attack, but all in vain. [Nah
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005). "He remembers his glorious ones:
they stumble in their paths; they hasten to the wall of it, and the
tortoise is set up. [Nah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006). The
gates are opened in the rivers, and the palace is dissolved. [Nah
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#007). It is determined: she is laid
bare, carried off, and her maids groan like the cry of doves, smiting on
their breasts." On the approach of the war-chariots of the enemy to the
attack, the Assyrian remembers his generals and warriors, who may
possibly be able to defend the city and drive back the foe. That the
subject changes with yizkōr, is evident from the change in the number,
i.e., from the singular as compared with the plurals in [Nah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003) and [Nah
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#004), and is placed beyond the reach of
doubt by the contents of [Nah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#005).,
which show that the reference is to the attempt to defend the city. The
subject to yizkōr is the Assyrian (בּליּעל, [Nah
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#001)), or the king of Asshur ([Nah
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018)). He remembers his glorious ones,
i.e., remembers that he has 'addı̄rı̄m, i.e., not merely generals
(μεγιστᾶνες, lxx), but good soldiers, including the generals (as in [Nah
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#018); [Jdg
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#013); [Neh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005)). He sends for them, but they
stumble in their paths. From terror at the violent assault of the foe,
their knees lose their tension (the plural hălı̄khōth is not to be
corrected into the singular according to the keri, as the word always
occurs in the plural). They hasten to the wall of it (Nineveh); there is
הסּכך set up: i.e., literally the covering one, not the defender,
praesidium militare (Hitzig), but the tortoise, testudo.

(Note: Not, however, the tortoise formed by the shields of the soldiers,
held close together above their heads (Liv. xxxiv. 9), since these are
never found upon the Assyrian monuments (vid., Layard), but a kind of
battering-ram, of which there are several different kinds, either a
moveable tower, with a battering-ram, consisting of a light framework,
covered with basket-work, or else a framework without any tower, either
with an ornamented covering, or simply covered with skins, and moving
upon four or six wheels. See the description, with illustrations, in
Layard's Nineveh, ii. pp. 366-370, and Strauss's commentary on this
passage.)

The prophet's description passes rapidly from the assault upon the city
wall to the capture of the city itself ([Nah
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006)). The opened or opening gates of
the rivers are neither those approaches to the city which were situated
on the bank of the Tigris, and were opened by the overflowing of the
river, in support of which appeal has been made to the statement of
Diodor. Sic. ii. 27, that the city wall was destroyed for the space of
twenty stadia by the overflowing of the Tigris; for "gates of the
rivers" cannot possibly stand for gates opened by rivers. Still less can
it be those roads of the city which led to the gates, and which were
flooded with people instead of water (Hitzig), or with enemies, who were
pressing from the gates into the city like overflowing rivers (Ros.);
nor even gates through which rivers flow, i.e., sluices, namely those of
the concentric canals issuing from the Tigris, with which the palace
could be laid under water (Vatabl., Burck, Hitzig, ed. 1); but as Luther
renders it, "gates on the waters," i.e., situated on the rivers, or
gates in the city wall, which were protected by the rivers; "gates most
strongly fortified, both by nature and art" (Tuch, de Nino urbe, p. 67,
Strauss, and others), for nehârōth must be understood as signifying the
Tigris and its tributaries and canals. At any rate, there were such
gates in Nineveh, since the city, which stood at the junction of the
Khosr with the Tigris, in the slope of the (by no means steep) rocky
bank, was to some extent so built in the alluvium, that the natural
course of the Khosr had to be dammed off from the plain chosen for the
city by three stone dams, remnants of which are still to be seen; and a
canal was cut above this point, which conducted the water to the plain
of the city, where it was turned both right and left into the city
moats, but had a waste channel through the city. To the south, however,
another small collection of waters helped to fill the trenches. "The
wall on the side towards the river consisted of a slightly curved line,
which connected together the mouths of the trenches, but on the land
side it was built at a short distance from the trenches. The wall on the
river side now borders upon meadows, which are only flooded at high
water; but the soil has probably been greatly elevated, and at the time
when the city was built this was certainly river" (see M. v. Niebuhr,
Geschichte Assurs u. Babels, p. 280; and the outlines of the plan of the
ground oh which Nineveh stood, p. 284). The words of the prophet are not
to be understood as referring to any particular gate, say the western,
either alone, or par excellence, as Tuch supposes, but apply quite
generally to the gates of the city, since the rivers are only mentioned
for the purpose of indicating the strength of the gates. As Luther has
correctly explained it, "the gates of the rivers, however firm in other
respects, and with no easy access, will now be easily occupied, yea,
have been already opened." The palace melts away, not, however, from the
floods of water which flow through the open gates. This literal
rendering of the words is irreconcilable with the situation of the
palaces in Nineveh, since they were built in the form of terraces upon
the tops of hills, either natural or artificial, and could not be
flooded with water. The words are figurative. mūg, to melt, dissolve,
i.e., to vanish through anxiety and alarm; and היכל, the palace, for the
inhabitants of the palace. "When the gates, protected by the rivers, are
broken open by the enemy, the palace, i.e., the reigning Nineveh,
vanishes in terror" (Hitzig). For her sway has now come to an end.

הצּב: the hophal of נצב, in the hiphil, to establish, to determine ([Deu
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008); [Psa
74:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#017); and Chald. [Dan
2:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#045); [Dan
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#013)); hence it is established, i.e.,
is determined, sc. by God: she will be made bare; i.e., Nineveh, the
queen, or mistress of the nations, will be covered with shame. גּלּתה is
not to be taken as interchangeable with the hophal הגלה, to be carried
away, but means to be uncovered, after the piel to uncover, sc. the
shame or nakedness ([Nah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005); cf. [Isa
47:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#002); [Hos
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#012)). העלה, for העלה (see Ges. 63,
Anm. 4), to be driven away, or led away, like the niph. in [Jer
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#011); [Sa2
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#027).

(Note: Of the different explanations that have been given of this
hemistich, the supposition, which dates back as far as the Chaldee, that
huzzab signifies the queen, or is the name of the queen (Ewald and
Rckert), is destitute of any tenable foundation, and is no better than
Hitzig's fancy, that we should read והצּב, "and the lizard is
discovered, fetched up," and that this "reptile" is Nineveh. The
objection offered to our explanation, viz., that it would only be
admissible if it were immediately followed by the decretum divinum in
its full extent, and not merely by one portion of it, rests upon a
misinterpretation of the following words, which do not contain merely a
portion of the purpose of God.)

The laying bare and carrying away denote the complete destruction of
Nineveh. אמהתיה, ancillae ejus, i.e., Nini. The "maids" of the city of
Nineveh personified as a queen are not the states subject to her rule
(Theodor., Cyr., Jerome, and others), - for throughout this chapter
Nineveh is spoken of simply as the capital of the Assyrian empire, - but
the inhabitants of Nineveh, who are represented as maids, mourning over
the fate of their mistress. Nâhag, to pant, to sigh, for which hâgâh is
used in other passages where the cooing of doves is referred to (cf.
[Isa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014); [Isa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#011)). כּקול יונים instead of
כּיּונים, probably to express the loudness of the moaning. Tophēph, to
smite, used for the smiting of the timbrels in [Psa
68:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#026); here, to smite upon the breast.
Compare pectus pugnis caedere, or palmis infestis tundere (e.g., Juv.
xiii. 167; Virg. Aen. i. 481, and other passages), as an expression of
violent agony in deep mourning (cf. [Luk
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013); [Luk
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#027)). לבבהן for לבביהן is the
plural, although this is generally written לבּות; and as the י is
frequently omitted as a sign of the plural (cf. Ewald, 258, a), there is
no good ground for reading לבבהן, as Hitzig proposes.

[Nahum 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">nah 2:8</span></span>

At the conquest of Nineveh the numerous inhabitants flee, and the rich
city is plundered. [Nah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#008). "And
Nineveh like a water-pond all her days. And they flee! Stand ye, O
stand! and no one turns round. [Nah
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#009). Take silver as booty, take ye
gold! And no end to the furnishing with immense quantity of all kinds of
ornamental vessels. [Nah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010).
Emptying and devastation! and the heart has melted, and trembling of the
knees, and labour pain in all loins, and the countenance of every one
withdraws its ruddiness." Nineveh is compared to a pool, not merely with
reference to the multitude of men who had gathered together there, but,
as water is everywhere an element of life, also with reference to the
wealth and prosperity which accrued to this imperial city out of the
streaming together of so many men and so many different peoples. Compare
[Jer 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013), where Babel is addressed
as "Thou that dwellest on many waters, art rich in many treasures." מימי
היא, since the days that she exists. היא = אשׁר היא, the relation being
indicated by the construct state; מן הוא in [Isa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002) is different. But they flee. The
subject to נסים is not the waters, although nūs is applied to water in
[Psa 104:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#007), but, as what follows
shows, the masses of men who are represented as water. These flee away
without being stopped by the cry "Stand ye" (i.e., remain), or even
paying any attention to it. Hiphnâh, lit., "to turn the back" (‛ōreph,
[Jer 48:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#039)), to flee, but when applied
to a person already fleeing, to turn round (cf. [Jer
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#005)). In [Nah
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#009) the conquerors are summoned to
plunder, not by their generals, but by God, who speaks through the
prophet. The fact is hereby indicated, "that this does not happen by
chance, but because God determines to avenge the injuries inflicted upon
His people" (Calvin). With ואין קצה the prophecy passes into a simple
description. There is no end lattekhūnâh, to the furnishing with
treasures. Tekhūnâh, from kūn, not from tâkhan, lit., the setting up,
the erection of a building ([Eze
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#011)); here the furnishing of Nineveh
as the dwelling-place of the rulers of the world, whilst in [Job
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#003) it is applied to the place where
the throne of God has been established. In כּבד the ל might be thought
of as still continuing in force (Ewald, Hitzig), but it answers better
to the liveliness of the description to take כּבד as beginning a fresh
sentence. כּבד written defectively, as in [Gen
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#001) : glory, equivalent to the great
amount of the wealth, as in Genesis (l.c.). Kelē chendâh, gold and
silver vessels and jewels, as in [Hos
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#015). That there were immense
treasures of the precious metals and of costly vessels treasured up in
Nineveh, may be inferred with certainty from the accounts of ancient
writers, which border on the fabulous.

(Note: For proofs, see Layard's Nineveh, ii. 415ff., and Movers,
Phnizier (iii. 1, pp. 40, 41). After quoting the statements of Ctesias,
the latter observes that "these numbers are indeed fabulous; but they
have their historical side, inasmuch as in the time of Ctesias the
riches of Nineveh were estimated at an infinitely greater amount than
the enormous treasures accumulated in the treasuries of the Persian
empire. That the latter is quite in accordance with truth, may be
inferred from the fact that the conquerors of Nineveh, the Medes and
Chaldaeans, of whose immense booty, in the shape of gold, silver, and
other treasures, even the prophet Nahum speaks, furnished Ecbatana and
Babylon with gold and silver from the booty of Nineveh to an extent
unparalleled in all history.")

Of all these treasures nothing was left but desolate emptiness. This is
expressed by the combination of three synonymous words. Būqâh and
mebhūqâh are substantive formations from būq = bâqaq, to empty out, and
are combined to strengthen the idea, like similar combinations in [Zep
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015); [Eze
33:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#029), and [Isa
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#002). Mebhullâqâh is a synonymous noun
formed from the participle pual, and signifying devastation (cf. [Isa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001), where even bâlaq is combined
with bâqaq). In [Nah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011) the horror
of the vanquished at the total devastation of Nineveh is described, also
in short substantive clauses: "melted heart" (nâmēs is a participle),
i.e., perfect despondency (see [Isa
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#007); [Jos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005)); trembling of the knees, so that
from terror men can hardly keep upon their feet (pı̄q for pūq; it only
occurs here). Chalchâlâh formed by reduplication from chı̄l: spasmodic
pains in all loins, like the labour pains of women in childbirth (cf.
[Isa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003)). Lastly, the faces of all
turning pale (see at [Joe 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006)).

[Nahum 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">nah 2:11</span></span>

Thus will the mighty city be destroyed, with its men of war and booty.
[Nah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011). "Where is the dwelling of
the lions and the feeding-place of the young lions, where the lion
walked, the lioness, the lion's whelp, and no one frightened? [Nah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012). The lion robbing for the need of
his young ones, and strangling for his lionesses, and he filled his dens
with prey, and his dwelling-places with spoil. [Nah
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013). Behold, O come to thee, is the
saying of Jehovah of hosts, and I cause her chariots to turn in smoke,
and thy young lions the sword devours; and I cut off thy prey from the
earth, and the voice of thy messengers shall be heard no more." The
prophet, beholding the destruction in spirit as having already taken
place, looks round for the site on which the mighty city once stood, and
sees it no more. This is the meaning of the question in [Nah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#011). He describes it as the
dwelling-place of lions. The point of comparison is the predatory lust
of its rulers and their warriors, who crushed the nations like lions,
plundering their treasures, and bringing them together in Nineveh. To
fill up the picture, the epithets applied to the lions are grouped
together according to the difference of sex and age. אריה is the
full-grown male lion; לביא, the lioness; כּפיר, the young lion, though
old enough to go in search of prey; גּוּר אריה, catulus leonis, the
lion's whelp, which cannot yet seek prey for itself. וּמרעה הוּא, lit.,
"and a feeding-place is it," sc. the dwelling-place (הוּא pointing back
to מעון) in this sense: "Where is the dwelling-place which was also a
feeding-place for the young lions?" By the apposition the thought is
expressed, that the city of lions was not only a resting-place, but also
afforded a comfortable living. אשׁר is to be taken in connection with
the following שׁם: in the very place where; and hâlakh signifies simply
to walk, to walk about, not "to take exercise," in which case the kal
would stand for piel. The more precise definition follows in ואין מחריד,
without any one terrifying, hence in perfect rest and security, and
undisturbed might (cf. [Mic 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004); [Lev
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#006); [Deu
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#026), etc.). Under the same figure
[Nah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012) describes the tyranny and
predatory lust of the Assyrians in their wars. This description is
subordinate in sense to the leading thought, or to the question
contained in the previous verse. Where is the city now, into which the
Assyrians swept together the booty of the peoples and kingdoms which
they had destroyed? In form, however, the verse is attached poetically
in loose apposition to [Nah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#012). The
lion, as king of the beasts, is a very fitting emblem of the kings or
rulers of Assyria. The lionesses and young lions are the citizens of
Nineveh and of the province of Assyria, the tribe-land of the imperial
monarchy of Assyria, and not the queens and princes, as the Chaldee
explains it. Gōrōth with the o-inflection for gūrōth, as in [Jer
51:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#038). Chōrı̄m, holes for
hiding-places, or caves, not only applies to the robbers, in which
character the Assyrians are exhibited through the figure of the lion
(Hitzig), but also to the lions, which carry their prey into caves (cf.
Bochart, Hieroz. i. 737). This destruction of Nineveh will assuredly
take place; for Jehovah the Almighty God has proclaimed it, and He will
fulfil His word. The word of God in [Nah
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013) stamps the foregoing threat with
the seal of confirmation. הנני אליך, behold I (will) to thee (Nineveh).
We have not to supply אבוא here, but simply the verb. copul., which is
always omitted in such sentences. The relation of the subject to the
object is expressed by אל (cf. [Nah
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#005); [Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)). הבערתּי בעשׁן, I burn into
smoke, i.e., so that it vanishes into smoke (cf. [Psa
37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020)). רכבּהּ, her war-chariots,
stands synecdochically for the whole of the apparatus of war (Calvin).
The suffix in the third person must not be altered; it may easily be
explained from the poetical variation of prophetic announcement and
direct address. The young lions are the warriors; the echo of the figure
in the previous verse still lingers in this figure, as well as in טרפּך.
The last clause expresses the complete destruction of the imperial might
of Assyria. The messengers of Nineveh are partly heralds, as the
carriers of the king's commands; partly halberdiers, or delegates who
fulfilled the ruler's commands (cf. [Kg1
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#002); [Kg2
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#023)). The suffix in מלאככה is in a
lengthened form, on account of the tone at the end of the section,
analogous to אתכה in [Exo 29:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#035), and
is not to be regarded as an Aramaeism or a dialectical variation (Ewald,
258, a). The tsere of the last syllable is occasioned by the previous
tsere. Jerome has summed up the meaning very well as follows: "Thou wilt
never lay countries waste any more, nor exact tribute, nor will thy
messengers be heard throughout thy provinces." (On the last clause, see
[Eze 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#009).)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 3](nah003)

</div>
