<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh007)  [Next](neh009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 8:0</span></span>

Public Reading of the Law. the Feast of Tabernacles. A Public Fast Held,
and a Covenant Made to Keep the Law - [Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

These three chapters form a connected whole, and describe acts of
worship and solemnities conducted by Ezra and other priests and Levites,
Nehemiah as the secular governor being only twice mentioned in them
([Neh 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009); [Neh
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#002)). The contents of the three
chapters are as follows: On the approach of the seventh month, which
opened with the feast of trumpets, and during which occurred both the
feast of tabernacles and the great day of atonement, the people were
gathered to Jerusalem; and Ezra, at the request of the congregation,
read to the assembled people out of the book of the law on the first and
second days. It being found written in the law, that the Israelites were
to dwell in booths during the seventh month, it was resolved to keep the
festival in accordance with this direction; and this resolution was
carried into execution by erecting booths made with branches of trees on
housetops, in courts, and in the public places of the city, and
celebrating the seven-days' festival by a daily public reading of the
law (Neh 8). On the twenty-fourth day of the same month, the
congregation again assembled, with fasting and mourning, to make a
public confession of their sins, and to renew their covenant with God
(Neh 9, 10).

The second clause of [Neh 7:73](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#073) belongs
to Neh 8, and forms one sentence with [Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001). "When the seventh month came, and
the children of Israel were in their cities, the whole people gathered
themselves together as one man in the open space that was before the
water-gate," etc. The capitular division of the Masoretic text is
erroneous, and makes the words, "and the children of Israel were in
their cities," appear a mere repetition of the sentence, "and all Israel
dwelt in their cities." The chronological statement, "when the seventh
month came," without mention of the year, points back to the date in
[Neh 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015) : the twenty-fifth Elul, in
the twentieth year of Artaxerxes; on which day the building of the wall
was completed. Elul, the sixth month, is followed by Tishri, the
seventh, and there is nothing against the inference that the seventh
month of the same year is intended; the dedication of the wall not being
related till Neh 12, and therefore occurring subsequently, while all the
facts narrated in Neh 8-11 might, without any difficulty, occur in the
interval between the completion of the wall and its dedication. For,
besides the public reading of the law on the first two days of the
seventh month, the celebration of the feast of tabernacles, and the
public fast on the twenty-fourth day of the seventh month (Neh 8-11),
nothing more is recorded ([Neh 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001),
[Neh 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#002)) than the execution of the
resolve made by Nehemiah, immediately after the completion of the wall
([Neh 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#004)), viz., to increase the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, by appointing by lot one of every ten dwellers
in the surrounding country to go to Jerusalem and dwell there. This is
succeeded by lists of the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and of the cities of
Benjamin and Judah, and lists of the priests and Levites (11:3-12:26):

[Nehemiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 8:1</span></span>

[Neh 8:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001). The public reading of the
law. - [Neh 8:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001). The introduction to
this narrative (Neh 7:73b-8:1a) is identical with [Ezr
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001). The same matter, the assembling
of the people on the approach of the seventh month, is described in the
same words. But the object of this assembling of the people was a
different one from that mentioned in [Ezr
3:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001). Then they met to restore the
altar of burnt-offering and the sacrificial worship; now, on the
contrary, for the due solemnization of the seventh month, the festal
month of the year. For this purpose the people came from the cities and
villages of Judah to Jerusalem, and assembled "in the open space before
the water-gate," i.e., to the south-east of the temple space. On the
situation of the water-gate, see rem. on [Neh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026); [Neh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#037)., and [Ezr
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#009). "And they spake unto Ezra the
scribe" (see rem. on [Ezr 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#011)). The
subject of ויּאמרוּ is the assembled people. These requested, through
their rulers, that Ezra should fetch the book of the law of Moses, and
publicly read it. This reading, then, was desired by the assembly. The
motive for this request is undoubtedly to be found in the desire of the
congregation to keep the new moon of the seventh month, as a feast of
thanksgiving for the gracious assistance they had received from the Lord
during the building of the wall, and through which it had been speedily
and successfully completed, in spite of the attempts of their enemies to
obstruct the work. This feeling of thankfulness impelled them to the
hearing of the word of God for the purpose of making His law their rule
of life. The assembly consisted of men and women indiscriminately (אשּׁה
ועד אישׁ, like [Jos 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#021); [Jos
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#025); [Sa1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019); [Ch1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#003)), and לשׁמע מבין כּל, every one
that understood in hearing, which would certainly include the elder
children. The first day of the seventh month was distinguished above the
other new moons of the year as the feast of trumpets, and celebrated as
a high festival by a solemn assembly and a cessation from labour; comp.
[Lev 23:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#023); [Num
29:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#001).

[Neh 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003)

Ezra read out of the law "from the light (i.e., from early morning) till
mid-day;" therefore for about six hours. Not, however, as is obvious
from the more particular description [Neh
8:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004), without cessation, but in such
wise that the reading went on alternately with instructive lectures on
the law from the Levites. "And the ears of all the people were directed
to the law," i.e., the people listened attentively. המּבינים must be
understood according to לשׁמע מבין כּל of [Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002). In [Neh
8:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004) the proceedings at this reading
are more nearly described.

[Neh 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004)

Ezra stood upon a raised stage of wood which had been made for the
purpose (לדּבר, for the matter). מגדּל, usually a tower, here a high
scaffold, a pulpit. Beside him stood six persons, probably priests, on
his right, and seven on his left hand. In 1 Esdras, seven are mentioned
as standing on his left hand also, the name Azariah being inserted
between Anaiah and Urijah. It is likely that this name has been omitted
from the Hebrew text, since it is improbable that there was one person
less on his right than on his left hand. "Perhaps Urijah is the father
of the Meremoth of [Neh 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004), [Neh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021); Maaseiah, the father of the
Azariah of [Neh 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023); Pedaiah, the
individual named [Neh 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025); the
Azariah to be inserted, according to 1 Esdras, the same named [Neh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023); a Meshullam occurs, [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004), [Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006); and a Malchiah, [Neh
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#011), [Neh
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014), [Neh
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031)" (Bertheau).

[Neh 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#005)

Ezra, standing on the raised platform, was above the assembled people
(he was כּל־העם מעל). When he opened the book, it was "in the sight of
all the people," so that all could see his action; and "all the people
stood up" (עמדוּ). It cannot be shown from the O.T. that it had been
from the days of Moses a custom with the Israelites to stand at the
reading of the law, as the Rabbis assert; comp. Vitringa, de Synag. vet.
p. 167.

[Neh 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#006)

Ezra began by blessing the Lord, the great God, perhaps with a sentence
of thanksgiving, as David did, [Ch1
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#010), but scarcely by using a whole
psalm, as in [Ch1 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#008). To this
thanksgiving the people answered Amen, Amen (comp. [Ch1
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#036)), lifting up their hands (ידיהם
בּמעל, with lifting up of their hands; the form מעל occurring only
here), and worshipping the Lord, bowing down towards the ground.

[Neh 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007)

And Jeshua, Bani, etc., the Levites, expounded the law to the people
(הבין, to cause to understand, here to instruct, by expounding the law).
The ו copulative before הלויּם must certainly have been inserted in the
text by a clerical error; for the previously named thirteen (or
fourteen) persons are Levites, of whom Jeshua, Bani, Sherebiah, and
Hodijah occur again, [Neh 9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004). The
names Jeshua, Sherebiah, Shabtai, and Jozabad are also met with [Neh
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#014); [Neh
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#016), but belong in these latter
passages to other individuals who were heads of classes of Levites.

[Neh 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#008)

"And they (the Levites) read in (out of) the book of the law of God,
explained and gave the sense; and they (the assembled auditors) were
attentive to the reading." The Rabbis understand מפרשׁ = the Chaldee
מפרשׁ, of a rendering of the law into the vulgar tongue, i.e., a
paraphrase in the Chaldee language for those who were not acquainted
with the ancient Hebrew. But this cannot be shown to be the meaning of
פרשׁ, this word being used in the Targums for the Hebrew נקב (קבב),
e.g., [Lev 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#016), and for בּאר, [Deu
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005). It is more correct to suppose a
paraphrastic exposition and application of the law (Pfeiffer, dubia vex.
p. 480), but not "a distinct recitation according to appointed rules"
(Gusset. and Bertheau). שׂום is infin. abs. instead of the temp. finit.:
and gave the sense, made the law comprehensible to the hearers. במּקרא
ויּבינוּ, not with older interpreters, Luther ("so that what was read
was understood"), and de Wette, "and they (the Levites) made what was
read comprehensible," which would be a mere tautology, but with the lxx,
Vulgate, and others, "and they (the hearers) attended to the reading,"
or, "obtained an understanding of what was read" (בּ הבין, like [Neh
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#012), [Dan
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023); [Dan
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#011)). Vitringa (de syn. vet. p. 420)
already gives the correct meaning: de doctoribus narratur, quod legerint
et dederint intellectum, de autitoribus, quod lectum intellexerint. The
manner of proceeding with this reading is not quite clear. According to
[Neh 8:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#005), the Levites alone seem to
have read to the people out of the book of the law, and to have
explained what they read to their auditors; while according to [Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003), Ezra read to the assembled
people, and the ears of all were attentive to the book of the law, while
we are told in [Neh 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#005) that Ezra
opened the book in the sight of all the people. If, however, we regard
[Neh 8:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004) as only a more detailed
description of what is related [Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002), [Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003), it is obvious that both Ezra and
the thirteen Levites mentioned in [Neh
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007) read out of the law. Hence the
occurrence may well have taken place as follows: Ezra first read a
section of the law, and the Levites then expounded to the people the
portion just read; the only point still doubtful being whether the
thirteen (fourteen) Levites expounded in succession, or whether they all
did this at the same time to different groups of people.

[Nehemiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 8:9</span></span>

The celebration of the feast of the new moon. - [Neh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#009) Then Nehemiah, the Tirshatha (see
remarks on [Ezr 2:63](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#063)), and the priest
Ezra the scribe, and the Levites who were teaching the people, said to
all the people, "This day is holy to the Lord our God. Mourn not, nor
weep; for all the people wept when they heard the words of the law."
היּום is the new moon of the seventh month. The portion read made a
powerful impression upon the assembled crowds. Undoubtedly it consisted
of certain sections of Deuteronomy and other parts of the Thorah, which
were adapted to convict the people of their sin in transgressing the
commands of the Lord, and of the punishments to which they had thus
exposed themselves. They were so moved thereby that they mourned and
wept. This induced Nehemiah, Ezra, and the Levites, who had been
applying what was read to the hearts of their hearers, to encourage
them.

[Neh 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#010)

And he said to them (viz., Nehemiah as governor and head of the
community, though the fact that his address is mentioned does not
exclude the participation of Ezra and the Levites): "Go, eat the fat,
and drink the sweet, and send gifts to them for whom nothing is
prepared, for this day is holy to our Lord; neither be ye sorry, for joy
in Jahve is your refuge." משׁמנּים, fatnesses (λιπάσματα, lxx), fat
pieces of meat, not "rich cakes" (Bertheau); comp. שׁמנים משׁתּה, [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006). ממתּקּים, sweetened drinks. The
sense is: Make glad repasts on good feast-day food and drink; and send
portions to the poor who have prepared nothing, that they too may
rejoice on this festival. מנות, gifts, are portions of food; [Est
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#019), [Est
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#022); [Sa1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#004). Hence we see that it was
customary with the Israelites to send portions of food and drink, on
festivals, to the houses of the poor, that they too might share in the
joy of the day. נכון לאן for נכון אין לאשׁר (see rem. on [Ch1
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#012)), to them for whom nothing is
prepared, who have not the means to prepare a feast-day meal. Because
the day is holy to the Lord, they are to desire it with holy joy. יהוה
חדות is a joy founded on the feeling of communion with the Lord, on the
consciousness that we have in the Lord a God long-suffering and abundant
in goodness and truth ([Exo 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006)).
This joy is to be to them מעוז, a strong citadel or refuge, because the
Almighty is their God; comp. [Jer
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019).

[Neh 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#011)

The Levites also strove to pacify the people, saying: "Hold your peace,
i.e., give over weeping, for the day is holy; neither be ye grieved."

[Neh 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#012)

This address had its effect. The people went their way, some to their
houses, some to their lodgings, to partake of festal repasts, and to
keep the feast with joy; "for they gave heed to the words that were
declared to them," i.e., they took to heart the address of Nehemiah,
Ezra, and the Levites.

[Nehemiah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 8:13</span></span>

Celebration of the feast of tabernacles. - [Neh
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013) On the second day were gathered
together the heads of the houses of all the people, of the priests, and
of the Levites to Ezra the scribe, to attend to the words of the law.
The infinitive להשׂכּיל may indeed be taken (as by Bertheau) as the
continuation of the finite verb, instead of as infinitive absolute
(Ewald, 352, c); this is, however, admissible only in cases where the
second verb either states what must be done, or further describes the
condition of affairs, while להשׂכּיל here states the purpose for which
the heads of the people, etc. assembled themselves unto Ezra. Hence we
take להשׂכּיל in its usual meaning, and the w before it as explicative.
אל השׂכּיל, as in [Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001), expresses
taking an attentive interest in anything. They desired to be further and
more deeply instructed in the law by Ezra.

[Neh 8:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#014)

And they found written in the law that the Lord had commanded Moses,
that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the
seventh month; and that they should publish and proclaim in all their
cities, and in Jerusalem, saying: "Go forth to the mount, and fetch
olive branches, etc. to make booths, as it is written." This statement
is not to be understood as saying that the heads of the people sought in
the law, fourteen days before the feast, for information as to what they
would have to do, that they might prepare for the due celebration of the
feast of tabernacles (Bertheau). The text only states that the heads of
the people again betook themselves to Ezra on the second day, to receive
from him instruction in the law, and that in reading the law they found
the precept concerning the celebration of the festival in booths, i.e.,
they met with this precept, and were thereby induced to celebrate the
approaching festival in strict accordance with its directions. The law
concerning the feast of tabernacles, of which the essentials are here
communicated, is found [Lev 23:39-43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#039).
In [Deu 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013) they were only commanded
to keep the feast with gladness. The particular of dwelling in booths or
bowers is taken from [Lev 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#043); the
further details in [Neh 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015) relate to
the carrying out of the direction: "He shall take you on the first day
the boughs of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of
thick trees, and willows of the brook" ([Lev
23:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#043)). Go to the mountain, a woody
district, whence branches may be obtained. עלי, state constructive
plural of עלה, leaf, foliage, here leafy boughs or branches of trees.
זית, the olive, שׁמן עץ, the wild olive (oleaster), the myrtle, the
palm, and branches of thick-leaved trees, are here mentioned (the two
latter being also named in Leviticus). כּכּתוּב does not relate to the
preparation of the booths, but to the precept that the feast should be
kept in booths. In [Neh 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016) the
accomplishment of the matter is related, presupposing a compliance with
the proclamation sent out into all the cities in the land, and indeed so
speedy a compliance that the booths were finished by the day of the
feast. The object (the branches of [Neh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015)) must be supplied to ויּביאוּ
from the context. They made themselves booths, every one upon the roof
of his house, and in their courts, and in the courts of the house of
God, and in the open space at the water-gate (see on [Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003)), and the open space at the gate
of Ephraim. On the situation of this gate, see rem. on [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008). The open space before it must be
thought of as within the city walls. On these two public places, booths
were probably made by those who had come to Jerusalem, but did not dwell
there; while the priests and Levites belonging to other places would
build theirs in the courts of the temple.

[Neh 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#017)

And the whole community that had returned from captivity (comp. [Ezr
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#021)) made themselves booths and dwelt
in booths; for since the days of Joshua the son of Nun unto that day,
had not the children of Israel done so. כּן, so, refers to the dwelling
in booths; and the words do not tell us that the Israelites had not
celebrated this festival since the days of Joshua, that is, since they
had taken possession of Canaan: for, according to [Ezr
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#004), those who returned from captivity
kept this feast in the first year of their return; and a celebration is
also mentioned after the dedication of Solomon's temple, [Ch2
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#009); [Kg1
8:65](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#065). The text only states that since
the days of Joshua the whole community had not so celebrated it, i.e.,
had not dwelt in booths. Neither do the words imply that since the days
of Joshua to that time no booths at all had been made at the celebration
of the feast of tabernacles, but only that this had not been done by the
whole congregation. On former occasions, those who came up to Jerusalem
may have regarded this precept as non-essential, and contented
themselves by keeping the feast with solemn assemblies, sacrifices, and
sacrificial feasts, without making booths and dwelling in them for seven
days.

[Neh 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#018)

And the book of the law was read from day to day. ויּקרא with the
subject indefinite, while Ramb. and others supply Ezra. The reading of
the law was only ordered at that celebration of the feast of tabernacles
which occurred during the sabbatical year, [Deu
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#010). The last day was the seventh,
for the eighth as a עצרת did not belong to the feast of tabernacles; see
rem. on [Lev 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#036). כּמּשׁפּט like
[Ch2 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#020), and elsewhere.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 9](neh009)

</div>
