<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh008)  [Next](neh010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 9:0</span></span>

The day of general fasting and prayer. - On the twenty-fourth day of the
month, i.e., two days after the termination of the feast of tabernacles,
the children of Israel re-assembled in the temple to humble themselves
before God with mourning and fasting, and, after the reading of the law,
to confess their own sins and the sins of their fathers ([Neh
9:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001)). After the Levites had invited
them to praise God ([Neh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004), [Neh
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005)), a general confession was made,
in which the congregation was reminded of all the grace and favour shown
by God to His people, from the days of Abraham down to the time then
present; and all the departures of the people from their God, all their
rebellions against Him, were acknowledged, to show that the bondage and
oppression to which Israel was not subjected were the well-deserved
punishment of their sins (vv. 6-37). This confession of sin much
resembles the confession of the faithfulness of God and the
unfaithfulness of Israel in the [Psa
106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001), both in its plan and details,
but differs from this "Hallelujah Psalm" in the circumstance that it
does not rise to the praise of God, to the hallelujah, but stops at the
confession that God is righteous and true in all that He has done, and
that Israel has done wickedly, without definitely uttering a request for
pardon and deliverance from oppression.

[Nehemiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 9:1</span></span>

On the twenty-second of Tishri was the Hazereth of the feast of
tabernacles; on the twenty-fourth the congregation re-assembled in the
temple, "with fasting and with sackcloths (penitential garments made of
hair; see rem. [Joe 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008)) and earth
upon them," i.e., spread upon their heads ([Sa1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#012); [Sa2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#002); [Job
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012)), - the external marks of deep
mourning and heaviness of heart.

[Neh 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#002)

"And the seed of Israel separated themselves from all strangers, and
stood and confessed all their sins, and the iniquities of their
fathers." This separation from strangers does not specially relate to
the dissolution of the marriages contracted with heathen women, nor to
any measures taken that only Israelites should be admitted to this
assembly (Bertheau). It was rather a voluntary renunciation of
connection with the heathen, and of heathen customs.

[Neh 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#003)

And they stood up (i.e., remained standing) in their place (comp. [Neh
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#007)), and read in the book of the law
of the Lord their God, i.e., listened to the reading of the law, a
fourth part of the day (about three hours), and a fourth part (the next
three hours) they confessed (made a confession of their sins), and
worshipped the Lord their God. This confession and worship is more
nearly described vv. 4-37.

[Nehemiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 9:4</span></span>

There stood upon the scaffold of the Levites, i.e., upon the platform
erected for the Levites (comp. [Neh
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#004)), Jeshua and seven other Levites
whose names are given, and they cried with a loud voice to God, and said
to the assembled congregation, "Stand up, bless the Lord your God for
ever and ever! and blessed be the name of Thy glory, which is exalted
above all blessing and praise." The repetition of the names of the
Levites in [Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005) shows that this
invitation to praise God is distinct from the crying to God with a loud
voice of [Neh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004), and seems to say
that the Levites first cried to God, i.e., addressed to Him their
confessions and supplications, and after having done so, called upon the
congregation to worship God. Eight names of Levites being given in both
verses, and five of these - Jeshua, Bani, Kadmiel, Shebaniah, and
Sherebiah - being identical, the difference of the three others in the
two verses - Bunni, Bani, and Chenani ([Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004)), and Hashabniah, Hodijah, and
Pethahiah ([Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005)) - seems to have
arisen from a clerical error, - an appearance favoured also by the
circumstance that Bani occurs twice in [Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004). Of the other names in question,
Hodijah occurs [Neh 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#014), and
Pethahiah [Ezr 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#023), as names of
Levites, but כּנני and חשׁבניה nowhere else. Hence Bunni, Bani, and
Chenani ([Neh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004)), and Hashabniah
([Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005)), may be assigned to a
clerical error; but we have no means for restoring the correct names.
With regard to the matter of these verses, Ramb. remarks on [Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004) : constitisse opinor omnes simul,
ita tamen ut unus tantum eodem tempore fuerit precatus, ceteris ipsi
adstantibus atque sua etiam vice Deum orantibus, hence that the eight
Levites prayed to God successively; while Bertheau thinks that these
Levites entreated God, in penitential and supplicatory psalms, to have
mercy on His sinful but penitent people. In this case we must also
regard their address to the congregation in [Neh
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005) as a liturgical hymn, to which the
congregation responded by praising God in chorus. To this view may be
objected the circumstance, that no allusion is made in the narrative to
the singing of penitential or other songs. Besides, a confession of sins
follows in vv. 6-37, which may fitly be called a crying unto God,
without its being stated by whom it was uttered. "This section," says
Bertheau, "whether we regard its form or contents, cannot have been sung
either by the Levites or the congregation. We recognise in it the speech
of an individual, and hence accept the view that the statement of the
lxx, that after the singing of the Levites, [Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004), and the praising of God in [Neh
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005), Ezra came forward and spoke the
words following, is correct, and that the words καὶ εἶπεν Ἔσδρας, which
it inserts before [Neh 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006), originally
stood in the Hebrew text." But if Psalms, such as Ps 105-106, and 107,
were evidently appointed to be sung to the praise of God by the Levites
or by the congregation, there can be no reason why the prayer vv. 6-37
should not be adapted both in form and matter for this purpose. This
prayer by no means bears the impress of being the address of an
individual, but is throughout the confession of the whole congregation.
The prayer speaks of our fathers ([Neh
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#009), [Neh
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#016)), of what is come upon us ([Neh
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#033)), addresses Jahve as our God, and
says we have sinned. Of course Ezra might have uttered it in the name of
the congregation; but that the addition of the lxx, καὶ εἶπεν Ἔσδρας, is
of no critical value, and is a mere conjecture of the translators, is
evident from the circumstance that the prayer does not begin with the
words יהוה הוּא אתּה of v. 6, but passes into the form of direct address
to God in the last clause of v. 5: Blessed be the name of Thy glory. By
these words the prayer which follows is evidently declared to be the
confession of those who are to praise the glory of the Lord; and the
addition, "and Ezra said," characterized as an unskilful interpolation.

According to what has now been said, the summons, יהוה את בּרכוּ קוּמוּ,
[Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005), like the introductions to
may Hodu and Hallelujah Psalms (e.g., [Psa
105:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#001); [Psa
106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001)), is to be regarded as only an
exhortation to the congregation to praise God, i.e., to join in the
praises following, and to unite heartily in the confession of sin. This
view of the connection of [Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005) and
[Neh 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006) explains the reason why it is
not stated either in [Neh 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006), or at
the close of this prayer in [Neh 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#037),
that the assembled congregation blessed God agreeably to the summons
thus addressed to them. They did so by silently and heartily praying to,
and praising God with the Levites, who were reciting aloud the
confession of sin. On ויברכוּ R. Sal. already remarks: nunc incipiunt
loqui Levitae versus Shechinam s. ad ipsum Deum. The invitation to
praise God insensibly passes into the action of praising. If, moreover,
vv. 6-37 are related in the manner above stated to [Neh
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005), then it is not probable that the
crying to God with a loud voice ([Neh
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004)) was anything else than the
utterance of the prayer subsequently given, vv. 6-37. The repetition of
the names in [Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005) is not enough to
confirm this view, but must be explained by the breadth of the
representation here given, and is rescued from the charge of mere
tautology by the fact that in [Neh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004)
the office of the individuals in question is not named, which it is by
the word הלויּם in [Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005). For
הלויּם in [Neh 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#004) belongs as genitive
to מעלה, and both priests and laymen might have stood on the platform of
the Levites. For this reason it is subsequently stated in [Neh
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005), that Jeshua, etc., were Levites;
and in doing this the names are again enumerated. In the exhortation,
Stand up and bless, etc., Bertheau seeks to separate "for ever and ever"
from the imp. בּרכוּ, and to take it as a further qualification of
אלהיכם. This is, however, unnatural and arbitrary; comp. [Ch1
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#026). Still more arbitrary is it to
supply "One day all people" to ויברכוּ, "shall bless Thy name," etc. וגו
וּמרומם adds a second predicate to שׁם: and which is exalted above all
blessing and praise, i.e., sublimius est quam ut pro dignitate laudari
possit (R. Sal.).

[Nehemiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 9:6</span></span>

In [Neh 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006) this praising of God
begins with the acknowledgment that Jahve, the Creator of heaven and
earth, chose Abram and made a covenant with him to give the land of
Canaan to his seed, and had performed this word ([Neh
9:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006)). These verses form the theme of
that blessing the name of His glory, to which the Levites exhorted. This
theme is then elucidated by facts from Israel's history, in four
strophes. a. When God saw the affliction of His people in Egypt, He
delivered them by great signs and wonders from the power of Pharaoh,
gave them laws and judgments on Sinai, miraculously provided them with
food and water in the wilderness, and commanded them to take possession
of the promised land ([Neh 9:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#009)). b.
Although their fathers rebelled against Him, even in the wilderness, God
did not withdraw His mercy from them, but sustained them forty years, so
that they lacked nothing; and subdued kings before them, so that they
were able to conquer and possess the land ([Neh
9:16-25](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#016)). c. After they were settled
in the land they rebelled again, and God delivered them into the hand of
their oppressors; but as often as they cried unto Him, He helped them
again, till at length, because of their continued opposition, He gave
them into the power of the people of the lands, yet of His great mercy
did not wholly cast them off ([Neh
9:26-31](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026)). d. May He now too look upon
the affliction of His people, as the God that keepeth covenant and
mercy, although they have deserved by their sins the troubles they are
suffering ([Neh 9:32-37](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032)).

[Neh 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#006)

"Thou art Jahve alone; Thou hast made heaven, the heaven of heavens, and
all their host, the earth and all that is thereon, the sea and all
therein; and Thou givest life to them all, and the host of heaven
worshippeth Thee. [Neh 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#007) Thou art
Jahve, the God who didst choose Abram, and broughtest him forth out of
Ur of the Chaldees, and gavest him the name of Abraham: [Neh
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#008) And foundest his heart faithful
before Thee, and madest a covenant with him to give the land of the
Canaanites, the Hittites, the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the
Jebusites, and the Girgashites, to give to his seed, and hast performed
Thy word; for Thou art righteous." Jahve alone is God, the Creator of
heaven and earth, and of all creatures in heaven and on earth. In order
duly to exalt the almightiness of God, the notion of heaven is enhanced
by the addition "heaven of heavens," as in [Deu
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014); [Kg1
8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#027); and that of earth by the
addition "the sea and all therein;" comp. [Psa
146:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#006). כּל־צבאם, [Gen
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#001), here refers only to heaven.
מחיּה, to cause to live = to give and preserve life. כּלּם relates to
all creatures in heaven and earth. The host of heaven who worshipped God
are the angels, as in [Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002); [Psa
103:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#021). This only God chose Abram;
comp. [Gen 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001) with [Gen
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031) and [Gen
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#007); [Gen
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005), where God bestowed upon the
patriarch Abram the name of Abraham. The words, "Thou foundest his heart
faithful," refer to בּיהוה האמין there mentioned. The making of a
covenant alludes to [Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005).; the
enumeration of six Canaanitish nations to [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001); [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008); comp. with [Gen
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#020). This His word God performed
(fulfilled), for He is righteous. God is called צדּיק, inasmuch as with
Him word and deed correspond with each other; comp. [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004).

[Nehemiah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 9:9</span></span>

The fulfilment of this word by the deliverance of Israel from Egypt, and
their guidance through the wilderness to Canaan.

[Neh 9:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#009)

"And Thou sawest the affliction of our fathers in Egypt, and heardest
their cry by the Red Sea: [Neh 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#010)
And showedst signs and wonders upon Pharaoh and all his servants, and on
all the people of his land, because Thou knewest that they dealt proudly
against them, and madest Thyself a name, as this day. [Neh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#011) And Thou dividedst the sea before
them, and they went through the midst of the sea on dry land; and their
persecutors Thou threwest into the deeps, as a stone into the mighty
waters." In [Neh 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#009) are comprised two
subjects, which are carried out in [Neh
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#010), [Neh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#011) : (1) the affliction of the
Israelites in Egypt, which God saw (comp. [Exo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007)), and out of which He delivered
them by the signs and wonders He showed upon Pharaoh ([Neh
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#010)); (2) the crying for help at the
Red Sea, when the Israelites perceived Pharaoh with his horsemen and
chariots in pursuit ([Exo 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)), and
the help which God gave them by dividing the sea, etc. ([Neh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#011)). The words in [Neh
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#010) are supported by [Deu
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#022), on the ground of the historical
narrative, Ex 7-10. The expression עליהם הזידוּ כּי is formed according
to עליהם זדוּ אשׁר, [Exo 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#011). על
הזיד occurs [Exo 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014) in a general
sense. On וגו שׁם לך ותּעשׂ comp. [Jer
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020); [Isa
58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012), [Isa
58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014); [Ch1
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#022). A name as this day - in that
the miracles which God then did are still praised, and He continues
still to manifest His almighty power. The words of [Neh
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#011) are supported by [Exo
14:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021), [Exo
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028), and [Exo
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#019). אבן כּמו בּמצולות are from [Exo
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#005); עזּים בּמים from Ex 15 and [Isa
43:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#016).

[Neh 9:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#012)

"And Thou leddest them in the day by a cloudy pillar, and in the night
by a pillar of fire, to give them light in the way wherein they should
go. [Neh 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#013) And Thou camest down
upon mount Sinai, and spakest with them from heaven, and gavest them
right judgments and true laws, good statutes and commandments: [Neh
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#014) And madest known unto them Thy
holy Sabbath, and commandedst them precepts, statutes, and laws, by the
hand of Moses Thy servant. [Neh 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#015)
And gavest them bread from heaven for their hunger, and broughtest forth
water for them out of the rock for their thirst; and Thou commandedst
them to go in and possess the land, which Thou hadst lifted up Thine
hand to give them." Three particulars in the miraculous leading of
Israel through the wilderness are brought forward: a. Their being guided
in the way by miraculous tokens of the divine presence, in the pillar of
fire and cloud, [Neh 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#012); comp. [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021); [Num
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#014). b. The revelation of God on
Sinai, and the giving of the law, [Neh
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#013), [Neh
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#014). The descent of God on Sinai and
the voice from heaven agree with [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018), [Exo
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020), and [Exo
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001)., compared with [Deu
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#036). On the various designations of
the law, comp. [Psa 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009); [Psa
119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043), [Psa
119:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039), [Psa
119:142](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#142). Of the commandments, that
concerning the Sabbath is specially mentioned, and spoken of as a
benefit bestowed by God upon the Israelites, as a proclamation of His
holy Sabbath, inasmuch as the Israelites were on the Sabbath to share in
the rest of God; see rem. on [Exo
20:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#009). c. The provision of manna,
and of water from the rock, for their support during their journey
through the wilderness on the way to Canaan; [Exo
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#004), [Exo
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#010)., [Exo
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006); [Num
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#008); comp. [Psa
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024), [Psa
78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015); [Psa
105:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#040). לרשׁת לבוא like [Deu
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#001), [Deu
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#005); [Deu
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#031), and elsewhere. את־ידך נשׂאת is
to be understood according to [Num
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#030).

[Nehemiah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 9:16</span></span>

Even the fathers to whom God had shown such favour, repeatedly departed
from and rebelled against Him; but God of His great mercy did not
forsake them, but brought them into possession of the promised land.

[Neh 9:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#016)

"And they, even our fathers, dealt proudly, and hardened their necks,
and hearkened not to Thy commandments. [Neh
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017) They refused to obey, and were
not mindful of Thy wonders that Thou didst amongst them; and hardened
their necks, and appointed a captain to return to their bondage. But
Thou art a God ready to pardon, gracious and merciful, slow to anger,
and of great kindness, and forsookest them not." In these verses the
conduct of the children of Israel towards God is contrasted with His
kindness towards this stiff-necked people, the historical confirmation
following in [Neh 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#018). והם is
emphatic, and prefixed to contrast the conduct of the Israelites with
the benefits bestowed on them. The contrast is enhanced by the ו
explicative before אבתינוּ, even our fathers (which J. D. Michaelis
would expunge, from a misconception of its meaning, but which Bertheau
with good reason defends). Words are accumulated to describe the
stiff-necked resistance of the people. הזידוּ as above, [Neh
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#010). "They hardened their necks"
refers to [Exo 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009); [Exo
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#003); [Exo
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#009), and therefore already alludes to
the worship of the golden calf at Sinai, mentioned [Neh
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#018); while in [Neh
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017), the second great rebellion of
the people at Kadesh, on the borders of the promised land, Num 14, is
contemplated. The repetition of the expression, "they hardened their
hearts," shows that a second grievous transgression is already spoken of
in [Neh 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#017). This is made even
clearer by the next clause, וגו ראשׁ ויּתּנוּ, which is taken almost
verbally from [Num 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#004) : "They said
one to another, Let us make a captain (ראשׁ נתּנה), and return to
Egypt;" the notion being merely enhanced here by the addition לעבדתם, to
their bondage. The comparison with [Num
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#004) also shows that בּמרים is a
clerical error for בּמצרים, as the lxx read; for בּמרים, in their
stubbornness, after לעבדתם, gives no appropriate sense. In spite,
however, of their stiff-neckedness, God of His mercy and goodness did
not forsake them. סליחות אלוהּ, a God of pardons; comp. [Dan
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#009); [Psa
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004). וגו ורחוּם חנּוּן is a
reminiscence of [Exo 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006). The ו
before חסד came into the text by a clerical error.

[Neh 9:18-21](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#018)

"Yea, they even made them a molten calf, and said, This is thy god that
brought thee up out of Egypt, and wrought great provocations. [Neh
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#019) Yet Thou, in Thy manifold
mercies, didst not forsake them in the wilderness; the pillar of the
cloud departed not from them by day to lead them, and the pillar of fire
by night to show them light in the way wherein they should go. [Neh
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#020) Thou gavest also Thy good Spirit
to instruct them, and withheldest not Thy manna from their mouth, and
gavest them water for their thirst: [Neh
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#021) And forty years didst Thou
sustain them in the wilderness; they lacked nothing, their clothes waxed
not old, and their feet swelled not." כּי אף, also (even this) = yea
even. On the worship of the golden calf, see [Exo
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#004). The words "they did (wrought)
great provocations" involve a condemnation of the worship of the molten
calf; nevertheless God did not withdraw His gracious presence, but
continued to lead them by the pillar of cloud and fire. The passage [Num
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#014), according to which the pillar
of cloud and fire guided the march of the people through the wilderness
after the departure from Sinai, i.e., after their transgression in the
matter of the calf, is here alluded to. הענן עמּוּד is rhetorically
enhanced by את: and with respect to the cloudy pillar, it departed not;
so, too, in the second clause, האשׁ את־עמּוּד; comp. Ewald, 277, d. The
words, [Neh 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#020), "Thou gavest Thy
good Spirit," etc., refer to the occurrence, [Num
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#017), [Num
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025), where God endowed the seventy
elders with the spirit of prophecy for the confirmation of Moses'
authority. The definition "good Spirit" recalls [Psa
143:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#010). The sending of manna is first
mentioned [Num 11:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#006), comp. [Jos
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#012); the giving of water, [Num
20:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002). - In [Neh
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#021), all that the Lord did for Israel
is summed up in the assertion of [Deu
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007); [Deu
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004), חסרוּ לא; see the explanation of
these passages.

[Neh 9:22-25](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#022)

The Lord also fulfilled His promise of giving the land of Canaan to the
Israelites notwithstanding their rebelliousness. [Neh
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#022) "And Thou gavest them kingdoms
and nations, and didst divide them by boundaries; and they took
possession of the land of Sihon, both the land of the king of Heshbon,
and the land of Og king of Bashan. [Neh
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#023) And Thou didst multiply their
children as the stars of heaven, and bring them into the land which Thou
hadst promised to their fathers, that they should go in to possess. [Neh
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#024) And the children went in and
possessed the land, and Thou subduedst before them the inhabitants of
the land, the Canaanites, and gavest them into their hands, both their
kings and the people of the land, to do with them according to their
pleasure. [Neh 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#025) And they took
fortified cities, and a fat land, and took possession of houses filled
with all kinds of goods, wells digged, vineyards and olive gardens, and
fruit trees in abundance; and they ate and became fat, and delighted
themselves in Thy great goodness." לפאה ותּחלקם is variously explained.
Aben Ezra and others refer the suffix to the Canaanites, whom God
scattered in multos angulos or varias mundi partes. Others refer it to
the Israelites. According to this view, Ramb. says: fecisti eos per
omnes terrae Cananaeae angulos habitare; and Gusset.: distribuisti eis
terram usque ad angulum h. l. nulla vel minima regionum particula
excepta. But חלק, Piel, generally means the dividing of things; and when
used of persons, as in [Gen 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007); [Lam
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#016), to divide, to scatter, sensu
malo, which is here inapplicable to the Israelites. חלק signifies to
divide, especially by lot, and is used chiefly concerning the partition
of the land of Canaan, in Kal, [Jos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#005); [Jos
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002), and in Piel, [Jos
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#007); [Jos
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010); [Jos
19:51](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#051). The word פּאה also frequently
occurs in Joshua, in the sense of a corner or side lying towards a
certain quarter of the heavens, and of a boundary; comp. [Jos
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005); [Jos
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#012), [Jos
18:14-15](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#014), [Jos
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#020). According to this, Bertheau
rightly takes the words to say: Thou didst divide them (the kingdoms and
nations, i.e., the land of these nations) according to sides or
boundaries, i.e., according to certain definite limits. Sihon is the
king of Heshbon ([Deu 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#004)), and the ו
before ח את־ארץ מ is not to be expunged as a gloss, but regarded as
explicative: and, indeed, both the land of the king of Heshbon and the
land of Og. The conquest of these two kingdoms is named first, because
it preceded the possession of Canaan ([Num
21:21-35](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021)). The increase of the
children of the Israelites is next mentioned, [Neh
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#023); the fathers having fallen in the
wilderness, and only their children coming into the land of Canaan. The
numbering of the people in the plains of Moab (Num 26) is here alluded
to, when the new generation was found to be twice as numerous as that
which marched out of Egypt; while the words לרשׁת לבוא, here and in [Neh
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#015), are similar to [Deu
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#010). The taking possession of Canaan
is spoken of in [Neh 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#024). ותּכנע
recalls [Deu 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#003). כּרצונם, according
to their pleasure, comp. [Dan 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004).
Fortified cities, as Jericho and Ai.

[Nehemiah 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">neh 9:26</span></span>

But even in that good land the fathers were disobedient: they rejected
the commands of God, slew the prophets who admonished them, and were not
brought back to the obedience of God even by the chastisement inflicted
on them, till at length God delivered them into the hands of Gentile
kings, though after His great mercy He did not utterly forsake them. -
[Neh 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026) "And they were disobedient,
and rebelled against Thee, and cast Thy law behind their backs, and slew
Thy prophets which testified against them to turn them to Thee, and they
wrought great provocations. [Neh 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#027)
And Thou deliveredst them into the hand of their oppressors, so that
they oppressed them; and in the time of their oppression they cried unto
Thee. Then Thou heardest them from heaven, and according to Thy manifold
mercies Thou gavest them deliverers, who delivered them out of the hand
of their oppressors. [Neh 9:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#028) And
when they had rest, they again did evil before Thee. Then Thou
deliveredst them into the hand of their enemies, so that they had
dominion over them; and they cried again unto Thee, and Thou heardest
from heaven, and didst deliver them according to Thy great mercy, many
times."

[Neh 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026)

[Neh 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026) again contains, like [Neh
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#016), a general condemnation of the
conduct of the children of Israel towards the Lord their God during the
period between their entrance into Canaan and the captivity, which is
then justified by the facts adduced in the verses following. In proof of
their disobedience, it is mentioned that they cast the commands of God
behind their back (comp. [Kg1 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#019);
[Eze 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#035)), and slew the prophets,
e.g., Zechariah ([Ch2 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#021)), the
prophets of the days of Jezebel ([Kg1
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#013); [Kg1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010)), and others who rebuked their
sins to turn them from them. בּ העיד, to testify against sinners, comp.
[Kg2 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#013), [Kg2
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#015). The last clause of [Neh
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026) is a kind of refrain, repeated
from [Neh 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#018).

[Neh 9:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#027)

[Neh 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#027) and [Neh
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#028) refer to the times of the judges;
comp. [Jdg 2:11-23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#011). מושׁיעים are the
judges whom God raised up to deliver Israel out of the power of their
oppressors; comp. [Jdg 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009). with [Neh
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#016). עתּים רבּות, multitudes of
times, is a co-ordinate accusative: at many times, frequently; רבּות
like [Lev 25:51](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#051).

[Neh 9:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#029)

"And testifiedst against them, to bring them back again to Thy law; yet
they hearkened not to Thy commandments, and sinned against Thy
judgments, which if a man do he shall live in them, and gave a resisting
shoulder, and hardened their neck, and would not hear. [Neh
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#030) And Thou didst bear with them
many years, and didst testify against them by Thy Spirit through Thy
prophets; but they would not hearken, therefore Thou gavest them into
the hand of the people of the lands. [Neh
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#031) Nevertheless in Thy great mercy
Thou didst not utterly consume them, nor forsake them; for Thou art
gracious and merciful."

[Neh 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#029) and [Neh
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#030) treat of the times of the kings.
בּהם ותּעד is the testimony of the prophets against the idolatrous
people; comp. [Neh 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026). וּבמשׁפּטיך
is emphatically prefixed, and taken up again by בּם. The sentence, which
if a man do he shall live in them, is formed upon [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005), comp. [Eze
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#011). On the figurative expression,
they gave a resisting shoulder, comp. [Zac
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#011). The simile is taken from the ox,
who rears against the yoke, and desires not to bear it; comp. [Hos
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016). The sentences following are
repeated from [Neh 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#016). עליהם תּמשׁך
is an abbreviated expression for חסד משׁך, [Psa
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#011); [Psa
109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012); [Jer
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#003), to draw out, to extend for a
long time favour to any one: Thou hadst patience with them for many
years, viz., the whole period of kingly rule from Solomon to the times
of the Assyrians. The delivering into the power of the people of the
lands, i.e., of the heathen (comp. [Psa
106:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#040).), began with the invasion of
the Assyrians (comp. [Neh 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032)), who
destroyed the kingdom of the ten tribes, and was inflicted upon Judah
also by means of the Chaldeans.

[Neh 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#031)

But in the midst of these judgments also, God, according to His promise,
[Jer 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027); [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010), [Jer
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#018); [Jer
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#011), and elsewhere, did not utterly
forsake His people, nor make a full end of them; for He did not suffer
them to become extinct in exile, but preserved a remnant, and delivered
it from captivity.

[Nehemiah 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">neh 9:32</span></span>

May then, God, who keepeth covenant and mercy, now also look upon the
affliction of His people, though kings, rulers, priests, and people have
fully deserved this punishment; for they are now bondmen, and in great
affliction, in the land of their fathers. [Neh
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032) "And now, our God, the great, the
mighty, and the terrible God, who keepest covenant and mercy, let not
all the trouble that hath come upon us, on our kings, our princes our
priests, our prophets, and our fathers, and on all Thy people, since the
times of the kings of Assyria unto this day, seem little to Thee. [Neh
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#033) Thou art just in all that is come
upon us; for Thou hast done right, but we have done wickedly. [Neh
9:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#034) And our kings, our princes, our
priests, and our fathers have not kept Thy law, nor hearkened to Thy
commandments and Thy testimonies, wherewith Thou didst testify against
them. [Neh 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#035) And they have not
served Thee in their kingdom, and in Thy great goodness that Thou gavest
them, and in the large and fat land which Thou gavest up to them, and
have not turned from their wicked works. [Neh
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#036) Behold, we are now bondmen; and
the land that Thou gavest unto our fathers to eat the fruit thereof, and
the good thereof, behold, we are bondmen in it. [Neh
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#037) And it yieldeth much increase
unto the kings whom Thou hast set over us because of our sins; and they
have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle at their pleasure,
and we are in great distress." The invocation of God, [Neh
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032), like that in [Neh
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#005), is similar to [Deu
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017). לפניך ימעט אל stands
independently, the following clause being emphasized by את, like e.g.,
[Neh 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#019) : Let not what concerns all
our trouble be little before Thee; comp. the similar construction with
מעט in [Jos 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#017). What seems little
is easily disregarded. The prayer is a litotes; and the sense is, Let
our affliction be regarded by Thee as great and heavy. The nouns
למלכינוּ, etc., are in apposition to the suffix of מצאתנוּ, the object
being continued by ל.

[Neh 9:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#033)

Thou art just: comp. [Neh 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#008), [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004); [Ezr
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#015). כּל על, upon all, i.e.,
concerning all that has befallen us; because their sins deserved
punishment, and God is only fulfilling His word upon the sinners. In
[Neh 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#034), את again serves to
emphasize the subject. In the enumeration of the different classes of
the people, the prophets are here omitted, because, as God's witnesses,
they are not reckoned among these who had transgressed, though involved
([Neh 9:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#032)) in the sufferings that
have fallen on the nation.

[Nehemiah 9:35](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">neh 9:35</span></span>

(10:1)

הם are the fathers who were not brought to repentance by God's goodness.
בּמלכוּתם, in their independent kingdom. הרב טוּבך, Thy much good, i.e.,
the fulness of Thy goodness, or "in the midst of Thy great blessing"
(Bertheau). The predicate הרחבה, the wide, extensive country, is derived
from [Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008). In [Neh
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#036)., the prayer that God would not
lightly regard the trouble of His people, is supported by a statement of
the need and affliction in which they still are. They are bondmen in the
land which God gave to their fathers as a free people, bondmen of the
Persian monarchs; and the increase of the land which God appointed for
His people belongs to the kings who rule over them. The rulers of the
land dispose of their bodies and their cattle, by carrying off both men
and cattle for their use, e.g., for military service. כּרצונם like [Neh
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#024).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 10](neh010)

</div>
