<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh002)  [Next](neh004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 3:0</span></span>

The Building of the Walls and Gates of Jerusalem - [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)

In these two chapters is described the building of the walls and gates
of Jerusalem: the individuals and families who performed the work, and
the portion of wall and the gates on which different families were
respectively employed, being specified in Neh 3; while the attempts of
Sanballat and his associates to obstruct the building and the defensive
measures resorted to by Nehemiah follow, 4:1-17.

Verses 1-32. The enumeration of the builders, and of the gates and
portions of wall built, begins with the sheep-gate and the portion of
the wall adjoining it, built by the priests ([Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001) and [Neh
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002)), and concludes with the
goldsmiths and merchants who built up to the sheep-gate ([Neh
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032)). Throughout it is almost
constantly said of the several parties of builders that they built ידו
על, by the side of, next to, the party previously named. Hence we are
justified in inferring that the course of the wall is adhered to in this
statement, and that the gates are mentioned in the actual order in which
they were found in the walls.

(Note: This description of the walls of Jerusalem, together with the
short statements in [Neh 2:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013) and
[Neh 12:27-40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027), forms the chief
authority for the topography of ancient Jerusalem (before the
captivity), and has been frequently discussed and explained. Comp. a
summary of recent topographical investigations on this subject by Arnold
in Herzog's Realencycl. xviii. p. 620f. Among the numerous plans of
ancient Jerusalem, the best is: A plan of the town and environs of
Jerusalem, constructed by C. W. M. Van de Velde; with Memoir by Dr.
Titus Tobler, 1858, Gotha.)

[Nehemiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 3:1</span></span>

The narrative of the building is connected with what precedes by ויּקם,
which alludes to the carrying out of the resolve, נקוּם, [Neh
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#018). The enumeration begins with
Eliashib the high priest and his brethren, i.e., the ordinary priests.
These built the sheep-gate, rightly sought by modern topographers in the
eastern wall north of Haram, the site of the ancient temple, i.e., in
the position or neighbourhood of the present St. Stephen's gate, through
which the Bedouins to this day drive sheep into the town for sale
(Tobler, Topogr. i. p. 149). "Although," as Bertheau remarks, "we are
not generally justified, after the lapse of so many centuries, during
which great changes have been made in the positions of the gates and
walls, and in face of the fact that the present walls and gates were not
erected till the years 1536, 1537, and 1539, in determining the
direction and extent of the walls between the several gates, and the
locality of the gates in this description, by the direction and extent
of the wall and the locality of the gates in modern Jerusalem (Tobl.
Topogr. Dritte Wanderung, p. 265), yet in the present instance valid
arguments exist in favour of this view. The very neighbourhood of the
temple and the nature of the soil bear witness that from ancient times a
gate was placed here which took its name from the circumstance that
sheep were driven in by it, whether for sale in the market or for
sacrificial purposes."

(Note: In the neighbourhood of this gate was the pool of Bethesda ([Joh
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#002)), i.e., either the present Birket
Israel or Birket es Serain, south of St. Stephen's gate (Tobler,
Denkbltter, p. 53f., and Dritte Wanderung, p. 221), or the Struthion
pool mentioned by Josephus, bell. Jud. v. 11. 4, κολυμβήθρα τοῦ
στρουθίου; Krafft, Topographie von Jerusalem, p. 127f.)

They sanctified it and set up its doors: and to the tower Hammeah they
sanctified it unto the tower Hananeel. קדּשׁ, to sanctify, to dedicate
(comp. [Kg1 8:64](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#064)), can here only mean
that the priests dedicated that portion of building on which they were
engaged, as soon as they had finished it, for the purpose of sanctifying
the whole work by this preliminary consecration; the solemn dedication
of the whole wall not taking place till afterwards, and being related
[Neh 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#027). The setting up of the
doors in the gates did not, according to [Neh
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#001), take place till after all the
breaches in the wall had been repaired, i.e., till the building of the
wall was completed. It is, however, mentioned here, and in [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003), [Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006), etc., contemporaneously with the
wall-building; because the builders of the several gates, undertaking
also the construction and setting up of the doors, the intention is to
give a summary of the work executed by the respective building parties.
המּאה ועד־מגּדּל is still dependent on יבנוּ, that is to say, this verb
must be mentally repeated before the words: they built to the tower
Hammeah, they sanctified it (the suffix in קדּשׁוּהוּ can only relate to
מגּדּל). יבנוּ must also be repeated before חננאל מגּדּל עד: and they
built further, unto the tower Hananeel. The tower המּאה (the hundred) is
only mentioned here and [Neh 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039),
but the tower Hananeel is likewise spoken of [Jer
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038) and [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010). From these passages it appears
that the two towers were so situated, that any one going from west to
east along the north wall of the city, and thence southward, would first
come to the tower Hananeel, and afterwards to the tower Hammeah, and
that both were between the fish-gate and the sheep-gate. From the
passages in Jeremiah and Zechariah especially, it is evident that the
tower Hananeel stood at the north-east corner of the wall. Hence the
statement in this verse, that the portion of wall built by the priests
extended to the north-east corner of the wall; and the tower Hammeah
must be sought between the sheep-gate and the north-east corner of the
wall. Whence the names of these towers were derived is unknown.

[Neh 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002)

Next to him built the men of Jericho (comp. [Ezr
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#024)); and next to them built Zaccur
the son of Imri. The suffix of the first ידו על, though in the singular
number, refers to Eliashib and the priests ([Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)), and that of the second to the
men of Jericho, while in [Neh 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004) and
[Neh 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009), on the contrary, a singular
noun is followed by ידם על; both ידו על and ידם על expressing merely the
notion beside, next to, and builders of the respective portions being at
one time regarded as in a plural, at another in a singular sense (as a
company). The portion built by the men of Jericho and Zaccur the son of
Imri, the head of a family, not mentioned elsewhere, let between the
tower Hananeel and the fish-gate in the north wall. When individuals
are, like Zaccur, mentioned in the following description, e.g., [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004), [Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006), as builders or repairers of
portions of wall, they are heads of houses who engaged in the work of
building at the head of the fathers of families and individuals who were
dependent on them.

[Nehemiah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 3:3</span></span>

The fish-gate did the sons of Senaah build (see rem. on [Ezr
2:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#035)); they laid its beams, and set up
its doors, bolts, and bars. The fish-gate probably received its name
from the fish-market in its neighbourhood, to which the Syrians brought
sea-fish ([Neh 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013), [Neh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016)); it is also mentioned in [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039); [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014), and [Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010). It was not situated, as Thenius
has represented it in his plan of Jerusalem, close to the corner tower
of Hananeel, but somewhat to the west of it in the north wall; two
lengths of wall being, according to [Neh
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002), built between this tower and the
gate in question. With respect to קרוּהוּ, see rem. on [Neh
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008). Besides the doors for the gate,
מנעוּיו and בּריחיו are mentioned, as also [Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006), [Neh
3:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013). Both words denote bars for
closing doors. בּרחים are, to judge from the use of this word in the
description of the tabernacle ([Exo
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#026). and elsewhere), longer bars,
therefore cross-bars, used on the inner side of the door; and מנעוּלים
the brackets into which they were inserted.

[Nehemiah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 3:4</span></span>

Next to these, Meremoth the son of Urijah, the son of Hakkoz, Meshullam
the son of Berechiah, Zadok the son of Baana, and the Tekoites, repaired
in the above order, each a portion of wall. החזיק, to strengthen, means
here to repair the gaps and holes in the wall; comp. [Neh
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009), [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027). Meremoth ben Urijah repaired,
according to [Neh 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021), another
portion besides. Meshullam ben Berechiah was, according to [Neh
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#018), a person of consideration in
Jerusalem. The men of Tekoa, who do not occur among those who returned
with Zerubbabel (Ezra 2), also repaired a second portion. "But their
nobles brought not their neck to the service of their Lord." The
expression "to bring the neck to service" is, according to [Jer
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#011), to be understood as meaning: to
bring the neck under the yoke of any one, i.e., to subject oneself to
the service of another. צוּרם stands for צוּארם. It is questionable
whether אדניהם is to be taken as the plural of excellence, and
understood of God, as in [Deu 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017);
[Psa 135:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#003); [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006); or of earthly lords or rulers, as
in [Gen 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001); [Sa2
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#003); [Kg1
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#027). The former view seems to us
decidedly correct, for it cannot be discerned how the suffix should
(according to Bertheau's opinion) prevent our thinking of the service of
God, if the repairing of the wall of Jerusalem may be regarded as a
service required by God and rendered to Him. Besides, the fact that
אדנים is only used of kings, and is inapplicable whether to the
authorities in Jerusalem or to Nehemiah, speaks against referring it to
secular rulers or authorities.

[Nehemiah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 3:6</span></span>

From the gate of the old wall to the valley gate. - [Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006) הישׁנה שׁער does not mean the old
gate, for הישׁנה is genitive. Schultz (Jerus. p. 90), Thenius, and
Bertheau supply העיר, gate of the old town, and explain the name from
the fact that Bezetha, the new town, already existed as a suburb or
village in front of the gate, which was named after the contrast. To
this Arnold rightly objects (in Herzog's Realencycl. xviii. p. 628) that
it is by no means proved that there was at that time any contrast
between the old and new towns, and as well as Hupfeld (die topograph.
Streitfragen ber Jerus., in the morgenl. Zeitschrift, xv. p. 231)
supplies חומה: gate of the old wall. He does not, however, derive this
designation from the remark (vv. [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008)), "They fortified Jerusalem unto
the broad wall," as though this old wall received its name from having
been left undestroyed by the Chaldeans, which is irreconcilable with the
fact (4-8) that both the gate of the old wall and the portions of wall
adjoining it on each side were now built, but understands the term "old
wall" as used in contrast to the "broad wall," which had indeed been
rebuilt after the destruction by Joash ([Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013)). This view we esteem to be
correct. The individuals specified as the builders of this gate are not
further known. That two principes were employed in the rebuilding of
this gate is explained by Ramb. as arising vel quod penitus disturbata a
Chaldaeis, vel quod magnis sumtibus reparanda fuit, quos unus princeps
ferre non potuit.

[Neh 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007)

Next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the
Meronothite, the men of Gibeon and of Mizpah. If Melatiah is to be
regarded as the superintendent of the men of Gibeon, Jadon the
Meronothite must be equally esteemed that of the men of Mizpah.
Meronoth, mentioned only here and [Ch1
27:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#030), must have been some small place
near Mizpah. Mizpah (המּצפּה, the watch-tower) is probably the modern
Nebi Samwil, two leagues to the north-east of Jerusalem; see rem. on
[Jos 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#026). The meaning of the words
next following, וגו פּחת לכּסּא, is questionable. Bertheau, together
with Osiander, Cler., de Wette, and others, understands them as more
precisely defining the men before named, as men of Gibeon and Mizpah, of
the throne or belonging to the throne of the Pechah of Eber hannahar.
This addition brings to light the fact that Jews who were not under the
jurisdiction of Nehemiah, nevertheless took part in the restoration of
the wall. It also distinguishes these men of Mizpah from those mentioned
[Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015) and [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019), who were certainly not under the
Pechah of Eber hannahar. Finally, the boundary of the little territory
of the returned Jewish community must have been at about Mizpah and
Gibeon; and a statement that certain inhabitants of this district were
not under the Pechah of Jerusalem, but under the Pechah of the province
west of Euphrates, would agree with the position of Gibeon and Mizpah.
None, however, of these reasons are of much force. For if, according to
[Neh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005) and [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), the Tekoites repaired two
different lengths of wall, without this fact implying any distinction
between these two parties of Tekoite builders, the same may be the case
with the men of Gibeon and Mizpah. Besides, neither in this verse nor in
[Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015) and [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019) are the men of Mizpah in general
spoken of, so as to make a distinction necessary; for in this verse two
chiefs, Melatiah and Jadon, are designated as men of Gibeon and Mizpah,
and in [Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015) and [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019) two rulers of the district of
Mizpah are specified by name. Hence the view that part of the
inhabitants of Mizpah were under the jurisdiction of the Pechah of the
province west of Euphrates, and part under that of the Pechah of
Jerusalem, is devoid of probability. Finally, there is no adequate
analogy for the metonomy set up in support of this view, viz., that
כּסּא, a seat, a throne, stands for jurisdiction. The words in question
can have only a local signification. כּסּא may indeed by metonomy be
used for the official residence, but not for the official or judicial
district, or jurisdiction of the Pechah. לכּסּא does not state the point
to which, but the direction or locality in which, these persons repaired
the wall: "towards the seat of the Pechah," i.e., at the place where the
court or tribunal of the governor placed over the province on this side
Euphrates was held when he came to Jerusalem to administer justice, or
to perform any other official duties required of him. This being so, it
appears from this verse that this court was within the northern wall,
and undoubtedly near a gate.

[Neh 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008)

Next to him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah of the goldsmiths, and
next to him repaired Hananiah, a son of the apothecaries. צורפים is in
explanatory apposition to the name Uzziel, and the plural is used to
denote that his fellow-artisans worked with him under his direction.
Hananiah is called בּן־הרקּחים, son of the apothecaries, i.e., belonging
to the guild of apothecaries. The obscure words, וגו ויּעזבוּ, "and they
left Jerusalem unto the broad wall," have been variously interpreted.
From [Neh 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), where the broad wall
is also mentioned, it appears that a length of wall between the tower of
the furnaces and the gate of Ephraim was thus named, and not merely a
place in the wall distinguished for its breadth, either because it stood
out or formed a corner, as Bertheau supposes; for the reason adduced for
this opinion, viz., that it is not said that the procession went along
the broad wall, depends upon a mistaken interpretation of the passage
cited. The expression "the broad wall" denotes a further length of wall;
and as this lay, according to [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), west of the gate of Ephraim,
the conjecture forces itself upon us, that the broad wall was that 400
cubits of the wall of Jerusalem, broken down by the Israelite king
Joash, from the gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate ([Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013)), and afterwards rebuilt by
Uzziel of a greater breadth, and consequently of increased strength
(Joseph. Antiq. ix. 10. 3). Now the gate of Ephraim not being mentioned
among the rebuilt gates, and this gate nevertheless existing (according
to [Neh 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016)) in the days of Nehemiah,
the reason of this omission must be the circumstance that it was left
standing when the wall of Jerusalem was destroyed. The remark, then, in
this verse seems to say the same concerning the broad wall, whether we
understand it to mean: the builders left Jerusalem untouched as far as
the broad wall, because this place as well as the adjoining gate of
Ephraim needed no restoration; or: the Chaldeans had here left
Jerusalem, i.e., either the town or town-wall, standing. So Hupfeld in
his above-cited work, p. 231; Arnold; and even older expositors.

(Note: Bertheau's interpretation of this statement, viz., that at the
rebuilding and re-fortification of the town after the captivity, the
part of the town extending to the broad wall was left, i.e., was not
rebuilt, but delayed for the present, answers neither to the verbal
sense of the passage nor to the particular mentioned [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), that at the dedication of the
wall the second company of them that gave thanks went upon the wall from
beyond the tower of the furnaces even unto the broad wall, and over from
beyond the gate of Ephraim, etc. Haneberg (in Reusch's theol.
Literaturbl. 1869, No. 12) supports this view, but understands by "the
broad wall" the wall which had a broad circuit, i.e., the wall previous
to the captivity, and hence infers that the Jerusalem now rebuilt was
not equal in extent to the old city. But if a portion of the former city
had here been left outside the new wall, the gate of Ephraim would have
been displaced, and must have been rebuilt elsewhere in a position to
the south of the old gate. Still less can the attempt of the elder
Buxtorf (Lexic. talm. rabb. s. v. עזב), now revived by Ewald (Gesch. iv.
p. 174), to force upon the word עזב the meaning restaurare, or fortify,
be justified.)

[Neh 3:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009)

Further lengths of wall were built by Rephaiah ben Hur, the ruler of the
half district of Jerusalem, i.e., of the district of country belonging
to Jerusalem (comp. [Neh 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019) with
[Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015), where Mizpah and the
district of Mizpah are distinguished); by Jedaiah ben Harumaph, בּיתו
ונגד, and indeed before (opposite) his house, i.e., the portion of wall
which lay opposite his own dwelling; and by Hattush the son of
Hashabniah. Whether Hattush is to be identified with the priest of this
name ([Neh 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#005)), or with the
similarly named descendant of David ([Ezr
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#002)), or with neither, cannot be
determined.

[Neh 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#011)

A second section of wall was repaired by Malchijah the son of Harim, and
Hashshub ben Pahath-Moab, two families who came up with Zerubbabel, [Ezr
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#006) and [Ezr
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#032). Bertheau understands שׁנית מדּה
of a second section of wall added to a first already repaired by the
same builders. So, too, he says, did Meremoth ben Urijah build one
portion, [Neh 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004), and a second, [Neh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021); comp. [Neh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005) and [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), [Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015) and [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019), [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008) and [Neh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030). This first portion, however,
which this mention of a second presupposes, not being named, he infers
that our present text has not preserved its original completeness, and
thinks it probable, from [Neh 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038)
and [Neh 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039), that certain
statements, in this description, relating to the gate of Ephraim and its
neighbourhood, which once stood before [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008), have been omitted. This inference
is unfounded. The non-mention of the gate of Ephraim is to be ascribed,
as we have already remarked on [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008), to other reasons than the
incompleteness of the text; and the assertion that שׁנית מדּה assumes
that a former portion was repaired by the same builders, receives no
support from a comparison of [Neh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005)
with [Neh 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), [Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015) with [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019), and [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008) with [Neh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030). Hananiah the son of Shelemiah,
and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, who, according to [Neh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030), built שׁני מדּה, are not
identical with Hananiah the son of the apothecaries, [Neh
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008). The same remark applies to Ezer
the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah ([Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019)), and Shallum the ruler of the
district of Mizpah ([Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)). Only
in [Neh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005) and [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), and [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004) and [Neh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021), are the names of the builders
the same. Moreover, besides [Neh 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021)
and [Neh 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), שׁנית מדּה occurs five
times more ([Neh 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#011), [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019), [Neh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020), [Neh
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024), and [Neh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030)) with respect to builders not
previously (nor subsequently) mentioned in this list. Hence, in five
different places, the names of the building parties, and the notices of
the portions of wall built by them respectively, must have been lost, -
a circumstance priori incredible. When, however, we consider the verses,
in which שׁנית מדּה occurs, more closely, the second length is, in [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019), [Neh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020), [Neh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021), [Neh
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024), and [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), more nearly defined by a
statement of locality: thus, in [Neh
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019), we have a second piece over
against the ascent to the arsenal at the angle; in [Neh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020), a second piece from the angle to
the door of the house of Eliashib; in [Neh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021), a second piece from the door of
the house of Eliashib to ... ; in [Neh
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024), a second piece from the house of
Azariah to ... , who, according to [Neh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023), built near his own house; in
[Neh 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), a second piece over against
the great projecting tower ... , as far as which, according to [Neh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026), the Nethinim dwelt in Ophel.
From all this, it is evident that שׁנית מדּה in these verses, always
denotes a second portion of that length of wall previously spoken of, or
a portion next to that of which the building was previously mentioned.
And so must שׁנית מדּה be understood in the present [Neh
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#011), where it is used because
Malchiah and Hashshub repaired or built the tower of the furnaces,
besides the portion of wall. שׁנית מדּה may be rendered, "another or a
further piece." the word שׁנית is chosen, because that previously
mentioned is regarded as a first. The tower of the furnaces lay,
according to this verse and [Neh
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#038), where alone it is again
mentioned, between the broad wall and the valley-gate. Now, since there
was between the gate of Ephraim and the corner-gate a portion of wall
four hundred cubits long (see [Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013)), which, as has been above
remarked, went by the name of the broad wall, it is plain that the tower
of the furnaces must be sought for in the neighbourhood of the
corner-gate, or perhaps even identified with it. This is the simplest
way of accounting for the omission of any notice in the present
description of this gate, which is mentioned not merely before ([Ch2
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#009); [Jer
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038); and [Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013)), but also after, the captivity
([Zac 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010)). It is probable that the
tower of the furnaces served as a defence for the corner-gate at the
north-western corner of the town, where now lie, upon an earlier
building of large stones with morticed edges, probably a fragment of the
old Jewish wall, the ruins of the ancient Kal'at el Dshalud (tower of
Goliath), which might, at the time of the Crusades, have formed the
corner bastion of the city: comp. Rob. Palestine, ii. p. 114; Biblical
Researches, p. 252; and Tobler, Topogr. i. p. 67f.

[Neh 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#012)

Next repaired Shallum, ruler of the other (comp. [Neh
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009)) half district of Jerusalem, he
and his daughters. הוּא can only refer to Shallum, not to הוּא, which
would make the daughters signify the daughters of the district, of the
villages and places in the district.

[Nehemiah 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 3:13</span></span>

From the valley-gate to the dung-gate. The valley-gate lay in the west,
in the neighbourhood of the present Jaffa gate (see rem. on [Neh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013)), "where," as Tobler, Topogr. i.
p. 163, expresses it, "we may conclude there must almost always have
been, on the ridge near the present citadel, the site in the time of
Titus of the water-gate also (Joseph. bell. Jud. v. 7. 3), an entrance
provided with gates." Hanun and the inhabitants of Zanoah are here
connected, probably because Hanun was the chief or ruler of the
inhabitants of this place. Zanoah, now Zanna, is in the Wady Ismail,
west of Jerusalem; see rem. on [Jos
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#034). They built and set up its
doors, etc.; comp. [Neh 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006). The
further statement, "and a thousand cubits on the wall unto the
dung-gate," still depends on החזיק, the principal verb of the verse. It
is incomprehensible how Bertheau can say that this statement does not
refer to the repairing of the wall, but only declares that the distance
from the valley-gate to the dung-gate amounted to one thousand cubits.
For the remark, that a section of such a length is, in comparison with
the other sections, far too extensive, naturally proves nothing more
than that the wall in this part had suffered less damage, and therefore
needed less repair. The number one thousand cubits is certainly stated
in round numbers. The length from the present Jaffa gate to the supposed
site of the dung-gate, on the south-western edge of Zion, is above two
thousand five hundred feet. The dung-gate may, however, have been placed
at a greater distance from the road leading to Baher. השׁפות is only
another form for האשׁפּות (without א prosthetic). Malchiah ben Rechab,
perhaps a Rechabite, built and fortified the dung-gate; for though the
Rechabites were forbidden to build themselves houses ([Jer
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#007)), they might, without
transgressing this paternal injunction, take part in building the
fortifications of Jerusalem (Berth.). This conjecture is, however,
devoid of probability, for a Rechabite would hardly be a prince or ruler
of the district of Beth-haccerem. The name Rechab occurs as early as the
days of David, [Sa2 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#005). בּית־הכּרם,
i.e., the garden or vineyard-house, where, according to [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001), the children of Benjamin were
wont to set up a banner, and to blow the trumpet in Tekoa, is placed by
Jerome (Comm. Jer 6) upon a hill between Jerusalem and Tekoa; on which
account Pococke (Reise, ii. p. 63) thinks Beth-Cherem must be sought for
on the eminence now known as the Frank mountain, the Dshebel Fureidis,
upon which was the Herodium of Josephus. This opinion is embraced with
some hesitation by Robinson (Pal. ii. p. 397), and unreservedly by
Wilson (The Holy City, i. p. 396) and v. de Velde, because "when we
consider that this hill is the highest point in the whole district, and
is by reason of its isolated position and conical shape very
conspicuous, we shall find that no other locality better corresponds
with the passage cited.

[Nehemiah 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 3:15</span></span>

The fountain-gate and a portion of wall adjoining it was repaired by
Shallum the son of Col-hozeh, the ruler of the district of Mizpah.
כּל־חזה occurs again, [Neh 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#005),
apparently as the name of another individual. To יבננּוּ is added
יטללנּוּ, he covered it, from טלל, to shade, to cover, answering to the
קרוּהוּ of [Neh 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003) and [Neh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006), probably to cover with a layer of
beams. The position of the fountain-gate is apparent from the
description of the adjoining length of wall which Shallum also repaired.
This was "the wall of the pool of Shelach (Siloah) by the king's garden,
and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David." The word שׁלח
recalls שׁלּוח; the pool of Shelach can be none other than the pool
which received its water through the שׁלח, i.e., mission (aquae). By the
researches of Robinson (Pal. ii. p. 148f.) and Tobler (Die Siloahquelle
u. der Oelberg, p. 6f.), it has been shown that the pool of Siloah
receives its water from a subterranean conduit 1750 feet long, cut
through the rock from the Fountain of the Virgin, Ain Sitti Miriam, on
the eastern slope of Ophel. Near to the pool of Siloah, on the eastern
declivity of Zion, just where the Tyropoean valley opens into the vale
of Kidron, is found an old and larger pool (Birket el Hamra), now
covered with grass and trees, and choked with earth, called by Tobler
the lower pool of Siloah, to distinguish it from the one still existing,
which, because it lies north-west of the former, he calls the upper pool
of Siloah. One of these pools of Siloah, probably the lower and larger,
is certainly the king's pool mentioned [Neh
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#014), in the neighbourhood of which
lay, towards the east and south-east, the king's garden. The wall of the
pool of Shelach need not have reached quite up to the pool, but may have
gone along the edge of the south-eastern slope of Zion, at some distance
therefrom. In considering the next particular following, "unto the
stairs that go down from the city of David," we must turn our thoughts
towards a locality somewhat to the north of this pool, the description
now proceeding from the south-eastern corner of the wall northward.
These stairs are not yet pointed out with certainty, unless perhaps some
remains of them are preserved in the "length of rocky escarpment," which
Robinson (Pal. ii. p. 102, and Biblical Researches, p. 247) remarked on
the narrow ridge of the eastern slope of the hill of Zion, north of
Siloam, at a distance of 960 feet from the present wall of the city,
"apparently the foundations of a wall or of some similar piece of
building."

(Note: Bertheau's view, that these stairs were situated where Mount
Zion, upon which stood the city of David, descends abruptly towards the
east, and therefore on the precipice running from south to north, which
still rises ninety-one feet above the ground northwards of the now
so-called Bab el Mogharibeh or dung-gate, opposite the southern part of
the west wall of the temple area, is decidedly incorrect. For this place
is two thousand feet, i.e., more than one thousand cubits, distant from
the pool of Siloah, while our text places them immediately after the
length of wall by this pool. The transposition of these "steps" to a
position within the present wall of the city is, in Bertheau's case,
connected with the erroneous notion that the fountain-gate ([Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015) and [Neh
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#014)) stood on the site of the present
dung-gate (Bab el Mogharibeh), for which no other reason appears than
the assumption that the southern wall of the city of David, before the
captivity, went over Zion, in the same direction as the southern wall of
modern Jerusalem, only perhaps in a rather more southerly direction, -
an assumption shown to be erroneous, even by the circumstance that in
this case the sepulchres of David, Solomon, and the kings of Judah would
have stood outside the city wall, on the southern part of Zion; while,
according to the Scripture narrative, David, Solomon, and the kings of
Judah were buried in the city of David ([Kg1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010); [Kg1
11:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#042); [Kg1
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#031); [Kg1
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#008), and elsewhere). But apart from
this consideration, this hypothesis is shattered by the statements of
this fifteenth verse, which Bertheau cannot explain so inconsistently
with the other statements concerning the building of the wall, as to
make them say that any one coming from the west and going round by the
south of the city towards the east, would first arrive at the
fountain-gate, and then at the portion of wall in question; but is
obliged to explain, so that the chief work, the building of the
fountain-gate, is mentioned first; then the slighter work, the
reparation of a length of wall as supplementary; and this makes the
localities enumerated in [Neh 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013)
succeed each other in the following order, in a direction from the west
by south and east towards the north: "Valley-gate - one thousand cubits
of wall as far as the dung-gate; dung-gate - the wall of the conduit
towards the king's garden, as far as the stairs which lead from the city
of David - fountain-gate." No adequate reason for this transposition of
the text is afforded by the circumstance that no portion of wall is
mentioned ([Neh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014) and [Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)) as being repaired between the
dung-gate and the valley-gate. For how do we know that this portion on
the southern side of Zion was broken down and needing repair? Might not
the length between these two gates have been left standing when the city
was burnt by the Chaldeans?)

[Nehemiah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 3:16</span></span>

The wall from the steps leading from the city of David to the angle
opposite the armoury. From [Neh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016)
onwards we find for the most part אחריו, after him, instead of ידו על,
which only occurs again in [Neh 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#017)
and [Neh 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019). Nehemiah the son of
Azbuk, the ruler of half the district of Beth-zur (see rem. on [Ch2
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#007)), repaired the wall as far as
"opposite the sepulchres of David, and unto the pool that was made, and
to the house of the heroes." The sepulchres of David are the sepulchres
of the house of David in the city of David (comp. [Ch2
32:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#033)). "Opposite the sepulchres of
David" is the length of wall on the eastern side of Zion, where was
probably, as Thenius endeavours to show in the Zeitschr. of the deutsch
morgenl. Gesellsch. xxi. p. 495f., an entrance to the burying-place of
the house of David, which was within the city. The "pool that was made"
must be sought at no great distance, in the Tyropoean valley, but has
not yet been discovered. The view of Krafft (Topographie von Jerusalem,
p. 152), that it was the reservoir artificially constructed by Hezekiah,
between the two walls for the water of the old pool ([Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011)), rests upon incorrect
combinations. "The house of the heroes" is also unknown. In [Neh
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#017) and [Neh
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#018), the lengths of wall repaired by
the three building parties there mentioned are not stated. "The Levites,
Rehum the son of Bani," stands for: the Levites under Rehum the son of
Bani. There was a Rehum among those who returned with Zerubbabel, [Neh
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#003); [Ezr
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002); and a Bani occurs among the
Levites in [Neh 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#005). After him
repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of half the district of Keilah, for his
district. Keilah, situate, according to [Jos
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044) and [Sa1
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001), in the hill region, is probably
the village of Kila, discovered by Tobler (vol. iii. p. 151), eastward
of Beit Dshibrin. By the addition לפלכּו, for his district, i.e., that
half of the whole district which was under his rule, "it is expressly
stated that the two halves of the district of Keilah worked apart one
from the other" (Bertheau). The other half is mentioned in the verse
next following.

[Nehemiah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 3:18</span></span>

"Their brethren" are the inhabitants of the second half, who were under
the rule of Bavai the son of Henadad.

[Nehemiah 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 3:19</span></span>

Next to these repaired Ezer the son of Jeshua, the ruler of Mizpah,
another piece (on שׁנית מדּה, see rem. on [Neh
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#011)) opposite the ascent to the
armoury of the angle. הנּשׁק or הנּשׁק (in most editions) is probably an
abbreviation of בּית־הנּשׁק, arsenal, armoury; and המּקצוע is,
notwithstanding the article in הנּשׁק, genitive; for to combine it as an
accusative with עלותּ, and read, "the going up of the armoury upon the
angle," gives no suitable meaning. The locality itself cannot indeed be
more precisely stated. The armoury was probably situate on the east side
of Zion, at a place where the wall of the city formed an angle; or it
occupied an angle within the city itself, no other buildings adjoining
it on the south. The opinion of Bertheau, that the armoury stood where
the tower described by Tobler (Dritte Wand. p. 228) stands, viz., about
midway between the modern Zion gate and the dung-gate, and of which he
says that "its lower strata of stones are undoubtedly of a remoter date
than the rebuilding of the wall in the sixteenth century," coincides
with the assumption already refuted, that the old wall of the city of
David passed, like the southern wall of modern Jerusalem, over Mount
Zion.

[Nehemiah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">neh 3:20</span></span>

The wall from the angle to the place of the court of the prison by the
king's upper house. - [Neh 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020) After
him Baruch the son of Zabbai emulously repaired a second length of wall,
from the angle to the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest.
Bertheau objects to the reading החרה, and conjectures that it should be
ההרה, "up the hill." But the reason he adduces, viz., that often as the
word החזיק occurs in this description, a further definition is nowhere
else added to it, speaks as much against, as for his proposed
alteration; definitions of locality never, throughout the entire
narrative, preceding החזיק, but uniformly standing after it, as also in
the present verse. Certainly החרה cannot here mean either to be angry,
or to be incensed, but may without difficulty be taken, in the sense of
the Tiphal תּחרה, to emulate, to contend ([Jer
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#015); [Jer
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005)), and the perfect adverbially
subordinated to the following verb (comp. Gesen. Gramm. 142, 3, a). The
Keri offers זכּי instead of זבּי, probably from [Ezr
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#009), but on insufficient grounds, the
name זבּי occurring also [Ezr 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#028).
Of the position of the house of Eliashib the high priest, we know
nothing further than what appears from these [Ezr
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#020) and [Ezr
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#021), viz., that it stood at the
northern part of the eastern side of Zion (not at the south-western
angle of the temple area, as Bertheau supposes), and extended some
considerable distance from south to north, the second length of wall
built by Meremoth reaching from the door at its southern end to the
תּכלית, termination, at its northern end. On Meremoth, see rem. on [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004).

[Nehemiah 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 3:22</span></span>

Farther northwards repaired the priests, the men of the district of
Jordan. כּכּר does not, as Bertheau infers from [Neh
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#028), signify the country round
Jerusalem, but here, as there, the valley of the Jordan. See rem. on
[Neh 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#028) and on [Gen
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010). Hence this verse informs us
that priests were then dwelling in the valley of the Jordan, probably in
the neighbourhood of Jericho. The length of wall built by these priests
is not further particularized.

[Nehemiah 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 3:23</span></span>

Further on repaired Benjamin and Hashub over against their house, and
Azariah the son of Maaseiah, by his house. Nothing further is known of
these individuals.

[Nehemiah 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">neh 3:24</span></span>

Next repaired Binnui the son of Henadad, a second portion from the house
of Azariah, to the angle and to the corner; and further on ([Neh
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025)) Palal the son of Uzzai, from
opposite the angle and the high tower which stands out from the king's
house by the court of the prison. We join העליון to המּגדּל, though it
is also verbally admissible to combine it with המּלך בּית, "the tower
which stands out from the king's upper house," because nothing is known
of an upper and lower king's house. It would be more natural to assume
(with Bertheau) that there was an upper and a lower tower at the court
of the prison, but this is not implied by העליון. The word means first,
high, elevated, and its use does not assume the existence of a lower
tower; while the circumstance that the same tower is in [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027) called the great (הגּדול) tells
in favour of the meaning high in the present case. The court of the
prison was, according to [Jer 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002), in
or near the king's house; it is also mentioned [Jer
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#008), [Jer
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#012); [Jer
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#001); [Jer
37:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#021); [Jer
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006), [Jer
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#013), [Jer
38:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#028), and [Jer
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#014). But from none of these passages
can it be inferred, as by Bertheau, that it was situate in the
neighbourhood of the temple. His further remark, too, that the king's
house is not the royal palace in the city of David, but an official
edifice standing upon or near the temple area, and including the court
of the prison with its towers, is entirely without foundation.

(Note: Equally devoid of proof is the view of Ewald, Diestel (in
Herzog's Realencycl. xiii. p. 325), Arnold, and others, that the royal
palace stood upon Moriah or Ophel on the south side of the temple, in
support of which Diestel adduces [Neh
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025). See the refutation of this view
in the commentary on [Kg1 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#012)
(Note).)

The royal palace lay, according to Josephus, Ant. viii. 5. 2, opposite
the temple (ἀντικρὺς ἔχων ναόν), i.e., on the north-eastern side of
Zion, and this is quite in accordance with the statements of this verse;
for as it is not till [Neh 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027) that
the description of the wall-building reaches the walls of Ophel, all the
localities and buildings spoken of in [Neh
3:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024) must be sought for on the east
side of Zion. The court of the prison formed, according to Eastern
custom, part of the royal fortress upon Zion. The citadel had, moreover,
a high tower. This is obvious from [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004), though the tower of David there
mentioned, on which hung a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men,
may not be identical with the tower of the king's house in this passage;
from [Mic 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008), where the tower of the
flock, the stronghold of the daughter of Zion, is the tower of the royal
citadel; and from [Isa 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#014), where
citadel and tower (בּחן, properly watch-tower) answer to the ארמון of
the royal citadel, which lay with its forts upon the hill of Zion. This
high tower of the king's house, i.e., of the royal citadel, stood,
according to our verses, in the immediate neighbourhood of the angle and
the corner (הפּנּה); for the section of wall which reached to the פּנּה
lay opposite the angle and the high tower of the king's house. The wall
here evidently formed a corner, running no longer from south to north,
but turning eastwards, and passing over Ophel, the southern spur of
Moriah. A length from this corner onwards was built by Pedaiah the son
of Parosh; comp. [Ezr 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#003).

[Nehemiah 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">neh 3:26</span></span>

Having now reached the place where the wall encloses Ophel, a remark is
inserted, [Neh 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026), on the dwellings
of Nethinim, i.e., of the temple servants. The Nethinim dwelt in Ophel
as far as (the place) before the water-gate toward the east, and the
tower that standeth out. הי המּגדּל still depends upon נגד עד. The
water-gate towards the east, judging from [Neh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#037), lay beyond the south-eastern
corner of the temple area. Bertheau, reasoning upon the view that the
open space of the house of God, where Ezra spoke to the assembled people
([Ezr 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#009)), is identical with the
open place before the water-gate mentioned [Neh
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#001), [Neh
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#003), [Neh
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#016), places it on the east side of
the temple area, near where the golden gate (Rab er Rahme) now stands.
This identity, however, cannot be proved; and even if it could, it would
by no means follow that this open space lay on the east side of the
temple area. And as little does it follow from [Neh
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#037), as we shall show when we reach
this passage. היּוצא המּגדּל is said by Bertheau to have belonged
perhaps to the water-gate towards the east, since, by reason of the
statements contained in [Neh 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031) and
[Neh 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032), we must not seek it so far
northwards on the east side of the temple area, as to combine it with
the remains of a tower projecting seven and a half feet from the line of
wall at the north-east corner, and described by Robinson (Biblical
Researches, p. 226). But even if the tower in question must not be
identified with these remains, it by no means follows that it stood in
the neighbourhood of the golden gate. Even Arnold, in his work already
cited, p. 636, remarks, in opposition to Bertheau's view, that "it is
evident from the whole statement that the tower standing out from the
king's house, in [Neh 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025), [Neh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026), and [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), is one and the same, and that
Bertheau's view of our having here three separate towers can hardly be
maintained," although he, as well as Bertheau, transposes both the
king's house and the court of the prison to the south of the Temple
area. The similar appellation of this tower as היּוצא in the three
verses speaks so decidedly for its identity, that very forcible reasons
must be adduced before the opposite view can be adopted. In [Neh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026) it is not a locality near the
water-gate in the east which is indicted by היּוצא המּגדּל, but the
western boundary of the dwellings of the Nethinim lying opposite. They
dwelt, that is, upon Ophel, southwards of the temple area, on a tract of
land reaching from the water-gate in the east to opposite the
outstanding tower of the royal citadel in the west, i.e., from the
eastern slope of the ridge of Ophel down to the Tyropoean valley.

[Neh 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027)

After them the Tekoites repaired a second piece from opposite the great
tower that standeth out to the wall of Ophel. The great (high) tower of
the king's house within the city wall being some distance removed
therefrom, the portion of wall on the eastern ridge of Zion from south
to north, reaching as far as the turning and the corner, and the
commencement of the wall running from this corner eastwards, might both
be designated as lying opposite to this tower. The portion mentioned in
our verse passed along the Tyropoean valley as far as the wall of Ophel.
King Jotham had built much on the wall of Ophel ([Ch2
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003)); and Manasseh had surrounded
Ophel with a very high wall ([Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014)), i.e., carried the wall round
its western, southern, and eastern sides. On the north no wall was
needed, Ophel being protected on this side by the southern wall of the
temple area.

[Nehemiah 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">neh 3:28</span></span>

The wall of Ophel and the eastern side of the temple area. - [Neh
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#028) Above the horse-gate repaired the
priests, each opposite his own house. The site of the horse-gate
appears, from [Ch2 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#015) compared with
[Kg2 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#006), to have been not far
distant from the temple and the royal palace; while according to the
present verse, compared with [Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), it stood in the neighbourhood of
the wall of Ophel, and might well be regarded as even belonging to it.
Hence we have, with Thenius, to seek it in the wall running over the
Tyropoean valley, and uniting the eastern edge of Zion with the western
edge of Ophel in the position of the present dung-gate (Bab el
Mogharibeh). This accords with [Jer
31:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#040), where it is also mentioned; and
from which passage Bertheau infers that it stood at the western side of
the valley of Kidron, below the east corner of the temple area. The
particular מעל, "from over," that is, above, is not to be understood of
a point northwards of the horse-gate, but denotes the place where the
wall, passing up from Zion to Ophel, ascended the side of Ophel east of
the horse-gate. If, then, the priests here repaired each opposite his
house, it is evident that a row of priests' dwellings were built on the
western side of Ophel, south of the south-western extremity of the
temple area.

[Neh 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#029)

Zadok ben Immer ([Ezr 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#037)) was
probably the head of the priestly order of Immer. Shemaiah the son of
Shecaniah, the keeper of the east gate, can hardly be the same as the
Shemaiah of the sons of Shecaniah entered among the descendants of David
in [Ch1 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#022). He might rather be
regarded as a descendant of the Shemaiah of [Ch1
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#006)., if the latter had not been
enumerated among the sons of Obed-Edom, whose duty was to guard the
south side of the temple. The east gate is undoubtedly the east gate of
the temple, and not to be identified, as by Bertheau, with the
water-gate towards the east ([Neh
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026)). The place where Shemaiah
repaired is not more precisely defined; nor can we infer, with Bertheau,
from the circumstance of his being the keeper of the east gate, that he,
together with his subordinate keepers, laboured at the fortification of
this gate and its adjoining section of wall. Such a view is opposed to
the order of the description, which passes on to a portion of the wall
of Ophel; see rem. on [Neh 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031).

[Neh 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030)

אחרי here and in [Neh 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031) gives no
appropriate sense, and is certainly only an error of transcription
arising from the scriptio defect. אחרו. Hananiah the son of Shelemiah,
and Hanun the sixth son of Zalaph, are not further known. The name of
Meshullam the son of Berechiah occurs previously in [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004); but the same individual can
hardly be intended in the two verses, the one mentioned in [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004) being distinguished from others of
the same name by the addition ben Meshezabeel. שׁני for שׁנית ([Neh
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027), [Neh
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024), and elsewhere) is grammatically
incorrect, if not a mere error of transcription. נשׁכּתו נגד, before his
dwelling. נשׁכּה occurs only here and [Neh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007), and in the plural הנּשׁכות, [Neh
12:44](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#044); it seems, judging from the
latter passage, only another form for לשׁכּה, chamber; while in [Neh
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007), on the contrary, נשׁכּה is
distinguished from לשׁכּה, [Neh
13:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#004). Its etymology is obscure. In
[Neh 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#007) it seems to signify
dwelling.

[Neh 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031)

הצּרפי is not a proper name, but an appellative, son of the goldsmith,
or perhaps better, member of the goldsmiths' guild, according to which
הצּרפי does not stand for hatsoreep, but designates those belonging to
the goldsmiths. The statements, (he repaired) unto the house of the
Nethinim, and of the merchants opposite the gate המּפקד, and to the
upper chamber of the corner, are obscure. This rendering is according to
the Masoretic punctuation; while the lxx, on the contrary, translate
according to a different division of the words: Malchiah repaired as far
as the house of the Nethinim, and the spice-merchants (repaired)
opposite the gate Miphkad, and as far as the ascent of the corner. This
translation is preferred by Bertheau, but upon questionable grounds. For
the objection made by him, that if the other be adopted, either the same
termination would be stated twice in different forms, or that two
different terminations are intended, in which case it does not appear
why one only should first be mentioned, and then the other also, is not
of much importance. In [Neh 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024) also
two terminations are mentioned, while in [Neh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016) we have even three together. And
why should not this occur here also? Of more weight is the
consideration, that to follow the Masoretic punctuation is to make the
house of the Nethinim and of the merchants but one building. Since,
however, we know nothing further concerning the edifice in question, the
subject is not one for discussion. The rendering of the lxx, on the
other hand, is opposed by the weighty objection that there is a total
absence of analogy for supplying החזיקוּ ואחריו; for throughout this
long enumeration of forty-two sections of wall, the verb החזיק or
החזיקוּ, or some corresponding verb, always stands either before or
after every name of the builders, and even the אחריו is omitted only
once ([Neh 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025)). To the statement,
"as far as the house of the Nethinim and the merchants," is appended the
further definition: before (opposite) the gate המּפקד. This word is
reproduced in the lxx as a proper name (τοῦ Μαφεκάδ), as is also
הנּתינים בּית, ἕως Βετηὰν Νατηινίμ); in the Vulgate it is rendered
appellatively: contra portam judicialem; and hence by Luther, Rathsthor.
Thenius translates (Stadt, p. 9): the muster or punishment gate. מפקד
does not, however, signify punishment, although the view may be correct
that the gate took the name המּפקד from the הבּית מפקד mentioned [Eze
43:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#021), where the bullock of the
sin-offering was to be burnt without the sanctuary; and it may be
inferred from this passage that near the temple of Solomon also there
was an appointed place for burning the flesh of the sin-offering without
the sanctuary. In Ezekiel's temple vision, this הבּית מפקד is probably
to be sought in the space behind the sanctuary, i.e., at the western end
of the great square of five hundred cubits, set apart for the temple,
and designated the Gizra, or separate place. In the temples of Solomon
and Zerubbabel, however, the place in question could not have been
situate at the west side of the temple, between the temple and the city,
which lay opposite, but only on the south side of the temple area,
outside the court, upon Ophel, where Thenius has delineated it in his
plan of Jerusalem before the captivity. Whether it lay, however, at the
south-western corner of the temple space (Thenius), or in the middle, or
near the east end of the southern side of the external wall of the
temple or temple court, can be determined neither from the present
passage nor from Ezekiel's vision. Not from [Eze
43:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze043.htm#021), because the temple vision of
this prophet is of an ideal character, differing in many points from the
actual temple; not from the present passage, because the position of the
house of the Nethinim and the merchants is unknown, and the definition
נגד, (before) opposite the gate Miphkad, admits of several explanations.
Thus much only is certain concerning this Miphkad gate, - on the one
hand, from the circumstance that the wall was built before (נגד) or
opposite this gate, on the other, from its omission in [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039), where the prison-gate is
mentioned as being in this neighbourhood in its stead, - that it was not
a gate of the city, but a gate through which the מפקד was reached.
Again, it is evident that the עליּה of the corner which is mentioned as
the length of wall next following, must be sought for at the
south-eastern corner of the temple area. Hence the house of the temple
servants and the merchants must have been situate south of this, on the
eastern side of Ophel, where it descends into the valley of Kidron.
הפּנּה עליּת, the upper chamber of the corner, was perhaps a ὑπερῷον of
a corner tower, not at the north-eastern corner of the external
circumvallation of the temple area (Bertheau), but at the south-eastern
corner, which was formed by the junction at this point of the wall of
Ophel with the eastern wall of the temple area. If these views are
correct, all the sections mentioned from [Neh
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#028) to [Neh
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031) belong to the wall surrounding
Ophel. This must have been of considerable length, for Ophel extended
almost to the pool of Siloam, and was walled round on its western,
southern, and eastern sides.

[Neh 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032)

The last section, between the upper chamber of the corner and the
sheep-gate, was repaired by the goldsmiths and the merchants. This is
the whole length of the east wall of the temple as far as the
sheep-gate, at which this description began ([Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)). The eastern wall of the temple
area might have suffered less than the rest of the wall at the
demolition of the city by the Chaldeans, or perhaps have been partly
repaired at the time the temple was rebuilt, so that less restoration
was now needed.

A survey of the whole enumeration of the gates and lengths of wall now
restored and fortified, commencing and terminating as it does at the
sheep-gate, and connecting almost always the several portions either
built or repaired by the words (ידם) ידו על or אחריו, gives good grounds
for inferring that in the forty-two sections, including the gates,
particularized vv. 1-32, we have a description of the entire fortified
wall surrounding the city, without a single gap. In [Neh
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007), indeed, as we learn by comparing
it with [Neh 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#029), the mention of the
gate of Ephraim is omitted, and in [Neh
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030) or [Neh
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031), to judge by [Neh
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#039), the prison-gate; while the wall
lying between the dung-gate and the fountain-gate is not mentioned
between [Neh 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014) and [Neh
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015). The non-mention, however, of
these gates and this portion of wall may be explained by the
circumstance, that these parts of the fortification, having remained
unharmed, were in need of no restoration. We read, it is true, in [Kg2
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#010) and [Kg2
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#011), that Nebuzaradan, captain of
the guard of Nebuchadnezzar, burnt the king's house and all the great
houses of the city, and that the army of the Chaldees broke down or
destroyed (נתץ) the walls of Jerusalem round about; but these words must
not be so pressed as to make them express a total levelling of the
surrounding wall. The wall was only so far demolished as to be incapable
of any longer serving as a defence to the city. And this end was fully
accomplished when it was partially demolished in several places, because
the portions of wall, and even the towers and gates, still perhaps left
standing, could then no longer afford any protection to the city. The
danger that the Jews might easily refortify the city unless the
fortifications were entirely demolished, was sufficiently obviated by
the carrying away into captivity of the great part of the population.
This explains the fact that nothing is said in this description of the
restoration of the towers of Hananeel and Hammeah ([Neh
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#011)), and that certain building
parties repaired very long lengths of wall, as e.g., the 1000 cubits
between the fountain-gate and the dung-gate, while others had very short
portions appointed them. The latter was especially the case with those
who built on the east side of Zion, because this being the part at which
King Zedekiah fled from the city, the wall may here have been levelled
to the ground.

From the consideration of the course of the wall, so far as the
description in the present chapter enables us to determine it with
tolerable certainty, and a comparison with the procession of the two
bands of singers round the restored wall in [Neh
12:31-40](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#031), which agrees in the chief
points with this description, it appears that the wall on the northern
side of the city, before the captivity, coincided in the main with the
northern wall of modern Jerusalem, being only somewhat shorter at the
north-eastern and north-western corners; and that it ran from the valley
(or Jaffa) gate by the tower of furnaces, the gate of Ephraim, the old
gate, and the fish-gate to the sheep-gate, maintaining, on the whole,
the same direction as the second wall described by Josephus (bell. Jud.
v. 4. 2). In many places remains of this wall, which bear testimony to
their existence at a period long prior to Josephus, have recently been
discovered. In an angle of the present wall near the Latin monastery are
found "remains of a wall built of mortice-edged stones, near which lie
blocks so large that we are first took them for portions of the natural
rock, but found them on closer inspection to be morticed stones removed
from their place. A comparatively large number of stones, both in the
present wall between the north-west corner of the tower and the Damascus
gate, and in the adjoining buildings, are morticed and hewn out of
ancient material, and we can scarcely resist the impression that this
must have been about the direction of an older wall." So Wolcott and
Tipping in Robinson's New Biblical Researches. Still nearer to the gate,
about three hundred feet west of it, Dr. Wilson remarks (Lands of the
Bible, i. p. 421), "that the wall, to some considerable height above its
foundation, bears evidence, by the size and peculiarity of its stones,
to its high antiquity," and attributes this portion to the old second
wall (see Robinson). "Eastward, too, near the Damascus gate, and even
near the eastern tower, are found very remarkable remains of Jewish
antiquity. The similarity of these remains of wall to those surrounding
the site of the temple is most surprising" (Tobler, Dritte Wand. p.
339). From these remains, and the intimations of Josephus concerning the
second wall, Robinson justly infers that the ancient wall must have run
from the Damascus gate to a place in the neighbourhood of the Latin
monastery, and that its course thence must have been nearly along the
road leading northwards from the citadel to the Latin monastery, while
between the monastery and the Damascus gate it nearly coincided with the
present wall. Of the length from the Damascus gate to the sheep-gate no
certain indications have as yet been found. According to Robinson's
ideas, it probably went from the Damascus gate, at first eastwards in
the direction of the present wall, and onwards to the highest point of
Bezetha; but then bent, as Bertheau supposes, in a south-easterly
direction, and ran to a point in the present wall lying north-east of
the Church of St. Anne, and thence directly south towards the north-east
corner of the temple area. On the south side, on the contrary, the whole
of the hill of Zion belonged to the ancient city; and the wall did not,
like the modern, pass across the middle of Zion, thus excluding the
southern half of this hill from the city, but went on the west, south,
and south-east, round the edge of Zion, so that the city of Zion was as
large again as that portion of modern Jerusalem lying on the hill of
Zion, and included the sepulchres of David and of the kings of Judah,
which are now outside the city wall. Tobler (Dritte Wand. p. 336)
believes that a trace of the course of the ancient wall has been
discovered in the cutting in the rock recently uncovered outside the
city, where, at the building of the Anglican Episcopal school, which
lies two hundred paces westward under En-Nebi-Dad, and the levelling of
the garden and cemetery, were found edged stones lying scattered about,
and "remarkable artificial walls of rock," whose direction shows that
they must have supported the oldest or first wall of the city; for they
are just so far distant from the level of the valley, that the wall
could, or rather must, have stood there. "And," continues Tobler, "not
only so, but the course of the wall of rock is also to a certain extent
parallel with that of the valley, as must be supposed to be the case
with a rocky foundation to a city wall." Finally, the city was bounded
on its western and eastern sides by the valleys of Gihon and Jehoshaphat
respectively.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 4](neh004)

</div>
