<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh004)  [Next](neh006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 5:0</span></span>

Abolition of Usury - Nehemiah's Unselfishness - Nehemiah 5

The events related in this and the following chapter also occurred
during the building of the wall. Zealously as the rulers and richer
members of the community, following the example of Nehemiah, were
carrying on this great undertaking by all the means in their power, the
work could not fail to be a heavy burden to the poorer classes, who
found it very difficult to maintain their families in these expensive
times, especially since they were still oppressed by wealthy usurers.
Hence great discontent arose, which soon vented itself in loud
complaints. Those who had no property demanded corn for the support of
their numerous families ([Neh 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#002));
others had been obliged to pledge their fields and vineyards, some to
procure corn for their hunger, some to be able to pay the king's
tribute; and these complained that they must now give their sons and
daughters to bondage ([Neh 5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#003)).
When these complaints came to the ears of Nehemiah, he was angry with
the rulers; and calling an assembly, he set before them the great
injustice of usury, and called upon them to renounce it, to restore to
their brethren their mortgaged lands, and to give them what they had
borrowed ([Neh 5:6-11](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#006)). His address
made the impression desired. The noble and wealthy resolved to perform
what was required; whereupon Nehemiah caused them to take a solemn oath
to this effect, indicating by a symbolical act that the heavy wrath of
God would fall upon all who should fail to act according to their
promise. To this the assembly expressed their Amen, and the people
carried out the resolution ([Neh 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#012),
[Neh 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#013)). Nehemiah then declared
with what unselfishness he had exercised his office of governor, for the
sake of lightening the heavy burden laid upon the people ([Neh
5:14-19](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014)).

[Nehemiah 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 5:1</span></span>

The people complain of oppression. - [Neh
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#001) There arose a great cry of the
people and of their wives against their brethren the Jews, i.e., as
appears from what follows ([Neh 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#007)),
against the nobles and rulers, therefore against the richer members of
the community. This cry is more particularly stated in [Neh
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#002), where the malcontents are divided
into three classes by וישׁ, [Neh 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#002),
[Neh 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#003), [Neh
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#004).

[Neh 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#002)

There were some who said: Our sons and our daughters are many, and we
desire to receive corn, that we may eat and live. These were the words
of those workers who had no property. נקחה (from לקח), not to take by
force, but only to desire that corn may be provided.

[Neh 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#003)

Others, who were indeed possessed of fields, vineyards, and houses, had
been obliged to mortgage them, and could now reap nothing from them.
ערב, to give as a pledge, to mortgage. The use of the participle denotes
the continuance of the transaction, and is not to be rendered, We must
mortgage our fields to procure corn; but, We have been obliged to
mortgage them, and we desire to receive corn for our hunger, because of
the dearth. For (1) the context shows that the act of mortgaging had
already taken place, and was still continuing in force (we have been
obliged to pledge them, and they are still pledged); and (2) נקחה must
not be taken here in a different sense from [Neh
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#002), but means, We desire that corn
may be furnished us, because of the dearth; not, that we may not be
obliged to mortgage our lands, but because they are already mortgaged.
בּרעב, too, does not necessarily presuppose a scarcity in consequence of
a failure of crops or other circumstances, but only declares that they
who had been obliged to pledge their fields were suffering from hunger.

[Neh 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#004)

Others, again, complained: We have borrowed money for the king's tribute
upon our fields and vineyards. לוה means to be dependent, nexum esse,
and transitively to make dependent, like מלא, to be full, and to make
full: We have made our fields and our vineyards answerable for money for
the king's tribute (Bertheau), i.e., we have borrowed money upon our
fields for ... This they could only do by pledging the crops of these
lands, or at least such a portion of their crops as might equal the sum
borrowed; comp. the law, [Lev
25:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#014).

[Neh 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#005)

"And now our flesh is as the flesh of our brethren, and our sons as
their sons; and lo, we are obliged to bring our sons and our daughters
into bondage, and some of our daughters are already brought into
bondage; and we have no power to alter this, and our fields and
vineyards belong to others." "Our brethren" are the richer Jews who had
lent money upon pledges, and בּניהם are their sons. The sense of the
first half of the verse is: We are of one flesh and blood with these
rich men, i.e., as Ramb. already correctly explains it: non sumus
deterioris conditionis quam tribules nostri divites, nec tamen nostrae
inopiae ex lege divina [Deu 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#007), [Deu
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#008), subvenitur, nisi maximo cum
foenore. The law not only allowed to lend to the poor on a pledge ([Deu
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#008)), but also permitted Israelites,
if they were poor, to sell themselves ([Lev
25:39](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039)), and also their sons and
daughters, to procure money. It required, however, that they who were
thus sold should not be retained as slaves, but set at liberty without
ransom, either after seven years or at the year of jubilee ([Lev
25:39-41](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#039); [Exo
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002).). It is set forth as a special
hardship in this verse that some of their daughters were brought into
bondage for maid-servants. ידנוּ לאל אין, literally, our hand is not to
God, i.e., the power to alter it is not in our hand; on this figure of
speech, comp. [Gen 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#029). The last
clause gives the reason: Our fields and our vineyards belonging to
others, what they yield does not come to us, and we are not in a
position to be able to put an end to the sad necessity of selling our
daughters for servants.

[Nehemiah 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 5:6</span></span>

The abolition of usury. - [Neh 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#006)
Nehemiah was very angry at this complaint and these things, i.e., the
injustice which had been brought to his knowledge.

[Neh 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#007)

"And my heart took counsel upon it (ימּלך according to the Chaldee use
of מלך, [Dan 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#024)), and I contended
with the nobles and rulers, and said to them, Ye exact usury every one
of his brother." ב נשׁא means to lend to any one, and משּׁא, also
משּׁאה, [Deu 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010); [Pro
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#026), and mashe', is the thing lent,
the loan, what one borrows from or lends to another. Consequently משּׁא
נשׁא is to lend some one a loan; comp. [Deu
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010). This does not seem to suit this
verse. For Nehemiah cannot reproach the nobles for lending loans, when
he and his servants had, according to [Neh
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#010), done so likewise. Hence the
injustice of the transaction which he rebukes must be expressed in the
emphatic precedence given to משּׁא. Bertheau accordingly regards משּׁא
not as the accusative of the object, but as an independent secondary
accusative in the sense of: for the sake of demanding a pledge, ye lend.
But this rendering can be neither grammatically nor lexically justified.
In the first respect it is opposed by משּׁאה השּׁא, [Deu
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#010), which shows that משּׁא in
conjunction with נשׁא is the accusative of the object; in the other, by
the constant use of משּׁא in all passages in which it occurs to express
a loan, not a demand for a pledge. From [Exo
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#024), where it is said, "If thou lend
money (תּלוה) to the poor, thou shalt not be to him כּנשׁה, shalt not
lay upon him usury," it is evident that נשׁה is one who lends money on
usury, or carries on the business of a money-lender. This evil secondary
meaning of the word is here strongly marked by the emphatic praeposition
of משּׁא; hence Nehemiah is speaking of those who practise usury. "And I
appointed a great assembly on their account," to put a stop to the usury
and injustice by a public discussion of the matter. עליהם, not against
them (the usurers), but on their account.

[Neh 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#008)

In this assembly he reproached them with the injustice of their
behaviour. "We" (said he) "have, after our ability, redeemed our
brethren the Jews which were sold unto the heathen; yet ye would sell
your brethren, and they are to be sold to us." We (i.e., Nehemiah and
the Jews living in exile, who were like-minded with him) have bought, in
contrast to ye sell. They had redeemed their Jewish brethren who were
sold to the heathen. בנוּ כּדי for בנוּ אשׁר כּדי, i.e., not according
to the full number of those who were among us, meaning as often as a
sale of this kind occurred (Bertheau); for דּי does not mean
completeness, multitude, but only sufficiency, supply, adequacy of means
([Lev 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#026)); hence בנוּ כּדי is:
according to the means that we had: secundum sufficientiam vel
facultatem, quae in nobis est (Ramb.), or secundum possibilitatem
nostram (Vulg.). The contrast is still more strongly expressed by the
placing of גּם before אתּם, so that וגם acquires the meaning of
nevertheless (Ewald, 354, a). The sale of their brethren for
bond-servants was forbidden by the law, [Lev
25:42](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#042). The usurers had nothing to
answer to this reproach. "They held their peace, and found no word," sc.
in justification of their proceedings.

[Neh 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#009)

Nehemiah, moreover, continued (ויאמר, the Chethiv, is evidently a
clerical error for ואמר, for the Niphal ויּאמר does not suit): "The
thing ye do is not good: ought ye not (= ye surely ought) to walk in the
fear of our God, because of the reproach of the heathen our enemies?"
i.e., we ought not, by harsh and unloving conduct towards our brethren,
to give our enemies occasion to calumniate us.

[Neh 5:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#010)

"I, likewise my brethren and my servants (comp. [Neh
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#017)), have lent them money and corn;
let us, I pray, remit (not ask back) this loan!" The participle נשׁים
says: we are those who have lent. Herewith he connects the invitation,
[Neh 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#011) : "Restore unto them, I pray
you, even this day (כּהיּום, about this day, i.e., even to-day, [Sa1
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#013)), their fields, their vineyards,
their olive gardens, and their houses, and the hundredth of the money,
and of the corn, wine, and oil which you have lent them." Nehemiah
requires, 1st, that those who held the lands of their poorer brethren in
pledge should restore them their property without delay: 2nd, that they
should remit to their debtors all interest owing on money, corn, etc.
that had been lent; not, as the words have been frequently understood,
that they should give back to their debtors such interest as they had
already received. That the words in [Neh
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#011) bear the former, and not the
latter signification, is obvious from the reply, [Neh
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#012), of those addressed: "We will
restore, sc. their lands, etc., and will not querie of them, sc. the
hundredth; so will we do as thou sayest." Hence we must not translate
בּהם נשׁים אתּם אשׁר, "which you had taken from them as interest" (de
Wette), - a translation which, moreover, cannot be justified by the
usage of the language, for ב נשׁה does not mean to take interest from
another, to lend to another on interest. The אשׁר relates not to וּמאת,
but to והיּצהר ... הדּגן; and השׁיב, to restore, to make good, is used
of both the transactions in question, meaning in the first clause the
restoration of the lands retained as pledges, and in the second, the
remission (the non-requirement) of the hundredth. The hundredth taken as
interest is probably, like the centesima of the Romans, to be understood
of a monthly payment. One per cent. per month was a very heavy interest,
and one which, in the case of the poor, might be exorbitant. The law,
moreover, forbade the taking of any usury from their brethren, their
poor fellow-countrymen, [Exo 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025) and
[Lev 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#036). When the creditors had
given the consent required, Nehemiah called the priests, and made them
(the creditors) swear to do according to this promise, i.e.,
conscientiously to adhere to their agreement. Nehemiah obtained the
attendance of the priests, partly for the purpose of giving solemnity to
the oath now taken, and partly to give to the declaration made in the
presence of the priests legal validity for judicial decisions.

[Neh 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#013)

To make the agreement thus sworn to still more binding, Nehemiah
confirmed the proceeding by a symbolical action: Also I shook my lap,
and said, So may God shake out every man from his house, and from his
labour, that performeth (fulfilleth) not this promise, and thus may he
be shaken out and emptied. חצן means the lap of the garment, in which
things are carried ([Isa 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022)), where
alone the word is again found. The symbolical action consisted in
Nehemiah's gathering up his garment as if for the purpose of carrying
something, and then shaking it out with the words above stated, which
declared the meaning of the act. The whole congregation said Amen, and
praised the Lord, sc. for the success with which God had blessed his
efforts to help the poor. And the people did according to this promise,
i.e., the community acted in accordance with the agreement entered into.

[Nehemiah 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 5:14</span></span>

Nehemiah's unselfish conduct. - The transaction above related gave
Nehemiah occasion to speak in his narrative of the unselfishness with
which he had filled the office of governor, and of the personal
sacrifices he had made for the good of his fellow-countrymen.

[Neh 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014)

The statement following is compared with the special occurrence
preceding it by גּם. As in this occurrence he had used his credit to do
away with the oppression of the people by wealthy usurers, so also had
he shown himself unselfish during his whole official career, and shunned
no sacrifice by which he might lighten the burdens that lay upon his
fellow-countrymen. "From the time that he appointed me to be their
governor in the land of Judah, from the twentieth year even unto the
two-and-thirtieth year of Artaxerxes the king, I and my servants have
not eaten the bread of the governor." The subject of צוּה is left
undefined, but is obviously King Artaxerxes. פּחם, their (the Jews')
governor. This he was from the twentieth (comp. [Neh
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001)) to the thirty-second year of
Artaxerxes, in which, according to [Neh
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#006), he again visited the court of
this monarch, returning after a short interval to Jerusalem, to carry
out still further the work he had there undertaken. "The bread of the
Pechah" is, according to [Neh 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#015),
the food and wine with which the community had to furnish him. The
meaning is: During this whole period I drew no allowances from the
people.

[Neh 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#015)

The former governors who had been before me in Jerusalem - Zerubbabel
and his successors-had received allowances, העם על הכבּידוּ, had
burdened the people, and had taken of them (their fellow-countrymen) for
bread and wine (i.e., for the requirements of their table), "afterwards
in money forty shekels." Some difficulty is presented by the word אחר,
which the lxx render by ἔσχατον, the Vulgate quotidie. The meaning
ultra, praeter, besides (EW. 217, 1), can no more be shown to be that of
אחר, than over can, which Bertheau attempts to justify by saying that
after forty shekels follow forty-one, forty-two, etc. The
interpretation, too: reckoned after money (Bttcher, de Inferis, 409, b,
and N. krit. Aehrenl. iii. p. 219), cannot be supported by the passages
quoted in its behalf, since in none of them is אחר used de illo quod
normae est, but has everywhere fundamentally the local signification
after. Why, then, should not אחר be here used adverbially, afterwards,
and express the thought that this money was afterwards demanded from the
community for the expenses of the governor's table? "Even their servants
bare rule over the people." שׁלט denotes arbitrary, oppressive rule,
abuse of power for extortions, etc. Nehemiah, on the contrary, had not
thus acted because of the fear of God.

[Neh 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#016)

"And also I took part in the work of this wall; neither bought we any
land, and all my servants were gathered thither unto the work." בּ החזיק
= בּ יד החזיק, to set the hand to something; here, to set about the
work. The manner in which Nehemiah, together with his servants, set
themselves to the work of wall-building is seen from [Neh
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#010), [Neh
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#012), [Neh
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#015), and [Neh
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#017). Neither have we (I and my
servants) bought any land, i.e., have not by the loan of money and corn
acquired mortgages of land; comp. [Neh
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#010).

[Neh 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#017)

But this was not all; for Nehemiah had also fed a considerable number of
persons at his table, at his own expense. "And the Jews, both one
hundred and fifty rulers, and the men who came to us from the nations
round about us, were at my table," i.e., were my guests. The hundred and
fifty rulers, comp. [Neh 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#016), were
the heads of the different houses of Judah collectively. These were
always guests at Nehemiah's table, as were also such Jews as dwelt among
the surrounding nations, when they came to Jerusalem.

[Neh 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#018)

"And that which was prepared for one (i.e., a single) day was one ox,
six choice (therefore fat) sheep, and fowls; they were prepared for me,
i.e., at my expense, and once in ten days a quantity of wine of all
kinds." The meaning of the last clause seems to be, that the wine was
furnished every ten days; no certain quantity, however, is mentioned,
but it is only designated in general terms as very great, להרבּה. זה
ועם, and with this, i.e., notwithstanding this, great expenditure, I did
not require the bread of the Pechah (the allowance for the governor,
comp. [Neh 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#014)), for the service was
heavy upon the people. העבדה is the service of building the walls of
Jerusalem. Thus Nehemiah, from compassion for his heavily burdened
countrymen, resigned the allowance to which as governor he was entitled.

[Neh 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh005.htm#019)

"Think upon me, my God, for good, all that I have done for this people."
Compare the repetition of this desire, [Neh
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#014) and [Neh
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#031). על עשׂה in the sense of ל עשׂה,
for the sake of this people, i.e., for them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 6](neh006)

</div>
