<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num018)  [Next](num020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001)

[Numbers 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 19:1</span></span>

In order that a consciousness of the continuance of the covenant
relation might be kept alive during the dying out of the race that had
fallen under the judgment of God, after the severe stroke with which the
Lord had visited the whole nation in consequence of the rebellion of the
company of Korah, He gave the law concerning purification from the
uncleanness of death, in which first of all the preparation of a
sprinkling water is commanded for the removal of this uncleanness ([Num
19:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001)); and then, secondly, the use
of this purifying water enjoined as an eternal statute ([Num
19:10-22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#010)). The thought that death, and
the putrefaction of death, as being the embodiment of sin, defiled and
excluded from fellowship with the holy God, was a view of the fall and
its consequences which had been handed down from the primeval age, and
which was not only shared by the Israelites with many of the nations of
antiquity,

(Note: Vid., Bhr, Symbolik, ii. pp. 466ff.; Sommer, bibl. Abhdll. pp.
271ff.; Knobel on this chapter, and Leyrer in Herzog's Cyclopaedia.)

but presupposed by the laws given on Sinai as a truth well known in
Israel; and at the same time confirmed, both in the prohibition of the
priests from defiling themselves with the dead, except in the case of
their nearest blood-relations ([Lev
21:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001), [Lev
21:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010)), and in the command, that
every one who was defiled by a corpse should be removed out of the camp
([Num 5:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#002)). Now, so long as the
mortality within the congregation did not exceed the natural limits, the
traditional modes of purification would be quite sufficient. But when it
prevailed to a hitherto unheard-of extent, in consequence of the
sentence pronounced by God, the defilements would necessarily be so
crowded together, that the whole congregation would be in danger of
being infected with the defilement of death, and of forfeiting its
vocation to be the holy nation of Jehovah, unless God provided it with
the means of cleansing itself from this uncleanness, without losing the
fellowship of His covenant of grace. The law which follows furnished the
means. In [Num 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002) this law is called
התּורה חקּת, a "statute of instruction," or law-statute. This
combination of the two words commonly used for law and statute, which is
only met with again in [Num 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#021), and
there, as here, in connection with a rule relating to purification from
the uncleanness of death, is probably intended to give emphasis to the
design of the law about to be given, to point it out as one of great
importance, but not as decretum absque ulla ratione, a decree without
any reason, as the Rabbins suppose.

[Numbers 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 19:2</span></span>

Preparation of the Purifying Water. - As water is the ordinary means by
which all kinds of uncleanness are removed, it was also to be employed
in the removal of the uncleanness of death. But as this uncleanness was
the strongest of all religious defilements, fresh water alone was not
sufficient to remove it; and consequently a certain kind of
sprinkling-water was appointed, which was strengthened by the ashes of a
sin-offering, and thus formed into a holy alkali. The main point in the
law which follows, therefore, was the preparation of the ashes, and
these had to be obtained by the sacrifice of a red heifer.

(Note: On this sacrifice, which is so rich in symbolical allusions, but
the details of which are so difficult to explain, compare the rabbinical
statutes in the talmudical tractate Para (Mishnah, v. Surenh. vi. pp.
269ff.); Maimonides de vacca rufa; and Lundius jd. Heiligth. pp. 680ff.
Among modern treatises on this subject, are Bhr's Symbolik, ii. pp.
493ff.; Hengstenberg, Egypt and the Books of Moses, pp. 173ff.; Leyrer
in Herzog's Cycl.; Kurtz in the Theol. Studien und Kritiken, 1846, pp.
629ff. (also Sacrificial Worship of the Old Testament, pp. 422ff., Eng.
transl., Tr.); and my Archologie, i. p. 58.)

[Num 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002)

The sons of Israel were to bring to Moses a red heifer, entirely without
blemish, and to give it to Eleazar the priest, that he might have it
slaughtered in his presence outside the camp. פּרה is not a cow
generally, but a young cow, a heifer, הב́לבכיע (lxx), juvenca, between
the calf and the full-grown cow. אדמּה, of a red colour, is not to be
connected with תמימה in the sense of "quite red," as the Rabbins
interpret it; but תמימה, integra, is to be taken by itself, and the
words which follow, "wherein is no blemish," to be regarded as defining
it still more precisely (see [Lev
22:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019)). The slaying of this heifer
is called חטּאת, a sin-offering, in [Num
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009) and [Num
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017). To remind the congregation that
death was the wages of sin, the antidote to the defilement of death was
to be taken from a sin-offering. But as the object was not to remove and
wipe away sin as such, but simply to cleanse the congregation from the
uncleanness which proceeded from death, the curse of sin, it was
necessary that the sin-offering should be modified in a peculiar manner
to accord with this special design. The sacrificial animal was not to be
a bullock, as in the case of the ordinary sin-offerings of the
congregation ([Lev 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#014)), but a
female, because the female sex is the bearer of life ([Gen
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#020)), a פּרה, i.e., lit., the
fruit-bringing; and of a red colour, not because the blood-red colour
points to sin (as Hengstenberg follows the Rabbins and earlier
theologians in supposing), but as the colour of the most "intensive
life," which has its seat in the blood, and shows itself in the red
colour of the face (the cheeks and lips); and one "upon which no yoke
had ever come," i.e., whose vital energy had not yet been crippled by
labour under the yoke. Lastly, like all the sacrificial animals, it was
to be uninjured, and free from faults, inasmuch as the idea of
representation, which lay at the foundation of all the sacrifices, but
more especially of the sin-offerings, demanded natural sinlessness and
original purity, quite as much as imputed sin and transferred
uncleanness. Whilst the last-mentioned prerequisite showed that the
victim was well fitted for bearing sin, the other attributes indicated
the fulness of life and power in their highest forms, and qualified it
to form a powerful antidote to death. As thus appointed to furnish a
reagent against death and mortal corruption, the sacrificial animal was
to possess throughout, viz., in colour, in sex, and in the character of
its body, the fulness of life in its greatest freshness and vigour.

[Num 19:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#003)

The sacrifice itself was to be superintended by Eleazar the priest, the
eldest son of the high priest, and his presumptive successor in office;
because Aaron, or the high priest, whose duty it was to present the
sin-offerings for the congregation ([Lev
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#016)), could not, according to his
official position, which required him to avoid all uncleanness of death
([Lev 21:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#011)), perform such an act
as this, which stood in the closest relation to death and the
uncleanness of death, and for that very reason had to be performed
outside the camp. The subject, to "bring her forth" and "slay her," is
indefinite; since it was not the duty of the priest to slay the
sacrificial animal, but of the offerer himself, or in the case before
us, of the congregation, which would appoint one of its own number for
the purpose. All that the priest had to do was to sprinkle the blood; at
the same time the slaying was to take place לפניו, before him, i.e.,
before his eyes. Eleazar was to sprinkle some of the blood seven times
"towards the opposite," i.e., toward the front of the tabernacle (seven
times, as in [Lev 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#017)). Through this
sprinkling of the blood the slaying became a sacrifice, being brought
thereby into relation to Jehovah and the sanctuary; whilst the life,
which was sacrificed for the sin of the congregation, was given up to
the Lord, and offered up in the only way in which a sacrifice, prepared
like this, outside the sanctuary, could possibly be offered.

[Num 19:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#005)

After this ([Num 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#005), [Num
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#006)), they were to burn the cow, with
the skin, flesh, blood, and dung, before his (Eleazar's) eyes, and he
was to throw cedar-wood, hyssop, and scarlet wool into the fire. The
burning of the sacrificial animal outside the camp took place in the
case of every sin-offering for the whole congregation, for the reasons
expounded on [Lev 4:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#011). But in the
case before us, the whole of the sacrificial act had to be performed
outside the camp, i.e., outside the sphere of the theocracy; because the
design of this sin-offering was not that the congregation might thereby
be received through the expiation of its sin into the fellowship of the
God and Lord who was present at the altar and in the sanctuary, but
simply that an antidote to the infection of death might be provided for
the congregation, which had become infected through fellowship with
death; and consequently, the victim was to represent, not the living
congregation as still associated with the God who was present in His
earthly kingdom, but those members of the congregation who had fallen
victims to temporal death as the wages of sin, and, as such, were
separated from the earthly theocracy (see my Archaeology, i. p. 283). In
this sacrifice, the blood, which was generally poured out at the foot of
the altar, was burned along with the rest, and the ashes to be obtained
were impregnated with the substance thereof. But in order still further
to increase the strength of these ashes, which were already well fitted
to serve as a powerful antidote to the corruption of death, as being the
incorruptible residuum of the sin-offering which had not been destroyed
by the fire, cedar-wood was thrown into the fire, as the symbol of the
incorruptible continuance of life; and hyssop, as the symbol of
purification from the corruption of death; and scarlet wool, the deep
red of which shadowed forth the strongest vital energy (see at [Lev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#006)), - so that the ashes might be
regarded "as the quintessence of all that purified and strengthened
life, refined and sublimated by the fire" (Leyrer).

[Num 19:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#007)

The persons who took part in this - viz., the priest, the man who
attended to the burning, and the clean man who gathered the ashes
together, and deposited them in a clean place for subsequent use -
became unclean till the evening in consequence; not from the fact that
they had officiated for unclean persons, and, in a certain sense, had
participated in their uncleanness (Knobel), but through the uncleanness
of sin and death, which had passed over to the sin-offering; just as the
man who led into the wilderness the goat which had been rendered unclean
through the imposition of sin, became himself unclean in consequence
([Lev 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#026)). Even the sprinkling
water prepared from the ashes defiled every one who touched it ([Num
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#021)). But when the ashes were
regarded in relation to their appointment as the means of purification,
they were to be treated as clean. Not only were they to be collected
together by a clean man; but they were to be kept for use in a clean
place, just as the ashes of the sacrifices that were taken away from the
altar were to be carried to a clean place outside the camp ([Lev
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004)). These defilements, like every
other which only lasted till the evening, were to be removed by washing.
The ashes thus collected were to serve the congregation נדּה למי, i.e.,
literally as water of uncleanness; in other words, as water by which
uncleanness was to be removed. "Water of uncleanness" is analogous to
"water of sin" in [Num 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007).

[Numbers 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 19:10</span></span>

Use of the Water of Purification. - The words in [Num
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#010), "And it shall be to the
children of Israel, and to the stranger in the midst of them, for an
everlasting statute," relate to the preparation and application of the
sprinkling water, and connect the foregoing instructions with those
which follow. - [Num 19:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001) contain
the general rules for the use of the water; [Num
19:14-22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014) a more detailed description
of the execution of those rules.

[Num 19:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011)

Whoever touched a corpse, "with regard to all the souls of men," i.e.,
the corpse of a person, of whatever age or sex, was unclean for seven
days, and on the third and seventh day he was to cleanse himself
(התחטּא, as in [Num 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#021)) with the
water (בּו refers, so far as the sense is concerned, to the water of
purification). If he neglected this cleansing, he did not become clean,
and he defiled the dwelling of Jehovah (see at [Lev
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#031)). Such a man was to be cut off
from Israel (vid., at [Gen 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#014)).

[Num 19:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014)

Special instructions concerning the defilement. If a man died in a tent,
every one who entered it, or who was there at the time, became unclean
for seven days. So also did every "open vessel upon which there was not
a covering, a string," i.e., that had not a covering fastened by a
string, to prevent the smell of the corpse from penetrating it. פּתיל, a
string, is in apposition to צמיד, a band, or binding (see Ges. 113;
Ewald, 287, e.). This also applied to any one in the open field, who
touched a man who had either been slain by the sword or had died a
natural death, or even a bone (skeleton), or a grave.

[Num 19:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017)

Ceremony of purification. They were to take for the unclean person some
of the dust of the burning of the cow, i.e., some of the ashes obtained
by burning the cow, and put living, i.e., fresh water (see [Lev
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005)), upon it in a vessel. A clean
man was then to take a bunch of hyssop (see [Exo
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022)), on account of its inherent
purifying power, and dip it in the water, on the third and seventh day
after the defilement had taken place, and to sprinkle the tent, with the
vessels and persons in it, as well as every one who had touched a
corpse, whether a person slain, or one who had died a natural death, or
a grave; after which the persons were to wash their clothes and bathe,
that they might be clean in the evening. As the uncleanness in question
is held up as the highest grade of uncleanness, by its duration being
fixed at seven days, i.e., an entire week, so the appointment of a
double purification with the sprinkling water shows the force of the
uncleanness to be removed; whilst the selection of the third and seventh
days was simply determined by the significance of the numbers
themselves. In [Num 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#020), the threat
of punishment for the neglect of purification is repeated from [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013), for the purpose of making it
most emphatic.

[Num 19:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#021)

This also was to be an everlasting statute, that he who sprinkled the
water of purification, or even touched it (see at [Num
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#007).), and he who was touched by a
person defiled (by a corpse), and also the person who touched him,
should be unclean till the evening, - a rule which also applied to other
forms of uncleanness.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 20](num020)

</div>
