<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num000)  [Next](num002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

I. Preparations for the Departure of Israel from Sinai - Numbers
1:1-10:10

Numbering of the People of Israel at Sinai - Numbers 1-4

Four weeks after the erection of the tabernacle (cf. [Num
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md) and [Exo
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017).md), Moses had the number of the
whole congregation taken, by the command of God, according to the
families and fathers' houses of the twelve tribes, and a list made of
all the males above twenty years of age for service in the army of
Jehovah ([Num 1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001).md). Nine months
before, the numbering of the people had taken place for the purpose of
collecting atonement-money from every male of twenty years old upwards
([Exo 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011.md)., compared with Num
38:25-26), and the result was 603,550, the same number as is given here
as the sum of all that were mustered in the twelve tribes ([Num
1:46](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#046).md). This correspondence in the
number of the male population after the lapse of a year is to be
explained, as we have already observed at [Exo
30:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#016.md), simply from the fact that the
result of the previous census, which was taken for the purpose of
raising head-money from every one who was fit for war, was taken as the
basis of the mustering of all who were fit for war, which took place
after the erection of the tabernacle; so that, strictly speaking, this
mustering merely consisted in the registering of those who had been
numbered in the public records, according to their families and fathers'
houses. It is most probable, however, that the numbering and registering
took place according to the classification adopted at Jethro's
suggestion for the administration of justice, viz., in thousands,
hundred, fifties, and tens ([Exo
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#025).md), and that the number of men in
the different tribes was reckoned in this way simply by thousands,
hundreds, and tens-a conclusion which we may draw from the fact, that
there are no units given in the case of any of the tribes. On this plan
the supernumerary units might be used to balance the changes that had
taken place in the actual condition of the families and fathers' houses,
between the numbering and the preparation of the muster-rolls, so that
the few changes that had occurred in the course of nine months among
those who were fit for war were not taken any further into
consideration, on account of their being so inconsiderable in relation
to the total result. A fresh census was taken 38 years later in the
steppes of Moab (Num 26), for the division of the land of Canaan among
the tribes according to the number of their families ([Num
33:54](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#054).md). The number which this gave was
601,730 men of twenty years old and upwards, not a single one of whom,
with the exception of Joshua and Caleb, was included among those that
were mustered at Sinai, because the whole of that generation had died in
the wilderness ([Num 26:63](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#063)..md). In the
historical account, instead of these exact numbers, the number of adult
males is given in a round sum of 600,000 ([Num
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#021.md); [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037).md). To this the Levites had to be
added, of whom there were 22,000 males at the first numbering and 23,000
at the second, reckoning the whole from a month old and upwards ([Num
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#039.md); [Num
26:62](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#062).md). Accordingly, on the precarious
supposition that the results obtained from the official registration of
births and deaths in our own day furnish any approximative standard for
the people of Israel, who had grown up under essentially different
territorial and historical circumstances, the whole number of the
Israelites in the time of Moses would have been about two millions.

(Note: Statistics show that, out of 10,000 inhabitants in any country,
about 5580 are over twenty years of age (cf. Chr. Bernoulli, Hdb. der
Populationistik, 1841). This is the case in Belgium, where, out of 1000
inhabitants, 421 are under twenty years of age. According to the Danish
census of 1840, out of 1000 inhabitants there were -

Place Under 20 yrs. of age Above 20 yrs. of age Denmark 432 568
Schleswig 436 56 Holstein 460 540 Lauenburg 458 542

According to this standard, if there were 600,000 males in Israel above
twenty years of age, there would be in all 1,000,000 or 1,100,000 males,
and therefore, including the females, more than two millions.)

Modern critics have taken offence at these numbers, though without
sufficient reason.

(Note: Knobel has raised the following objections to the historical
truth or validity of the numbers given above: (1.) So large a number
could not possibly have lived for any considerable time in the peninsula
of Sinai, as modern travellers estimate the present population at not
more than from four to seven thousand, and state that the land could
never have been capable of sustaining a population of 50,000. But the
books of Moses do not affirm that the Israelites lived for forty years
upon the natural produce of the desert, but that they were fed
miraculously with manna by God (see at [Exo
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#031).md). Moreover, the peninsula of
Sinai yielded much more subsistence in ancient times than is to be found
there at present, as is generally admitted, and only denied by Knobel in
the interests of rationalism. The following are Ritter's remarks in his
Erdkunde, 14 pp. 926-7: "We have repeatedly referred above to the
earlier state of the country, which must have been vastly different from
that of the present time. The abundant vegetation, for example; the
larger number of trees, and their superiority in size, the destruction
of which would be followed by a decrease in the quantity of smaller
shrubs, etc.; also the greater abundance of the various kinds of food of
which the children of Israel could avail themselves in their season; the
more general cultivation of the land, as seen in the monumental period
of the earliest Egyptians, viz., the period of their mines and cities,
as well as in Christian times in the wide-spread remains of monasteries,
hermitages, walls, gardens, fields, and wells; and, lastly, the
possibility of a better employment of the temporary flow of water in the
wadys, and of the rain, which falls by no means unfrequently, but which
would need to be kept with diligence and by artificial means for the
unfruitful periods of the year, as is the case in other districts of the
same latitude. These circumstances, which are supported by the numerous
inscriptions of Sinai and Serbal, together with those in the Wady
Mokatteb and a hundred other valleys, as well as upon rocky and
mountainous heights, which are now found scattered in wild solitude and
utter neglect throughout the whole of the central group of mountains,
prove that at one time a more numerous population both could and did
exist there." (2.) "If the Israelites had been a nation of several
millions in the Mosaic age, with their bravery at that time, they would
have conquered the small land more easily and more rapidly than they
seem to have done according to the accounts in the books of Joshua,
Judges, and Samuel, which show that they were obliged to tolerate the
Canaanites for a long time, that they were frequently oppressed by them,
and that it was not till the time of David and Solomon that their
supremacy was completely established," This objection of Knobe's is
founded upon the supposition that the tribes of Canaan were very small
and weak. But where has he learned that? As they had no less than 31
kings, according to Josh 12, and dwelt in many hundreds of towns, they
can hardly have been numerically weaker than the Israelites with their
600,000 men, but in all probability were considerably stronger in
numbers, and by no means inferior in bravery; to say nothing of the fact
that the Israelites neither conquered Canaan under Joshua by the
strength of their hands, nor failed to exterminate them afterwards from
want of physical strength. (3.) Of the remaining objections, viz., that
so large a number could not have gone through the Arabian Gulf in a
single night, or crossed the Jordan in a day, that Joshua could not have
circumcised the whole of the males, etc., the first has been answered on
pp. 350, 351, by a proof that it was possible for the Red Sea to be
crossed in a given time, and the others will be answered when we come to
the particular events referred to.)

When David had the census taken by Joab, in the closing years of his
reign, there were 800,000 men capable of bearing arms in Israel, and
500,000 in Judah ([Sa2 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009).md). Now, if
we suppose the entire population of a country to be about four times the
number of its fighting men, there would be about five millions of
inhabitants in Palestine at that time. The area of this land, according
to the boundaries given in [Num
34:2-12](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#002.md), the whole of which was
occupied by Israel and Judah in the time of David, with the exception of
a small strip of the Phoenician coast, was more than 500 square miles.

(Note: The German mile being equal to about five English miles, this
would give 12,500 square miles English.)

Accordingly there would be 10,000 inhabitants to each square mile
(German); a dense though by no means unparalleled population;

(Note: In the kingdom of Saxony (according to the census of the year
1855) there are 7501 persons to the square mile; in Belgium (according
to the census of 1856) 8462; and in the district of Dsseldorf there are
9832 square miles and (according to the census of 1855) 1,007,570
inhabitants, so that there must be 10,248 persons to the square mile.
Consequently, not only could more than five millions have lived in
Palestine, but, if we take into account on the one hand what is
confirmed by both biblical and other testimonies, viz., the
extraordinary fertility of the land in ancient times (cf. v. Raumer,
Pal. pp. 92ff.), and on the other hand the well-known fact that the
inhabitants of warm countries require less food than Europeans living in
colder climates, they could also have found a sufficient supply of
food.)

so that it is certainly possible that in the time of Christ it may have
been more numerous still, according to the account of Josephus, which
are confirmed by Dio Cassius (cf. C. v. Raumer, Palstina, p. 93). And if
Canaan could contain and support five millions of inhabitants in the
flourishing period of the Israelitish kingdom, two millions or more
could easily have settled and been sustained in the time of Joshua and
the Judges, notwithstanding the fact that there still remained large
tracts of land in the possession of the Canaanites and Philistines, and
that the Israelites dwelt in the midst of the Canaanitish population
which had not yet been entirely eradicated ([Jdg
3:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#001).md).

If we compare together the results of the two numbering in the second
and fortieth years of their march, we shall find a considerable increase
in some of the tribes, and a large decrease in others. The number of men
of twenty years old and upwards in the different tribes was as follows:
-

Tribe 1st Numbering 2nd Numbering Reuben 46,500 43,730 Simeon 59,300
22,200 Gad 45,650 40,500 Judah 74,600 76,500 Issachar 54,400 64,300
Zebulon 57,400 60,500 Ephraim 40,500 32,500 Manasseh 32,200 52,700
Benjamin 35,400 45,600 Dan 62,700 64,400 Asher 41,500 53,400 Naphtali
53,400 45,400 Total 603,550 601,730

Consequently by the second numbering Dan had increased 1700, Judah 1900,
Zebulon 3100, Issachar 9900, Benjamin 10,200, Asher 11,900, Manasseh
20,900. This increase, which was about 19 per cent. in the case of
Issachar, 29 per cent. in that of Benjamin and Asher, and 63 per cent.
in that of Manasseh, is very large, no doubt; but even that of Manasseh
is not unparalleled. The total population of Prussia increased from
10,349,031 to 17,139,288 between the end of 1816 and the end of 1855,
that is to say, more than 65 per cent. in 39 years; whilst in England
the population increased 47 per cent. between 1815 and 1849, i.e., in 34
years. On the other hand, there was a decrease in Reuben of 2770, in Gad
of 5150, and Ephraim of 8000, in Naphtali of 8000, and in Simeon of
37,100. The cause of this diminution of 6 per cent. in the case of
Reuben, 12 per cent. in Gad, 15 per cent. in Naphtali, 20 per cent. in
Ephraim, and nearly 63 per cent. in Simeon, it is most natural to seek
for in the different judgments which fell upon the nation. If it be
true, as the earlier commentators conjectured, with great plausibility,
on account of the part taken by Zimri, a prince of the tribe ([Num
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#006.md), [Num
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014).md), that the Simeonites were the
worst of those who joined in the idolatrous worship of Baal Peor, the
plague, in which 24,000 men were destroyed ([Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009).md), would fall upon them with
greater severity than upon the other tribes; and this would serve as the
principal explanation of the circumstance, that in the census which was
taken immediately afterwards, the number of men in that tribe who were
capable of bearing arms had melted away to 22,200. But for all that, the
total number included in the census had only been reduced by 1820 men
during the forty years of their journeying through the wilderness.

The tribe of Levi appears very small in comparison with the rest of the
tribes. In the second year of their journey, when the first census was
taken, it only numbered 22,000 males of a month old and upwards; and in
the fortieth year, when the second was taken, only 23,000 ([Num
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#039.md); [Num
26:62](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#062).md). "Reckoning," says Knobel,
"that in Belgium, for example, in the rural districts, out of 10,000
males, 1074 die in the first month after their birth, and 3684 between
the first month and the twentieth year, so that only 5242 are then
alive, the tribe of Levi would only number about 13,000 men of 20 years
old and upwards, and consequently would not be half as numerous as the
smallest of the other tribes, whilst it would be hardly a sixth part the
size of Judah, which was the strongest of the tribes." But
notwithstanding this, the correctness of the numbers given is not to be
called in question. It is not only supported by the fact, that the
number of the Levites capable of service between the ages of 30 and 50
amounted to 8580 ([Num 4:48](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#048).md), - a
number which bears the most perfect proportion to that of 22,000 of a
month old and upwards, - but is also confirmed by the fact, that in the
time of David the tribe of Levi only numbered 38,000 of thirty years old
and upwards ([Ch1 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#003).md); so that in
the interval between Moses and David their rate of increase was still
below that of the other tribes, which had grown from 600,000 to
1,300,000 in the same time. Now, if we cannot discover any reason for
this smaller rate of increase in the tribe of Levi, we see, at any rate,
that it was not uniform in the other tribes. If Levi was not half as
strong as Manasseh in the first numbering, neither Manasseh nor Benjamin
was half as strong as Judah; and in the second numbering, even Ephraim
had not half the number of men that Judah had.

A much greater difficulty appears to lie in the fact, that the number of
all the male first-born of the twelve tribes, which was only 22,273
according to the census taken for the purpose of their redemption by the
Levites ([Num 3:43](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#043).md), bore no kind of
proportion to the total number of men capable of bearing arms in the
whole of the male population, as calculated from these. If the 603,550
men of twenty years old and upwards presuppose, according to what has
been stated above, a population of more than a million males; then, on
the assumption that 22,273 was the sum total of the first-born sons
throughout the entire nation, there would be only one first-born to 40
or 45 males, and consequently every father of a family must have
begotten, or still have had, from 39 to 44 sons; whereas the ordinary
proportion of first-born sons to the whole male population is one to
four. But the calculation which yields this enormous disproportion, or
rather this inconceivable proportion, is founded upon the supposition
that the law, which commanded the sanctification of the male first-born,
had a retrospective force, and was to be understood as requiring that
not only the first-born sons, who were born from the time when the law
was given, but all the first-born sons throughout the entire nation,
should be offered to the Lord and redeemed with five shekels each, even
though they were fathers or grandfathers, or even great-grandfathers, at
that time. Now if the law is to be interpreted in this sense, as having
a retrospective force, and applying to those who were born before it was
issued, as it has been from the time of J. D. Michaelis down to that of
Knobel, it is an unwarrantable liberty to restrict its application to
the first-born sons, who had not yet become fathers themselves-a mere
subterfuge, in fact, invented for the purpose of getting rid of the
disproportion, but without answering the desired end.

(Note: This is evident from the different attempts which have been made
to get rid of the difficulty, in accordance with this hypothesis. J. D.
Michaelis thought that he could explain the disproportion from the
prevalence of polygamy among the Israelites; but he has overlooked the
fact, that polygamy never prevailed among the Israelites, or any other
people, with anything like the universality which this would suppose.
Hvernick adopted this view, but differed so far from Michaelis, that he
understood by first-born only those who were so on both the father's and
mother's side, - a supposition which does not remove the difficulty, but
only renders it perfectly incredible. Others imagined, that only those
first-born were counted who had been born as the result of marriages
contracted within the last six years. Baumgarten supports this on the
ground that, according to [Lev 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#006.md),
the redemption-fee for boys of this age was five shekels ([Num
3:47](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#047).md); but this applies to vows, and
proves nothing in relation to first-born, who could not have been the
object of a vow ([Lev 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#026).md). Bunsen
comes to the same conclusion, on the ground that it was at this age that
children were generally dedicated to Moloch (sic!). Lastly, Kurtz
endeavours to solve the difficulty, first, by referring to the great
fruitfulness of the Israelitish women; secondly, by excluding, (a) the
first-born of the father, unless at the same time the first-born of the
mother; (b) all the first-born who were fathers of families themselves;
and thirdly, by observing, that in a population of 600,000 males above
20 years of age, we may assume that there would be about 200,000 under
the age of fifteen. Now, if we deduct these 200,000 who were not yet
fifteen, from the 600,000 who were above twenty, there would remain
400,000 married men. "In that case the total number of 22,273 first-born
would yield this proportion, that there would be one first-born to nine
male births. And on the ground assigned under No. 2(a), this proportion
would have to be reduced one-half. So that for every family we should
have, on an average, four or five sons, or nine children, - a result by
no means surprising, considering the fruitfulness of Hebrew marriages."
This would be undoubtedly true, and the facit of the calculation quite
correct, as 9 x 22,273 = 200,457, if only the subtraction upon which it
is based were reconcilable with the rules of arithmetic, or if the
reduction of 600,000 men to 400,000 could in any way be justified.)

If we look more closely at the law, we cannot find in the words
themselves "all the first-born, whatsoever openeth the womb" ([Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002.md), cf. [Num
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#012).md), or in the ratio legis, or in
the circumstances under which the law was given, either a necessity or
warrant for any such explanation or extension. According to [Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002.md), after the institution of the
Passover and its first commemoration, God gave the command, "Sanctify
unto Me all the first-born both of man and of beast;" and added,
according to [Num 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#011.md)., the further
explanation, that when the Israelites came into the land of Canaan, they
were to set apart every first-born unto the Lord, but to redeem their
first-born sons. This further definition places it beyond all doubt,
that what God prescribed to His people was not a supplementary
sanctification of all the male first-born who were then to be found in
Israel, but simply the sanctification of all that should be born from
that time forward. A confirmation of this is to be found in the
explanation given in [Num 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013.md) and
[Num 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#017.md) : "All the first-born are
Mine; for on the day that I smote all the first-born in the land of
Egypt, I hallowed unto Me all the first-born in Israel, both man and
beast." According to this distinct explanation, God had actually
sanctified to Himself all the first-born of Israel by the fact, that
through the blood of the paschal lamb He granted protection to His
people form the stroke of the destroyer ([Exo
12:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022).md), and had instituted the
Passover, in order that He might therein adopt the whole nation of
Israel, with all its sons, as the people of His possession, or induct
the nation which He had chosen as His first-born son ([Exo
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#022).md) into the condition of a child of
God. This condition of sonship was henceforth to be practically
manifested by the Israelites, not only by the yearly repetition of the
feast of Passover, but also by the presentation of all the male
first-born of their sons and their cattle to the Lord, the first-born of
the cattle being sacrificed to Him upon the altar, and the first-born
sons being redeemed from the obligation resting upon them to serve at
the sanctuary of their God. Of course the reference was only to the
first-born of men and cattle that should come into the world from that
time forward, and not to those whom God had already sanctified to
Himself, by sparing the Israelites and their cattle.

(Note: Vitringa drew the correct conclusion from [Exo
13:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#011.md), in combination with the fact
that this law was not carried out previous to the adoption of the
Levites in the place of the first-born for service at the sanctuary -
that the law was intended chiefly for the future: "This law," he
observes (in his Obs. ss. L. ii. c. 2, 13), "relates to the tabernacle
to be afterwards erected, and to the regular priests to be solemnly
appointed; when this law, with many others of a similar kind, would have
to be observed. The first-born were set apart by God to be consecrated
to Him, as servants of the priests and of the sacred things, either in
their own persons, or in that of others who were afterwards substituted
in the goodness of God. This command therefore presupposed the erection
of the tabernacle, the ordination of priests, the building of an altar,
and the ceremonial of the sacred service, and showed from the very
nature of the case, that there could not be any application of this law
of the first-born before that time.")

This being established, it follows that the 22,273 first-born, who were
exchanged for the Levites ([Num
3:45](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#045)..md), consisted only of the
first-born sons who had been born between the time of the exodus from
Egypt and the numbering of the twelve tribes, which took place thirteen
months afterwards. Now, if, in order to form an idea of the proportion
which this number would bear to the whole of the male population of the
twelve tribes of Israel, we avail ourselves of the results furnished by
modern statistics, we may fairly assume, according to these, that in a
nation comprising 603,550 males above 20 years of age, there would be
190,000 to 195,100 between the ages of 20 and 30.

(Note: According to the census of the town of Basle, given by Bernoulli
in his Populationistik, p. 42, and classified by age, out of 1000
inhabitants in the year 1837, there were 326 under 20 years of age, 224
between 20 and 30, and 450 of 30 years old and upwards. Now, if we apply
this ration to the people of Israel, out of 603,550 males of 20 years
old and upwards, there would be 197,653 between the ages of 20 and 30.
The statistics of the city of Vienna and its suburbs, as given by
Brachelli (Geographie und Statistik, 1861), yield very nearly the same
results. At the end of the year 1856 there were 88,973 male inhabitants
under 20 years of age, 44,000 between 20 and 30, and 97,853 of 30 years
old and upwards, not including the military and those who were in
hospitals. According to this ratio, out of the 603,550 Israelites above
20 years of age, 187,209 would between 20 and 30.)

And, supposing that this was the age at which the Israelites married,
there would be from 19,000 to 19,500 marriages contracted upon an
average every year; and in a nation which had grown up in a land so
celebrated as Egypt was in antiquity for the extraordinary fruitfulness
of its inhabitants, almost as many first-born, say at least 19,000,
might be expected to come into the world. This average number would be
greater if we fixed the age for marrying between 18 and 28, or reduced
it to the seven years between 18 and 25.

(Note: From a comparison with the betrothals which take place every
years in the Prussian state, it is evident that the number given in the
text as the average number of marriages contracted every years is not
too high, but most assuredly too low. In the years 1858 there were
167,387 betrothals in a population of 17,793,900; in 1816, on the other
hand, there were 117,448 in a population of 10,402,600 (vid., Brachelli,
Geog. und Statistik von Preussen, 1861). The first ration, if applied to
Israel with its two millions, would yield 19,000 marriages annually; the
second, 22,580; whilst we have, in addition, to bear in mind how many
men there are in the European states who would gladly marry, if they
were not prevented from doing to by inability to find the means of
supporting a house of their own.)

But even without doing this, we must take into consideration the
important fact that such averages, based upon a considerable length of
time, only give an approximative idea of the actual state of things in
any single year; and that, as a matter of fact, in years of oppression
and distress the numbers may sink to half the average, whilst in other
years, under peculiarly favourable circumstances, they may rise again to
double the amount.

(Note: How great the variations are in the number of marriages
contracted year by year, even in large states embracing different
tribes, and when no unusual circumstances have disturbed the ordinary
course of things, is evident from the statistics of the Austrian empire
as given by Brachelli, from which we may see that in the year 1851, with
a total population of 36 1/2 millions, there were 361,249 betrothals,
and in the year 1854, when the population had increased by half a
million, only 279,802. The variations in particular districts are, as
might be supposed, considerably larger.)

When the Israelites were groaning under the hard lash of the Egyptian
taskmasters, and then under the inhuman and cruel edict of Pharaoh,
which commanded all the Hebrew boys that were born to be immediately put
to death, the number of marriages no doubt diminished from year to year.
But the longer this oppression continued, the greater would be the
number of marriages concluded at once (especially in a nation rejoicing
in the promise of numerous increase which it had received from its God),
when Moses had risen up and proved himself, by the mighty signs and
wonders with which he smote Egypt and its haughty king, to be the man
whom the God of the fathers had sent and endowed with power to redeem
His nation out of the bondage of Egypt, and lead it into Canaan, the
good land that He had promised to the fathers. At that time, when the
spirits of the nation revived, and the hope of a glorious future filled
every years, there might very well have been about 38,000 marriages
contracted in a year, say from the time of the seventh plague, three
months before the exodus, and about 37,600 children born by the second
month of the second year after the exodus, 22,273 of them being boys, as
the proportion of male births to female varies very remarkably, and may
be shown to have risen even as high as 157 to 100, whilst among the Jews
of modern times it has frequently been as high as 6 to 5, and has even
risen to 3 to 2 (or more exactly 29 to 20).

(Note: According to Bernoulli (p. 143), in the city of Geneva, there
were 157 boys born to every 200 girls in the year 1832. He also
observes, at p. 153: "It is remarkable that, according to a very
frequently observation, there are an unusual number of boys born among
the Jews;" and as a proof, he cites the fact that, according to Burdach,
the lists of births in Leghorn show 120 male children born among the
Jews to 100 female, whilst, according to Hufeland, there were 528 male
Jews and 365 female born in Berlin in the course of 16 years, the
proportion therefore being 145 to 100. And, according to this same
proportion, we have calculated above, that there would be 15,327 girls
to 22,273 boys.)

In this way the problem before us may be solved altogether independently
of the question, whether the law relates to all the first-born sons on
the father's side, or only to those who were first-born on both father's
and mother's side, and without there having been a daughter born before.
This latter view we regard as quite unfounded, as a mere subterfuge
resorted to for the purpose of removing the supposed disproportion, and
in support of which the expression "opening the womb" (fissura uteri,
i.e., qui findit uterum) is pressed in a most unwarrantable manner. On
this point, J. D. Michaelis has correctly observed, that "the etymology
ought not to be too strongly pressed, inasmuch as it is not upon this,
but upon usage chiefly, that the force of words depends." It is a fact
common to all languages, that in many words the original literal
signification falls more and more into the background in the course, of
years, and at length is gradually lost sight of altogether. Moreover,
the expression "openeth the womb" is generally employed in cases in
which a common term is required to designate the first-born of both man
and beast ([Exo 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002.md), [Exo
13:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#012.md); [Exo
34:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#019.md); [Num
3:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#012.md); [Num
8:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#016.md); [Num
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#015.md); [Eze
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#016).md); but even then, wherever the
two are distinguished, the term בּכור is applied as a rule to the
first-born sons, and פּטר to the first-born of animals (comp. [Exo
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013.md) with [Exo
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#012.md) and [Exo
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#013.md); and [Num
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#020.md) with [Num
34:19](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#019.md) and [Num
34:20](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#020).md). On the other hand, where only
first-born sons are referred to, as in [Deu
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015.md), we look in vain for the
expression peter rechem, "openeth the womb." Again, the Old Testament,
like modern law, recognises only first-born sons, and does not apply the
term first-born to daughters at all; and in relation to the inheritance,
even in the case of two wives, both of whom had born sons to their
husband, it recognises only one first-born son, so that the fact of its
being the first birth on the mother's side is not taken into
consideration at all (cf. [Gen 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008.md);
[Gen 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003.md); [Deu
21:15-17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#015).md). And the established rule in
relation to the birthright, - namely, that the first son of the father
was called the first-born, and possessed all the rights of the
first-born, independently altogether of the question whether there had
been daughters born before, - would no doubt be equally applicable to
the sanctification of the first-born sons. Or are we really to believe,
that inasmuch as the child first born is quite as often a girl as a boy,
God exempted every father in Israel whose eldest child was a daughter
from the obligation to manifest his own sonship by consecrating his
first-born son to God, and so demanded the performance of this duty from
half the nation only? We cannot for a moment believe that such an
interpretation of the law as this would really be in accordance with the
spirit of the Old Testament economy.

[Numbers 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 1:1</span></span>

Muster of the Twelve Tribes, with the Exception of that of Levi. - [Num
1:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md). Before the departure of Israel
from Sinai, God commanded Moses, on the first of the second month in the
second year after the exodus from Egypt, to take the number of the whole
congregation of the children of Israel, "according to their families,
according to their fathers' houses (see [Exo
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#014)), in (according to.md) the number of
their names," i.e., each one counted singly and entered, but only "every
male according to their heads of twenty years old and upwards" (see [Exo
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#014).md), viz., only צבא כּל־יצא "all
who go forth of the army," i.e., all the men capable of bearing arms,
because by means of this numbering the tribes and their subdivisions
were to be organized as hosts of Jehovah, that the whole congregation
might fight as an army for the cause of their Lord (see at [Exo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004).md).

[Numbers 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 1:4</span></span>

Moses and Aaron, who were commanded to number, or rather to muster, the
people, were to have with them "a man of every tribe, who was head-man
of his fathers' houses," i.e., a tribe-prince, viz., to help them to
carry out the mustering. Beth aboth ("fathers' houses"), in [Num
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#002.md), is a technical expression for the
subdivisions in which the mishpachoth, or families of the tribes, were
arranged, and is applied in [Num 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#004.md)
according to its original usage, based upon the natural division of the
tribes into mishpachoth and families, to the fathers' houses which every
tribe possessed in the family of its first-born. In [Num
1:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005.md), these heads of tribes were
mentioned by name, as in [Num 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#003.md).,
[Num 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#012.md)., [Num
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#014.md). In [Num
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016.md) they are designated as "called
men of the congregation," because they were called to diets of the
congregation, as representatives of the tribes, to regulate the affairs
of the nation; also "princes of the tribes of their fathers," and "heads
of the thousands of Israel:" "prince," from the nobility of their birth;
and "heads," as chiefs of the alaphim composing the tribes. Alaphim is
equivalent to mishpachoth (cf. [Num
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#004.md); [Jos
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#014).md); because the number of heads of
families in the mishpachoth of a tribe might easily amount to a thousand
(see at [Exo 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#025).md). In a similar
manner, the term "hundred" in the old German came to be used in several
different senses (see Grimm, deutsche Rechts-alterthmer, p. 532).

[Numbers 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 1:17</span></span>

This command was carried out by Moses and Aaron. They took for this
purpose the twelve heads of tribes who are pointed out (see at [Lev
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#011).md) by name, and had the whole
congregation gathered together by them and enrolled in genealogical
tables. התילּד, to announce themselves as born, i.e., to have themselves
entered in genealogical registers (books of generations). This entry is
called a פּקד, mustering, in [Num
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#019.md), etc. In vv. 20-43 the number is
given of those who were mustered of all the different tribes, and in
[Num 1:44-47](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#044.md) the total of the whole
nation, with the exception of the tribe of Levi. "Their generations"
([Num 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020.md), [Num
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#022.md), [Num
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#024), etc..md), i.e., those who were
begotten by them, so that "the sons of Reuben, Simeon," etc., are
mentioned as the fathers from whom the mishpachoth and fathers' houses
had sprung. The ל before שׁמעון בּני in [Num
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#022.md), and the following names (in [Num
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#024.md), [Num
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#026), etc..md), signifies "with regard
to" (as in [Isa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001.md); [Psa
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#004), etc..md).

[Numbers 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 1:48</span></span>

Moses was not to muster the tribe of Levi along with the children of
Israel, i.e., with the other tribes, or take their number, but to
appoint the Levites for the service of the dwelling of the testimony
([Exo 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021).md), i.e., of the tabernacle,
that they might encamp around it, might take it down when the camp was
broken up, and set it up when Israel encamped again, and that no
stranger (zar, non-Levite, as in [Lev
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#010).md) might come near it and be put
to death (see [Num 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#010).md). The rest of
the tribes were to encamp every man in his place of encampment, and by
his banner (see at [Num 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002).md), in their
hosts (see Num 2), that wrath might not come upon the congregation,
viz., through the approach of a stranger. קצף, the wrath of Jehovah,
breaking in judgment upon the unholy who approached His sanctuary in
opposition to His command ([Num 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#019.md);
[Num 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#005.md), [Num
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#022).md). On the expression "keep the
charge" (shamar mishmereth), see at [Gen
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#005.md) and [Lev
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#035.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 2](num002.md)

</div>
