<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num027)  [Next](num029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#001)

[Numbers 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 28:1</span></span>

When Israel was prepared for the conquest of the promised land by the
fresh numbering and mustering of its men, and by the appointment of
Joshua as commander, its relation to the Lord was regulated by a law
which determined the sacrifices through which it was to maintain its
fellowship with its God from day to day, and serve Him as His people
(Num 28 and 29). Through this order of sacrifice, the object of which
was to form and sanctify the whole life of the congregation into a
continuous worship, the sacrificial and festal laws already given in
[Exo 23:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#014); [Exo
29:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038); [Exo
31:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#012); [Lev
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#001), and [Num
25:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001), were completed and arranged
into a united and well-ordered whole. "It was very fitting that this law
should be issued a short time before the advance into Canaan; for it was
there first that the Israelites were in a position to carry out the
sacrificial worship in all its full extent, and to observe all the
sacrificial and festal laws" (Knobel). The law commences with the daily
morning and evening burnt-offering ([Num
28:3-8](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#003)), which was instituted at Sinai
at the dedication of the altar. It is not merely for the sake of
completeness that it is introduced here, or for the purpose of including
all the national sacrifices that were to be offered during the whole
year in one general survey; but also for an internal reason, viz., that
the daily sacrifice was also to be offered on the Sabbaths and
feast-days, to accompany the general and special festal sacrifices, and
to form the common substratum for the whole of these. Then follow in
[Num 28:9-15](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#009) the sacrifices to be
offered on the Sabbath and at the new moon; and in Num 28:16 - Num 29:38
the general sacrifices for the different yearly feasts, which were to be
added to the sacrifices that were peculiar to each particular festival,
having been appointed at the time of its first institution, and being
specially adapted to give expression to its specific character, so that,
at the yearly feasts, the congregation had to offer their different
kinds of sacrifices: (a) the daily morning and evening sacrifice; (b)
the general sacrifices that were offered on every feast-day; and (c) the
festal sacrifices that were peculiar to each particular feast. This
cumulative arrangement is to be explained from the significance of the
daily and of the festal sacrifices. In the daily burnt-offering the
congregation of Israel, as a congregation of Jehovah, was to sanctify
its life, body, soul, and spirit, to the Lord its God; and on the Lord's
feast-days it was to give expression to this sanctification in an
intensified form. This stronger practical exhibition of the
sanctification of the life was embodied in the worship by the elevation
and graduation of the daily sacrifice, through the addition of a second
and much more considerable burnt-offering, meat-offering, and
drink-offering. The graduation was regulated by the significance of the
festivals. On the Sabbaths the daily sacrifice was doubled, by the
presentation of a burnt-offering consisting of two lambs. On the other
feast-days it was increased by a burnt-offering composed of oxen, rams,
and yearling lambs, which was always preceded by a sin-offering. - As
the seventh day of the week, being a Sabbath, was distinguished above
the other days of the week, as a day that was sanctified to the Lord in
a higher degree than the rest, by an enlarged burnt-offering,
meat-offering, and drink-offering; so the seventh month, being a
Sabbath-month, was raised above the other months of the year, and
sanctified as a festal month, by the fact that, in addition to the
ordinary new moon sacrifices of two bullocks, one ram, and seven
yearling lambs, a special festal sacrifice was also offered, consisting
of one bullock, one ram, and seven yearling lambs ([Num
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#002)), which was also repeated on the
day of atonement, and at the close of the feast of Tabernacles ([Num
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#008), [Num
29:36](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#036)); and also that the feast of
Tabernacles, which fell in this month, was to be celebrated by a much
larger number of burnt-offerings, as the largest and holiest feast of
the congregation of Israel.

(Note: Knobel's remarks as to the difference in the sacrifices are not
only erroneous, but likely to mislead, and tending to obscure and
distort the actual facts. "On those feast-days," he says, "which were
intended as a general festival to Jehovah, viz., the sabbatical portion
of the seventh new moon, the day of atonement, and the closing day of
the yearly feasts, the sacrifices consisted of one bullock, one ram, and
seven yearling lambs ([Num 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#002), [Num
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#008), [Num
29:36](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#036)); whereas at the older festivals
which had a reference to nature, such as the new moons, the days of
unleavened bread, and the feast of Weeks, they consisted of two
bullocks, one ram, and seven yearling lambs ([Num
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011), [Num
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#019), [Num
28:24](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#024), [Num
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#027); [Num
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#006)), and at the feast of Tabernacles
of even a larger number, especially of bullocks ([Num
29:12](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#012).). In the last, Jehovah was
especially honoured, as having poured out His blessing upon nature, and
granted a plentiful harvest to the cultivation of the soil. The ox was
the beast of agriculture." It was not the so-called "older festivals
which had reference to nature" that were distinguished by a larger
number of sacrificial animals, above those feast-days which were
intended as general festivals to Jehovah, but the feasts of the seventh
month alone. Thus the seventh new moon's day was celebrated by a double
new moon's sacrifice, viz., with three bullocks, two rams, and fourteen
yearling lambs; the feast of atonement, as the introductory festival of
the feast of Tabernacles, by a special festal sacrifice, whilst the day
of Passover, which corresponded to it in the first festal cycle, as the
introductory festival of the feast of unleavened bread, had no general
festal sacrifices; and, lastly, the feast of Tabernacles, not only by a
very considerable increase in the number of the festal sacrifices on
every one of the seven days, but also by the addition of an eighth day,
as the octave of the feast, and a festal sacrifice answering to those of
the first and seventh days of this month.)

All the feasts of the whole year, for example, formed a cycle of
feast-days, arranged according to the number seven, which had its
starting-point and centre in the Sabbath, and was regulated according to
the division of time established at the creation, into weeks, months,
years, and periods of years, ascending from the weekly Sabbath to the
monthly Sabbath, the sabbatical year, and the year of jubilee. In this
cycle of holy periods, regulated as it was by the number seven, and ever
expanding into larger and larger circles, there was embodied the whole
revolution of annually recurring festivals, established to commemorate
the mighty works of the Lord for the preservation and inspiration of His
people. And this was done in the following manner: in the first place,
the number of yearly feasts amounted to exactly seven, of which the two
leading feasts (Mazzoth and the feast of Tabernacles) lasted seven days;
in the second place, in all the feasts, some of which were of only one
day's duration, whilst others lasted seven days, there were only seven
days that were to be observed with sabbatical rest and a holy meeting;
and in the third place, the seven feasts were formed into two large
festal circles, each of which consisted of an introductory feast, the
main feast of seven days, and a closing feast of one day. The first of
these festal circles was commemorative of the elevation of Israel into
the nation of God, and its subsequent preservation. It commenced on the
14th Abib (Nisan) with the Passover, which was appointed to commemorate
the deliverance of Israel from the destroying angel who smote the
first-born of Egypt, as the introductory festival. It culminated in the
seven days' feast of unleavened bread, as the feast of the deliverance
of Israel from bondage, and its elevation into the nation of God; and
closed with the feast of Weeks, Pentecost, or the feast of Harvest,
which was kept seven weeks after the offering of the sheaf of
first-fruits, on the second day of Mazzoth. This festal circle contained
only three days that were to be kept with sabbatical rest and a holy
meeting (viz., the first and seventh days of Mazzoth and the day of
Pentecost). The second festal circle fell entirely in the seventh month,
and its main object was to inspire the Israelites in their enjoyment of
the blessings of their God: for this reason it was celebrated by the
presentation of a large number of burnt-offerings. This festal circle
opened with the day of atonement, which was appointed for the tenth day
of the seventh month, as the introductory feast, culminated in the seven
days' feast of Tabernacles, and closed with the eighth day, which was
added to the seven feast-days as the octave of this festive circle, or
the solemn close of all the feasts of the year. This also included only
three days that were to be commemorated with sabbatical rest and a holy
meeting (the 10th, 15th, and 22nd of the month); but to these we have to
add the day of trumpets, with which the month commenced, which was also
a Sabbath of rest with a holy meeting; and this completes the seven days
of rest (see my Archaeologie, i. 76).

[Numbers 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 28:2</span></span>

[Num 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#002) contains the general
instruction to offer to the Lord His sacrificial gift "at the time
appointed by Him." On corban, see at [Lev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002); on "the bread of Jehovah," at
[Lev 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011); on the "sacrifice made by
fire," and "a sweet savour," at [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009); and on "moed," at [Lev
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#002), [Lev
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004).

[Numbers 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 28:3</span></span>

"The daily sacrifice: as it had already been instituted at Sinai ([Exo
29:38-42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038)).

[Numbers 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 28:7</span></span>

"In the sanctuary," i.e., περὶ τὸν βωμόν (round about the altar), as
Josephus paraphrases it (Ant. iii. 10); not "with (in) holy vessels," as
Jonathan and others interpret it. "Pour out a drink-offering, as שׁכר
for Jehovah." Shecar does not mean intoxicating drink here (see at [Lev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#009)), but strong drink, in
distinction from water as simple drink. The drink-offering consisted of
wine only (see at [Num 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#005).); and
hence Onkelos paraphrases it, "of old wine."

[Numbers 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 28:9</span></span>

The Sabbath-offering, which was to be added to the daily sacrifice (על,
upon it), consisted of two yearling lambs as a burnt-offering, with the
corresponding meat-offering and drink-offering, according to the general
rule laid down in [Num 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#003)., and is
appointed here for the first time; whereas the sabbatical feast had
already been instituted at [Exo
20:8-11](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008) and [Lev
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#003). "The burnt-offering of the
Sabbath on its Sabbath," i.e., as often as the Sabbath occurred, every
Sabbath.

[Numbers 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 28:11</span></span>

At the beginnings of the month, i.e., at the new moons, a larger
burnt-offering was to be added to the daily or continual burnt-offering,
consisting of two bullocks (young oxen), one ram, and seven yearling
lambs, with the corresponding meat and drink-offerings, as the "month's
burnt-offering in its (i.e., every) month with regard to the months of
the year," i.e., corresponding to them. To this there was also to be
added a sin-offering of a shaggy goat (see at [Lev
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#023)). The custom of distinguishing
the beginnings of the months of new moon's days by a peculiar festal
sacrifice, without their being, strictly speaking, festal days, with
sabbatical rest and a holy meeting,

(Note: In later times, however, the new moon grew more and more into a
feast-day, trade was suspended ([Amo
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005)), the pious Israelite sought
instruction from the prophets ([Kg2
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023)), many families and households
presented yearly thank-offerings ([Sa1
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#006), [Sa1
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#029)), and at a still later period
the most devout abstained from fasting (Judith 8:6); consequently it is
frequently referred to by the prophets as a feast resembling the Sabbath
([Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013); [Hos
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#013); [Eze
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001)).)

arose from the relation in which the month stood to the single day. "If
the congregation was to sanctify its life and labour to the Lord every
day by a burnt-offering, it could not well be omitted at the
commencement of the larger division of time formed by the month; on the
contrary, it was only right that the commencement of a new month should
be sanctified by a special sacrifice. Whilst, then, a burnt-offering, in
which the idea of expiation was subordinate to that of consecrating
surrender to the Lord, was sufficient for the single day; for the whole
month it was necessary that, in consideration of the sins that had been
committed in the course of the past month, and had remained without
expiation, a special sin-offering should be offered for their expiation,
in order that, upon the ground of the forgiveness and reconciliation
with God which had been thereby obtained, the lives of the people might
be sanctified afresh to the Lord in the burnt-offering. This
significance of the new moon sacrifice was still further intensified by
the fact, that during the presentation of the sacrifice the priests
sounded the silver trumpets, in order that it might be to the
congregation for a memorial before God ([Num
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)). The trumpet blast was intended
to bring before God the prayers of the congregation embodied in the
sacrifice, that God might remember them in mercy, granting them the
forgiveness of their sins and power for sanctification, and quickening
them again in the fellowship of His saving grace" (see my Archaeologie,
i. p. 369).

[Numbers 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 28:16</span></span>

The same number of sacrifices as at the new moon were to be offered on
every one of the seven days of the feast of unleavened bread (Mazzoth),
from the 15th to the 21st of the month, whereas there was no general
festal offering on the day of the Passover, or the 14th of the month
([Exo 12:3-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#003)). With regard to the
feast of Mazzoth, the rule is repeated from [Exo
12:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015) and [Lev
23:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#006), that on the first and seventh
day there was to be a Sabbath rest and holy meeting.

[Numbers 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 28:23</span></span>

The festal sacrifices of the seven days were to be prepared "in addition
to the morning burnt-offering, which served as the continual
burnt-offering." This implies that the festal sacrifices commanded were
to be prepared and offered every day after the morning sacrifice.

[Numbers 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 28:26</span></span>

The same number of sacrifices is appointed for the day of the
first-fruits, i.e., for the feast of Weeks or Harvest feast (cf. [Lev
23:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015)). The festal burnt-offering
and sin-offering of this one day was independent of the supplementary
burnt-offering and sin-offering of the wave-loaves appointed in [Lev
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#018), and was to be offered before
these and after the daily morning sacrifice.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 29](num029)

</div>
