<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num007)  [Next](num009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001)

[Numbers 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 8:1</span></span>

Consecration of the Levites. - The command of God to consecrate the
Levites for their service, is introduced in [Num
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#001) by directions issued to Aaron
with regard to the lighting of the candlestick in the dwelling of the
tabernacle. Aaron was to place the seven lamps upon the candlestick in
such a manner that they would shine פּניו אל־מוּל. These directions are
not a mere repetition, but also a more precise definition, of the
general instructions given in [Exo
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037), when the candlestick was made,
to place the seven lamps upon the candlestick in such a manner that each
should give light over against its front, i.e., should throw its light
upon the side opposite to the front of the candlestick. In itself,
therefore, there is nothing at all striking in the renewal and
explanation of those directions, which committed the task of lighting
the lamps to Aaron; for this had not been done before, as [Exo
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021) merely assigns the daily
preparation of the candlestick to Aaron and his sons; and their being
placed in the connection in which we find them may be explained from the
signification of the seven lamps in relation to the dwelling of God,
viz., as indicating that Israel was thereby to be represented
perpetually before the Lord as a people causing its light to shine in
the darkness of this world. And when Aaron is commanded to attend to the
lighting of the candlestick, so that it may light up the dwelling, in
these special instructions the entire fulfilment of his service in the
dwelling is enforced upon him as a duty. In this respect the
instructions themselves, coupled with the statement of the fact that
Aaron had fulfilled them, stand quite appropriately between the account
of what the tribe-princes had done for the consecration of the altar
service as representatives of the congregation, and the account of the
solemn inauguration of the Levites in their service in the sanctuary.
The repetition on this occasion ([Exo
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#004)) of an allusion to the artistic
character of the candlestick, which had been made according to the
pattern seen by Moses in the mount ([Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031).), is quite in keeping with the
antiquated style of narrative adopted in these books.

[Numbers 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 8:5</span></span>

Consecration of the Levites for their service in the sanctuary. - The
choice of the Levites for service in the sanctuary, in the place of the
first-born of the people generally, has been already noticed in [Num
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#005)., and the duties binding upon them
in [Num 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004). But before entering upon
their duties they were to be consecrated to the work, and then formally
handed over to the priests. This consecration is commanded in [Num
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007)., and is not called קדּשׁ, like
the consecration of the priests ([Exo
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001); [Lev
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#011)), but טהר to cleanse. It
consisted in sprinkling them with sin-water, shaving off the whole of
the hair from their bodies, and washing their clothes, accompanied by a
sacrificial ceremony, by which they were presented symbolically to the
Lord as a sacrifice for His service. The first part of this ceremony had
reference to outward purification, and represented cleansing from the
defilement of sin; hence the performance of it is called התחטּא (to
cleanse from sin) in [Num 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#021).
"Sprinkle sin-water upon them." The words are addressed to Moses, who
had to officiate at the inauguration of the Levites, as he had already
done at that of the priests. "Water of sin" is water having reference to
sin, designed to remove it, just as the sacrifice offered for the
expiation of sin is called חטּאת (sin) in [Lev
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#014), etc.; whilst the "water of
uncleanness" in [Num 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009), [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013), signifies water by which
uncleanness was removed or wiped away. The nature of this purifying
water is not explained, and cannot be determined with any certainty. We
find directions for preparing sprinkling water in a peculiar manner, for
the purpose of cleansing persons who were cured of leprosy, in [Lev
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#005)., 50ff.; and also for cleansing
both persons and houses that had been defiled by a corpse, in [Num
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009). Neither of these, however, was
applicable to the cleansing of the Levites, as they were both of them
composed of significant ingredients, which stood in the closest relation
to the special cleansing to be effected by them, and had evidently no
adaptation to the purification of the Levites. At the same time, the
expression "sin-water" precludes our understanding it to mean simply
clean water. So that nothing remains but to regard it as referring to
the water in the laver of the sanctuary, which was provided for the
purpose of cleansing the priests for the performance of their duties
([Exo 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018).), and might therefore be
regarded by virtue of this as cleansing from sin, and be called
"sin-water" in consequence. "And they shall cause the razor to pass over
their whole body," i.e., shave off all the hair upon their body, "and
wash their clothes, and so cleanse themselves." תּער העביר is to be
distinguished from גּלּח. The latter signifies to make balk or shave the
hair entirely off, which was required of the leper when he was cleansed
([Lev 14:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#008)); the former signifies
merely cutting the hair, which was part of the regular mode of adorning
the body. The Levites also were not required to bathe their bodies, as
lepers were ([Lev 13:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#008)), and also
the priests at their consecration ([Lev
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#006)), because they were not affected
with any special uncleanness, and their duties did not require them to
touch the most holy instruments of worship. The washing of the clothes,
on the other hand, was a thing generally required as a preparation for
acts of worship ([Gen 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002); [Exo
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010)), and was omitted in the case of
the consecration of the priests, simply because they received a holy
official dress. הטּהרוּ for הטּהרוּ, as in [Ch2
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#018).

[Numbers 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 8:8</span></span>

After this purification the Levites were to bring two young bullocks,
one with the corresponding meat-offering for a burnt-sacrifice, the
other for a sin-offering.

[Numbers 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 8:9</span></span>

Moses was then to cause them to draw near before the tabernacle, i.e.,
to enter the court, and to gather together the whole congregation of
Israel, viz., in the persons of their heads and representatives.

[Numbers 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 8:10</span></span>

After this the Levites were to come before Jehovah, i.e., in front of
the altar; and the children of Israel, i.e., the tribe-princes in the
name of the Israelites, were to lay their hands upon them, not merely
"as a sign that they released them from the possession of the nation,
and assigned them and handed them over to Jehovah" (Knobel), but in
order that by this symbolical act they might transfer to the Levites the
obligation resting upon the whole nation to serve the Lord in the
persons of its first-born sons, and might present them to the Lord as
representatives of the first-born of Israel, to serve Him as living
sacrifices.

[Numbers 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 8:11</span></span>

This transfer was to be completed by Aaron's waving the Levites as a
wave-offering before Jehovah on behalf of the children of Israel, i.e.,
by his offering them symbolically to the Lord as a sacrifice presented
on the part of the Israelites. The ceremony of waving consisted no doubt
in his conducting the Levites solemnly up to the altar, and then back
again. On the signification of the verb, see at [Lev
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#030). The design of the waving is
given in [Num 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#011), viz., "that they
might be to perform the service of Jehovah" ([Num
8:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024) compared with Num 4:4-33).

[Numbers 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 8:12</span></span>

The Levites were then to close this transfer of themselves to the Lord
with a sin-offering and burnt-offering, in which they laid their hands
upon the sacrificial animals. By this imposition of hands they made the
sacrificial animals their representatives, in which they presented their
own bodies to the Lord as a living sacrifice well-pleasing to Him. The
signification of the dedication of the Levites, as here enjoined, is
still further explained in [Num
8:13-19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#013). The meaning of [Num
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#013). is this: According to the
command already given (in [Num
8:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#006)), thou shalt place the Levites
before Aaron and his sons, and wave them as a wave-offering before the
Lord, and so separate them from the midst of the children of Israel,
that they may be Mine. They shall then come to serve the tabernacle. So
shalt thou cleanse them and wave them. The same reason is assigned for
this in [Num 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#016), [Num
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#017), as in [Num
3:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#011) (כּל בּכור for כּל־בּכור, cf.
[Num 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#013)); and in [Num
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#018) and [Num
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#019), what was commanded in [Num
3:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#006) is described as having been
carried out. On [Num 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#019) see [Num
1:53](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#053).

[Numbers 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 8:20</span></span>

[Num 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#020) contain an account of the
execution of the divine command.

[Numbers 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 8:23</span></span>

The Levitical period of service is fixed here at twenty-five years of
age and upwards to the fiftieth year. "This is what concerns the
Levites," i.e., what follows applies to the Levites. "From the age of
twenty-five years shall he (the Levite) come to do service at the work
of the tabernacle; and at fifty years of age shall he return from the
service of the work, and not work any further, but only serve his
brethren at the tabernacle in keeping charge," i.e., help them to look
after the furniture of the tabernacle. "Charge" (mishmereth), as
distinguished from "work," signified the oversight of all the furniture
of the tabernacle (see [Num 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#008));
"work" (service) applied to laborious service, e.g., the taking down and
setting up of the tabernacle and cleaning it, carrying wood and water
for the sacrificial worship, slaying the animals for the daily and
festal sacrifices of the congregation, etc.

[Num 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#026)

"So shalt thou do to the Levites (i.e., proceed with them) in their
services." משׁמרת from משׁמרת, attendance upon an official post. Both
the heading and final clause, by which this law relating to the Levites'
period of service is bounded, and its position immediately after the
induction of the Levites into their office, show unmistakeably that this
law was binding for all time, and was intended to apply to the standing
service of the Levites at the sanctuary; and consequently that it was
not at variance with the instructions in ch. 4, to muster the Levites
between thirty and fifty years of age, and organize them for the
transport of the tabernacle on the journey through the wilderness (Num
4:3-49). The transport of the tabernacle required the strength of a
full-grown man, and therefore the more advanced age of thirty years;
whereas the duties connected with the tabernacle when standing were of a
lighter description, and could easily be performed from the twenty-fifth
year (see Hengstenberg's Dissertations, vol. ii. pp. 321ff.). At a later
period, when the sanctuary was permanently established on Mount Zion,
David employed the Levites from their twentieth year ([Ch1
23:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#024)), and expressly stated that
he did so because the Levites had no longer to carry the dwelling and
its furniture; and this regulation continued in force from that time
forward (cf. [Ch2 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#017); [Ezr
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#008)). But if the supposed discrepancy
between the verses before us and [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003), [Num
4:47](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#047), is removed by this distinction,
which is gathered in the most simple manner from the context, there is
no ground whatever for critics to deny that the regulation before us
could have proceeded from the pen of the Elohist.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 9](num009)

</div>
