<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](lev027)  [Next](num001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 0:0</span></span>

The Fourth Book Of Moses(Numbers)

Introduction

Contents, and Arrangement of the Book of Numbers

The fourth book of Moses, which the Jews call either Vayedabber (וידבר),
from the opening word, מספרים (Ἀριθμοί, Numeri, lxx, Vulg.), or פקודים
recensiones (= liber recensionum), and to which the heading במדבר (in
the wilderness) is given in the Masoretic texts with a more direct
reference to its general contents, narrates the guidance of Israel
through the desert, from Mount Sinai to the border of Canaan by the
river Jordan, and embraces the whole period from the second month of the
second year after the exodus from Egypt to the tenth month of the
fortieth year.

As soon as their mode of life in a spiritual point of view had been
fully regulated by the laws of Leviticus, the Israelites were to enter
upon their journey to Canaan, and take possession of the inheritance
promised to their fathers. But just as the way from Goshen to Sinai was
a preparation of the chosen people for their reception into the covenant
with God, so the way from Sinai to Canaan was also a preparation for the
possession of the promised land. On their journey through the wilderness
the Israelites were to experience on the one hand the faithful
watchfulness and gracious deliverance of their God in every season of
distress and danger, as well as the stern severity of the divine
judgments upon the despisers of their God, that they might learn thereby
to trust entirely in the Lord, and strive after His kingdom alone; and
on the other hand they were to receive during their journey the laws and
ordinances relating to their civil and political constitution, and
thereby to be placed in a condition to form and maintain themselves as a
consolidated nation by the side of and in opposition to the earthly
kingdoms formed by the nations of the world, and to fulfil the task
assigned them by God in the midst of the nations of the earth. These
laws, which were given in part at Sinai, in relation to the external and
internal organization of the tribes of Israel as the army and the
congregation of Jehovah, and in part on various occasions during the
march through the desert, as well as after their arrival in the steppes
of Moab, on the other side of the Jordan opposite to Jericho, with
especial reference to the conquest of Canaan and their settlement there,
are not only attached externally to the history itself in the order in
which they were given, but are so incorporated internally into the
historical narrative, according to their peculiar character and
contents, as to form a complete whole, which divides itself into three
distinct parts corresponding to the chronological development of the
history itself.

The First part, which extends from ch. 1-10:10, contains the
preparations for departing from Sinai, arranged in four groups: - viz.,
(1) the outward arrangement and classification of the tribes in the camp
and on their march, or the numbering and grouping of the twelve tribes
around the sanctuary of their God (ch. 1 and 2), and the appointment of
the Levites in the place of the first-born of the nation to act as
servants of the priests in the sanctuary (ch. 3 and 4); (2) the internal
or moral and spiritual organization of the nation as the congregation of
the Lord, by laws relating to the maintenance of the cleanliness of the
camp, restitution for trespasses, conjugal fidelity, the fulfilment of
the vow of the Nazarite, and the priestly blessing (ch. 5 and 6); (3)
the closing events at Sinai, viz., the presentation of dedicatory
offerings on the part of the tribe princes for the transport of the
tabernacle and the altar service (ch. 7), the consecration of the
Levites (ch. 8), and the feast of Passover, with an arrangement for a
supplementary Passover ([Num 9:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001).md);
(4) the appointment of signs and signals for the march in the desert
(ch. 9:5-10:10). In the Second part ([Num
10:11-21](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011).md), the history of the journey
is given in the three stages of its progress from Sinai to the heights
of Pisgah, near to the Jordan, viz., (1) from their departure from the
desert of Sinai (ch. 10:11-36) to their arrival at the desert of Paran,
at Kadesh, including the occurrences at Tabeerah, at the graves of lust,
and at Hazeroth (ch. 11 and 12), and the events at Kadesh which led God
to condemn the people who had revolted against Him to wander in the
wilderness for forty years, until the older generation that came out of
Egypt had all died (ch. 13 and 14); (2) all that is related of the
execution of this divine judgment, extending from the end of the second
year to the reassembling of the congregation at Kadesh at the beginning
of the fortieth year, is the history of the rebellion and destruction of
Korah (ch. 16-17:15), which is preceded by laws relating to the offering
of sacrifices after entering Canaan, to the punishment of blasphemers,
and to mementos upon the clothes (ch. 15), and followed by the divine
institution of the Aaronic priesthood (ch.17:16-28), with directions as
to the duties and rights of the priests and Levites (ch. 18), and the
law concerning purification from uncleanness arising from contact with
the dead (ch. 19); (3) the journey of Israel in the fortieth year from
Kadesh to Mount Hor, round Mount Seir, past Moab, and through the
territory of the Amorites to the heights of Pisgah, with the defeat of
the kings of the Amorites, Sihon and Og, and the conquest of their
kingdoms in Gilead and Bashan (ch. 20 and 21). In the Third part (ch.
22-36), the events which occurred in the steppes of Moab, on the eastern
side of the plain of Jordan, are gathered into five groups, with the
laws that were given there, viz., (1) the attempts of the Moabites and
Midianites to destroy the people of Israel, first by the force of
Balaam's curse, which was turned against his will into a blessing (ch.
22-24), and then by the seduction of the Israelites to idolatry (ch.
25); (2) the fresh numbering of the people according to their families
(ch. 26), together with a rule for the inheritance of landed property by
daughters ([Num 27:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#001).md), and the
appointment of Joshua as the successor of Moses (ch. 27:12-23); (3) laws
relating to the sacrifices to be offered by the congregation on the
Sabbath and feast days, and to the binding character of vows made by
dependent persons (ch. 28-30); (4) the defeat of the Midianites (ch.
31), the division of the land that had been conquered on the other side
of the Jordan among the tribes of Reuben, Gad, and half Manasseh (ch.
32), and the list of the halting-places (ch. 33:1-49); (5) directions as
to the expulsion of the Canaanites, the conquest of Canaan and division
of it among the tribes of Israel, the Levites and free cities, and the
marriage of heiresses (ch. 33:50-36).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 1](num001.md)

</div>
