<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num032)  [Next](num034) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 33](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)

[Numbers 33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 33:1</span></span>

As the Israelites had ended their wanderings through the desert, when
they arrived in the steppes of Moab by the Jordan opposite to Jericho
([Num 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001)), and as they began to take
possession when the conquered land beyond Jordan was portioned out (ch.
32), the history of the desert wandering closes with a list of the
stations which they had left behind them. This list was written out by
Moses "at the command of Jehovah" ([Num
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#002)), as a permanent memorial for
after ages, as every station which Israel left behind on the journey
from Egypt to Canaan "through the great and terrible desert," was a
memorial of the grace and faithfulness with which the Lord led His
people safely "in the desert land and in the waste howling wilderness,
and kept him as the apple of His eye, as an eagle fluttereth over her
young, spreadeth abroad her wings, taketh them, beareth them on her
wings" ([Exo 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004); [Deu
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010).).

[Num 33:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)

The first and second verses form the heading: "These are the marches of
the children of Israel, which they marched out," i.e., the marches which
they made from one place to another, on going out of Egypt. מסּע does
not mean a station, but the breaking up of a camp, and then a train, or
march (see at [Exo 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037), and [Gen
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003)). לצבאתם (see [Exo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004)). בּיד, under the guidance, as in
[Num 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#028), and [Exo
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#021). למסעיהם מוצאיהם, "their goings
out (properly, their places of departure) according to their marches,"
is really equivalent to the clause which follows: "their marches
according to their places of departure." The march of the people is not
described by the stations, or places of encampment, but by the
particular spots from which they set out. Hence the constant repetition
of the word ויּסעוּ, "and they broke up." In [Num
33:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#003), the departure is described
according to [Exo 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#017), [Exo
12:37-41](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037). On the judgments of Jehovah
upon the gods of Egypt, see at [Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012). "With an high hand:" as in [Exo
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#008). - The places of encampment from
Succoth to the desert of Sinai ([Num
33:5-15](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#005)) agree with those in the
historical account, except that the stations at the Red Sea ([Num
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#010)) and those at Dophkah and Alush
([Num 33:13](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#013) and [Num
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#014)) are passed over there. For
Raemses, see at [Exo 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037). Succoth
and Etham ([Exo 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020)). Pihahiroth
([Exo 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002)). "The wilderness" ([Num
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#008)) is the desert of Shur, according
to [Exo 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022). Marah, see [Exo
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023). Elim ([Exo
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#027)). For the Red Sea and the
wilderness of Sin, see [Exo 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001). For
Dophkah, Alush, and Rephidim, see [Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001); and for the wilderness of Sinai,
[Exo 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#002).

Numbers 33:16-35

In vv. 16-36 there follow twenty-one names of places where the
Israelites encamped from the time that they left the wilderness of Sinai
till they encamped in the wilderness of Zin, i.e., Kadesh. The
description of the latter as "the wilderness of Zin, which is Kadesh,"
which agrees almost word for word with [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001), and still more the agreement of
the places mentioned in [Num 33:37-49](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#037),
as the encampments of Israel after leaving Kadesh till their arrival in
the steppes of Moab, with the march of the people in the fortieth year
as described in Num 20:22-22:1, put it beyond all doubt that the
encampment in the wilderness of Zin, i.e., Kadesh ([Num
33:36](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#036)), is to be understood as
referring to the second arrival in Kadesh after the expiration of the
thirty-eight years of wandering in the desert to which the congregation
had been condemned. Consequently the twenty-one names in vv. 16-36
contain not only the places of encampment at which the Israelites
encamped in the second year of their march from Sinai to the desert of
Paran at Kadesh, whence the spies were despatched into Canaan, but also
those in which they encamped for a longer period during the thirty-eight
years of punishment in the wilderness. This view is still further
confirmed by the fact that the two first of the stations named after the
departure from the wilderness of Sinai, viz., Kibroth-hattaavah and
Hazeroth, agree with those named in the historical account in [Num
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#034) and [Num
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#035). Now if, according to [Num
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#016), when the people left Hazeroth,
they encamped in the desert of Paran, and despatched the spies thence
out of the desert of Zin ([Num 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021)),
who returned to the congregation after forty days "into the desert of
Paran to Kadesh" ([Num 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#026)), it is
as natural as it well can be to seek for this place of encampment in the
desert of Paran or Zin at Kadesh under the name of Rithmah, which
follows Hazeroth in the present list ([Num
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#018)). This natural supposition
reaches the highest degree of probability, from the fact that, in the
historical account, the place of encampment, from which the sending out
of the spies took place, is described in so indefinite a manner as the
"desert of Paran," since this name does not belong to a small desert,
just capable of holding the camp of the Israelites, but embraces the
whole of the large desert plateau which stretches from the central
mountains of Horeb in the south to the mountains of the Amorites, which
really form part of Canaan, and contains no less than 400 (? 10,000
English) square miles. In this desert the Israelites could only pitch
their camp in one particular spot, which is called Rithmah in the list
before us; whereas in the historical account the passage is described,
according to what the Israelites performed and experienced in this
encampment, as near to the southern border of Canaan, and is thus
pointed out with sufficient clearness for the purpose of the historical
account. To this we may add the coincidence of the name Rithmah with the
Wady Abu Retemat, which is not very far to the south of Kadesh, "a wide
plain with shrubs and retem," i.e., broom (Robinson, i. p. 279), in the
neighbourhood of which, and behind the chalk formation which bounds it
towards the east, there is a copious spring of sweet water called Ain el
Kudeirt. This spot was well adapted for a place of encampment for
Israel, which was so numerous that it might easily stretch into the
desert of Zin, and as far as Kadesh.

The seventeen places of encampment, therefore, that are mentioned in vv.
19-36 between Rithmah and Kadesh, are the places at which Israel set up
in the desert, from their return from Kadesh into the "desert of the way
to the Red Sea" ([Num 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#025)), till the
reassembling of the whole congregation in the desert of Zin at Kadesh
([Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001)).

(Note: The different hypotheses for reducing the journey of the
Israelites to a few years, have been refuted by Kurtz (iii. 41) in the
most conclusive manner possible, and in some respects more elaborately
than was actually necessary. Nevertheless Knobel has made a fresh
attempt, in the interest of his fragmentary hypothesis, to explain the
twenty-one places of encampment given in vv. 16-37 as twenty-one marches
made by Israel from Sinai till their first arrival at Kadesh. As the
whole distance from Sinai to Kadesh by the straight road through the
desert consists of only an eleven days' journey, Knobel endeavours to
bring his twenty-one marches into harmony with this statement, by
reckoning only five hours to each march, and postulating a few detours
in addition, in which the people occupied about a hundred hours or more.
The objection which might be raised to this, namely, that the Israelites
made much longer marches than these on their way from Egypt to Sinai, he
tries to set aside by supposing that the Israelites left their flocks
behind them in Egypt, and procured fresh ones from the Bedouins at
Sinai. But this assertion is so arbitrary and baseless an idea, that it
is not worth while to waste a single word upon the subject (see [Exo
12:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#038)). The reduction of the places of
encampment to simple marches is proved to be at variance with the text
by the express statement in [Num
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#033), that when the Israelites left
the wilderness of Sinai they went a three days' journey, until the cloud
showed them a resting-place. For it is perfectly evydent from this, that
the march from one place to another cannot be understood without further
ground as being simply a day's march of five hours.)

Of all the seventeen places not a single one is known, or can be pointed
out with certainty, except Eziongeber. Only the four mentioned in [Num
33:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#030), Moseroth, Bene-Jaakan,
Hor-hagidgad, and Jotbathah, are referred to again, viz., in [Deu
10:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006), where Moses refers to the
divine protection enjoyed by the Israelites in their wandering in the
desert, in these words: "And the children of Israel took their journey
from Beeroth-bene-Jaakan to Mosera; there Aaron died, and there he was
buried.... From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah, and from Gudgodah
to Jotbathah, a land of water-brooks." Of the identity of the places
mentioned in the two passages there can be no doubt whatever. Bene
Jaakan is simply an abbreviation of Beeroth-bene-Jaakan, wells of the
children of Jaakan. Now if the children of Jaakan were the same as the
Horite family of Kanan mentioned in [Gen
36:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#027), - and the reading יעקן for ועקן
in [Ch1 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#042) seems to favour this-the
wells of Jaakan would have to be sought for on the mountains that bound
the Arabah on either the east or west.

Gudgodah is only a slightly altered and abbreviated form of
Hor-hagidgad, the cave of Gidgad or Gudgodah; and lastly, Moseroth is
simply the plural form of Mosera. But notwithstanding the identity of
these four places, the two passages relate to different journeys. [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006) and [Deu
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007) refers to the march in the
fortieth year, when the Israelites went from Kadesh through the Wady
Murreh into the Arabah to Mount Hor, and encamped in the Arabah first of
all at the wells of the children, and then at Mosera, where Aaron died
upon Mount Hor, which was in the neighbourhood, and whence they
travelled still farther southwards to Gudgodah and Jotbathah. In the
historical account in Num 20 and 21 the three places of encampment,
Bene-Jaakan, Gudgodah, and Jotbathah, are not mentioned, because nothing
worthy of note occurred there. Gudgodah was perhaps the place of
encampment mentioned in [Num 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#004), the
name of which is not given, where the people were punished with fiery
serpents; and Jotbathah is probably to be placed before Zalmonah ([Num
33:41](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#041)). The clause, "a land of
water-brooks" ([Deu 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007)), points to a
spot in or near the southern part of the Arabah, where some wady, or
valley with a stream flowing through it, opened into the Arabah from
either the eastern or western mountains, and formed a green oasis
through its copious supply of water in the midst of the arid steppe. But
the Israelites had encamped at the very same places once before, namely,
during their thirty-seven years of wandering, in which the people, after
returning from Kadesh to the Red Sea through the centre of the great
desert of et Tih, after wandering about for some time in the broad
desert plateau, went through the Wady el Jerafeh into the Arabah as far
as the eastern border of it on the slopes of Mount Hor, and there
encamped at Mosera (Moseroth) somewhere near Ain et Taiyibeh (on
Robinson's map), and then crossed over to Bene-Jaakan, which was
probably on the western border of the Arabah, somewhere near Ain el
Ghamr (Robinson), and then turning southwards passed along the Wady el
Jeib by Hor-gidgad (Gudgodah), Jotbathah, and Abronah to Eziongeber on
the Red Sea; for there can be no doubt whatever that the Eziongeber in
[Num 33:35](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#035), [Num
33:36](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#036), and that in [Deu
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#008), are one and the same town, viz.,
the well-known port at the northern extremity of the Elanitic Gulf,
where the Israelites in the time of Solomon and Jehoshaphat built a
fleet to sail to Ophir ([Kg1 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#026);
[Kg1 22:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#049)). It was not far from Elath
(i.e., Akaba), and is supposed to have been "the large and beautiful
town of Asziun," which formerly stood, according to Makrizi, near to
Aila, where there were many dates, fields, and fruit-trees, though it
has now long since entirely disappeared.

Consequently the Israelites passed twice through a portion of the Arabah
in a southerly direction towards the Red Sea, the second time from Wady
Murreh by Mount Hor, to go round the land of Edom, not quite to the head
of the gulf, but only to the Wady el Ithm, through which they crossed to
the eastern side of Edomitis; the first time during the thirty-seven
years of wandering from Wady el Jerafeh to Moseroth and Bene Jaakan, and
thence to Eziongeber.

[Num 33:36](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#036)

"And they removed from Eziongeber, and encamped in the desert of Zin,
that is Kadesh:" the return to Kadesh towards the end of the
thirty-ninth year is referred to here. The fact that no places of
encampment are given between Eziongeber and Kadesh, is not to be
attributed to the "plan of the author, to avoid mentioning the same
places of encampment a second time," for any such plan is a mere
conjecture; but it may be simply and perfectly explained from the fact,
that on this return route-which the whole of the people, with their
wives, children, and flocks, could accomplish without any very great
exertion in ten or fourteen days, as the distance from Aila to Kadesh
through the desert of Paran is only about a forty hours' journey upon
camels, and Robinson travelled from Akabah to the Wady Retemath, near
Kadesh, in four days and a half-no formal camp was pitched at all,
probably because the time of penal wandering came to an end at
Eziongeber, and the time had arrived when the congregation was to
assemble again at Kadesh, and set out thence upon its journey to Canaan.
- Hence the eleven names given in [Num
33:19-30](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#019), between Rithmah and
Moseroth, can only refer to those stations at which the congregation
pitched their camp for a longer or shorter period during the
thirty-seven years of punishment, on their slow return from Kadesh to
the Red Sea, and previous to their entering the Arabah and encamping at
Moseroth.

This number of stations, which is very small for thirty-seven years
(only seventeen from Rithmah or Kadesh to Eziongeber), is a sufficient
proof that the congregation of Israel was not constantly wandering about
during the whole of that time, but may have remained in many of the
places of encampment, probably those which furnished an abundant supply
of water and pasturage, not only for weeks and months, but even for
years, the people scattering themselves in all directions round about
the place where the tabernacle was set up, and making use of such means
of support as the desert afforded, and assembling together again when
this was all gone, for the purpose of travelling farther and seeking
somewhere else a suitable spot for a fresh encampment. Moreover, the
words of [Deu 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046), "ye abode in
Kadesh many days," when compared with [Num
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001), "then we turned, and took our
journey into the wilderness of the way to the Red Sea," show most
distinctly, that after the sentence passed upon the people in Kadesh
(Num 14), they did not begin to travel back at once, but remained for a
considerable time in Kadesh before going southwards into the desert.

With regard to the direction which they took, all that can be said, so
long as none of the places of encampment mentioned in [Num
33:19-29](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#019) are discovered, is that they
made their way by a very circuitous route, and with many a wide detour,
to Eziongeber, on the Red Sea.

(Note: We agree so far, therefore, with the vie adopted by Fries, and
followed by Kurtz (History of Old Covenant, iii. 306-7) and Schultz
(Deut. pp. 153-4), that we regard the stations given in vv. 19-35,
between Rithmah and Eziongeber, as referring to the journeys of Israel,
after its condemnation in Kadesh, during the thirty-seven years of its
wandering about in the desert. But we do not regard the view which these
writers have formed of the marches themselves as being well founded, or
in accordance with the text, - namely, that the people of Israel did not
really come a second time in full procession from the south to Kadesh,
but that they had never left Kadesh entirely, inasmuch as then the
nation was rejected in Kadesh, the people divided themselves into larger
and smaller groups, and that portion which was estranged from Moses, or
rather from the Lord, remained in Kadesh even after the rest were
scattered about; so that, in a certain sense, Kadesh formed the standing
encampment and meeting-place of the congregation even during the
thirty-seven years. According to this view, the removals and encampments
mentioned in vv. 9-36 do not describe the marches of the whole nation,
but are to be understood as the circuit made by the headquarters during
the thirty-seven years, with Moses at the head and the sanctuary in the
midst (Kurtz), or else as showing "that Moses and Aaron, with the
sanctuary and the tribe of Levi, altered their resting-place, say from
year to year, thus securing to every part of the nation in turn the
nearness of the sanctuary, in accordance with the signals appointed by
God ([Num 10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011)), and thus passed
over the space between Kadesh and Eziongeber within the first eighteen
years, and then, by a similar change of place, gradually drew near to
Kadesh during the remaining eighteen or nineteen years, and at length in
the last year summoned the whole nation (all the congregation) to
assemble together at this meeting-place." Now we cannot admit that in
this view "we find all the different and scattered statements of the
Pentateuch explained and rendered intelligible." In the first place, it
does not do justice even to the list of stations; for if the constantly
repeated expression, "and they (the children of Israel, [Num
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)) removed...and encamped," denotes
the removal and encamping of the whole congregation in vv. 3-18 and [Num
33:37-49](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#037), it is certainly at variance
with the text to explain the same words in vv. 19-36 as signifying the
removal and encamping of the headquarters only, or of Moses, with Aaron
and the Levites, and the tabernacle. Again, in all the laws that were
given and the events that are described as occurring between the first
halt of the congregation in Kadesh (Num 13 and 14) and their return
thither at the commencement of the fortieth year (Num 20), the presence
of the whole congregation is taken for granted. The sacrificial laws in
Num 15, which Moses was to address to the children of Israel ([Num
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#001)), were given to "the whole
congregation" (cf. [Num 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#024), [Num
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#025), [Num
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#026)). The man who gathered wood on
the Sabbath was taken out of the camp and stoned by "all the
congregation" ([Num 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#036)). "All the
congregation" took part in the rebellion of the company of Korah ([Num
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019); [Num
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#006), [Num
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#008).). It is true this occurrence is
supposed by Kurtz to have taken place "during the halt in Kadesh," but
the reasons given are by no means conclusive (p. 105). Besides, if we
assign everything that is related in Num 15-19 to the time when the
whole congregation abode in Kadesh, this deprives the hypothesis of its
chief support in [Deu 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#046), "and ye
abode in Kadesh a long time, according to the days that he abode." For
in that case the long abode in Kadesh would include the period of the
laws and incidents recorded in Num 15-19, and yet, after all, "the whole
congregation" went away. In no case, in fact, can the words be
understood as signifying that a portion of the nation remained there
during the thirty-seven years. Nor can this be inferred in any way from
the fact that their departure is not expressly mentioned; for, at all
events, the statement in [Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001),
"and the children of Israel, the whole congregation, came into the
desert of Zin," presupposes that they had gone away. And the
"inconceivable idea, that in the last year of their wanderings, when it
was their express intention to cross the Jordan and enter Canaan from
the east, they should have gone up from Eziongeber to the southern
boundary of Canaan, which they had left thirty-seven years before,
merely to come back again to the neighbourhood of Eziongeber, after
failing in their negotiations with the king of Edom, which they might
have carried on from some place much farther south, and to take the road
from that point to the country on the east of the Jordan after all"
(Fries), loses all the surprising character which it apparently has, if
we only give up the assumption upon which it is founded, but which has
no support whatever in the biblical history, viz., that during the
thirty-seven years of their wandering in the desert, Moses was
acquainted with the fact that the Israelites were to enter Canaan from
the east, or at any rate that he had formed this plan for some time. If,
on the contrary, when the Lord rejected the murmuring nation ([Num
14:26](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#026)), He decided nothing with
reference to the way by which the generation that would grow up in the
desert was to enter Canaan, - and it was not till after the return to
Kadesh that Moses was informed by God that they were to advance into
Canaan from the east and not from the south, - it was perfectly natural
that when the time of punishment had expired, the Israelites should
assemble in Kadesh again, and start from that point upon their journey
onward.)

[Num 33:37-49](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#037)

The places of encampment on the journey of the fortieth year from Kadesh
to Mount Hor, and round Edom and Moab into the steppes of Moab, have
been discussed at Num 20 and 21. On Mount Hor, and Aaron's death there,
see at [Num 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022). For the remark in
[Num 33:40](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#040) concerning the Canaanites
of Arad, see at [Num 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001). On
Zalmonah, Phunon, and Oboth, see at [Num
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#010); on Ijje Abarim, at [Num
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#011); on Dibon Gad, Almon Diblathaim,
and the mountains of Abarim, before Nebo, [Num
21:16-20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016). On Arboth Moab, see [Num
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001).

[Numbers 33:50](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">num 33:50</span></span>

These instructions, with which the eyes of the Israelites were directed
to the end of all their wandering, viz., the possession of the promised
land, are arranged in two sections by longer introductory formulas ([Num
33:50](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050) and [Num
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)). The former contains the divine
commands (a) with regard to the extermination of the Canaanites and
their idolatry, and the division of the land among the tribes of Israel
([Num 33:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050)); (b) concerning the
boundaries of Canaan ([Num 34:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#001));
(c) concerning the men who were to divide the land ([Num
34:16-29](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#016)). The second contains
commands (a) respecting the towns to be given up to the Levites ([Num
35:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)); (b) as to the setting apart
of cities of refuge for unintentional manslayers, and the course to be
adopted in relation to such manslayers (Num 35:9-34); and (c) a law
concerning the marrying of heiresses within their own tribes ([Num
36:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/num036.htm#001)). - The careful dovetailing of
all these legal regulations by separate introductory formulas, is a
distinct proof that the section [Num
33:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050) is not to be regarded, as
Baumgarten, Knobel, and others suppose, in accordance with the
traditional division of the chapters, as an appendix or admonitory
conclusion to the list of stations, but as the general legal foundation
for the more minute instructions in Num 34-36.

[Num 33:50-56](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#050)

Command to Exterminate the Canaanites, and Divide their Land among the
Families of Israel.

[Num 33:51-53](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#051)

When the Israelites passed through the Jordan into the land of Canaan,
they were to exterminate all the inhabitants of the land, and to destroy
all the memorials of their idolatry; to take possession of the land and
well therein, for Jehovah had given it to them for a possession. הורישׁ,
to take possession of ([Num 33:53](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#053),
etc.), then to drive out of their possession, to exterminate ([Num
33:52](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#052); cf. [Num
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#012), etc.). On [Num
33:52](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#052), see [Exo
34:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#013). משׂכּית, an idol of stone (cf.
[Lev 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001)). מסּכת צלמי, idols cast
from brass. Massecah, see at [Exo
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004). Bamoth, altars of the Canaanites
upon high places (see [Lev 26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030)).

[Num 33:54-56](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#054)

The command to divide the land by lot among the families is partly a
verbal repetition of [Num 26:53-56](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#053).
וגו לו יצא אל־אשׁר: literally, "into that, whither the lot comes out to
him, shall be to him" (i.e., to each family); in other words, it is to
receive that portion of land to which the lot that comes out of the urn
shall point it. "According to the tribes of your fathers:" see at [Num
26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055). - The command closes in [Num
33:55](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#055), [Num
33:56](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#056), with the threat, that if they
did not exterminate the Canaanites, not only would such as were left
become "thorns in their eyes and stings in their sides," i.e., inflict
the most painful injuries upon them, and make war upon them in the land;
but Jehovah would also do the very same things to the Israelites that He
had intended to do to the Canaanites, i.e., drive them out of the land
and destroy them. This threat is repeated by Joshua in his last address
to the assembled congregation ([Jos
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#013)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 34](num034)

</div>
