<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Obadiah Index](oba)  
  [Previous](oba000)  [Next](jon000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Obadiah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

[Obadiah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">oba 1:1</span></span>

Edom's Ruin, setting forth, in the first place, the purpose of God to
make Edom small through the medium of hostile nations, and to hurl it
down from the impregnable heights of its rocky castles ([Oba
1:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)); and then depicting, in lively
colours, how it will be plundered by enemies, forsaken and deceived by
allies and friends, and perish in helplessness and impotence ([Oba
1:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005)). [Oba
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) contains, in addition to the brief
heading, the introduction to the prophecy, which gives in a brief form
the substance of the first section: "Thus hath the Lord Jehovah spoken
of Edom, A report have we heard from Jehovah, and a messenger is sent
among the nations: Up, and let us arise against it in battle." The first
clause, לאדום ... כּה אמר, does not harmonize with what follows,
inasmuch as we should expect it to be followed with a declaration made
by Jehovah Himself, instead of which there follow simply tidings heard
from Jehovah. The difficulty cannot be removed by assuming that these
introductory words are spurious, or were added by a later prophet
(Eichhorn, Ewald, and others); for the interpolator could not fail to
observe the incongruity of these words just as well as Obadiah.
Moreover, לאדום could not be omitted from the opening, because it is
required not only by the suffix in עליה (against her), but also by the
direct addresses in [Oba 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002). Nor is
the assumption that the prophet suddenly altered the construction any
more satisfactory, or that the declaration of Jehovah announced in כּה
אמר וגו ("thus saith the Lord") commences in [Oba
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002), and that the words from שׁמוּעה
to the end of the verse form an explanatory parenthesis to כּה אמר וגו
ot sisehtnera. For such an alteration of the construction at the very
beginning of the address is hardly conceivable; and the parenthetical
explanation of the last three clauses of [Oba
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) is at variance with their
contents, which do not form by any means a subordinate thought, but
rather the main thought of the following address. No other course
remains, therefore, than to take these introductory words by themselves,
as Michaelis, Maurer, and Caspari have done, in which case כה אמר does
not announce the actual words of Jehovah in the stricter sense, but is
simply meant to affirm that the prophet uttered what follows jussu
Jehovae, or divinitus monitus, so that כה אמר is really equivalent to
diber זה הדּבר אשׁר דּבּר in [Isa
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#013), as Theodoret has explained it.
לאדום, not "to Edom," but with reference to, or of, Edom. On the
occurrence of Yehōvâh after 'Adōnâi, see the comm. on [Gen
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#004). What Obadiah saw as a word of the
Lord was the tidings heard from the Lord, and the divine message sent to
the nations to rise up for war against Edom. The plural שׁמענוּ (we have
heard) is communicative. The prophet includes himself in the nation
(Israel), which has heard the tidings in him and through him. This
implies that the tidings were of the greatest interest to Israel, and
would afford it consolation. Jeremiah ([Jer
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#014)) has removed the pregnant
character of the expression, by introducing the singular שׁמעתּי (I have
heard). The next clause, "and an ambassador," etc., might be taken, as
it has been by Luther, as a statement of the import of the news, namely,
that a messenger had been sent; inasmuch as in Hebrew a sentence is
frequently co-ordinated with the preceding one by Vav cop., when it
ought really to be subordinated to it so far as the sense is concerned,
from a simple preference for the parallelism of the clauses. But the
address gains in force, if we take the clause as a co-ordinate one, just
as it reads, viz., as a declaration of the steps already taken by the
Lord for carrying out the resolution which had been heard of by report.
In this case the substance of the report is not given till the last
clause of the verse; the summons of the ambassador sent among the
nations, "to rise up for war against Edom," indicating at the same time
the substance of the report which Israel has heard. The perfect shullâch
with qâmets in the pause, which is changed by Jeremiah into the less
appropriate passive participle kal, corresponds to שׁמענוּ, and
expresses in prophetic form the certainty of the accomplishment of the
purpose of God. The sending of the messenger (tsı̄r as in [Isa
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#002)) among the nations (ב as in [Jdg
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#035)) is an assurance that the nations
will rise up at the instigation of Jehovah to war against Edom (compare
[Isa 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017); [Jer
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#001), [Jer
51:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#011)). The plural nâqūmâh (let us
rise up), in the words of the messenger, may be explained on the simple
ground that the messenger speaks in the name of the sender. The sender
is Jehovah, who will also rise up along with the nations for war against
Edom, placing Himself at their head as leader and commander (compare
[Joe 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011); [Isa
13:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004)). עליה, against Edom, construed
as a land or kingdom, gener. faem. The fact that it is the nations
generally that are here summoned to make war upon Edom, and not only one
nation in particular, points at once to the fact that Edom is regarded
as a type of the power of the world, and its hostility to God, the
destruction of which is here foretold.

[Obadiah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">oba 1:2</span></span>

The Lord threatens Edom with war, because He has determined to reduce
and humble the nation, which now, with its proud confidence in its lofty
rocky towers, regards itself as invincible. [Oba
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002). "Behold, I have made thee small
among the nations; thou art greatly despised. [Oba
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003). The pride of thy heart hath
deceived thee; thou that dwellest in rocky castles, upon its lofty seat;
that saith in its heart, Who will cast me down to the ground?: [Oba
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004). If thou buildest high like the
eagle, and if thy nest were placed among stars, thence will I cast thee
down, is the saying of Jehovah." [Oba
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002) is correctly attached in Jeremiah
([Oba 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)) by כּי, inasmuch as it
contains the reason for the attack upon Edom. By hinnēh (behold), which
points to the fact itself, the humiliation of Edom is vividly presented
to the mind. The perfect nâthattı̄ "describes the resolution of Jehovah
as one whose fulfilment is as certain as if it had already occurred"
(Caspari). What Jehovah says really takes place. קטן refers to the
number of the people. The participle בּזוּי is perfectly appropriate, as
expressing the ideal present, i.e., the present which follows the קטן
נתתּיך. When the Lord has made Edom small, it will be very much
despised. It is only through an incorrect interpretation of the
historical present that Hitzig would possibly be led to regard the
participle as unsuitable, and to give the preference to Jeremiah's
בּזוּי בּאדם.

[Oba 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003)

[Oba 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003) contains a consequence which
follows from [Oba 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002). Edom will be
unable to avert this fate: its lofty rocky castles will not preserve it
from the overthrow which has been decreed by the Lord, and which He will
carry out through the medium of the nations. Edom has therefore been
deceived by its proud reliance upon these rocky towers. שׁכני, which the
connecting sound י attached to the construct state (see at [Gen
31:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#039)), is a vocative. הגוי סלע are
rocky towers, though the primary meaning of חגוי is open to dispute. The
word is derived from the root חגה, which is not used in Hebrew (like
קצוי from קצה), and is found not only here and in the parallel passage
of Jeremiah, but also in the [Sol
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#014), where it occurs in parallelism
with סתר, which points to the meaning refugium, i.e., asylum. This
meaning has also been confirmed by A. Schultens (Anim-adv. ad Jes. xix.
17) and by Michaelis (Thes. s.v. Jes.), from the Arabic ḥj'a, confugit,
and maḥjâ'u, refugium.

(Note: The renderings adopted on the authority of the ancient versions,
such as clefts of the rock, scissurae, jagged rocks, fissures (ὀπαί,
lxx), caves, which are derived either from the supposed connection
between חגה and חקה, and the Arabic chjj, fidit, laceravit, or from the
Arabic wajaḥ, antrum (with the letters transposed), have far less to
sustain them. For the meanings assigned to these Arabic words are not
the primary meanings, but derivative ones. The former signifies
literally propulit, the latter confugit, iv. effecit ut ad rem
confugeret; and Arabic mawjaḥun means refugium, asylum.)

In the expression מרום שׁבתּו the ב is to be considered as still
retaining its force from חגוי onwards (cf. [Isa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#007); [Job
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#003), etc.). The emphasis rests upon
high; and hence the abstract noun mârōm, height, instead of the
adjective. The Edomites inhabited the mountains of Seir, which have not
yet been carefully explored in detail. They are on the eastern side of
the Ghor (or Arabah), stretching from the deep rocky valley of the Ahsy,
which opens into the southern extremity of the Dead Sea, and extending
as far as Aela on the Red Sea, and consist of mighty rocks of granite
and porphyry, covered with fresh vegetation, which terminate in the
west, towards the deeply intersected sand-sea of the Ghor and Arabah, in
steep and lofty walls of sandstone. The mountains are hardly accessible,
therefore, on the western side; whereas on the east they are gradually
lost in the broad sandy desert of Arabia, without any perceptible fall
(see Burckhardt in v. Raumer's Pal. pp. 83-4, 86; and Robinson's
Palestine, ii. p. 551ff.). They also abound in clefts, with both natural
and artificial caves; and hence its earliest inhabitants were Horites,
i.e., dwellers in caves; and even the Edomites dwelt in caves, at least
to some extent.

(Note: Jerome observes on [Oba 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006) :
"And indeed ... throughout the whole of the southern region of the
Idumaeans, from Eleutheropolis to Petra and Hala (for this is a
possession of Esau), there are small dwellings in caves; and on account
of the great heat of the sun, since it is a southern province,
subterranean huts are used.")

The capital, Sela (Petra), in the Wady Musa, of whose glory at one time
there are proofs still to be found in innumerable remains of tombs,
temples, and other buildings, was shut in both upon the east and west by
rocky walls, which present an endless variety of bright lively colours,
from the deepest crimson to the softest pale red, and sometimes passing
into orange and yellow; whilst on the north and south it was so
encircled by hills and heights, that it could only be reached by
climbing through very difficult mountain passes and defiles (see
Burckhardt, Syr. p. 703; Robinson, Pal. ii. p. 573; and Ritter, Erdk.
xiv. p. 1103); and Pliny calls it oppidum circumdatum montibus
inaccessis. Compare Strabo, xvi. 779; and for the different roads to
Petra, Ritter, p. 997ff.

[Oba 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004)

[Oba 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004) shows the worthlessness of
this reliance of the Edomites. The object to תּגבּיהּ, viz., קנּך, does
not follow till the second clause: If thou makest thy nest high like the
eagle, which builds its nest upon the loftiest jagged rocks ([Job
39:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#027)). This thought is
hyperbolically intensified in the second clause: if thy nest had been
placed among stars. שׁים is not an infinitive, but a passive participle,
as in the primary passage, [Num 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#021),
which Obadiah had before his mind, and in [Sa1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#024); [Sa2
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#032); but קנּך is nevertheless to be
taken as an accusative of the object, after the analogy of the
construction of passives c. accus. obj. (see Ges. 143, l, a.).

[Obadiah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">oba 1:5</span></span>

The prophet sees this overthrow of Edom from its lofty height as
something that has already happened, and he now depicts the utter
devastation of Edom through the medium of the enemies whom Jehovah has
summoned against it. [Oba 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005). "If
thieves had come to thee, if robbers by night, alas, how art thou
destroyed! would they not steal their sufficiency? If vine-dressers had
come to thee, would they not leave gleanings? [Oba
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006). How have the things of Esau been
explored, his hidden treasures desired! [Oba
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007). Even to the border have all the
men of thy covenant sent thee: the men of thy peace have deceived thee,
overpowered thee. They make thy bread a wound under thee. There is no
understanding in him." In order to exhibit the more vividly the complete
clearing out of Edom, Obadiah supposes two cases of plundering in which
there is still something left ([Oba
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005)), and then shows that the enemies
in Edom will act much worse than this. אם with the perfect supposes a
case to have already occurred, when, although it does not as yet exist
in reality, it does so in imagination. גּנּבים are common thieves, and
שׁדדי לילה robbers by night, who carry off another's property by force.
With this second expression, the verb בּאוּ לך must be repeated. "To
thee," i.e., to do thee harm; it is actually equivalent to "upon thee."
The following words איך נדמיתה cannot form the apodosis to the two
previous clauses, because nidmēthâh is too strong a term for the injury
inflicted by thieves or robbers, but chiefly because the following
expression הלוא יגנבוּ וגו is irreconcilable with such an explanation,
the thought that thieves steal דּיּם being quite opposed to nidmâh, or
being destroyed. The clause "how art thou destroyed" must rather be
taken as pointing far beyond the contents of [Oba
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005) and [Oba
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006). It is more fully explained in
[Oba 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009), and is thereby proved to be
a thought thrown in parenthetically, with which the prophet anticipates
the principal fact in his lively description, in the form of an
exclamation of amazement. The apodosis to 'im gannâghı̄m (if robbers,
etc.) follows in the words "do they not steal" (= they surely steal)
dayyâm, i.e., their sufficiency (see Delitzsch on [Isa
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#016)); that is to say, as much as
they need, or can use, or find lying open before them. The picture of
the grape-gatherers says the same thing. They also do not take away all,
even to the very last, but leave some gleanings behind, not only if they
fear God, according to [Lev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#010);
[Deu 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#021), as Hitzig supposes, but
even if they do not trouble themselves about God's commandments at all,
because many a bunch escapes their notice which is only discovered on
careful gleaning. Edom, on the contrary, is completely cleared out. In
[Deu 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006) the address to Edom passes
over into words concerning him. עשׂו is construed as a collective with
the plural. איך is a question of amazement. Châphas, to search through,
to explore (cf. [Zep 1:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012)). Bâ‛âh
(nibh‛ū), to beg, to ask; here in the niphal to be desired. Matspōn, ἁπ.
λεγ. from tsâphan, does not mean a secret place, but a hidden thing or
treasure (τὰ κεκρυμμένα αὐτοῦ, lxx). Obadiah mentions the plundering
first, because Petra, the capital of Edom, was a great emporium of the
Syrio-Arabian trade, where many valuables were stored (vid., Diod. Sic.
xix. 95), and because with the loss of these riches the prosperity and
power of Edom were destroyed.

(Note: Jeremiah ([Jer 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#009)) has
greatly altered the words of Obadiah, dropping the comparison of the
enemy to thieves and grape-gatherers, and representing the enemy as
being themselves grape-gatherers who leave no gleaning, and thieves who
waste till they have enough; and thereby considerably weakening the
poetical picture.)

[Obadiah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">oba 1:7</span></span>

In the midst of this calamity Edom will be forsaken and betrayed by its
allies, and will also be unable to procure any deliverance for itself by
its own understanding. The allies send Edom even to the border. The
meaning of this is not that they will not receive the Edomitish
fugitives, but drive them back to the frontier, so that they fall into
the hands of the enemy (Hitzig and others); for the suffix ך cannot
refer to the small number of fugitives from Edom who have escaped the
massacre, but applies to Edom as a nation. The latter seeks for help and
support from their allies, - namely, through the medium of ambassadors
whom it sends to them. But the ambassadors, and in their persons the
Edomites themselves, are sent back to the frontier by all the allies,
because they will not entangle themselves in the fate of Edom. Sending
to the frontier, however, is not to be understood as signifying that the
allies "send their troops with them as far as the frontier, and then
order them to turn back," as Michaelis supposes; for "if the allies were
unwilling to help, they would hardly call out the army to march as far
as the frontier" (Hitzig). Nor is this implied either in שׁלּחוּך or
השּׁיאוּך; for shillēăch means to send away, to dismiss, and both here
and in [Gen 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#020) to send across the
frontier. This was a deception of the expectation of the Edomites,
although the words "have deceived thee" belong, strictly speaking, to
what follows, and not to the conduct of the allies. אנשׁי שׁלמך, an
expression taken from [Psa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010), both
here and in [Jer 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#022) (cf. [Jer
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010)), the men or people with whom
thou didst live in peace, are probably neighbouring Arabian tribes, who
had made commercial treaties with the Edomites. They deceived, or rather
overpowered, Edom. יכלוּ is the practical explanation and more precise
definition of השּׁיאוּ.

But the answer to the question whether the overpowering was carried out
by cunning and deception ([Jer 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010);
[Jer 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#022)), or by open violence ([Gen
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#026); [Psa
129:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#002)), depends upon the explanation
given to the next sentence, about which there are great diversities of
opinion, partly on account of the different explanations given of לחמך,
and partly on account of the different renderings given to מזור. The
latter occurs in [Hos 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013) and [Jer
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#013) in the sense of a festering
wound or abscess, and the rabbinical commentators and lexicographers
have retained this meaning in the passage before us. On the other hand,
the older translators have here ἔνεδρα (lxx), תקלא, offence, σκάνδαλον
(Chald.), kemi'nā', insidiae (Syr.), Aq. and Symm. σύνδεσμος and
ἐπίδεσις, Vulg. insidiae; and hence the modern rendering, they lay a
snare, or place a trap under thee. But this rendering cannot be
vindicated etymologically, since zūr (= zârar) does not mean to bind,
but to press together or squeeze out. Nor can the form mâzōr be taken as
a contraction of mezōrâh, as Hitzig supposes, since this is derived from
zârâh, to strew or scatter. And no weight is to be attached to the
opinion of Aquila with his literal translation, for the simple reason
that his rendering of [Hos 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013) is
decidedly false. Ewald and Hitzig prefer the rendering "net;" but this,
again, cannot be sustained either from the expression mezorâh hâresheth
in [Pro 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#017) (Hitzig), or from the
Syriac, mezar, extendit (Ges. Addid. ad thes. p. 96). The only meaning
that can be sustained as abscess or wound. We must therefore adhere to
the rendering, "they make thy bread a wound under thee." For the
proposal to take lachmekhâ (thy bread) as a second genitive dependent
upon 'anshē (the men), is not only opposed to the accents and the
parallelism of the members, according to which 'anshē shelōmekhâ (the
men of thy peace) must conclude the second clause, just as 'anshē
berı̄thekhâ (the men of thy covenant) closes the first; but it is
altogether unexampled, and the expression 'anshē lachmekhâ is itself
unheard of. For this reason we must not even supply 'anshē to lachmekhâ
from the previous sentence, or make "the men of thy bread" the subject,
notwithstanding the fact that the lxx, the Chald., the Syr., and Jerome
have adopted this as the meaning. Still less can lachmekhâ stand in the
place of אכלי לחמך (they that eat thy bread), as some suppose. Lachmekhâ
can only be the first object to yâsı̄mū, and consequently the subject of
the previous clause still continues in force: they who befriended thee
make thy bread, i.e., the bread which they ate from thee or with thee,
not "the bread which thou seekest from them" (Hitzig), into a wound
under thee, i.e., an occasion for destroying thee. We have not to think
of common meals of hospitality here, as Rashi, Rosenmller, and others
do; but the words are to be taken figuratively, after the analogy of
[Psa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010), which floated before the
prophet's mind, He that eateth bread with me hath lifted up the heel
against me," as denoting conspiracies on the part of those who were
allied to Edom, and drew their own sustenance from it, the rich trading
nation, to destroy that very nation which was now oppressed by its foes.
The only difficulty is in the word תּחתּיך, under thee, inasmuch as the
meaning "without thy knowledge" (clam te), which Vatablus and Drusius
adopt, cannot be sustained, and least of all from [Sa2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#012). We must connect תּחתּיך closely
with מזור, in this sense, that the wound is inflicted upon the lower
part of the body, to express its dangerous nature, inasmuch as wounds
upon which one sits or lies are hard to heal. Consequently יכוּ לך (they
prevail against thee) is to be understood as denoting conquest, not by
an unexpected attack or open violence, but by cunning and deceit, or by
secret treachery. The last clause, אין תּבוּנה וגו, does not give the
reason why the thing described was to happen to the Edomites (Chald.,
Theod.); nor is it to be connected with mâzōr as a relative clause
(Hitzig), or as explanatory of תּחתּיך, "to thee, without thy perceiving
it, or before thou perceivest it" (Luther and L. de Dieu). The very
change from the second person to the third ( בּו) is a proof that it
introduces an independent statement, - namely, that in consequence of
the calamity which thus bursts upon the Edomites, they lose their wonted
discernment, and neither know what to do nor how to help themselves
(Maurer and Caspari). This thought is expanded still further in [Oba
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008), [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009).

[Obadiah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">oba 1:8</span></span>

"Does it not come to pass in that day, is the saying of Jehovah, that I
destroy the wise men out of Edom, and discernment from the mountains of
Esau? [Oba 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009). And thy heroes
despair, O Teman, that every one may be cut off by murder from the
mountains of Esau." In order to give up the Edomites to destruction at
that time, the Lord will take away discernment from their wise men, so
that even they will not be able to help them. The destruction of the
wise men is not to be understood as signifying that the wise men will
all be slain, or slain before any others, but simply that they will be
destroyed as wise men by the withdrawal or destruction of their wisdom.
This meaning is sustained, not only by the fact that in the second
clause tebhūnâh only is mentioned as that which is to be destroyed, but
also by the parallel passages, [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007); [Isa
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#011); [Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014). Jeremiah mentions here the
wisdom of the Temanites in particular. That they were celebrated for
their wisdom, is evident not only from this passage, but also from the
fact that Eliphaz, the chief opponent of Job in argument, was a Temanite
([Job 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001), etc.). With this withdrawal
of wisdom and discernment, even the brave warriors lose their courage.
The heroes are dismayed (chattū), or fall into despair. Tēmân, which the
Chaldee has rendered incorrectly as an appellative, viz., inhabitants of
the south (dârōmâ'), is a proper name of the southern district of
Idumaea (see at [Amo 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012)), so called
from Teman, a son of Eliphaz and grandson of Esau ([Gen
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011), [Gen
36:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#015)). Gibbōrekhâ (thy heroes), with
the masculine suffix, the people inhabiting the district being addressed
under the name of the district itself. God inflicts this upon Edom with
the intention (lema‛an, to this end) that all the Edomites should be cut
off. Miqqâtel, from the murdering, by murder (compare [Gen
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011), where min occurs after yikkârēth
in this sense); not "without conflict," as Ewald renders it, for qetel
signifies slaying, and not conflict. The thought of connecting miqqâtel
with what follows cannot for a moment be entertained (vid., lxx, Syr.,
Vulg.). It is opposed not only by the authority of the Masoretic
punctuation, but still more decisively by the fact, that the stronger
and more special word (qetel) cannot precede the weaker and more general
one (châmâs), and that the murder of certain fugitives is placed first
in the list of crimes committed by Edom upon the Israelites ([Oba
1:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)).

[Obadiah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">oba 1:10</span></span>

The Cause of the Ruin of the Edomites is their wickedness towards the
brother nation Jacob ([Oba 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010) and
[Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)), which is still further
exhibited in [Oba 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012) in the form
of a warning, accompanied by an announcement of righteous retribution in
the day of the Lord upon all nations ([Oba
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015), [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)). [Oba
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010). "For the wickedness towards thy
brother Jacob shame will cover thee, and thou wilt be cut off for ever.
[Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011). In the day that thou
stoodest opposite, in the day when enemies carried away his goods, and
strangers came into his gates, and cast the lot upon Jerusalem, then
even thou (wast) like one of them." Chămas 'âchı̄khâ, wickedness, violent
wrong towards (upon) thy brother (genit. obj. as in [Joe
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019); [Gen
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#005), etc.). Drusius has already
pointed out the peculiar emphasis on these words. Wrong, or violence, is
all the more reprehensible, when it is committed against a brother. The
fraternal relation in which Edom stood towards Judah is still more
sharply defined by the name Jacob, since Esau and Jacob were twin
brothers. The consciousness that the Israelites were their brethren,
ought to have impelled the Edomites to render helpful support to the
oppressed Judaeans. Instead of this, they not only revelled with
scornful and malignant pleasure in the misfortune of the brother nation,
but endeavored to increase it still further by rendering active support
to the enemy. This hostile behaviour of Edom arose from envy at the
election of Israel, like the hatred of Esau towards Jacob ([Gen
27:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041)), which was transmitted to his
descendants, and came out openly in the time of Moses, in the
unbrotherly refusal to allow the Israelites to pass in a peaceable
manner through their land (Numbers 20). On the other hand, the
Israelites are always commanded in the law to preserve a friendly and
brotherly attitude towards Edom ([Deu
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#004)); and in [Deu
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#007) it is enjoined upon them not to
abhor the Edomite, because he is their brother. תּכסּך בוּשׁה (as in
[Mic 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#010)), shame will cover thee,
i.e., come upon thee in full measure, - namely, the shame of everlasting
destruction, as the following explanatory clause clearly shows. ונכרתּ
with Vav consec., but with the tone upon the penultima, contrary to the
rule (cf. Ges. 49, 3; Ewald, 234, b and c). In the more precise account
of Edom's sins given in [Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011), the
last clause does not answer exactly to the first. After the words "in
the day that thou stoodest opposite," we should expect the apodosis
"thou didst this or that." But Obadiah is led away from the sentence
which he has already begun, by the enumeration of hostilities displayed
towards Judah by its enemies, so that he observes with regard to Edom's
behaviour: Then even thou wast as one of them, that is to say, thou
didst act just like the enemy. עמד מנּגד, to stand opposite (compare
[Psa 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012)), used here to denote a
hostile intention, as in [Sa2 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#013).
They showed this at first by looking on with pleasure at the misfortunes
of the Judaeans ([Oba 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)), still
more by stretching out their hand after their possessions ([Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013)), but most of all by taking part
in the conflict with Judah ([Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014)). In the clauses which follow,
the day when Edom acted thus is described as a day on which Judah had
fallen into the power of hostile nations, who carried off its
possessions, and disposed of Jerusalem as their booty. Zȧrı̄m and nokhrı̄m
are synonymous epithets applied to heathen foes. שׁבה generally denotes
the carrying away of captives; but it is sometimes applied to booty in
cattle and goods, or treasures ([Ch1
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#021); [Ch2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014); [Ch2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#017)). חיל is not used here either
for the army, or for the strength, i.e., the kernel of the nation, but,
as חילו in [Oba 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013) clearly shows,
for its possessions, as in [Isa 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#004);
[Isa 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014); [Eze
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#012), etc. שׁערו, his (Judah's)
gates, used rhetorically for his cities.

Lastly, Jerusalem is also mentioned as the capital, upon which the
enemies cast lots. The three clauses form a climax: first, the carrying
away of Judah's possessions, that is to say, probably those of the open
country; then the forcing of a way into the cities; and lastly,
arbitrary proceedings both in and with the capital. ידּוּ גורל (perf.
kal of ידד = ידה, not piel for יידּוּ, because the Yod praef. of the
imperfect piel is never dropped in verbs פי), to cast the lot upon booty
(things) and prisoners, to divide them among them (compare [Joe
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003) and [Nah
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#010)). Caspari, Hitzig, and others
understand it here as in [Joe 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003), as
denoting the distribution of the captive inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
found upon this one of their leading arguments, that the description
given here refers to the destruction of Jerusalem, which Obadiah either
foresaw in the Spirit, or depicts as something already experienced. But
this by no means follows from the fact that in Joel we have עמּי instead
of ירוּשׁלם, since it is generally acknowledged that, when the prophets
made use of their predecessors, they frequently modified their
expressions, or gave them a different turn. But if we look at our
passage simply as its stands, there is not the slightest indication that
Jerusalem is mentioned in the place of the people. As שׁבות חילו does
not express the carrying away of the inhabitants, there is not a single
syllable which refers to the carrying away captive of either the whole
nation or the whole of the population of Jerusalem. On the contrary, in
[Oba 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013) we read of the perishing of
the children of Judah, and in [Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014) of fugitives of Judah, and those
that have escaped. From this it is very obvious that Obadiah had simply
a conquest of Jerusalem in his eye, when part of the population was
slain in battle and part taken captive, and the possessions of the city
were plundered; so that the casting of the lot upon Jerusalem has
reference not only to the prisoners, but also to the things taken as
plunder in the city, which the conquerors divided among them. גּם אתּה,
even thou, the brother of Jacob, art like one of them, makest common
cause with the enemy. The verb הייתה, thou wast, is omitted, to bring
the event before the mind as something even then occurring. For this
reason Obadiah also clothes the further description of the hostilities
of the Edomites in the form of a warning against such conduct.

[Obadiah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">oba 1:12</span></span>

"And look not at the day of thy brother on the day of his misfortune;
and rejoice not over the sons of Judah in the day of their perishing,
and do not enlarge thy mouth in the day of the distress. [Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013). Come not into the gate of my
people in the day of their calamity; thou also look not at his
misfortune in the day of his calamity, and stretch not out thy hand to
his possession in the day of his calamity: [Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014). Nor stand in the cross-road, to
destroy his fugitives, nor deliver up his escaped ones in the day of
distress." This warning cannot be satisfactorily explained either "on
the assumption that the prophet is here foretelling the future
destruction of Judah and Jerusalem" (Caspari), or "on the supposition
that he is merely depicting an event that has already past" (Hitzig). If
the taking and plundering of Jerusalem were an accomplished fact,
whether in idea or in reality, as it is shown to be by the perfects
בּאוּ and ידּוּ in [Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011), Obadiah
could not in that case warn the Edomites against rejoicing over it, or
even taking part therein. Hence Drusius, Rosenmller, and others, take
the verbs in [Oba 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012) as futures
of the past: "Thou shouldest not have seen, shouldest not have
rejoiced," etc. But this is opposed to the grammar. אל followed by the
so-called fut. apoc. is jussive, and cannot stand for the pluperf.
conjunct. And Maurer's suggestion is just as untenable, namely, that yōm
in [Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011) denotes the day of the
capture of Jerusalem, and in [Oba
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), [Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013) the period after this day; since
the identity of יום עמדך (the day of thy standing) in [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011) with יום אחיך in [Oba
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012) strikes the eye at once. The
warning in [Oba 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012) is only
intelligible on the supposition, that Obadiah has not any particular
conquest and plundering of Jerusalem in his mind, whether a future one
or one that has already occurred, but regards this as an event that not
only has already taken place, but will take place again: that is to say,
on the assumption that he rises from the particular historical event to
the idea which it embodied, and that, starting from this, he sees in the
existing case all subsequent cases of a similar kind. From this ideal
standpoint he could warn Edom of what it had already done, and designate
the disastrous day which had come upon Judah and Jerusalem by different
expressions as a day of the greatest calamity; for what Edom had done,
and what had befallen Judah, were types of the future development of the
fate of Judah and of the attitude of Edom towards it, which go on
fulfilling themselves more and more until the day of the Lord upon all
nations, upon the near approach of which Obadiah founds his warning in
[Oba 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015). The warning proceeds in
[Oba 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012) from the general to the
particular, or from the lower to the higher. Obadiah warns the Edomites,
as Hitzig says, "not to rejoice in Judah's troubles ([Oba
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)), nor to make common cause with
the conquerors ([Oba 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013)), nor to
outdo and complete the work of the enemy ([Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014))." By the cop. Vav, which stands
at the head of all the three clauses in [Oba
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), the warning addressed to the
Edomites, against such conduct as this, is linked on to what they had
already done.

The three clauses of [Oba 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012) contain
a warning in a graduated form against malicious pleasure. ראה with ב, to
look at anything with pleasure, to take delight in it, affirms less than
שׂמח ב, to rejoice, to proclaim one's joy without reserve. הגדּיל פּה,
to make the mouth large, is stronger still, like הגדּיל בּפה, to boast,
to do great things with the mouth, equivalent to הרחיב פּה על, to make
the mouth broad, to stretch it open, over (against) a person ([Psa
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#021); [Isa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#004)), a gesture indicating contempt
and derision. The object of their malicious pleasure mentioned in the
first clause is yōm 'âchı̄khâ, the day of thy brother, i.e., the day upon
which something strange happened to him, namely, what is mentioned in
[Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011). Yōm does not of itself
signify the disastrous day, or day of ruin, either here or anywhere
else; but it always receives the more precise definition from the
context. If we were to adopt the rendering "disastrous day," it would
give rise to a pure tautology when taken in connection with what
follows. The expression 'âchı̄khâ (of thy brother) justifies the warning.
בּיום נכרו is not in apposition to בּיום אחיך, but, according to the
parallelism of the clauses, it is a statement of time. נכר, ἁπ. λεγ. =
נכר ([Job 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#003)), fortuna aliena, a
strange, i.e., hostile fate, not "rejection" (Hitzig, Caspari, and
others). The expression יום אבדם, the day of their (Judah's sons)
perishing, is stronger still; although the perishing ('ăbhōd) of the
sons of Judah cannot denote the destruction of the whole nation, since
the following word tsrh, calamity, is much too weak to admit of this.
Even the word איד, which occurs three times in [Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013), does not signify destruction,
but (from the root אוּד, to fall heavily, to load) simply pressure, a
burden, then weight of suffering, distress, misfortune (see Delitzsch on
[Job 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#012)). In [Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013) Obadiah warns against taking part
in the plundering of Jerusalem. The gate of my people: for the city in
which the people dwell, the capital (see [Mic
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009)). Look not thou also, a brother
nation, upon his calamity, as enemies do, i.e., do not delight thyself
thereat, nor snatch at his possessions. The form tishlachnâh, for which
we should expect tishlach, is not yet satisfactorily explained (for the
different attempts that have been made to explain it, see Caspari). The
passages in which nâh is appended to the third pers. fem. sing., to
distinguish it from the second person, do not help us to explain it.
Ewald and Olshausen would therefore alter the text, and read תּשׁלח יד.
But יד is not absolutely necessary, since it is omitted in [Sa2
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006); [Sa2
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#017), or [Psa
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#017), where shâlach occurs in the
sense of stretching out the hand. חילו, his possessions. On the fact
itself, compare [Joe 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#005). The
prominence given to the day of misfortune at the end of every sentence
is very emphatic; "inasmuch as the selection of the time of a brother's
calamity, as that in which to rage against him with such cunning and
malicious pleasure, was doubly culpable" (Ewald). In [Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014) the warning proceeds to the worst
crime of all, their seizing upon the Judaean fugitives, for the purpose
of murdering them or delivering them up to the enemy. Pereq signifies
here the place where the roads break or divide, the cross-road. In [Nah
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001), the only other place in which it
occurs, it signifies tearing in pieces, violence. Hisgı̄r, to deliver up
(lit., concludendum tradidit), is generally construed with אל ([Deu
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#016)) or בּיד ([Psa
31:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#009); [Sa1
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#011)). Here it is written absolutely
with the same meaning: not "to apprehend, or so overpower that there is
no escape left" (Hitzig). This would affirm too little after the
preceding הכרית, and cannot be demonstrated from [Job
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#010), where hisgı̄r means to keep in
custody.

[Obadiah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">oba 1:15</span></span>

This warning is supported in [Oba 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)
by an announcement of the day of the Lord, in which Edom and all the
enemies of Israel will receive just retribution for their sins against
Israel. [Oba 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015). "For the day of
Jehovah is near upon all nations. As thou hast done, it will be done to
thee; what thou hast performed returns upon thy head. [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016). For as ye have drunken upon my
holy mountain, all nations will drink continually, and drink and
swallow, and will be as those that were not." כּי (for) connects what
follows with the warnings in [Oba
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), but not also, or exclusively,
with [Oba 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010), [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011), as Rosenmller and others
suppose, for [Oba 1:2-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#002) are not
inserted parenthetically. "The day of Jehovah" has been explained at
[Joe 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015). The expression was first
formed by Obadiah, not by Joel; and Joel, Isaiah, and the prophets that
follow, adopted it from Obadiah. The primary meaning is not the day of
judgment, but the day on which Jehovah reveals His majesty and
omnipotence in a glorious manner, to overthrow all ungodly powers, and
to complete His kingdom. It was this which gave rise to the idea of the
day of judgment and retribution which predominates in the prophetic
announcements, but which simply forms one side of the revelation of the
glory of God, as our passage at once shows; inasmuch as it describes
Jehovah as not only judging all nations and regarding them according to
their deeds (cf. [Oba 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015), and [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)), but as providing deliverance
upon Zion ([Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)), and setting up
His kingdom ([Oba 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021)). The
retribution will correspond to the actions of Edom and of the nations.
For גּמלך וגו, compare [Joe 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004), [Joe
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#007), where ([Joe
3:2-7](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)) the evil deeds of the nations,
what they have done against the people of God, are described. In [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016) Obadiah simply mentions as the
greatest crime the desecration of the holy mountain by drinking
carousals, for which all nations are to drink the intoxicating cup of
the wrath of God till they are utterly destroyed. In shethı̄them (ye have
drunk) it is not the Judaeans who are addressed, as many commentators,
from Ab. Ezra to Ewald and Meier, suppose, but the Edomites. This is
required not only by the parallelism of כּאשׁר שׁתיתם (as ye have drunk)
and בּאשׁר שׁתיתם על הת (as thou hast done), but also by the actual
wording and context. בּאשׁר שׁתיתם על הר cannot mean "as ye who are upon
my holy mountain have drunk;" and in the announcement of the retribution
which all nations will receive for the evil they have done to Judah, it
is impossible that either the Judaeans should be addressed, or a
parallel drawn between their conduct and that of the nations. Moreover,
throughout the whole of the prophecy Edom only is addressed, and never
Judah. Mount Zion is called "my holy mountain," because Jehovah was
there enthroned in His sanctuary. The verb shâthâh is used in the two
clauses in different senses: viz., shethı̄them, of the drinking carousals
which the Edomites held upon Zion, like yishtū in [Joe
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003); and shâthū, in the apodosis, of
the drinking of the intoxicating goblet (cf. [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017); [Jer
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#015); [Jer
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#012), etc.), as the expression "they
shall be as though they had not been" clearly shows. At the same time,
we cannot infer from the words "all nations will drink," that all
nations would succeed in taking Zion and abusing it, but that they would
have to taste all the bitterness of their crime; for it is not stated
that they are to drink upon Mount Zion. The fact that the antithesis to
שׁתיתם is not תּשׁתּוּ ("ye will drink") but ישׁתּוּ כּל־הגּוים, does
not compel us to generalize shethı̄them, and regard all nations as
addressed implicite in the Edomites. The difficulty arising from this
antithesis cannot be satisfactorily removed by the remark of Caspari,
that in consequence of the allusion to the day of the Lord upon all
nations in [Oba 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015), the judgment
upon all nations and that upon the Edomites were thought of as
inseparably connected, or that this induced Obadiah to place opposite to
the sins of the Edomites, not their own punishment, but the punishment
of all nations, more especially as, according to [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011), it must necessarily be assumed
that the foreign nations participated in the sin of Edom. For this
leaves the question unanswered, how Obadiah came to speak at all ([Oba
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)) of the day of the Lord upon all
nations. The circumstance that, according to [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011), heathen nations had plundered
Jerusalem, and committed crimes like those for which Edom is condemned
in [Oba 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), does not lead
directly to the day of judgment upon all nations, but simply to a
judgment upon Edom and the nations which had committed like sins. The
difficulty is only removed by the assumption that Obadiah regarded Edom
as a type of the nations that had risen up in hostility to the Lord and
His people, and were judged by the Lord in consequence, so that what he
says of Edom applies to all nations which assume the same or a similar
attitude towards the people of God. From this point of view he could,
without reserve, extend to all nations the retribution which would fall
upon Edom for its sins. They should drink tâmı̄d, i.e., not at once, as
Ewald has rendered it in opposition to the usage of the language, but
"continually." This does not mean, however, that "there will be no time
in which there will not be one of the nations drinking the intoxicating
cup, and being destroyed by drinking thereof; or that the nations will
come in turn, and therefore in a long immeasurable series, one after the
other, to drink the cup of intoxication," as Caspari supposes, but
"continually, so that the turn never passes from the heathen to Judah,
[Isa 51:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022)" (Hitzig). This drinking
is more precisely defined as drinking and swallowing (לוּע, in Syriac,
to devour or swallow, hence לע, a throat, so called from the act of
swallowing, [Pro 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#002)), i.e., drinking
in full draughts; and the effect, "they will be like such as have not
been, have never existed" (cf. [Job
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#019)), i.e., they will be utterly
destroyed as nations.

[Obadiah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">oba 1:17</span></span>

The Kingdom of Jehovah Established upon Zion. - The prophecy advances
from the judgment upon all the heathen to the completion of the kingdom
of God by the raising up of Israel to world-wide dominion. While the
judgment is falling upon all the heathen nations, Mount Zion will be an
asylum for those who are delivered. Judah and Israel will capture the
possessions of the nations, destroy Edom, and extend its borders on
every side ([Oba 1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)). The
Israelites scattered among the nations will return into their enlarged
inheritances, and upon Zion will saviours arise, to judge Edom, and the
kingdom will then be the Lord's ([Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020), [Oba
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021)). This promise is appended as an
antithesis to the proclamation of judgment in [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016).

[Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)

"But upon Mount Zion will be that which has been saved, and it will be a
sanctuary, and the house of Jacob will take possession of their
possessions." Upon Mount Zion, which the Edomites have now desecrated by
drinking carousals, there will then, when the nations are obliged to
drink the cup of intoxication even to their utter destruction, be
pelētâh, that which has escaped, i.e., the multitude of those who have
been rescued and preserved throughout the judgment. See the explanation
of this at [Joe 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032), where this
thought is still further expounded. Mount Zion is the seat of the
kingdom of Jehovah (cf. [Oba 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021)).
There the Lord is enthroned ([Joe
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017)), and His rescued people with
Him. And it (Mount Zion) will be qōdesh, a sanctuary, i.e., inviolable;
the heathen will no more dare to tread it and defile it ([Joe
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017)). It follows from this, that the
rescued crowd upon it will also be a holy people (" a holy seed," [Isa
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013)). This sanctified people of the
Lord, the house of Jacob, will capture the possessions of their foes.
The suffix attached to מורשׁיהם is supposed by many to refer to בּית
יעקב: those of the house of Jacob, i.e., the rescued Israelites, will
take their former possessions once more. This view cannot be overthrown
by the simple remark that yârash cannot mean to take possession again;
for that meaning might be given to it by the context, as, for example,
in [Deu 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#005). But it is a decisive
objection to it, that neither in what precedes nor in what follows is
there any reference to Israel as having been carried away. The
penetration of foes into the gates of Jerusalem, the plundering of the
city, and the casting of lots upon the booty and the prisoners ([Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)), do not involve the carrying
away of the whole nation into exile; and the gâlūth of the sons of
Israel and Jerusalem in [Oba 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020) is
clearly distinguished from the "house of Jacob" in [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018). And since we have first of all
([Oba 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018), [Oba
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019)) an announcement of the conquest
of Edom by the house of Jacob, and the capture of the mountains of Esau,
of Philistia, etc., by the inhabitants of the south-land, i.e., by
Judaeans; and then in [Oba 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020) the
possession of the south-land is promised to the gâluth (captivity); this
gâluth can only have been a small fragment of the nation, and therefore
the carrying away can only have extended to a number of prisoners of
war, whilst the kernel of the nation had remained in the land, i.e., in
its own possessions. The objection offered to this, namely, that if we
refer the suffix in mōrâshēhem (their possessions) to kŏl-haggōyı̄m (all
nations), Judah would have to take possession of all nations, which is
quite incredible and even at variance with [Oba
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019), [Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020), inasmuch as the only enemies'
land mentioned there ([Oba 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019)) is
the territory of the Edomites and Philistines, whilst the other
countries or portions of country mentioned there are not enemies' land
at all. For there is no incredibility in the taking of the land of all
nations by Judah, except on the assumption that Judah merely denotes the
posterity or remnant of the citizens of the earthly kingdom of Judah.
But this is not what Obadiah says. He does not mention Judah, but the
house of Jacob, and means thereby not the natural Israel, but the people
of God, who are eventually to obtain the dominion of the world. The
discrepancy between [Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017) and [Oba
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019) is not greater than that between
שׁתיתם in [Oba 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016) and ישּׁתּוּ
כל־הגּוים in [Oba 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016), and disappears
if we only recognise the fact that Edom and the Philistines are simply
mentioned in [Oba 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019) as types of the
heathen world in its hostility to god. We therefore regard the
application of the expression mōrâshēhem to the possessions of the
heathen nations as the only correct one, and that all the more because
the וירשׁוּ in [Oba 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019) is very
clearly seen to be a more exact explanation of the וירשׁוּ in [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017). In [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017) Obadiah gives, in a few brief
words, the sum and substance of the salvation which awaits the people of
the Lord in the future. This salvation is unfolded still further in what
follows, and first of all in [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018), [Oba
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019), by a fuller exposition of the
thought expressed in [Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017).

[Obadiah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">oba 1:18</span></span>

"And the house of Jacob will be a fire, and the house of Joseph a flame,
and the house of Esau for stubble. And they will burn among them, and
consume them, and there will not be one left to the house of Esau, for
Jehovah hath spoken." This verse not only resumes the discussion of the
retribution, so that it corresponds to [Oba
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015), but it also affirms, as an
appendix to [Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017), that Edom is to
be utterly destroyed. By the "house of Jacob" Judah is intended, as the
co-ordination of the house of Joseph, i.e., of the ten tribes, clearly
shows. The assumption that "house of Jacob" signifies all Israel, in
connection with which that portion is also especially mentioned, which
might be supposed to be excluded (Rosenmller, Hengstenberg, and others),
is at variance with such passages as [Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003), "the house of Jacob, and all the
remnant of the house of Israel," where the reason assigned for the
co-ordination is not applicable. Obadiah uses the name Jacob for Judah
because ever since the division of the kingdoms Judah alone has
represented the people of God, the ten tribes having fallen away from
the kingdom of God for a time. In the future, however, Judah and Israel
are to be united again (vid., [Hos
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#002); [Eze
37:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#016); [Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018)), and unitedly to attack and
overcome their foes ([Isa 11:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013)).
Obadiah distinctly mentions the house of Joseph, i.e., of the ten
tribes, in this passage and in this alone, for the purpose of guarding
against the idea that the ten tribes are to be shut out from the future
salvation. For the figure of the flame of fire which consumes stubble,
see [Isa 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#024) and [Isa
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#017). For the expression, "for
Jehovah hath spoken," compare [Joe
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#008).

[Obadiah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">oba 1:19</span></span>

After the destruction of its foes the nation of God will take possession
of their land, and extend its territory to every region under heaven.
[Oba 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019). "And those towards the
south will take possession of the mountains of Esau; and those in the
lowland, of the Philistines: and they will take possession of the fields
of Ephraim, and the fields of Samaria; and Benjamin (will take
possession) of Gilead. [Oba 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020). And
the captives of this army of the sons of Israel (will take possession)
of what Canaanites there are as far as Zarephath; and the prisoners of
Jerusalem that are in Sepharad will take possession of the cities of the
south." In וירשׁוּ וגו the expression וירשׁוּ בּית י in [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017) is more precisely defined, and
the house of Jacob, i.e., the kingdom of Judah, is divided into the
Negeb, the Shephelah, and Benjamin, to each of which a special district
is assigned, of which it will take possession, the countries being
mentioned in the place of their inhabitants. The negebh, or southern
land of Judah (see the comm. on [Jos
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)), i.e., the inhabitants thereof,
will take possession of the mountains of Esau, and therefore extend
their territory eastwards; whilst those of the lowland (shephēlâh; see
at [Jos 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#033)), on the Mediterranean,
will seize upon the Philistines, that is to say, upon their land, and
therefore spread out towards the west. The subject to the second וירשׁוּ
is not mentioned, and must be determined from the context: viz., the men
of Judah, with the exception of the inhabitants of the Negeb and
Shephelah already mentioned, that is to say, strictly speaking, those of
the mountains of Judah, and original stock of the land of Judah ([Jos
15:48-60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048)). Others would leave
hannegebh and hasshephēlâh still in force as subjects; so that the
thought expressed would be this: The inhabitants of the south land and
of the lowland will also take possession in addition to this of the
fields of Ephraim and Samaria. But not only is the parallelism of the
clauses, according to which one particular portion of territory is
assigned to each part, utterly destroyed, but according to this view the
principal part of Judah is entirely passed over without any perceptible
reason. Sâdeh, fields, used rhetorically for land or territory. Along
with Ephraim the land, Samaria the capital is especially mentioned, just
as we frequently find Jerusalem along with Judah. In the last clause
ירשׁוּ (shall take possession of) is to be repeated after Benjamin. From
the taking of the territories of the kingdom of the ten tribes by Judah
and Benjamin, we are not to infer that the territory of the ten tribes
was either compared to an enemy's land, or thought of as depopulated;
but the thought is simply this: Judah and Benjamin, the two tribes,
which formed the kingdom of God in the time of Obadiah will extend their
territory to all the four quarters of the globe, and take possession of
all Canaan beyond its former boundaries. Hengstenberg has rightly shown
that we have here simply an individualizing description of the promise
in [Gen 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014), "thy seed will be as
the dust of the ground; and thou breakest out to the west and to the
east, to the north and to the south," etc.; i.e., that on the ground of
this promise Obadiah predicts the future restoration of the kingdom of
God, and its extension beyond the borders of Canaan. In this he looks
away from the ten tribes, because in his esteem the kingdom of Judah
alone constituted the kingdom or people of God. But he has shown clearly
enough in [Oba 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018) that he does not
regard them as enemies of Judah, or as separated from the kingdom of
God, but as being once more united to Judah as the people of God. And
being thus incorporated again into the people of God, he thinks of them
as dwelling with them upon the soil of Judah, so that they are included
in the population of the four districts of this kingdom. For this
reason, no other places of abode are assigned to the Ephraimites and
Gileadites. The idea that they are to be transplanted altogether to
heathen territory, rests upon a misapprehension of the true facts of the
case, and has no support whatever in [Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020). "The sons of Israel" in [Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020) cannot be the ten tribes, as
Hengstenberg supposes, because the other portion of the covenant nation
mentioned along with them would in that case be described as Judah, not
as Jerusalem. "The sons of Israel" answer to the "Jacob" in [Oba
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010), and the "house of Jacob" in [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017), in connection with which special
prominence is given to Jerusalem in [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011), and to Mount Zion in [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017); so that it is the Judaeans who
are referred to, - not, however, as distinguished from the ten tribes,
but as the people of God, with whom the house of Jacob is once more
united. In connection with the gâluth (captivity) of the sons of Israel,
the gâluth of Jerusalem is also mentioned, like the sons of Judah and
the sons of Jerusalem in [Joe 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006), of
whom Joel affirms, with a glance at Obadiah, that the Phoenicians and
Philistines have sold them to the sons of Javan. These citizens of Judah
and Jerusalem, who have been taken prisoners in war, are called by
Obadiah the gâluth of the sons of Israel and Jerusalem, the people of
God being here designated by the name of their tribe-father Jacob or
Israel. That we should understand by the "sons of Israel" Judah, as the
tribe or kernel of the covenant nation, is required by the actual
progress apparent in v.20 in relation to [Oba
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019).

After Obadiah had foretold to the house of Jacob in [Oba
1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017) that it would take possession
of the land of their enemies, and spread beyond the borders of Canaan,
the question still remained to be answered, What would become of the
prisoners, and those who had been carried away captive, according to
[Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011) and [Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014)? This is explained in [Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020). The carrying away of the sons of
Israel is restricted to a portion of the nation by the words, "the
captivity of this host" (hachēl-hazzeh); no such carrying away of the
nation as such had taken place at that time as that which afterwards
occurred at the destruction of the kingdoms of Israel and Judah. The
enemies who had conquered Jerusalem had contented themselves with
carrying away those who fell into their hands. The expression
hachēl-hazzeh points to this host which had been carried away captive.
חל, which the lxx and some of the Rabbins have taken as a verbal noun, ἡ
ἀρχή, initium, is a defective form of חיל, an army ([Kg2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007); [Isa
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002)), like חק for חיק in [Pro
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#020); [Pro
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#023); [Pro
21:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#014), and is not to be identified
with חל, the trench of a fortification. The two clauses in [Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020) have only one verb, which renders
the meaning of צרפת ... אשׁר כ ambiguous. The Chaldee (according to our
editions, though not according to Kimchi's account) and the Masoretes
(by placing athnach under sephârâd), also Rashi and others, take אשׁר
כּנענים as in apposition to the subject: those prisoners of the sons of
Israel who are among the Canaanites to Zarephath. And the parallelism to
אשׁר בּספרד appears to favour this; but it is decidedly negatived by the
absence of ב before כנענים. אשׁר כן can only mean, "who are Canaanites."
But this, when taken as in apposition to בּני ישׂ, gives no sustainable
meaning. For the sons of Israel could only be called Canaanites when
they had adopted the nature of Canaan. And any who had done this could
look for no share in the salvation of the Lord, and no return to the
land of the Lord. We must therefore take אשׁר כנענים as the object, and
supply the verb ירשׁוּ from the first clauses of the preceding verse.
Obadiah first of all expresses the verb twice, then omits it in the next
two clauses ([Oba 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019) and [Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)), and inserts it again in the
last clause ([Oba 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)). The meaning
is, that the army of these sons of Israel, who have been carried away
captive, will take possession of what Canaanites there are as far as
Zarephath, i.e., the Phoenician city of Sarepta, the present Surafend,
between Tyre and Sidon on the sea-coast (see comm. on [Kg1
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#009)). The capture of the land of the
enemy presupposes a return to the fatherland. The exiles of Jerusalem
shall take possession of the south country, the inhabitants of which
have pushed forward into Edom. בּספרד (in Sepharad) is difficult, and
has never yet been satisfactorily explained, as the word does not occur
again. The rendering Spain, which we find in the Chaldee and Syriac, is
probably only an inference drawn from [Joe
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006); and the Jewish rendering
Bosphorus, which is cited by Jerome, is simply founded upon the
similarity in the name. The supposed connection between this name and
the PaRaD, or parda, mentioned in the great arrow-headed inscription of
Nakshi Rustam in a list of names of tribes between Katpadhuka
(Cappadocia) and Yun (Ionia), in which Sylv. de Sacy imagined that he
had found our Sepharad, has apparently more to favour it, since the
resemblance is very great. But if parda is the Persian form for Sardis
(Σάρδις or Σάρδεις), which was written varda in the native (Lydian)
tongue, as Lassen maintains, Sepharad cannot be the same as parda,
inasmuch as the Hebrews did not receive the name ספרד through the
Persians; and the native varda, apart from the fact that it is merely
postulated, would be written סורד in Hebrew. To this we may add, that
the impossibility of proving that Sardis was ever used for Lydia,
precludes our rendering parda by Sardis. It is much more natural to
connect the name with Σπάρτη (Sparta) and Σπαρτιάαι (1 Maccabees 14:16,
20, 23; 12:2, 5, 6), and assume that the Hebrews had heard the name from
the Phoenicians in connection with Javan, as the name of a land in the
far west.

(Note: The appellative rendering ἐν διασπορᾶ (Hendewerk and Maurer) is
certainly to be rejected; and Ewald's conjecture, ספרם, "a place three
hours' journey from Acco," in support of which he refers to Niebuhr, R.
iii. p. 269, is a very thoughtless one. For Niebuhr there mentions the
village of Serfati as the abode of the prophet Elijah, and refers to
Maundrell, who calls the village Sarphan, Serephat, and Serepta, in
which every thoughtful reader must recognise the biblical Zarephath, and
the present village of Surafend.)

The cities of the south country stand in antithesis to the Canaanites as
far as Zarephath in the north; and these two regions are mentioned
synecdochically for all the countries round about Canaan, like "the
breaking forth of Israel on the right hand and on the left, that its
seed may inherit the Gentiles," which is promised in [Isa
54:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#003). The description is rounded off
by the closing reference to the south country, in which it returns to
the point whence it started.

With the taking of the lands of the Gentiles, the full display of
salvation begins in Zion. [Oba 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021).
"And saviours go up on Mount Zion to judge the mountains of Esau; and
the kingdom will be Jehovah's." עלה followed by ב does not mean to go up
to a place, but to climb to the top of ([Deu
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005); [Psa
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003); [Jer
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#029); [Jer
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#010)), or into ([Jer
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020)). Consequently there is no
allusion in ועלוּ to the return from exile. Going up to the top of Mount
Zion simply means, that at the time when Israel captures the possessions
of the heathen, Mount Zion will receive and have saviours who will judge
Edom. And as the mountains of Esau represent the heathen world, so Mount
Zion, as the seat of the Old Testament kingdom of God, is the type of
the kingdom of God in its fully developed form. מושׁיעים, which is
written defectively מושׁעים in some of the ancient mss, and has
consequently been rendered incorrectly σεσωσμένοι and ἀνασωζόμενοι by
the lxx, Aq., Theod., and the Syriac, signifies salvatores, deliverers,
saviours. The expression is selected with an allusion to the olden time,
in which Jehovah saved His people by judges out of the power of their
enemies ([Jdg 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#016); [Jdg
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#009), [Jdg
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015), etc.). "מושׁיעים are heroes,
resembling the judges, who are to defend and deliver Mount Zion and its
inhabitants, when they are threatened and oppressed by enemies"
(Caspari). The object of their activity, however, is not Israel, but
Edom, the representative of all the enemies of Israel. The mountains of
Esau are mentioned instead of the people, partly on account of the
antithesis to the mountain of Zion, and partly also to express the
thought of supremacy not only over the people, but over the land of the
heathen also. Shâphat is not to be restricted in this case to the
judging or settling of disputes, but includes the conduct of the
government, the exercise of dominion in its fullest extent, so that the
"judging of the mountains of Esau" expresses the dominion of the people
of God over the heathen world. Under the saviours, as Hengstenberg has
correctly observed, the Saviour par excellence is concealed. This is not
brought prominently out, nor is it even distinctly affirmed; but it is
assumed as self-evident, from the history of the olden time, that the
saviours are raised up by Jehovah for His people. The following and
concluding thought, that the kingdom will be Jehovah's, i.e., that
Jehovah will show Himself to the whole world as King of the world, and
Ruler in His kingdom, and will be acknowledged by the nations of the
earth, either voluntarily or by constraint, rests upon this assumption.
God was indeed Kings already, not as the Almighty Ruler of the universe,
for this is not referred to here, but as King in Israel, over which His
kingdom did extend. But this His royal sway was not acknowledged by the
heathen world, and could not be, more especially when He had to deliver
Israel up to the power of its enemies, on account of its sins. This
acknowledgment, however, He would secure for Himself, by the destruction
of the heathen power in the overthrow of Edom, and by the exaltation of
His people to dominion over all nations. Through this mighty saving act
He will establish His kingdom over the whole earth (cf. [Joe
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#021); [Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007); [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023)). "The coming of this kingdom
began with Christ, and looks for its complete fulfilment in Him"
(Hengstenberg).

If now, in conclusion, we cast another glance at the fulfilment of our
whole prophecy; the fulfilment of that destruction by the nations, with
which the Edomites are threatened ([Oba
1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)), commenced in the Chaldean
period. For although no express historical evidence exists as to the
subjugation of the Edomites by Nebuchadnezzar, since Josephus (Ant. x.
9, 7) says nothing about the Edomites, who dwelt between the Moabites
and Egypt, in the account which he gives of Nebuchadnezzar's expedition
against Egypt, five years after the destruction of Jerusalem, in which
he subdued the Ammonites and Moabites; the devastation of Edom by the
Chaldeans may unquestionably be inferred from [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007). and [Eze
35:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001), when compared with [Jer
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009), [Jer
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#021), and [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003). In [Jer
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#021) the Edomites are mentioned among
the nations round about Judah, whom the Lord would deliver up into the
hand of His servant Nebuchadnezzar ([Jer
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#009)), and to whom Jeremiah was to
present the cup of the wine of wrath from the hand of Jehovah; and they
are placed between the Philistines and the Moabites. And according to
[Mal 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003), Jehovah made the mountains
of Esau into a wilderness; and this can only refer to the desolation of
the land of Edom by the Chaldeans (see at [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003)). It is true, that at that time
the Edomites could still think of rebuilding their ruins; but the threat
of Malachi, "If they build, I shall pull down, saith the Lord," was
subsequently fulfilled, although no accounts have been handed down as to
the fate of Edom in the time of Alexander the Great and his successors.
The destruction of the Edomites as a nation was commenced by the
Maccabees. After Judas Maccabaeus had defeated them several times (1
Maccabees 5:3 and 65; Jos. Ant. xii. 18, 1), John Hyrcanus subdued them
entirely about 129 b.c., and compelled them to submit to circumcision,
and observe the Mosaic law (Jos. Ant. xiii. 9, 1), whilst Alexander
Jannaeus also subjugated the last of the Edomites (xiii. 15, 4). And the
loss of their national independence, which they thereby sustained, was
followed by utter destruction at the hands of the Romans. To punish them
for the cruelties which they had practised in Jerusalem in connection
with the Zelots, immediately before the siege of that city by the Romans
(Josephus, Wars of the Jews, iv. 5, 1, 2), Simon the Gerasene devastated
their land in a fearful manner (Wars of the Jews, iv. 9, 7); whilst the
Idumaeans in Jerusalem, who took the side of Simon (v. 6, 1), were slain
by the Romans along with the Jews. The few Edomites who still remained
were lost among the Arabs; so that the Edomitish people was "cut off for
ever" ([Oba 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)) by the Romans, and
its very name disappeared from the earth. Passing on to the rest of the
prophecy, Edom filled up the measure of its sins against its brother
nation Israel, against which Obadiah warns it in [Oba
1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), at the taking and destruction
of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans (vid., [Eze
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005), [Eze
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#010); [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007); [Lam
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#022)). The fulfilment of the threat in
[Oba 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018) we cannot find, however, in
the subjugation of the Edomites by the Maccabeans, and the devastating
expedition of Simon the Gerasene, as Caspari and others do, although it
is apparently favoured by the statement in [Eze
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#014), that Jehovah would fulfil His
vengeance upon Edom by the hand of His people Israel. For even if this
prophecy of Ezekiel may have been fulfilled in the events just
mentioned, we are precluded from understanding [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018), and the parallel passages, [Amo
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011), and [Num
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#018), as referring to the same
events, by the fact that the destruction of Edom, and the capture of
Seir by Israel, are to proceed, according to [Num
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#018), from the Ruler to arise out of
Jacob (the Messiah), and that they were to take place, according to [Amo
9:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011), in connection with the
raising up of the fallen hut of David, and according to Obadiah, in the
day of Jehovah, along with and after the judgment upon all nations.
Consequently the fulfilment of [Oba
1:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017) can only belong to the
Messianic times, and that in such a way that it commenced with the
founding of the kingdom of Christ on the earth, advances with its
extension among all nations, and will terminate in a complete fulfilment
at the second coming of our Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Introduction](jon000)

</div>
