<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Obadiah Index](oba)  
  [Previous](amo009)  [Next](oba001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Obadiah Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

[Obadiah](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">oba 0:0</span></span>

Obadiah

Introduction

As to the person and circumstances of Obadiah, nothing certain is known,
since the heading to his prophecy simply contains the name עבדיה, i.e.,
servant, worshipper of Jehovah (Ὀβδιού al. Ἀβδιού, sc. ὅρασις, lxx), and
does not even mention his father's name. The name Obadiah frequently
occurs in its earlier form ‛Obadyâhū. This was the name of a pious
governor of the palace under king Ahab ([Kg1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#003).), of a prince of Judah under
Jehoshaphat ([Ch2 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#007)), of a grave
Gadite under David ([Ch1 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#009)), of a
Benjamite ([Ch1 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#038)), of an
Issacharite ([Ch1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#003)), of a
Zebulunite ([Ch1 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#019)), of several
Levites ([Ch1 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#016), [Ch1
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#044); [Ch2
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#012)), and of different men after the
captivity ([Ch1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#021); [Ezr
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#009); [Neh
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#006)). The traditional accounts of our
prophet in the rabbins and fathers, some of whom identify him with
Ahab's pious commander of the castle, others with the third captain sent
by Ahaziah against Elisha ([Kg2 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#013)),
whilst others again make him an Edomitish proselyte (see Carpzov,
Introd. p. 332ff., and Delitzsch, de Habacuci vita atque aetate, pp. 60,
61), are quite worthless, and evidently false, and have merely
originated in the desire to know something more about him than the
simple name (see C. P. Caspari, Der Proph. Ob. pp. 2, 3).

The writing of Obadiah contains but one single prophecy concerning the
relation in which Edom stood to the people of God. It commences with the
proclamation of the destruction with which the Lord has determined to
visit the Edomites, who rely upon the impregnability of their rocky seat
([Oba 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)); and then depicts, as the
cause of the divine judgment which will thus suddenly burst upon the
haughty people, the evil which it did to Jacob, the covenant nation,
when Judah and Jerusalem had been taken by heathen nations, who not only
plundered them, but shamefully desecrated the mountain of Zion ([Oba
1:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)). For this the Edomites and
all nations will receive retribution, even to their utter destruction in
the approaching day of the Lord ([Oba
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015), [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)). But upon Mount Zion there will
be delivered ones, and the mountain will be holy. The house of Jacob
will take possession of the settlement of the Gentiles, and, in common
with Israel, will destroy the Edomites, and extend its territory on all
sides ([Oba 1:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)). That portion of
the nation which has been scattered about in heathen lands will return
to their enlarged fatherland ([Oba
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#020)). Upon Mount Zion will saviours
arise to judge Edom, and the kingdom will then be the Lord's ([Oba
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#021)). This brief statement of the
contents is sufficient to show that Obadiah's prophecy does not consist
of a mere word of threatening directed against Edom, or treat of so
special a theme as that his châzōn could be compared to Ahijah's
nebhū'âh, and Yehdi's (Iddo's) châzōth against Jeroboam I ([Ch2
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029)); but that Obadiah takes the
general attitude of Edom towards the people of Jehovah as the groundwork
of his prophecy, regards the judgment upon Edom as one feature in the
universal judgment upon all nations (cf. [Oba
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015), [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)), proclaims in the destruction of
the power of Edom the overthrow of the power of all nations hostile to
God, and in the final elevation and re-establishment of Israel in the
holy land foretels the completion of the sovereignty of Jehovah, i.e.,
of the kingdom of God, as dominion over all nations; so that we may say
with Hengstenberg, that "Obadiah makes the judgment upon the Gentiles
and the restoration of Israel the leading object of his prophetic
painting." Through this universal standpoint, from which Edom is taken
as a representative of the ungodly power of the world, Obadiah rises far
above the utterances of the earlier prophets contained in the historical
books of the Old Testament, and stands on a level with the prophets, who
composed prophetic writings of their own for posterity, as well as for
their own age; so that, notwithstanding the small space occupied by his
prophecy, it has very properly had a place assigned it in the prophetic
literature. At the same time, we cannot agree with Hengstenberg, who
gives the following interpretation to this view of the attitude of Edom
towards the people of God, namely, that Obadiah simply adduces Edom as
an example of what he has to say with regard to the heathen world, with
its enmity against God, and as to the form which the relation between
Israel and the heathen world would eventually assume, and therefore that
his prophecy simply individualizes the thought of the universal dominion
of the kingdom of God which would follow the deepest degradation of the
people of God, the fullest and truest realization of which dominion is
to be sought for in Christ, and that the germ of his prophecy is
contained in [Joe 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019), where Edom is
introduced as an individualized example and type of the heathen world
with its hostility to God, which is to be judged by the Lord after the
judgment upon Judah. For, apart from the fact that Obadiah does not
presuppose Joel, but vice versa, as we shall presently see, this mode of
idealizing our prophecy cannot be reconciled with its concrete character
and expression, or raised into a truth by any analogies in prophetic
literature. All the prophecies are occasioned by distinct concrete
relations and circumstances belonging to the age from which they spring.
And even those which are occupied with the remote and remotest future,
like Isaiah for example, form no real exception to this rule. Joel would
not have mentioned Edom as the representation of the heathen world with
its hostility to God ([Joe 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019)), and
Obadiah would not have predicted the destruction of Edom, if the
Edomites had not displayed their implacable hatred of the people of God
on one particular occasion in the most conspicuous manner. It is only in
this way that we can understand the contents of the whole of Obadiah's
prophecy, more especially the relation in which the third section ([Oba
1:17-21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)) stands to the first two, and
explain them without force.

The time of the prophet is so much a matter of dispute, that some regard
him as the oldest of the twelve minor prophets, whilst others place him
in the time of the captivity, and Hitzig even assigns him to the year
312 b.c., when prophecy had long been extinct. (For the different views,
see my Lehrbuch der Einleitung, 88). That Obadiah does not belong to the
prophets of the captivity, or to those after the captivity, but to the
earlier prophets, may be generally inferred from the position of his
book in the collection of the twelve minor prophets; for although the
collection is not strictly chronological, yet it is so arranged as a
whole, that the writings of the captivity and the times after the
captivity occupy the last places, whereas Obadiah stands among older
prophets. More precise information may be obtained from the contents of
his prophecy, more especially from the relation in which it stands on
the one hand to the prophecy of Jeremiah (Jeremiah 49:7-22) concerning
Edom, and on the other hand to the prophecy of Joel. Obadiah so
thoroughly coincides with these in a number of characteristic thoughts
and expressions, that the one must have known the other. If we examine,
first of all, the relation which exists between Obadiah and Jeremiah
(l.c.), there can be no doubt, (and since the thorough investigations of
Caspari p. 5ff. it has been admitted by every one with the exception of
Hitzig,) that Obadiah did not use Jeremiah, but that Jeremiah read and
made use of Obadiah. This might indeed be conjectured from the peculiar
characteristic of Jeremiah, namely, that he leans throughout upon the
utterances of the earlier prophets, and reproduces their thoughts,
figures, and words (see A. Kueper, Jeremias librorum ss. interpres atque
vindex, 1837). Thus, for example, nearly all his prophecies against
foreign nations are founded upon utterances of the earlier prophets:
that against the Philistines ([Jer
47:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#001)) upon Isaiah's prophecy against
that people ([Isa 14:28-32](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#028)); that
against the Moabites (Jeremiah 48) upon that of Isaiah in [Isa
15:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001), [Isa
16:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001); that against the Ammonites
([Jer 49:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001)) upon the prophecy of
Amos against the same ([Amo 1:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013));
that against Damascus ([Jer 49:23-27](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023))
upon that of Amos against this kingdom ([Amo
1:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003)); and lastly, that against
Babylon (Jeremiah 50-51) upon the prophecy of Isaiah against Babylonian
Isaiah 13:1-14:23. To this we may add, (1) that the prophecy of Jeremiah
against Edom contains a number of expressions peculiar to himself and
characteristic of his style, not a single one of which is to be found in
Obadiah, whilst nothing is met with elsewhere in Jeremiah of that which
is common to Obadiah and him (for the proofs of this, see Caspari, pp.
7, 8); and (2) that what is common to the two prophets not only forms an
outwardly connected passage in Obadiah, whereas in Jeremiah it occurs in
several unconnected passages of his prophecy (compare [Oba
1:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) with [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007), [Jer
49:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#009), [Jer
49:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#014)), but, as the exposition will
show, that in Obadiah it is more closely connected and apparently more
original than in Jeremiah. But if it be a fact, as this unquestionably
proves, that Obadiah's prophecy is more original, and therefore older,
than that of Jeremiah, Obadiah cannot have prophesied after the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, but must have prophesied
before it, since Jeremiah's prophecy against Edom belongs to the fourth
year of Jehoiakim (see Caspari, p. 14ff., and Graf's Jeremias, pp.
558-9, compared with p. 506).

The central section of Obadiah's prophecy ([Oba
1:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)) does not appear to harmonize
with this result, inasmuch as the cause of the judgment with which the
Edomites are threatened in [Oba 1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)
is said to be their rejoicing over Judah and Jerusalem at the time of
their calamity, when foreigners entered into his gates, and cast the lot
upon Jerusalem; and they are charged not only with looking upon the
destruction of the brother nation with contemptuous pleasure, but with
taking part themselves in the plundering of Judah, and murdering the
fugitives, or giving them up to their enemies. These reproaches
unquestionably presuppose a conquest of Jerusalem by foreign nations;
but whether it is the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, is by
no means so certain as many commentators imagine. It is true that
Caspari observes (p. 18), that "every one who reads these verses would
naturally suppose that they refer to that catastrophe, and to the
hostilities shown by the Edomites to the Judaeans on that occasion, to
which those prophets who lived after the destruction of Jerusalem, viz.,
Jeremiah ([Lam 4:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021)), Ezekiel ([Eze
35:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001)), and the author of [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), refer to some extent in
almost the same words in which Obadiah speaks of them." But of the
passages cited, [Lam 4:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#021) cannot be
taken into account at all, since it simply contains the thought that the
cup (of affliction) will also reach to the daughter of Edom; and that
she will be intoxicated and stripped, and that Jehovah will punish her
guilt. The other two are no doubt similar. The Psalmist in [Psa
137:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001) utters this prayer in [Psa
137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007) : "Remember, Jehovah, the
children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, who say, Strip, strip (i.e.,
demolish) even to the foundation thereof;" and Ezekiel threatens Edom
with everlasting desolation, because it has cherished everlasting
enmity, and given up the sons of Israel to the sword, בּעת אידם בּעת עון
קץ ([Oba 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005)), because it has said,
The two nations (Judah and Israel) shall be mine, we will take
possession of them ([Oba 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010));
because it has cherished hatred toward the sons of Israel, and spoken
blasphemy against the mountains of Israel, and said they are laid waste,
they are given to us for food ([Oba
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012)); because it has taken pleasure
in the desolation of the inheritance of the house of Israel ([Oba
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015)). There is a most unambiguous
allusion here to the desolating of Judah and the destruction of
Jerusalem, and to the hostilities which the Edomites displayed when this
calamity fell upon Judah. On the other hand, Obadiah does not hint at
the destruction of Jerusalem in a single word. He neither speaks of the
everlasting enmity of Edom, nor of the fact that it wanted to get
possession of Judah and Israel for itself, but simply of the hostile
behaviour of the Edomites towards the brother nation Judah, when enemies
forced their way into Jerusalem and plundered its treasures, and the
sons of Judah perished. Consequently Obadiah has before his eyes simply
the conquest and plundering of Jerusalem by foreign, i.e., heathen foes,
but not the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans. Even Caspari is
obliged to admit, that there is no necessity to understand most (or more
correctly "any") of the separate expressions of Obadiah as referring to
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans; but, in his opinion, this
allusion is required by "what is said in [Oba
1:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011) when taken all together,
inasmuch as the prophet there describes the day of Jerusalem by the
strongest possible names, following one upon another, as the day of his
people's rejection, the day of their distress (twice), and the day of
their calamity (three times)." But even this we cannot regard as well
established, since neither יום נכרו nor יום אידו designates the
calamitous day as a day of rejection; and יום אבדם cannot possibly
denote the utter destruction of all the Judaeans, but simply affirms
that the sons of Judah perished en masse. The other epithets, נכר, איד,
צרה, do not enable us to define more precisely the nature of the
calamity which befel Judah at that time; and the crowding together of
these expressions simply shows that the calamity was a very great one,
and not that Jerusalem was destroyed and the kingdom of Judah dissolved.

But before the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, it was
several times taken and plundered by foes: viz., (1) by Shishak king of
Egypt in the fifth year of Rehoboam ([Kg1
14:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#025); [Ch2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#002).); (2) by the Philistines and
Arabians in the time of Jehoram ([Ch2
21:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016)); (3) by the Israelitish king
Joash in the reign of Amaziah ([Kg2
14:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013); [Ch2
25:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#023)); (4) by the Chaldeans in the
time of Jehoiakim ([Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001).; [Ch2
36:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#006)); and (5) by the Chaldeans
again in the reign of Jehoiachin ([Kg2
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#010).; [Ch2
36:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#010)). Of these different conquests,
the first can have no bearing upon the question before us, inasmuch as
in the time of Rehoboam the Edomites were subject to the kingdom of
Judah, and therefore could not have attempted to do what Obadiah says
they did; nor can the two Babylonian conquests under Jehoiakim and
Jehoiachin, inasmuch as, according to the relation in which Obadiah
stood to Jeremiah, as shown above, he must have prophesied before they
occurred; nor can the conquest in the reign of Amaziah, because Obadiah
describes the enemies as zârı̄m and nokhrı̄m (strangers and foreigners),
which clearly points to Gentile nations (compare [Joe
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017); [Lam
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#002); [Deu
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#015)), and does not apply to the
citizens of the kingdom of the ten tribes. Consequently there only
remains the taking of Jerusalem by the Philistines and Arabians in the
time of Jehoram; and the relation in which Obadiah stood to Joel clearly
points to this.

There is so remarkable a coincidence between [Oba
1:10-18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010) of Obadiah and [Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032) and ch. 3, in a very large number
of words, expressions, and thoughts, considering the smallness of the
two passages, and especially of that of Obadiah, that the dependence of
one upon the other must be universally acknowledged.

(Note: Compare מחמס אחיך יעקב in [Oba
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010) with מחמס בּני יהוּדה in [Joe
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019); ועל ירוּשׁלם ידּוּ גורל in [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011) with ואל־עמּי ידּוּ גורל in [Joe
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003); כּי־קרוב יום־יהוה על כּל־הגּוים
in [Oba 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#015) and גּמלך ישׁוּב בּראשׁך
ibid. with כּי קרוב יום יהו בּעמק החרוּץ ([Joe
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#014), compare [Joe
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#015); [Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001), and [Joe
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012), לשׁפּט את־כּל־הגּוים) and אשׁיב
גּמלכם בּראשׁכם in [Joe 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#004), [Joe
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#007); בּהר ציּון תּהיה פליטה and והיה
קדשׁ in [Oba 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017) with כּי בּהר־ציּון
וּבירוּשׁלם תּהיה פליטה in [Joe 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032),
and והיתה ירוּשׁלם קדשׁ in [Joe 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#017);
and lastly, כּי יהוה דּבּר in [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018) and [Joe
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#008).)

But this dependence is not to be sought for on the side of Obadiah, as
Caspari and others suppose; for the fact that Joel bears the stamp of
originality in a greater degree than any other prophet, and the
circumstance that we meet with references to him in not a few of the
later prophets from Amos onwards, furnish no evidence that will bear a
moment's test. "The originality of Joel," as Delitzsch observes, "is no
disproof of this dependence; for, on the one hand, the reproduction of
certain elements from Obadiah's prophecy does not in the least
invalidate his originality, inasmuch as the reproduction is itself
original; and, on the other hand, not one of the prophets with whom we
are acquainted (not even Isaiah) is so original as that the prophecies
of his predecessors are not echoed by him, just as Obadiah, even if he
were original in relation to Joel, had the prophecies of Balaam as his
original, and imitates them in several passages (compare [Num
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#021), [Num
24:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#018) with [Oba
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#004), [Oba
1:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018))." But the fact that Joel
rests upon Obadiah is proved in the most decisive manner by the
expression in [Joe 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032), "as the Lord
hath said," where the foregoing thought, which is common both to Joel
and Obadiah, viz., "in Mount Zion ... shall be phelētâh" (see [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017)), is described as a well-known
word of the Lord. Now Joel can only have taken this from Obadiah, for it
occurs nowhere else; and the idea suggested by Ewald, that it is derived
from an older oracle that has been lost, would only be feasible if the
later date of Obadiah, or his dependence upon Joel, could not be
demonstrated by conclusive arguments, which is not the case.

A correct determination of the relation in which Obadiah stood to Joel,
especially if we compare the prophecies of Amos, who also alludes to
Joel (compare [Joe 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016) with [Amo
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002), and [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018) with [Amo
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013)), leads with the greatest
probability to the conclusion that Obadiah reproaches the Edomites with
the hostility which they displayed when Judah and Jerusalem were
plundered by the Philistines and Arabians in the time of Jehoram. In the
reign of Jehoram the Edomites threw off the Judaean supremacy (compare
[Kg2 8:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020), and [Ch2
21:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#008)); and in connection with this
rebellion, they appear to have planned a great massacre upon the
Judaeans, who were in their land at the time (compare [Joe
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019) with [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011)). Libnah also fell away from
Judah at the same time ([Kg2 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#022);
[Ch2 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#010)), and Philistines and
Arabians penetrated victoriously into Judah. This expedition of the
Philistines and (Petraean) Arabians against Jerusalem was not merely "a
passing raid on the part of certain of the neighbouring nations who had
been made tributary by Jehoshaphat ([Ch2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#011)), and had rebelled in the time
of Jehoram," as Caspari says; but these hordes continued their ravages
in the most cruel manner in Judah and Jerusalem. According to [Ch2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#017), they burst into the land,
forced their way into Jerusalem, plundered the royal palace, and carried
away the children and wives of the king, so that only the youngest son,
Jehoahaz or Ahaziah, was left behind. We also learn from [Joe
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#005) that they took away gold, silver,
and jewels from the temple; and from [Joe
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003), [Joe
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006), that they carried on the vilest
trade with the men and women of Judah, and sold the captives to the
Greeks, and that, as we see from [Amo
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006), [Amo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009), through the medium of the
Phoenicians and Edomites. This agrees perfectly with [Oba
1:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010). For, according to this
passage also, the Edomites themselves were not the enemies who conquered
Jerusalem and plundered its treasures, but simply accomplices, who
rejoiced in the doings of the enemy ([Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011).), held carousals with them upon
the holy mountain Zion ([Oba 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)),
and sought, partly by rapine and partly by slaying or capturing the
fugitive Judaeans ([Oba 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014)), to get
as much gain as possible out of Judah's misfortune. We must therefore
regard this event, as Hofmann and Delitzsch have done, as the occasion
of Obadiah's prophecy, and that all the more, because the historical
allusions which it contains can thereby be satisfactorily explained;
whereas the other attempts at solving the difficulties, when we look at
the thing more closely, prove to be either altogether untenable, or such
as will not apply throughout.

Thus, for example, Ewald and Graf (on [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007).) have endeavoured to reconcile
the fact that Jeremiah had read the first part of Obadiah as early as
the fourth year of Jehoiakim, and had made use of it in his prophecy,
with the opinion that [Oba 1:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)
(Ob.) refer to the Chaldean conquest and destruction of Jerusalem, by
the hypothesis that the first part of Obadiah, as we possess it, was
founded upon an earlier prophecy, which was adopted by the later editor
of our book, and incorporated in his writings, and which had also been
made use of by Jeremiah. In support of this hypothesis, the circumstance
has been adduced, that Jeremiah's references to Obadiah only extend to
[Oba 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009), that the introductory words
in Obadiah, "Thus saith the Lord Jehovah concerning Edom," do not stand
in a close connection with what follows immediately after and thus
appear to have been added at a later period, and that the rare word
tiphlatstekhâ ([Jer 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#016)), which is
not met with anywhere else in Jeremiah, is wanting in Obadiah. But the
first phenomenon may be explained very simply, from the fact that the
remaining portion of Obadiah ([Oba
1:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)) furnished nothing which
Jeremiah could make use of for his object, and that we have an analogy
in the relation between Jeremiah 48 and Isaiah's prophecy concerning
Moab (Isaiah 15-16), where in just the same manner certain portions,
viz., [Isa 16:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001), have not been made
use of at all. Again, the want of any closer logical connection between
the introduction, "Thus hath the Lord said with regard to Edom," and
what follows, "We have heard a rumour from Jehovah," arises from the
circumstance that these introductory words do not apply exclusively to
what follows immediately after, but belong to the whole of Obadiah's
prophecy (see at [Oba 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001)). Moreover,
these words could not have been wanting even in the supposed earlier or
original prophecy, inasmuch as what follows would be unintelligible
without them, since the name Edom, to which the suffixes and addresses
in [Oba 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) apply, would be
altogether wanting. and lastly, the word tiphlatstekhâ, which is
otherwise strange to Jeremiah, proves nothing in favour of an earlier
source, which both Obadiah and Jeremiah employed; nor can we see any
sufficient reason for its omission when the earlier oracle was adopted.
The other arguments adduced in support of this hypothesis are entirely
without significance, if not absolutely erroneous. The fact that from
[Oba 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010) onwards, where Jeremiah
ceases to make use of our prophecy, the connection between Obadiah and
Joel commences, of which there is not the slightest trace in [Oba
1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001), has its natural foundation in
the contents of the two parts of Obadiah. The announcement of the
judgment upon the Edomites in [Oba
1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) could not be made use of by
Joel, because, with the exception of the casual allusion in [Joe
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#019), he does not treat of the
judgment upon Edom at all. The contents of [Oba
1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) also show the reason why no
allusion whatever is made in these verses to Israel and Jerusalem. The
judgment predicted here was not to be executed by either Israel or
Judah, but by the nations. Graf's assertion, that [Oba
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007) contains an allusion to totally
different circumstances from those referred to in [Oba
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)., as the verses mentioned relate
to altogether disproportionate things, is decidedly incorrect. So also
is Ewald's opinion, that half our present Obadiah, viz., [Oba
1:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001), and [Oba
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#017) and [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018), "clearly points to an earlier
prophet in contents, language, and colour." Caspari has already replied
to this as follows: "We confess, on the contrary, that we can discover
no difference in colour and language between [Oba
1:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#001) and [Oba
1:10-21](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010). The latter has its ἅπαξ
λεγόμενα and its rare words just like the former (compare חגוי סלע [Oba
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#003), נבעוּ [Oba
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006), מצפּניו [Oba
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#006), מזור [Oba
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#007), קטל [Oba
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#009), in the first paragraph; and נכרו
[Oba 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), תּשׁלחנה [Oba
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#013), פּרק [Oba
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#014), לעוּ [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016), in the second); and precisely
the same liveliness and boldness which distinguished the first part of
the prophecy, prevail in the second also. Not a single later word, nor a
single form of more recent date, is met with to indicate the later
origin of the second part." Moreover, it is impossible to discover any
well-established analogy in the prophetical writings of the Old
Testament to support this hypothesis.

The attempt made by Caspari, Hengstenberg, and others, to reconcile the
opinion, that Obadiah alludes in [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011). to the Chaldean destruction of
Jerusalem, with the fact that Jeremiah has made use of our book of
Obadiah in his prophecy against Edom, which was uttered in the reign of
Jehoiakim, by the assumption that Obadiah is not describing something
that has already happened, but giving a prophetic picture of the future,
is wrecked on the wording of the verses in question. When Obadiah
threatens Edom with shame and destruction on account of its wickedness
towards its brother Jacob ([Oba 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010)),
and then describes this wickedness in preterites - "On the day of thy
standing opposite when strangers had come into his gates and cast the
lot upon Jerusalem" ([Oba 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)); and,
"As ye have drunk upon my holy mountain, so will all the heathen drink,"
etc. ([Oba 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016)) - no one would
understand these preterites as used prophetically, i.e., as referring to
what was not to take place till a far distant future, except on the most
conclusive grounds. Such grounds, however, some imagine that they can
find in [Oba 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), where the
prophet warns the Edomites not to rejoice over their brother nation's
day of calamity, or take part in the destruction of Judah. Hengstenberg
and Caspari follow Theodoret, Michaelis, and others, in the opinion that
Obadiah is predicting the destruction of Jerusalem, and that [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011) can only be interpreted
prophetically, and cannot be taken as referring to an ideal past. For,
as Caspari adds (p. 29), "I might very well be able to warn a person
against an act, even though he were just about to perform it, and I were
perfectly certain that he would perform it notwithstanding, and my
warning would be fruitless, and though I merely warned him, that he
might not perform it without warning; but to warn a person against an
act which he has already performed would be a most marvellous thing,
even though the warning were only given in the spirit and with the deed
standing out as a present thing." No doubt it is perfectly true that
"such a warning after the deed was done would be quite out of place," if
it had reference merely to one isolated act, a repetition of which was
not to be expected. But if the act already performed was but one single
outbreak of a prevailing disposition, and might be repeated on every
fresh occasion, and possibly had already shown itself more than once, a
warning against such an act could neither be regarded as out of place,
nor as particularly striking, even after the thing had been done. The
warnings in [Oba 1:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012), therefore,
do not compel us to interpret the preterites in [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011) and [Oba
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#016) prophetically, as relating to
some future deed. Moreover, "the repeated warnings against so wicked a
deed were simply the drapery in which the prophet clothed the prediction
of the certain coming of the day of Jehovah, which would put an end to
the manifestation of such a disposition on the part of Edom"
(Delitzsch). There is still less ground for the further remark of
Caspari, that the allusions to Joel in Obadiah's description of the day
of calamity (not "of the destruction") of Jerusalem, unquestionably
preclude the supposition that he was an eye-witness of that event, and
require the hypothesis that he wrote either before or a long time
afterwards. For these allusions are not of such a nature that Obadiah
simply repeats and still further develops what Joel had already
prophesied before him, but, on the contrary, of such a nature that Joel
had Obadiah before his mind, and has expanded certain features of his
prophecy still further in [Joe 3:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#003).
The description of the hostilities of the Edomites towards Israel,
Obadiah could not possibly take from either Joel, or [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012), or the sayings of Balaam in [Num
24:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#018), as Caspari supposes; because
neither of these prophets has depicted them any more fully, but can only
have drawn it from his own experience, and from what he himself had
seen, so that his prophecy is thereby proved to be the original, as
compared with that of Joel and Amos.

All this leads to the conclusion, that we must regard Obadiah as older
than Joel, and fix upon the reign of Joram as the date of his ministry,
but without thereby giving him "an isolated position;" for, according to
the most correct chronological arrangement of their respective dates,
Joel prophesied at the most twenty years after him, and Hosea and Amos
commenced their labours only about seventy-five years later. The
calamitous event which burst upon Judah and Jerusalem, and gave occasion
for Obadiah's prophecy, took place in the latter part of Joram's eight
years' reign. Consequently Obadiah cannot have uttered his prophecy, and
committed it to writing, very long before Jehoram's death. At the same
time, it cannot have been at a later period; because, on the one hand,
it produces the unquestionable impression, that the hostilities
practised by the Edomites were still kept in the most lively
remembrance; and on the other hand, it contains no hint of that
idolatrous worship to which the ruthless Athaliah endeavoured to give
the pre-eminence in Judah, after the one year's reign of Ahaziah, who
succeeded Joram. For the commentaries on Obadiah, see my Lehrbuch der
Einleitung, 88.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah Chapter 1](oba001)

</div>
