<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro030)  [Next](ecc000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001)

[Proverbs 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 31:1</span></span>

Superscription:

1 Words of Lemuel the king,

The utterance wherewith his mother warned him.

Such would be the superscription if the interpunction of the text as it
lies before us were correct. But it is not possibly right. For,
notwithstanding the assurance of Ewald, 277b, למואל מלך, nevertheless,
as it would be here used, remains an impossibility. Certainly under
circumstances an indeterminate apposition can follow a proper name. That
on coins we read מתתיה כהן גדול or נרון קיסר is nothing strange; in this
case we also use the words "Nero, emperor," and that we altogether omit
the article shows that the case is singular: the apposition wavers
between the force of a generic and of a proper name. A similar case is
the naming of the proper name with the general specification of the
class to which this or that one bearing the name belongs in lists of
persons, as e.g., [Kg1 4:2-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#002), or in
such expressions as, e.g., "Damascus, a town," or "Tel Hum, a castle,"
and the like; here we have the indefinite article, because the
apposition is a simple declaration of the class.

(Note: Thus it is also with the examples of indeterminate gentilicia,
which Riehm makes valid for למואל מלך (for he translates למואל
symbolically, which, however, syntactically makes no difference): "As
analogous to 'Lemuel, a king,' one may adduce 'Jeroboam, son of Nebat,
an Ephrathite,' [Kg1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026), instead of
the usual form 'the Ephrathite;'" and בן־ימיני, [Psa
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001), for בן הימיני; on the contrary,
כהן, [Kg1 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#005), does not belong to the
subject, but is the pred.)

But would the expression, "The poem of Oscar, a king," be proper as the
title of a book? Proportionally more so than "Oscar, king;" but also
that form of indeterminate apposition is contrary to the usus loq.,
especially with a king with whom the apposition is not a generic name,
but a name of honour. We assume that "Lemuel" is a symbolical name, like
"Jareb" in "King Jareb," [Hos 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013);
[Hos 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#006); so we would expect the
phrase to be מלך למואל(ה) rather than למואל מלך. The phrase "Lemuel,
king," here in the title of this section of the book, sounds like a
double name, after the manner of עבר מלך in the book of Jeremiah. In the
Greek version also the phrase Λεμουέλου βασιλέως (Venet.) is not used as
syntactically correct without having joined to the βασιλέως a dependent
genitive such as τῶν Αράβων, while none of the old translators, except
Jerome, take the words למואל מלך together in the sense of Lamuelis
regis. Thus מלך משּׂא are to be taken together, with Hitzig, Bertheau,
Zckler, Mhlau, and Dchsel, against Ewald and Kamphausen; משׂא, whether
it be a name of a tribe or a country, or of both at the same time, is
the region ruled over by Lemuel, and since this proper name throws back
the determination which it has in itself on מלך, the phrase is to be
translated: "Words of Lemuel the king of Massa" (vid., under [Pro
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001)). If Aquila renders this proper
name by Λεμμοῦν, Symmachus by Ἰαμουήλ, Theodotion by Ρεβουήλ, the same
arbitrariness prevails with reference to the initial and terminal sound
of the word, as in the case of the words Ἀμβακούμ, Βεελζεβούλ, Βελίαρ.
The name למוּאל sounds like the name of Simeon's first-born, ימוּאל,
[Gen 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010), written in [Num
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#012) and [Ch1
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#024) as נמוּאל; יואל also appears,
[Ch1 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#035), as a Simeonite name, which
Hitzig adduces in favour of his view that משׂא was a North Arab.
Simeonite colony. The interchange of the names ימואל and נמואל is
intelligible if it is supposed that ימואל (from ימה = ימא) designates
the sworn (sworn to) of God, and נמואל (from נם Mishnic = נאם)

(Note: In the Midrash Koheleth to [Pro
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001), the name Lemuel (as a name of
Solomon) is explained: he who has spoken to God in his heart.)

the expressed (addressed) of God; here the reference of ימו and נמו to
verbal stems is at least possible, but a verb למּה is found only in the
Arab., and with significations inus. But there are two other derivations
of the name: (1) The verb (Arab.) waâla signifies to hasten (with the
infin. of the onomatop. verbs waniyal, like raḥyal, walking, because
motion, especially that which is tumultuous, proceeds with a noise),
whence mawnil, the place to which one flees, retreat. Hence למוּאל or
למואל, which is in this case to be assumed as the ground-form, might be
formed from אל מואל, God is a refuge, with the rejection of the א. This
is the opinion of Fleischer, which Mhlau adopts and has established, p.
38-41; for he shows that the initial א is not only often rejected where
it is without the support of a full vocal, e.g., נחנוּ = אנחנוּ, lalah =
ilalah (Deus), but that this aphaeresis not seldom also occurs where the
initial has a full vocal, e.g., לעזר = אלעזר, laḥmaru = âllahmaru
(ruber), laḥsâ = âl-laḥsâ (the name of a town); cf. also Blau in
Deutsch. Morgenl. Zeitschr. xxv. 580. But this view is thus acceptable
and tenable; a derivation which spares us by a like certainty the
supposition of such an abbreviation established only by the late
Palestinian לעזר, Λάζαρος, might well desire the preference. (2)
Fleischer himself suggests another derivation: "The signification of the
name is Deo consecratus, למו, poetic for ל, as also in [Pro
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#004) it is to be vocalized למואל after
the Masora." The form למואל is certainly not less favourable to that
first derivation than to this second; the is in both cases an
obscuration of the original. But that "Lemuel" may be explained in this
second way is shown by "Lael," [Num
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#024) (Olshausen, 277d).

(Note: Simonis has also compared Aethiopic proper names, such as
Zakrestos, Zaiasus. Zamikal, Zamariam.)

It is a beautiful sign for King Lemuel, and a verification of his name,
that it is he himself by whom we receive the admonition with which his
mother in her care counselled him when he attained to independent
government. אשׁר connects itself with דברי, after we have connected משׂא
with מלך; it is accus. of the manner to יסּרתּוּ = יסּרתהוּ; cf.
הטּתּוּ, [Pro 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#021), with גּמלתהוּ,
[Pro 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#012) : wherewith (with which
words) she earnestly and impressively admonished him. The Syr.
translates: words of Muel, as if ל were that of the author. "Others as
inconsistently: words to Lemuel - they are words which is himself ought
to carry in his mouth as received from his mother" (Fleischer).

The name "Massa," is it here means effatum, would be proportionally more
appropriate for these "Words" of Lemuel than for the "Words" of Agur,
for the maternal counsels form an inwardly connected compact whole. They
begin with a question which maternal love puts to itself with regard to
the beloved son whom she would advise:

[Proverbs 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 31:2</span></span>

2 What, my son? and what the son of my womb?

And what, O son of my vows?!

The thrice repeated מה is completed by תּעשׂה (cf. Khler under [Mal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#015)), and that so that the question
is put for the purpose of exciting attention: Consider well, my son,
what thou wilt do as ruler, and listen attentively to my counsel
(Fleischer). But the passionate repetition of מה would be only
affectation if thus interpreted; the underlying thought must be of a
subjective nature: what shall I say, אדבּר (vid., under [Isa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#015)), what advise thee to do? The
question, which is at the same time a call, is like a deep sigh from the
heart of the mother concerned for the welfare of her son, who would say
to him what is beneficial, and say it in words which strike and remain
fixed. He is indeed her dear son, the son whom she carries in her heart,
the son for whom with vows of thanksgiving she prayed to God; and as he
was given her by God, so to His care she commits him. The name "Lemuel"
is, as we interpret it, like the anagram of the fulfilment of the vows
of his mother. בּרי bears the Aramaic shade in the Arameo-Arab.
colouring of these proverbs from Massa; בּריהּ is common in the Aram.,
and particularly in the Talmudic, but it can scarcely be adduced in
support of ברי. וּמה belongs to the 24, מה, with ח or ע not following;
vid., the Masora to [Exo 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001), and its
correction by Norzi at [Deu 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023). We
do not write וּמה־בּר; מה, with Makkeph and with Metheg, exclude one
another.

[Proverbs 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 31:3</span></span>

The first admonition is a warning against effeminating sensuality:

Give not thy strength to women,

Nor thy ways to them that destroy kings.

The punctuation למחות sees in this form a syncopated inf. Hiph. = להמחות
(vid., at [Pro 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#017)), according to
which we are to translate: viasque tuas ad perdendos reges (ne dirige),
by which, as Fleischer formulates the twofold possibility, it may either
be said: direct not thy effort to this result, to destroy neighbouring
kings - viz. by wars of invasion (properly, to wipe them away from the
table of existence, as the Arabs say) - or: do not that by which kings
are overthrown; i.e., with special reference to Lemuel, act not so that
thou thyself must thereby be brought to ruin. But the warning against
vengeful, rapacious, and covetous propensity to war (thus Jerome, so
that Venet. after Kimchi: ἀπομάττειν βασιλέας, C. B. Michaelis, and
earlier, Gesenius) does not stand well as parallel with the warning
against giving his bodily and mental strength to women, i.e., expending
it on them. But another explanation: direct not thy ways to the
destruction of kings, i.e., toward that which destroys kings (Elster);
or, as Luther translates: go not in the way wherein kings destroy
themselves - puts into the words a sense which the author cannot have
had in view; for the individualizing expression would then be
generalized in the most ambiguous way. Thus למחות מלכין will be a name
for women, parallel to לנּשׁים. So far the translation of the Targum:
לבנת מלכין, filiabus (לאמהת?) regum, lies under a right supposition. But
the designation is not thus general. Schultens explains catapultis regum
after [Eze 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#009); but, inasmuch as he
takes this as a figure of those who lay siege to the hearts of men, he
translates: expugnatricibus regum, for he regards מחות as the plur. of
מחה, a particip. noun, which he translates by deletor. The connecting
form of the fem. plur. of this מחה might certainly be מחות (cf. מזי,
from מזה), but למחות מלכין ought to be changed into 'וגו 'לם; for one
will not appeal to anomalies, such as 'לם, [Pro
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004); 'כּג, [Isa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#002); 'לם, [Lam
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#019); or 'וגו 'הת, [Kg1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#024), to save the Pathach of למחות,
which, as we saw, proceeds from an altogether different understanding of
the word. But if 'לם is to be changed into 'לם, then one must go
further, since for מחה not an active but a conditional meaning is to be
assumed, and we must write למחות, in favour of which Fleischer as well
as Gesenius decides: et ne committe consilia factaque tua iis quae reges
perdunt, regum pestibus. Ewald also favours the change למחות, for he
renders מחה as a denom. of מח, marrow: those who enfeeble kings, in
which Kamphausen follows him. Mhlau goes further; he gives the privative
signification, to enfeeble, to the Piel מחה = makhakha (cf. Herzog's
Real-Wrterb. xiv. 712), which is much more probable, and proposes
לממחות: iis quae vires enervant regum. But we can appropriately, with
Nldeke, adhere to למחות, deletricibus (perditricibus), for by this
change the parallelism is satisfied; and that מחה may be used, with
immediate reference to men, of entire and total destruction, is
sufficiently established by such passages as [Gen
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#007); [Jdg
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#017), if any proof is at all needed
for it. Regarding the lxx and those misled by it, who, by מלכין and
מלכים, 4a, think on the Aram. מלכּין, βουλαί, vid., Mhlau, p. 53.

(Note: Also Hitzig's Blinzlerinnen \[women who ogle or leer = seductive
courtesans\] and Bttcher's Streichlerinnen \[caressers, viz., of kings\]
are there rejected, as they deserve to be.)

But the Syr. has an idea worthy of the discourse, who translates epulis
regum without our needing, with Mhlau, to charge him with dreaming of
לחם in למחות. Perhaps that is true; but perhaps by למחות he thought of
למחות (from מה, the particip. adj. of מחח): do not direct thy ways to
rich food (morsels), such as kings love and can have. By this reading,
3b would mediate the transition to [Pro
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#004); and that the mother refers to
the immorality, the unseemliness, and the dangers of a large harem, only
in one brief word (3a), cannot seem strange, much rather it may be
regarded as a sign of delicacy. But so much the more badly does וּדרכיך
accord with למחות. Certainly one goes to a banquet, for one finds
leisure for it; but of one who himself is a king, it is not said that he
should not direct his ways to a king's dainties. But if למחות refers to
the whole conduct of the king, the warning is, that he should not
regulate his conduct in dependence on the love and the government of
women. But whoever will place himself amid the revelry of lust, is wont
to intoxicate himself with ardent spirits; and he who is thus
intoxicated, is in danger of giving reins to the beast within him.

[Proverbs 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 31:4</span></span>

Hence there now follows a warning against drunkenness, not unmediated by
the reading למחות:

4 It is not for kings, O Lemuel,

Not for kings to drink wine,

Not for rulers to ask for intoxicating drink;

5 Lest he drink, and forget what is prescribed,

And pervert the right of all the children of want.

The usual translation of 4a is: non decet reges... (as e.g., also
Mhlau); but in this אל is not rightly rendered, which indeed is at times
only an οὐ, spoken with close interest, but yet first of all, especially
in such paraenetic connection as here, it is a dissuasive μή. But now לא
למלכים שׁתות or לא למלכים לשׁתּות, after [Ch2
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#018); [Mic
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#001), signifies: it is not the part of
kings, it does not become them to drink, which may also be turned into a
dissuasive form: let it not be the part of kings to drink, let them not
have any business therewith, as if it belonged to their calling;
according to which Fleischer renders: Absit a regibus, Lemuel, absit a
regibus potare vinum. The clearer expression למואל, instead of למוּאל,
is, after Bttcher, occasioned by this, that the name is here in the
vocative; perhaps rather by this, that the meaning of the name:
consecrated to God, belonging to God, must be placed in contrast to the
descending to low, sensual lust. Both times we write אל לּמלכים with the
orthophonic Dagesh

(Note: Vid., Luth. Zeitschrift, 1863, p. 413. It is the rule, according
to which, with Ben-Asher, it is to be written בּן־נּוּן.)

in the ל following ל, and without the recompensative Dagesh, the want of
which is in a certain measure covered by the Metheg (vid., Norzi).
Regarding the inf. constr. שׁתו (cf. קנה, [Pro
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#016)), vid., Gesen. 75, Anm. 2; and
regarding the sequence of accents here necessary, אל לּמלכים שׁתו־יין
(not Mercha, Dechi, Athnach, for Dechi would be here contrary to rule),
vid., Thorath Emeth, p. 22 6, p. 43 7.

In 4b nothing is to be gained from the Chethı̂b או. There is not a
substantive או, desire, the constr. of which would here have to be read,
not או (Umbreit, Gesenius), but או, after the form קו (Maurer); and why
did the author not write תּאות שׁכר? But the particle או does not here
also fall in with the connection; for if או שׁכר connect itself with יין
(Hitzig, Ewald, and others), then it would drag disagreeably, and we
would have here a spiritless classification of things unadvisable for
kings. Bttcher therefore sees in this או the remains of the obliterated
סבוא; a corrector must then have transformed the וא which remained into
או. But before one ventures on such conjectures, the Kerı̂ אי \[where?\]
must be tried. Is it the abbreviated אין (Herzog's Real-Wrterbuch, xiv.
712)? Certainly not, because וּלרוזנים אין שׁכר would mean: and the
princes, or rulers (vid., regarding רוזנים at [Pro
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#015)), have no mead, which is
inconsistent. But אין does not abbreviate itself into אי, but into אי.
Not אי, but אי, is in Heb., as well as in Ethiop., the word with which
negative adjectives such as אי נקי, not innocent, [Job
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#030), and in later Heb. also,
negative sentences, such as אי אפשׁר: it is not possible, are formed.

(Note: The author of the Comm. עטרת זקנים to the ארח חיים, c. 6, Geiger
and others would read אי, because אי is abbreviated from אין. But why
not from אין, [Sa1 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#009)? The
traditional expression is אי; and Elias Levita in the Tishbi, as also
Baer in the Siddur Abodath Jisrael, are right in defending it against
that innovation.)

Therefore Mhlau vocalizes אי, and thinks that the author used this word
for אל, so as not to repeat this word for the third time. But how is
that possible? אי שׁכר signifies either: not mead, or: there is not
mead; and both afford, for the passage before us, no meaning. Is, then,
the Kerı̂ אי truly so unsuitable? Indeed, to explain: how came
intoxicating drink to rulers! is inadmissible, since אי always means
only ubi (e.g., [Gen 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#009)); not, like
the Ethiop. aitê, also quomodo. But the question ubi temetum, as a
question of desire, fits the connection, whether the sentence means: non
decet principibus dicere (Ahron b. Josef supplies שׁיאמרו) ubi temetum,
or: absit a principibus quaerere ubi temetum (Fleischer), which, from
our view of 4a, we prefer. There is in reality nothing to be supplied;
but as 4a says that the drinking of wine ought not to characterize
kings, so 4b, that "Where is mead?" (i.e., this eager inquiry after
mead) ought not to characterize rulers.

(Note: The translation of Jerome, quia nullum secretum est ubi regnat
ebrietas (as if the words were לית רזא אי שׁכר), corresponds to the
proverb: נכנס יין יצא סוד :b, when the wine goes in the secret comes
out; or, which is the same thing: if one adds יין (= 70), סוד (= 70)
comes out.)

Why not? [Pro 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#005) says. That the
prince, being a slave to drink, may not forget the מחקּק, i.e., that
which has been made and has become חק, thus that which is lawfully
right, and may not alter the righteous cause of the miserable, who cry
against their oppressors, i.e., may not handle falsely the facts of the
case, and give judgment contrary to them.

שׁנּה דין (Aquila, Theodotion, Quinta, ἀλλοιοῦν κρίσιν) is elsewhere
equivalent to הטּה משׁפּט (עוּת). בּני־עני are those who are, as it
were, born to oppression and suffering. This mode of expression is a
Semitism (Fleischer), but it here heightens the impression of the Arab.
colouring. In כל (Venet. ὡντινοῦν) it is indicated that, not merely with
reference to individual poor men, but in general to the whole class of
the poorer people, suffering humanity, sympathy and a regard for truth
on the part of a prince given to sensuality are easily thrown aside.
Wine is better suited for those who are in a condition to be timeously
helped over which, is a refreshment to them.

[Proverbs 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 31:6</span></span>

6 Give strong drink to him that is perishing,

And wine to those whose soul is in bitter woe;

7 Let him drink and forget his poverty,

And let him think of his misery no more.

The preparation of a potion for malefactors who were condemned to death
was, on the ground of these words of the proverb, cared for by noble
women in Jerusalem (נשׁים יקרות שׁבירושׁלים), Sanhedrin 43a; Jesus
rejected it, because He wished, without becoming insensible to His
sorrow, to pass away from the earthly life freely and in full
consciousness, [Mar 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023). The
transition from the plur. to the sing. of the subject is in [Pro
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#007) less violent than in [Pro
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#005), since in [Pro
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006) singular and plur. already
interchange. We write תּנוּ־שׁכר with the counter-tone Metheg and
Mercha. אובד designates, as at [Job
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#013); [Job
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#019), one who goes to meet
destruction: it combines the present signification interiens, the fut.
signif. interiturus, and the perf. perditus (hopelessly lost). מרי נפשׁ
(those whose minds are filled with sorrow) is also supported from the
Book of Job; [Job 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020), cf. [Pro
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#025), the language and thought and
mode of writing of which notably rests on the Proverbs of Agur and
Lemuel (vid., Mhlau, pp. 64-66). The Venet. τοῖς πικροῖς (not ψυξροῖς)
τὴν ψυχήν. רישׁ (poverty) is not, however, found there, but only in the
Book of Proverbs, in which this word-stem is more at home than
elsewhere. Wine rejoices the heart of man, [Psa
104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015), and at the same time raises it
for the time above oppression and want, and out of anxious sorrow,
wherefore it is soonest granted to them, and in sympathizing love ought
to be presented to them by whom this its beneficent influence is to be
wished for. The ruined man forgets his poverty, the deeply perplexed his
burden of sorrow; the king, on the contrary, is in danger from this
cause of forgetting what the law required at his hands, viz., in
relation to those who need help, to whom especially his duty as a ruler
refers.

[Proverbs 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 31:8</span></span>

8 Open thy mouth for the dumb,

For the right of all the children of leaving;

9 Open thy mouth, judge righteously,

And do right to the poor and needy.

He is called dumb who suffers the infirmity of dumbness, as עוּר and
פּסּח, [Job 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#015), is he who suffers
the infirmity of blindness or lameness, not here figuratively; at the
same time, he who, on account of his youth, or on account of his
ignorance, or from fear, cannot speak before the tribunal for himself
(Fleischer). With ל the dat. commodi (lxx after Lagarde, μογιλάλῳ;
Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion, ἀλάλῳ; the Venet. after Gebhardt, βωβῷ)
אל, of the object aimed at, interchanges, as e.g., [Kg1
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#003); [Kg2
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#007), אל־נפשׁם, for the preservation of
their life, or for the sake of their life, for it is seldom that it
introduces the object so purely as here. And that an infin. such as חלוף
should stand as a subst. occurs proportionally seldomer in Heb. ([Isa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004); [Psa
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007); cf. with ה of the artic., [Num
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#012); [Psa
66:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#009)) than it does in Arab. בּני חלוף
in the same way as בּני־עני, 5b, belongs to the Arab. complexion of this
proverb, but without its being necessary to refer to the Arab. in order
to fix the meaning of these two words. Hitzig explains after khalf, to
come after, which further means "to have the disadvantage," in which
Zckler follows him; but this verb in Arab. does not mean ὑστερεῖν
(ὑστερεῖσθαι), we must explain "sons of him that remains behind," i.e.,
such as come not forward, but remain behind ('an) others. Mhlau goes
further, and explains, with Schultens and Vaihinger: those destitute of
defence, after (Arab.) khalafahu he is ranked next to him, and has
become his representative - a use of the word foreign to the Heb. Still
less is the rendering of Gesenius justified, "children of inheritance" =
children left behind, after khallafa, to leave behind; and Luther, "for
the cause of all who are left behind," by the phrase (Arab.)
khallfany'an 'awnih, he has placed me behind his help, denied it to me,
for the Kal of the verb cannot mean to abandon, to leave. And that בני
חלוף means the opposers of the truth, or of the poor, or the litigious
person, the quarrelsome, is perfectly inadmissible, since the Kal חלוף
cannot be equivalent to (Arab.) khilaf, the inf. of the 3rd conj., and
besides, the gen. after דּין always denotes those in whose favour, not
those against whom it is passed; the latter is also valid against
Ralbag's "sons of change," i.e., who say things different from what they
think; and Ahron b. Josef's "sons of changing," viz., the truth into
lies. We must abide by the meaning of the Heb. חלף, "to follow after, to
change places, pass away." Accordingly, Fleischer understands by חלוף,
the going away, the dying, viz., of parents, and translates: eorum qui
parentibus orbati sunt. In another way Rashi reaches the same sense:
orphans deprived of their helper. But the connection בני חלף requires
that we make those who are intended themselves the subject of חלוף.
Rightly Ewald, Bertheau, Kamphausen, compare [Isa
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#018) (and [Psa
90:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#005)., this with questionable right),
and understand by the sons of disappearance those whose inherited lot,
whose proper fate, is to disappear, to die, to perish (Symmachus: πάντων
υἱῶν ἀποιχομένων; Jerome: omnium filiorum qui pertranseunt). It is not
men in general as children of frailty that are meant (Kimchi, Meri,
Immanuel, Euchel, and others), after which the Venet. τῶν υἱῶν τοῦ
μεταβάλλειν (i.e., those who must exchange this life for another), but
such as are on the brink of the abyss. צדק in שׁפט־צדק is not equivalent
to בּצדק, but is the accus. of the object, as at [Zac
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#016), decide justice, i.e., so that
justice is the result of thy judicial act; cf. Knobel on [Deu
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#016). ודּין is imper., do right to the
miserable and the poor; cf. [Psa 54:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#003)
with [Jer 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#016); [Jer
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#028). That is a king of a right sort,
who directs his high function as a judge, so as to be an advocate
\[procurator\] for the helpless of his people.

[Proverbs 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 31:10</span></span>

A wife, such as she ought to be, is a rare treasure, a good excelling
all earthly possession:

10 א A virtuous woman, who findeth her!

She stands far above pearls in worth.

In the connection אושׁת חיל and the like, the idea of bodily vigour is
spiritualized to that of capacity, ability, and is generalized; in
virtus the corresponding transition from manliness, and in the
originally Romanic "Bravheit," valour to ability, is completed; we have
translated as at [Pro 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004), but also
Luther, "a virtuous woman," is suitable, since Tugend (virtue) has with
Tchtigkeit \[ability\] the same root-word, and according to our
linguistic \[German\] usage designates the property of moral goodness
and propriety, while for those of former times, when they spoke of the
tugend (tugent) of a woman, the word combined with it the idea of fine
manners (cf. חן, [Pro 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#016)) and
culture (cf. שׂכל טוב, [Pro 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#015)).
The question מי ימצא, quis inveniat, which, [Ecc
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#024), proceeds from the supposition of
the impossibility of finding, conveys here only the idea of the
difficulty of finding. In ancient Jerusalem, when one was married, they
were wont to ask: מצא אומוצא, i.e., has he found? thus as is said at
[Pro 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022), or at [Ecc
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026). A virtuous woman \[braves Weib\]
is not found by every one, she is found by comparatively few. In 10b
there is given to the thought which underlies the question a synonymous
expression. Ewald, Elster, and Zckler incorrectly render the ו by
"although" or "and yet." Fleischer rightly: the second clause, if not in
form yet in sense, runs parallel to the first. מכר designates the price
for which such a woman is sold, and thus is purchasable, not without
reference to this, that in the Orient a wife is obtained by means of
מהר. מכר, synon. מחיר, for which a wife of the right kind is gained, is
רחוק, placed further, i.e., is more difficult to be obtained, than
pearls (vid., regarding "pearls" at [Pro
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#015)), i.e., than the price for such
precious things. The poet thereby means to say that such a wife is a
more precious possession than all earthly things which are precious, and
that he who finds such an one has to speak of his rare fortune.

[Proverbs 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 31:11</span></span>

The reason for this is now given:

11 ב The heart of her husband doth trust her,

And he shall not fail of grain.

If we interpret שׁלל, after [Ecc 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#008),
as subject, then we miss לּו; it will thus be object., and the husband
subj. to לא יחסּר: nec lucro carebit, as e.g., Fleischer translates it,
with the remark that שׁלל denotes properly the spoil which one takes
from an enemy, but then also, like the Arab. ḍanymat, can mean profit
and gain of all kinds (cf. Rdiger in Gesenius' Thes.). Thus also in our
"kriegen" = to come into possession, the reference to war disappears.
Hitzig understands by שׁלל, the continual prosperity of the man on
account of his fortunate possession of such a wife; but in that case the
poet should have said שׂמחת שׁלל; for שׁלל is gain, not the feeling that
is therewith connected. There is here meant the gain, profit, which the
housewife is the means of bringing in (cf. [Psa
78:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#013)). The heart of her husband
(בּעלּהּ) can be at rest, it can rest on her whom it loves - he goes
after his calling, perhaps a calling which, though weighty and
honourable, brings in little or nothing; but the wife keeps the family
possessions scrupulously together, and increases them by her laborious
and prudent management, so that there is not wanting to him gain, which
he properly did not acquire, but which the confidence he is justified in
reposing in his wife alone brings to him. She is to him a perpetual
spring of nothing but good.

[Proverbs 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 31:12</span></span>

12 ג She doeth good to him, and not evil,

All the days of her life;

or, as Luther translates:

"Sie thut jm liebs und kein leids."

\[She does him good, and no harm.\]

She is far from ever doing him evil, she does him only good all her life
long; her love is not dependent on freaks, it rests on deep moral
grounds, and hence derives its power and purity, which remain ever the
same. גּמל signifies to accomplish, to perform. To the not assimilated
form גּמלתהוּ, cf. יסּרתּוּ, 1b.

[Proverbs 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 31:13</span></span>

The poet now describes how she disposes of things:

13 ד She careth for wool and flax,

And worketh these with her hands' pleasure.

The verb דּרשׁ proceeds, as the Arab. shows,

(Note: The inquirer is there called (Arab.) daras, as libros terens.)

from the primary meaning terere; but to translate with reference
thereto: tractat lanam et linum (lxx, Schultens, Dathe, Rosemller,
Fleischer), is inadmissible. The Heb. דרשׁ does not mean the external
working at or manufacturing of a thing; but it means, even when it
refers to this, the intention of the mind purposely directed thereto.
Thus wool and flax come into view as the material of work which she
cares to bring in; and ותּעשׂ signifies the work itself, following the
creation of the need of work. Hitzig translates the second line: she
works at the business of her hands. Certainly ב after עשׂה may denote
the sphere of activity, [Exo 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#004); 1
Kings 5:30, etc.; but if חפץ had here the weakened signification
business, πρᾶγμα, - which it gains in the same way as we say business,
affair, of any object of care - the scarcely established meaning
presents itself, that she shows herself active in that which she has
made the business of her hands. How much more beautiful, on the
contrary, is the thought: she is active with her hands' pleasure! חפץ
is, as Schultens rightly explains, inclinatio flexa et propensa in
aliquid, and pulchre manibus diligentissimis attribuitur lubentia cum
oblectatione et per oblectationem sese animans. עשׂה, without obj.
accus., signifies often: to accomplish, e.g., Ps. 22:32; here it stands,
in a sense, complete in itself, and without object. accus., as when it
means "handeln" \[agere\], [Pro 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#016),
and particularly to act in the service of God = to offer sacrifice, [Exo
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#025); it means here, and at [Rut
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#019); [Hab
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004), to be active, as at [Isa
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#015), to be effective; ותּעשׂ is
equivalent to ותעשׂ בּמּלאכה or ותעשׂ מלאכתּהּ (cf. under [Pro
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#004)). And pleasure and love for the
work, חפץ, can be attributed to the hands with the same right as at [Psa
78:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072), discretion. The disposition
which animates a man, especially his inner relation to the work
devolving upon him, communicates itself to his hands, which, according
as he has joy or aversion in regard to his work, will be nimble or
clumsy. The Syr. translates: "and her hands are active after the
pleasure of her heart;" but בחפץ is not equivalent to כּחפצהּ; also
בּחפץ, in the sense of con amore (Bttcher), is not used.

[Proverbs 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 31:14</span></span>

The following proverb praises the extent of her housewifely
transactions:

14 ה She is like the ships of the merchant -

Bringeth her food from afar.

She is (lxx ἐγένετο) like merchant ships (כּאניות, indeterminate, and
thus to be read kōǒnı̂joth), i.e., she has the art of such ships as sail
away and bring wares from a distance, are equipped, sent out, and
managed by an enterprising spirit; so the prudent, calculating look of
the brave wife, directed towards the care and the advancement of her
house, goes out beyond the nearest circle; she descries also distant
opportunities of advantageous purchase and profitable exchange, and
brings in from a distance what is necessary for the supply of her house,
or, mediately, what yields this supply (ממּרחק, Cod. Jaman. ממרחק, cf.
under [Isa 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006)), for she finds that
source of gain she has espied.

[Proverbs 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 31:15</span></span>

With this diligence in her duties she is not a long sleeper, who is not
awakened till the sun is up; but

15 ו She riseth up while it is yet night,

And giveth food to her house,

And the fixed portion to her maidens.

The fut. consec. express, if not a logical sequence of connection, yet a
close inner binding together of the separate features of the character
here described. Early, ere the morning dawns, such a housewife rises up,
because she places care for her house above her own comfort; or rather,
because this care is to her a satisfaction and a joy. Since now the poet
means without doubt to say that she is up before the other inmates of
the house, especially before the children, though not before the maids:
we have not, in ותּתּן, to think that the inmates of the house, all in
the morning night-watch, stand round about her, and that each receives
from her a portion for the approaching day; but that she herself, early,
whilst yet the most are asleep, gives out or prepares the necessary
portions of food for the day (cf. ויּתּן, [Isa
53:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#009)). Regarding טרף, food, from טרף
(to tear in pieces, viz., with the teeth), and regarding חק, a portion
decreed, vid., at [Pro 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008). It is
true that חק also means the appointed labour (pensum), and thus the
day's work (דּבר יום); but the parallelism brings it nearer to explain
after [Pro 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008), as is done by
Gesenius and Hitzig after [Exo 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#014).

[Proverbs 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 31:16</span></span>

This industry - a pattern for the whole house - this punctuality in the
management of household matters, secures to her success in the extension
of her household wealth:

16 ז She seeketh a field and getteth possession of it;

Of the fruit of her hands she planteth a vineyard.

The field which she considereth, towards which her wish and her effort
are directed, is perhaps not one beyond those which she already
possesses, but one which has hitherto been wanting to her family; for
the poet has, after [Pro 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#023), an
inhabitant of a town in his eye, - a woman whose husband is not a
landlord, but has a business in the city. The perf. זממה precedes and
gives circumstantiality to the chief factum expressed by ותּקּחה.
Regarding זמם, vid., [Pro 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027). "לקח
is the general expression for purchasing, as נתן, 24b, for selling. Thus
the Aram. and Arab. אחד, while, (Arab.) akhadh w'ṭa, Turk. alisch
werisch (from elmeḳ, to take, and wirmek, to give - viz. ṣâtun, in the
way of selling; Lat. venum), post-bibl. משּׂא וּמתּן or מקּח וּממכּר,
denotes giving and taking = business in general" (Fleischer). In 16b the
Chethı̂b is, with Ewald and Bertheau, to be read נטע, and, with Hitzig,
to be made dependent on ותקחה, as parallel obj.: "of her hands' fruit
(she gaineth) a planting of vines." But a planting of vines would be
expressed by מטּע כרם ([Mic 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006)); and
the Kerı̂ נטעה is more acceptable. The perf., as a fundamental verbal
form, is here the expression of the abstract present: she plants a
vineyard, for she purchases vines from the profit of her industry ([Isa
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023), cf. [Pro
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#002)).

[Proverbs 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 31:17</span></span>

The poet has this augmented household wealth in his eye, for he
continues:

17 ח She girdeth her loins with strength,

And moveth vigorously her arms.

Strength is as the girdle which she wraps around her body ([Psa
93:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001)). We write חגרה בעוז; both words
have Munach, and the ב of בעוז is aspirated. Thus girded with strength,
out of this fulness of strength she makes firm or steels her arms (cf.
[Psa 89:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#022)). The produce of the field
and vineyard extend far beyond the necessity of her house; thus a great
portion is brought to sale, and the gain thence arising stimulates the
industry and the diligence of the unwearied woman.

[Proverbs 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 31:18</span></span>

18 ט She perceiveth that her gain is good;

And her light goeth not out at night.

The perf. and fut. are related to each other as antecedent and
consequent, so that 18a can also be rendered as an hypothetical
antecedent. She comes to find (taste) how profitable her industry is by
the experience resulting from the sale of its product: the corn, the
grapes, and the wine are found to be good, and thus her gain (cf. [Pro
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014)) is better, this opened new
source of nourishment productive.

This spurs on her active industry to redoubled effort, and at times,
when she is not fully occupied by the oversight of her fields and
vineyard, she has another employment over which her light goes not out
till far in the night. בּלּילה is, as at [Lam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019), a needless Kerı̂ for the poetic
בּלּיל ([Isa 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#003)). What other
business it is to which she gives attention till in the night, is
mentioned in the next verse.

[Proverbs 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 31:19</span></span>

19 י She putteth her hand to the rock Spinnrocken;

And her fingers lay hold on the spindle.

She applies herself to the work of spinning, and performs it with skill.
The phrase שׁלּח יד בּ (שׁלח, [Job
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#009)) signifies to take up an object
of work, and תּמך, with obj. accus. (cf. [Amo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005)), the handling of the instrument
of work necessary thereto. כּפּים denotes the hands when the subject is
skilful, successful work; we accordingly say יגיע כפים, not יגיע ידים;
cf. [Pro 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#013) and [Pro
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#016), [Psa
78:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#072). What פּלך means is shown by the
Arab. falakat, which, as distinguished from mighzal, i.e., fuseau (Lat.
fusus), is explained by bout arrondi et conique au bas du fuseau, thus:
the whorl, i.e., the ring or knob fastened on the spindle below, which
gives it its necessary weight and regulates its movement, Lat.
verticellus, post-bibl. פּיקה (which Bartenora glosses by the Ital.
fusajuolo) or צנּורה, e.g., Kelim ix. 6, כושׁ שׁבלע את הצנורה, a spindle
which holds the whorl hidden (vid., Aruch under כש, iii.). But the word
then also signifies per synecdochen partis pro toto, the spindle, i.e.,
the cylindrical wood on which the thread winds itself when spinning (cf.
[Sa2 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029), where it means the staff on
which the infirm leans); Homer gives to Helen and the goddesses golden
spindles (χρυσηλάκατοι). Accordingly it is not probable that כּישׁור
also denotes the whorl, as Kimchi explains the word: "כישור is that
which one calls by the name verteil, viz., that which one fixes on the
spindle (פלך) above to regulate the spinning (מטוה)," according to which
the Venet. renders כישׁור by σφόνδυλος, whorl, and פלך by ἄτρακτος,
spindle. The old interpreters have not recognised that כישׁור denotes a
thing belonging to the spinning apparatus; the lxx, Aquila, Symmachus,
Theodotion, Syr., and Jerome see therein an ethical idea (from כּשׁר, to
be capable, able); but Luther, not misled thereby, translates with
unusual excellence:

She stretches her hand to the rock,

And her fingers grasp the spindle.

He has in this no predecessors, except only the Targumists, whose
כוּנשׁרא (vid., Levy) appears also to denote the spinning-rock. The
Syriac and Talmudic כּוּשׁ, which is compared by Gesenius-Dietrich, is
another word, and denotes, not the rock, but the spindle. Immanuel also,
who explains פלך as the מעזל, i.e., the spindle, understands (as perhaps
also Parchon) by כישׁור the rock. And why should not the rock (wocken =
distaff), i.e., the stock to which the tuft of flax, hemp, or wool is
fixed for the purpose of being spun, Lat. colus, not be named כּישׁור,
from כשׁר, to be upright as a stick, upright in height, or perhaps more
correctly as מכשׁיר, i.e., as that which prepares or makes fit the flax
for spinning? Also in צינק, [Jer
29:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#026), there are united the meanings
of the close and the confining dungeon, and שׁלה = שׁילון signifies

(Note: Otherwise, but improbably, Schultens: colus a כשׁר = katr kathr,
necti in orbem, circumnecti in globum. In פּלך, whence פּלך, he rightly
finds the primary meaning of circumvolutio sive gyratio.)

the place which yields rest. The spinning-wheel is a German invention of
the 16th century, but the rock standing on the ground, or held also in
the hands, the spindle and the whorl, are more ancient.

(Note: A view of the ancient art of spinning is afforded by the figures
of the 12th Dynasty (according to Lepsius, 2380-2167 b.c.) in the burial
chamber of Beni Hassan (270 kilometres above Bulak, on the right bank of
the Nile). M. J. Henry, in his work L'Egypte Pharaonique (Paris 1846),
Bd. 2, p. 431, mentions that there are figures there which represent
"toutes les oprations de la fabrication des tissus depuis le filage
jusqu au tissage." Then he continues: Lex fuseaux dont se servent les
fileuses sont excatement semblables aux ntres, et on voit mme ces
fileuses imprimer le mouvement de rotation ces fuseaux, en en froissant
le bout inferieur entre leur main et leur cuisse.)

With the spindle תמך stands in fit relation, for it is twirled between
the fingers, as Catullus says of Fate:

Libratum tereti versabat pollice fusum.

(Note: In the "marriage of Peleus and Thetis," Catullus describes the
work of the Fates: "Their hands are ceaselessly active at their
never-ending work; while the left holds the rock, surrounded with a soft
fleece, the right assiduously draws the thread and forms it with raised
fingers; then it swiftly turns the spindle, with the thumb stretched
down, and swings it away in whirling circles." Then follows the refrain
of the song of the Fates: Currite ducentes subtegmina, currite, fusi. -
(After Hertzberg's Translation.))

[Proverbs 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 31:20</span></span>

That which impels the housewife to this labour is not selfishness, not a
narrow-hearted limitation of her care to the circle of what is her own,
but love, which reaches out far beyond this circle:

20 כ She holdeth out her hand to the unfortunate,

And stretcheth forth her hands to the needy.

With כּפּיה, 19b, is connected the idea of artistic skilfulness; with
כּפּהּ, here that of offering for counsel (vid., at [Isa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006)); with sympathy and readiness to
help, she presents herself to those who are oppressed by the misfortunes
of life as if for an alliance, as if saying: place confidence in me, I
shall do whatever I can - there thou hast my hand! Hitzig erroneously
thinks of the open hand with a gift lying in it: this ought to be named,
for כף in itself is nothing else than the half-opened hand. Also in 20b
we are not to think of alms. Here Hitzig rightly: she stretches out to
him both of her hands, that he might grasp them, both of them, or
whichever he may. She does not throw to him merely a gift from a
distance, but above all she gives to him to experience her warm sympathy
(cf. [Eze 16:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#049)). Here, as at 19a,
שׁלחה is punctuated (with Dagesh) as Piel. The punctuation supposes that
the author both times not unintentionally made use of the intensive
form. This one verse (20) is complete in itself as a description of
character; and the author has done well in choosing such strong
expressions, for, without this sympathy with misery and poverty, she, so
good and trustworthy and industrious, might indeed be pleasing to her
husband, but not to God. One could almost wish that greater expansion
had been given to this one feature in the picture.

[Proverbs 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 31:21</span></span>

But the poet goes on to describe her fruitful activity in the nearest
sphere of her calling:

21 ל She is not afraid of the snow for her house;

For her whole house is clothed in scarlet.

A fall of snow in the rainy season of winter is not rare in Palestine,
the Hauran, and neighbouring countries, and is sometimes accompanied
with freezing cold.

(Note: Vid., regarding a fall of snow in Jerusalem, the journal Saat auf
Hoffnung Jahrg. 3, Heft 3; and in the Hauran Comm. to [Job
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022).)

She sees approaching the cold time of the year without any fear for her
house, even though the season bring intense cold; for her whole house,
i.e., the whole of the members of her family, are לבשׁ שׁנים. The
connection is accusatival (Venet. ἐνδεδυμένος ἐρυθρά), as at [Sa2
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#032); [Eze
9:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002). שׁני, from שׁנה, to shine,
glance clear, or high red, and is with or without תולעת the name of the
colour of the Kermes worm, crimson or scarlet, perhaps to be
distinguished from ארגּמן, the red-purple shell colour, and תּכלת, the
blue. שׁנים are clothing or material coloured with such שׁני (bright
red) (vid., at [Isa 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)). The
explanation of the word by dibapha is inadmissible, because the doubled
colouring, wherever it is mentioned, always refers to the purple,
particularly that of Tyre (dibapha Tyria), not to the scarlet.

(Note: Vid., Blmner's Die gewerbliche Thtigkeit der Vlder des
klassischen Alterthums (1869), p. 21f.)

But why does the poet name scarlet-coloured clothing? On account of the
contrast to the white snow, says Hitzig, he clothes the family in
crimson. But this contrast would be a meaningless freak. Rather it is to
be supposed that there is ascribed to the red material a power of
retaining the heat, as there is to the white that of keeping off the
heat; but evidence for this are wanting. Therefore Rosenmller,
Vaihinger, and Bttcher approve of the translation duplicibus (Jerome,
Luther) \[= with double clothing\], because they read, with the lxx,
שׁנים.

(Note: The lxx reads together שנים מרבדים, δισσὰς χλαίνας, and brings
into [Pro 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#021) (her husband remains
without care for the members of the family if it does not snow χιονίζη,
as it is to be read for χρονίζη) and 22 the husband, who appears to the
translator too much kept in the background.)

But, with right, the Syr., Targ. abide by זהוריתא, scarlet. The scarlet
clothing is of wool, which as such preserves warmth, and, as
high-coloured, appears at the same time dignified ([Sa2
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#024)).

[Proverbs 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 31:22</span></span>

From the protecting, and at the same time ornamental clothing of the
family, the poet proceeds to speak of the bed-places, and of the attire
of the housewife:

22 מ She prepareth for herself pillows;

Linen and purple is her raiment.

Regarding מרבדּים (with ב raphatum), vid., at [Pro
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#016). Thus, pillows or mattresses
(Aquila, Theodotion, περιστρώματα; Jerome, stragulatam vestem; Luther,
Decke = coverlets) to make the bed soft and to adorn it (Kimchi: ליפּות
על המטות, according to which Venet. κόσμια); Symmachus designates it as
ἀμφιτάπους, i.e., τάπητες (tapetae, tapetia, carpets), which are hairy
(shaggy) on both sides.

(Note: Vid., Lumbroso, Recherches sur l'Economie politique de l'Egypte
sous les Lagides (Turin, 1870), p. 111; des tapis de laine de premere
qualit, pourpres, laineux des deux cts (ἀμφίταποι).)

Only the lxx makes out of it δισσὰς χλαίνας, lined overcoats, for it
brings over שׁנים. By עשׂתה־לּהּ it is not meant that she prepares such
pillows for her own bed, but that she herself (i.e., for the wants of
her house) prepares them. But she also clothes herself in costly attire.
שׁשׁ (an Egyptian word, not, as Heb., derived from שׁוּשׁ, cogn. ישׁשׁ,
to be white) is the old name for linen, according to which the Aram.
translates it by בּוּץ, the Greek by βύσσος, vid., Genesis, pp. 470,
557, to which the remark is to be added, that the linen \[Byssus\],
according to a prevailing probability, was not a fine cotton cloth, but
linen cloth. Luther translates שׁשׁ, here and elsewhere, by weisse Seide
\[white silk\] (σηρικόν, i.e., from the land of the Σῆρες, [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012)); but the silk, is first
mentioned by Ezekiel under the name of משׁי; and the ancients call the
country where silk-stuff (bombycina) was woven, uniformly Assyria.
ארגּמן (Aram. ארגּון, derived by Benfey, with great improbability, from
the rare Sanscrit word râgavant, red-coloured; much rather from רגם =
רקם, as stuff of variegated colour) is red purple; the most valuable
purple garments were brought from Tyre and Sidon.

[Proverbs 31:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 31:23</span></span>

Now, first, the description turns back to the husband, of the woman who
is commended, mentioned in the introduction:

23 נ 32 Well known in the gates is her husband,

Where he sitteth among the elders of the land.

Such a wife is, according to [Pro
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004), עטרת בּעלּהּ, - she advances the
estimation and the respect in which her husband is held. He has, in the
gates where the affairs of the city are deliberated upon, a well-known,
reputable name; for there he sits, along with the elders of the land,
who are chosen into the council of the city as the chief place of the
land, and has a weighty voice among them. The phrase wavers between נודע
(lxx περίβλεπτος γίνεται; Venet. ἔλνωσται) and נודע. The old Venetian
edd. have in this place (like the Cod. Jaman.), and at [Psa
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017), נודע; on the contrary, [Psa
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002); [Ecc
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#010), נודע, and that is correct; for
the Masora, at this place and at [Psa
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002) (in the Biblia rabb), is
disfigured.

[Proverbs 31:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 31:24</span></span>

The description, following the order of the letters, now directs
attention to the profitable labour of the housewife:

24 ס She prepareth body-linen and selleth it,

And girdles doth she give to the Phoenicians.

It is a question whether סדין signifies σινδών, cloth from Sindhu, the
land of India (vid., at [Isa 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#023));
the Arab. sadn (sadl), to cause to hang down, to descend (for the
purpose of covering or veiling), offers an appropriate verbal root. In
the Talmud, סדין is the sleeping linen, the curtain, the embroidered
cloth, but particularly a light smock-frock, as summer costume, which
was worn on the bare body (cf. [Mar
14:51](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#051).). Kimchi explains the word by
night-shirt; the Edictum Diocletiani, xviii. 16, names σινδόνες
κοιταρίαι, as the Papyrus Louvre, ὀθόνια ἐγκοιμήτρια; and the connection
in the Edict shows that linen attire (ἐκ λίνου) is meant, although - as
with שׁשׁ, so also with סדין - with the ancients and the moderns,
sometimes linen and sometimes cotton is spoken of without any
distinction. Aethicus speaks of costly girdles, Cosmogr. 84, as
fabricated at Jerusalem: baltea regalia ... ex Hierosolyma allata;
Jerusalem and Scythopolis were in later times the chief places in
Palestine for the art of weaving. In Galilee also, where excellent flax
grew, the art of weaving was carried on; and the ὀθόναι, which,
according to Clemens Alex. Paedag. ii. 10, p. 239, were exported ἐκ γῆς
Ἑβραίων, are at least in their material certainly synon. with σινδόνες.
Regarding נתן, syn. מכר, opp. לקח, syn. נשׂא = קנה, vid., at 16a. There
is no reason to interpret כּנעני here, with the obliteration of the
ethnographical meaning, in the general sense of סחר, trader, merchant;
for purple, 22b, is a Phoenician manufacture, and thus, as an article of
exchange, can be transferred to the possession of the industrious wife.

[Proverbs 31:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 31:25</span></span>

The description is now more inward:

25 ע Strength and honour is her clothing;

Thus she laugheth at the future day.

She is clothed with עז, strength, i.e., power over the changes of
temporal circumstances, which easily shatter and bring to ruin a
household resting on less solid foundations; clothed with הדר, glory,
i.e., elevation above that which is low, little, common, a state in
which they remain who propose to themselves no high aim after which they
strive with all their might: in other words, her raiment is just pride,
true dignity, with which she looks confidently into the future, and is
armed against all sorrow and care. The connection of ideas, עז והדר
(defectively written, on the contrary, at [Psa
84:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#006), Masora, and only there written
plene, and with Munach), instead of the frequent הוד והדר, occurs only
here. The expression 25b is like [Job
39:7](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#007), wherefore Hitzig rightly
compares [Job 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#014) to 25a. יום אחרון,
distinguished from אחרית, and incorrectly interpreted (Rashi) of the day
of death, is, as at [Isa 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#008), the
future, here that which one at a later period may enter upon.

[Proverbs 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 31:26</span></span>

The next verse presents one of the most beautiful features in the
portrait:

26 פ She openeth her mouth with wisdom,

And amiable instruction is on her tongue.

The ב of בּחכמה is, as also at [Psa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005); [Psa
78:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#002), that of means: when she speaks,
then it is wisdom pressing itself from her heart outward, by means of
which she breaks the silence of her mouth. With על, in the expression
26b, elsewhere תּהת interchanges: under the tongue, [Psa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007), one has that which is ready to
be spoken out, and on the tongue, [Psa
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#003), that which is in the act of
being spoken out. תּורת־חסד is a genitive connection after the manner of
tôrath אמת, [Mal 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006). The gen. is not,
as at [Lev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002), in tôrath העלה, the
gen. of the object (thus e.g., Fleischer's institutio ad humanitatem),
but the gen. of property, but not so that חסד denotes grace (Symmachus,
νόμος ἐπίχαρις; Theodotion, νόμος χάριτος), because for this meaning
there is no example except [Isa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006);
and since חסד in the O.T. is the very same as in the N.T., love, which
is the fulfilling of the law, [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006), cf. [Kg1
20:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#031),

(Note: Immanuel remarks that Tôrath חסד probably refers to the Tôra, and
שׁכוהל חסד, i.e., which is wholly love, which goes forth in love, to the
Gesetz = statute.)

it is supposed that the poet, since he writes תורת חסד, and not תורת חן,
means to designate by חסד this property without which her love for her
husband, her industry, her high sentiment, would be no virtues, viz.,
unselfish, sympathizing, gentle love. Instruction which bears on itself
the stamp of such amiability, and is also gracious, i.e., awakening
love, because going forth from love (according to which Luther,
translating holdselige Lere = pleasing instructions, thus understands
it) - such instruction she carries, as house-mother ([Pro
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#008)), in her mouth. Accordingly the
lxx translate (vid., Lagarde regarding the mistakes of this text before
us) θεσμοὶ ἐλεημοσύνης, and Jerome lex clementiae. חסד is related to
אהבה as grace to love; it denotes love showing itself in kindness and
gracefulness, particularly condescending love, proceeding from a
compassionate sympathy with the sufferings and wants of men. Such
graceful instruction she communicates now to this and now to that member
of her household, for nothing that goes on in her house escapes her
observation.

[Proverbs 31:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 31:27</span></span>

27 צ She looketh well to the ways of her house,

And eateth not the bread of idleness.

Although there exists an inner relation between 27a and [Pro
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#026), yet 27a is scarcely to be
thought of (Hitzig) as appos. to the suffix in לשׁונהּ. Participles with
or without determination occur in descriptions frequently as predicates
of the subject standing in the discourse of the same force as abstr.
present declarations, e.g., [Isa
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#022)., [Psa
104:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#013). צופיּה is connected with the
accus. of the object of the intended warning, like [Pro
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#003), and is compared according to the
form with המיּה, [Pro 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011). הליבה
signifies elsewhere things necessary for a journey, [Job
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019), and in the plur. magnificus it
denotes show (pompa), [Hab 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006) : but
originally the walk, conduct, [Nah
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#006); and here in the plur. walks =
comings and goings, but not these separately, but in general, the modi
procedendi (lxx διατριβαι). The Chethı̂b has הילכות, probably an error in
writing, but possibly also the plur. of הלכה, thus found in the
post-bibl. Heb. (after the form צדקות), custom, viz., appointed
traditional law, but also like the Aram. הלכא (emph. הלכתא), usage,
manner, common practice. Hitzig estimates this Chethı̂b, understood
Talmudically, as removing the section into a late period; but this
Talmudical signification is not at all appropriate (Hitzig translates,
with an incorrect rendering of צופיה, "for she sees after the ordering
of the house"), and besides the Aram. הלכא, e.g., Targ. [Pro
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009), in the first line, signifies
only the walk or the manner and way of going, and this gives with the
Kerı̂ essentially the same signification. Luther well: Sie schawet wie es
in jrem Hause zugeht \[= she looks how it goes in her house\]. Her eyes
are turned everywhere; she is at one time here, at another there, to
look after all with her own eyes; she does not suffer the day's work,
according to the instructions given, to be left undone, while she folds
her own hands on her bosom; but she works, keeping an oversight on all
sides, and does not eat the bread of idleness (עצלוּת = עצלה, [Pro
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#015)), but bread well deserved, for
εἴ τις οὐ θέλει ἐργάζεσθαι, μηδὲ ἐσθιέτω, [Th2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010).

[Proverbs 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 31:28</span></span>

Now begins the finale of this song in praise of the virtuous woman:

28 ק Her sons rise up and bless her,

Her husband (riseth up) and praiseth her.

The Piel אשּׁר in such a connection is denom. of אשׁר (אשׁרי). Her
children rise up (קוּם, like e.g., [Jer
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#017), but here, perhaps, with the
associated idea of reverential honour) and bless her, that she has on
her part brought the house and them to such prosperity, such a position
of respect, and to a state where love (חסד) reigns, and her husband
rises up and sings her praise.

[Proverbs 31:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 31:29</span></span>

29 ר "Many are the daughters who have done bravely,

But thou hast surpassed them all together."

We have already often remarked, last time under [Pro
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#006), that רב, not indeed in its
sing., but in its plur. רבּים and רבּות, can precede, after the manner
of a numeral, as attribute; but this syntactical licence, [Pro
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012), by no means appears, and needs
to be assumed as little here as at [Pro
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#026), although there is no reason that
can be adduced against it. עשׂה חיל signifies here not the gaining of
riches (the lxx, Syr., Targ., Jerome, Luther, Gesenius, Bttcher, and
others), which here, where the encomium comes to its height, would give
to it a mercenary mammon-worship note - it indeed has this signification
only when connected with ל of the person: Sibi opes acquirere, [Deu
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#017); [Eze
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze028.htm#004) - but: bravery, energy, and, as
the reference to אשׁת חיל demands, moral activity, capacity for
activity, in accordance with one's calling, ποιεῖν ἀρετήν, by which the
Venet. translates it. בּנות is, as in the primary passages, [Gen
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#013); [Sol
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#009), a more delicate, finer name of
women than נשׁים: many daughters there have always been who have
unfolded ability, but thou my spouse hast raised thyself above them all,
i.e., thou art excellent and incomparable. Instead of עלית, there is to
be written, after Chajug, Aben Ezra (Zachoth 7a), and Jekuthiel under
[Gen 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#011), עלית; the Spanish Nakdanim
thus distinguish the forms מצאת, thou hast found, and מצאת, she has
found. כּלּנה, for כּלּן, [Gen 42:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036).

[Proverbs 31:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 31:30</span></span>

What now follows is not a continuation of the husband's words of praise
(Ewald, Elster, Lwenstein), but an epiphonema auctoris (Schultens); the
poet confirms the praise of the husband by referring it to the general
ground of its reason:

30 ש Grace is deceit; and beauty, vanity -

A wife that feareth Jahve, she shall be praised.

Grace is deceit, because he who estimates the works of a wife merely by
the loveliness of her external appearance, is deceived by it; and beauty
is vanity, vanitas, because it is nothing that remains, nothing that is
real, but is subject to the law of all material things - transitoriness.
The true value of a wife is measured only by that which is enduring,
according to the moral background of its external appearance; according
to the piety which makes itself manifest when the beauty of bodily form
has faded away, in a beauty which is attractive.

(Note: Vid., the application of [Pro
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#030) in Taanith 26b: "Young man," say
the maidens, "lift up thine eyes and behold that which thou choosest for
thyself! Direct thine eyes not to beauty (נוי), direct thine eyes to the
family (משׁפחה); pleasantness is a deception, etc.")

יראת (with Makkeph following),

(Note: The writing יראת־ is that of Ben Asher, יראת that of Ben
Naphtali; Norzi, from a misunderstanding, claims יראת־ (with Gaja) as
Ben Asher's manner of writing.)

is here the connective form of יראה (fem. of ירא). The Hithpa. תתהלּל is
here manifestly ([Pro 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#002)) not
reflexive, but representative of the passive (cf. [Pro
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#008), and the frequently occurring
מהלּל, laudatus = laudandus), nowhere occurring except in the passage
before us. In itself the fut. may also mean: she will be praised = is
worthy of praise, but the jussive rendering (Luther: Let her be praised)
is recommended by the verse which follows:

[Proverbs 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 31:31</span></span>

31 ת Give to her of the fruit of her hands;

And let her works praise her in the gates!

The fruit of her hands is the good which, by her conduct, she has
brought to maturity - the blessing which she has secured for others,
but, according to the promise ([Isa
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#010)), has also secured for her own
enjoyment. The first line proceeds on the idea that, on account of this
blessing, she herself shall rejoice. תּנוּ־להּ (with Gaja, after
Metheg-Setzung, 37) is not equivalent to give to her honour because
of...; for in that case, instead of the ambiguous מן, another
preposition - such e.g., as על - would have been used; and so תּנוּ, of
itself, cannot be equivalent to תּנּוּ (sing the praise of), as Ziegler
would read, after [Jdg 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#040). It must
stand with כבוד, or instead of מפּרי an accus. obj. is to be thought of,
as at [Psa 68:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#035); [Deu
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#003), which the necessity of the case
brings with it - the giving, as a return in the echo of the song of
praise. Immanuel is right in explaining תנו־לה by תגמלו לה חסד or עשׂו
עתה חסד וכבוד, cf. [Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004). The מן,
as is not otherwise to be expected, after תנו is partitive: give to her
something of the fruit of her hands, i.e., recompense it to her, render
it thankfully, by which not exclusively a requital in the form of
honourable recognition, but yet this specially, is to be thought of. Her
best praise is her works themselves. In the gates, i.e., in the place
where the representatives of the people come together, and where the
people are assembled, her works praise her; and the poet desires that
this may be right worthily done, full of certainty that she merits it,
and that they honour themselves who seek to praise the works of such a
woman, which carry in themselves their own commendation.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Introduction](ecc000)

</div>
