<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro015)  [Next](pro017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)

[Proverbs 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 16:1</span></span>

Four proverbs of God, the disposer of all things:

1 Man's are the counsels of the heart;

But the answer of the tongue cometh from Jahve.

Gesen., Ewald, and Bertheau incorrectly understand 1b of hearing, i.e.,
of a favourable response to what the tongue wishes; 1a speaks not of
wishes, and the gen. after מענה (answer) is, as at [Pro
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#023); [Mic
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#007), and also here, by virtue of the
parallelism, the gen. subjecti [Pro
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#023) leads to the right sense,
according to which a good answer is joy to him to whom it refers: it
does not always happen to one to find the fitting and effective
expression for that which he has in his mind; it is, as this cog.
proverb expresses it, a gift from above (δοθήσεται, [Mat
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019)). But now, since מענה neither
means answering, nor yet in general an expression (Euchel) or report
(Lwenstein), and the meaning of the word at 4a is not here in question,
one has to think of him whom the proverb has in view as one who has to
give a reason, to give information, or generally - since ענה, like
ἀμείβεσθαι, is not confined to the interchange of words - to solve a
problem, and that such an one as requires reflection. The scheme
(project, premeditation) which he in his heart contrives, is here
described as מערכי־לב, from ערך, to arrange, to place together,
metaphorically of the reflection, i.e., the consideration analyzing and
putting a matter in order. These reflections, seeking at one time in one
direction, and at another in another, the solution of the question, the
unfolding of the problem, are the business of men; but the answer which
finally the tongue gives, and which here, in conformity with the
pregnant sense of מענה (vid., at [Pro
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#023), [Pro
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#028)), will be regarded as right,
appropriate, effective, thus generally the satisfying reply to the
demand placed before him, is from God. It is a matter of experience
which the preacher, the public speaker, the author, and every man to
whom his calling or circumstances present a weighty, difficult theme,
can attest. As the thoughts pursue one another in the mind, attempts are
made, and again abandoned; the state of the heart is somewhat like that
of chaos before the creation. But when, finally, the right thought and
the right utterance for it are found, that which is found appears to us,
not as if self-discovered, but as a gift; we regard it with the feeling
that a higher power has influenced our thoughts and imaginings; the
confession by us, ἡ ἱκανότης ἡμῶν ἐκ τοῦ Θεοῦ ([Co2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)), in so far as we believe in a
living God, is inevitable.

[Proverbs 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 16:2</span></span>

2 Every way of a man is pure in his own eyes;

But a weigher of the spirits is Jahve.

Variations of this verse are [Pro
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#002), where ישׁר for זך (according to
the root-meaning: pricking in the eyes, i.e., shining clear, then:
without spot, pure, vid., Fleischer in Levy's Chald. Wrterbuch, i. 424),
לבּות for רוּחות, and כּל־דּרך for כּל־דּרכי, whereupon here without
synallage (for כל means the totality), the singular of the pred.
follows, as [Isa 64:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#010); [Eze
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#015). For the rest, cf. with 2a, [Pro
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012), where, instead of the subj.
בּעיני, is used לפני, and with 2b, [Pro
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#012), where God is described by תּכן
לבּות. The verb תּכן is a secondary formation from כּוּן (vid., Hupfeld
on [Psa 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007)), like תּכן from Arab.
tyaḳn (to be fast, sure), the former through the medium of the reflex.
התכּונן, the latter of the reflex. Arab. âitḳn; תּכן means to regulate
(from regula, a rule), to measure off, to weigh, here not to bring into
a condition right according to rule (Theodotion, ἑδράζων, stabiliens,
Syr. Targ. מתקּן, Venet. καταρτίζει; Luther, "but the Lord maketh the
heart sure"), but to measure or weigh, and therefore to estimate
rightly, to know accurately (Jerome, spiritum ponderator est Dominus).
The judgment of a man regarding the cause of life, which it is good for
him to enter upon, lies exposed to great and subtle self-deception; but
God has the measure and weight, i.e., the means of proving, so as to
value the spirits according to their true moral worth; his investigation
goes to the root (cf. κριτικός, [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012)), his judgment rests on the
knowledge of the true state of the matter, and excludes all deception,
so that thus a man can escape the danger of delusion by no other means
than by placing his way, i.e., his external and internal life, in the
light of the word of God, and desiring for himself the all-penetrating
test of the Searcher of hearts ([Psa
139:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#023).), and the self-knowledge
corresponding to the result of this test.

[Proverbs 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 16:3</span></span>

3 Roll on Jahve thy works,

So thy thoughts shall prosper.

The proverbs [Pro 16:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#001) are wanting
in the lxx; their absence is compensated for by three others, but only
externally, not according to their worth. Instead of גּל, the Syr.,
Targ., and Jerome read גּל, revela, with which the על, [Psa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005), cf. [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023), interchanging with אל (here and
at [Psa 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009)), does not agree; rightly
Theodotion, κύλισον ἐπὶ κύριον, and Luther, "commend to the Lord thy
works." The works are here, not those that are executed, [Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016), but those to be executed, as
[Psa 90:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#017), where כּונן, here the
active to ויכּונוּ, which at [Pro 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026)
as jussive meant to be placed right, here with ו of the consequence in
the apodosis imperativi: to be brought about, and to have continuance,
or briefly: to stand (cf. [Pro 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#003))
as the contrast of disappointment or ruin. We should roll on God all
matters which, as obligations, burden us, and on account of their weight
and difficulty cause us great anxiety, for nothing is too heavy or too
hard for Him who can overcome all difficulties and dissolve all
perplexities; then will our thoughts, viz., those about the future of
our duty and our life-course, be happy, nothing will remain entangled
and be a failure, but will be accomplished, and the end and aim be
realized.

[Proverbs 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 16:4</span></span>

4 Jahve hath made everything for its contemplated end;

And also the wicked for the day of evil.

Everywhere else מענה means answer (Venet. πρὸς ἀπόκρισιν αὐτοῦ), which
is not suitable here, especially with the absoluteness of the כּל; the
Syr. and Targ. translate, obedientibus ei, which the words do not
warrant; but also propter semet ipsum (Jerome, Theodotion, Luther) give
to 4b no right parallelism, and, besides, would demand למענו or למענהוּ.
The punctuation למּענהוּ, which is an anomaly (cf. כּגּברתּהּ, [Isa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#002), and בּערינוּ, [Ezr
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr010.htm#014)), shows (Ewald) that here we
have, not the prepositional למען, but ל with the subst. מענה, which in
derivation and meaning is one with the form מעז abbreviated from it (cf.
מעל, מער), similar in meaning to the Arab. ma'anyn, aim, intention,
object, and end, and mind, from 'atay, to place opposite to oneself a
matter, to make it the object of effort. Hitzig prefers למענה, but why
not rather למענהוּ, for the proverb is not intended to express that all
that God has made serve a purpose (by which one is reminded of the
arguments for the existence of God from final causes, which are often
prosecuted too far), but that all is made by God for its purpose, i.e.,
a purpose premeditated by Him, that the world of things and of events
stands under the law of a plan, which has in God its ground and its end,
and that also the wickedness of free agents is comprehended in this
plan, and made subordinate to it. God has not indeed made the wicked as
such, but He has made the being which is capable of wickedness, and
which has decided for it, viz., in view of the "day of adversity" ([Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014)), which God will cause to come
upon him, thus making His holiness manifest in the merited punishment,
and thus also making wickedness the means of manifesting His glory. It
is the same thought which is expressed in [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016) with reference to Pharaoh. A
praedestinatio ad malum, and that in the supralapsarian sense, cannot be
here taught, for this horrible dogma (horribile quidem decretrum,
fateor, says Calvin himself) makes God the author of evil, and a ruler
according to His sovereign caprice, and thus destroys all pure
conceptions of God. What Paul, Rom 9, with reference to [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016), wishes to say is this, that it
was not Pharaoh's conduct that determined the will of God, but that the
will of God is always the antecedens: nothing happens to God through the
obstinacy and rebellion of man which determines Him to an action not
already embraced in the eternal plan, but also such an one must against
his will be subservient to the display of God's glory. The apostle adds
[Rom 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022), and shows that he
recognised the factor of human self-determination, but also as one
comprehended in God's plan. The free actions of men create no situation
by which God would be surprised and compelled to something which was not
originally intended by Himself. That is what the above proverb says: the
wicked also has his place in God's order of the world. Whoever
frustrates the designs of grace must serve God in this, ἐνδείζασθαι τὴν
ὀργὴν καὶ γνωρίσαι τὸ δυνατὸν αὐτοῦ ([Rom
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)).

[Proverbs 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 16:5</span></span>

Here follow three proverbs of divine punishment, expiatio \[Vershnung\]
and reconciliatio \[Vershnung\].

5 An abomination of Jahve is every one who is haughty;

The hand for it \[assuredly\] he remains not unpunished.

Proverbs thus commencing we already had at [Pro
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#009), [Pro
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#026). גּבהּ is a metaplastic
connecting form of גּבהּ; on the contrary, גּבהּ, [Sa1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007); [Psa
103:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#011), means being high, as גּבהּ,
height; the form underlying גּבהּ is not גּבהּ (as Gesen. and Olshausen
write it), but גּבהּ. In 5b, [Pro
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#021) is repeated. The translators are
perplexed in their rendering of יד ליד. Fleischer: ab aetate in aetatem
non (i.e., nullo unquam tempore futuro) impunis erit.

[Proverbs 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 16:6</span></span>

6 By love and truth is iniquity expiated,

And through the fear of Jahve one escapes from evil -

literally, there comes (as the effect of it) the escaping of evil (סוּר,
n. actionis, as [Pro 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#019)), or
rather, since the evil here comes into view as to its consequences ([Pro
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#027); [Pro
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#024)), this, that one escapes evil.
By חסד ואמת are here meant, not the χάρις καὶ ἀλήθεια of God (Bertheau),
but, like [Pro 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028), [Isa
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#008), love and faithfulness in the
relation of men to one another. The ב is both times that of the
mediating cause. Or is it said neither by what means one may attain the
expiation of his sins, nor how he may attain to the escaping from evil,
but much rather wherein the true reverence for Jahve, and wherein the
right expiation of sin, consist? Thus von Hofmann, Schriftbew. i. 595.
But the ב of בחסד is not different from that of בּזאת, [Isa
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009). It is true that the article of
justification is falsified if good works enter as causa meritoria into
the act of justification, but we of the evangelical school teach that
the fides qu justificat is indeed inoperative, but not the fides quae
justificat, and we cannot expect of the O.T. that it should everywhere
distinguish with Pauline precision what even James will not or cannot
distinguish. As the law of sacrifice designates the victim united with
the blood in the most definite manner, but sometimes also the whole
transaction in the offering of sacrifice even to the priestly feast as
serving לכפּר, [Lev 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017), so it also
happens in the general region of ethics: the objective ground of
reconciliation is the decree of God, to which the blood in the typical
offering points, and man is a partaker of this reconciliation, when he
accepts, in penitence and in faith, the offered mercy of God; but this
acceptance would be a self-deception, if it meant that the blotting out
of the guilt of sin could be obtained in the way of imputation without
the immediate following thereupon of a blotting of it out in the way of
sanctification; and therefore the Scriptures also ascribe to good works
a share in the expiation of sin in a wider sense - namely, as the proofs
of thankful ([Luk 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#047)) and
compassionate love (vid., at [Pro
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#002)), as this proverb of love and
truth, herein according with the words of the prophets, as [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006); [Mic
6:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#006). He who is conscious of this,
that he is a sinner, deeply guilty before God, who cannot stand before
Him if He did not deal with him in mercy instead of justice, according
to the purpose of His grace, cannot trust to this mercy if he is not
zealous, in his relations to his fellow-men, to practise love and truth;
and in view of the fifth petition of the Lord's Prayer, and of the
parable of the unmerciful steward rightly understood, it may be said
that the love which covers the sins, [Pro
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012), of a neighbour, has, in regard
to our own sins, a covering or atoning influence, of "blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy." That "love and truth" are meant
of virtues practised from religious motives, 6b shows; for, according to
this line, by the fear of Jahve one escapes evil. The fear of Jahve is
subjection to the God of revelation, and a falling in with the revealed
plan of salvation.

[Proverbs 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 16:7</span></span>

7 If Jahve has pleasure in the ways of a man,

He reconciles even his enemies to him -

properly (for השׁלים is here the causative of the transitive, [Jos
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#001)): He brings it about that they
conclude peace with him. If God has pleasure in the ways of a man, i.e.,
in the designs which he prosecutes, and in the means which he employs,
he shows, by the great consequences which flow from his endeavours,
that, even as his enemies also acknowledge, God is with him (e.g., [Gen
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#027).), so that they, vanquished in
heart (e.g., [Sa2 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#009).), abandon
their hostile position, and become his friends. For if it is manifest
that God makes Himself known, bestowing blessings on a man, there lies
in this a power of conviction which disarms his most bitter opponents,
excepting only those who have in selfishness hardened themselves.

[Proverbs 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 16:8</span></span>

Five proverbs of the king, together with three of righteousness in
action and conduct:

8 Better is a little with righteousness,

Than rich revenues with unrighteousness.

The cogn. proverb [Pro 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#016) commences
similarly. Of רב תּבוּאות, multitude or greatness of income, vid., [Pro
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#004) : "unrighteous wealth profits
not." The possessor of it is not truly happy, for sin cleaves to it,
which troubles the heart (conscience), and because the enjoyment which
it affords is troubled by the curses of those who are injured, and by
the sighs of the oppressed. Above all other gains rises ἡ εὐσέβεια μετ ̓
αὐταρκείας ([Ti1 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006)).

[Proverbs 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 16:9</span></span>

9 The heart of man deviseth his way;

But Jahve directeth his steps.

Similar to this is the German proverb: "Der Mensch denkt, Gott lenkt"
\[= our "man proposes, God disposes"\], and the Arabic el-‛abd (העבד =
man) judebbir wallah juḳaddir; Latin, homo proponit, Deus disponit; for,
as Hitzig rightly remarks, 9b means, not that God maketh his steps firm
(Venet., Luther, Umbreit, Bertheau, Elster), but that He gives direction
to him (Jerome, dirigere). Man deliberates here and there (חשּׁב,
intens. of חשׁב, to calculate, reflect) how he will begin and carry on
this or that; but his short-sightedness leaves much out of view which
God sees; his calculation does not comprehend many contingencies which
God disposes of and man cannot foresee. The result and issue are thus of
God, and the best is, that in all his deliberations one should give
himself up without self-confidence and arrogance to the guidance of God,
that one should do his duty and leave the rest, with humility and
confidence, to God.

[Proverbs 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 16:10</span></span>

10 Oracular decision (belongeth) to the lips of the king;

In the judgment his mouth should not err.

The first line is a noun clause: קסם, as subject, thus needs a
distinctive accent, and that is here, after the rule of the sequence of
accents, and manuscript authority (vid., Torath Emeth, p. 49), not
Mehuppach legarme, as in our printed copies, but Dechi (קסם). Jerome's
translation: Divinatio in labiis regis, in judicio non errabit os ejus,
and yet more Luther's: "his mouth fails not in judgment," makes it
appear as if the proverb meant that the king, in his official duties,
was infallible; and Hitzig (Zckler agreeing), indeed, finds here
expressed the infallibility of the theocratic king, and that as an
actual testimony to be believed, not only is a mere political fiction,
like the phrase, "the king can do no wrong." But while this political
fiction is not strange even to the Israelitish law, according to which
the king could not be brought before the judgment, that testimony is
only a pure imagination. For as little as the N.T. teaches that the
Pope, as the legitimate vicarius of Christ, is infallible, cum ex
cathedra docet, so little does the O.T. that the theocratic king, who
indeed was the legitimate vicarius Dei, was infallible in judicio
ferendo. Yet Ewald maintains that the proverb teaches that the word of
the king, when on the seat of justice, is an infallible oracle; but it
dates from the first bright period of the strong uncorrupted kingdom in
Israel. One may not forget, says Dchsel also, with von Gerlach, that
these proverbs belong to the time of Solomon, before it had given to the
throne sons of David who did evil before the Lord. Then it would fare
ill for the truth of the proverb - the course of history would falsify
it. But in fact this was never maintained in Israel. Of the idolizing
flattering language in which, at the present day, rulers in the East are
addressed, not a trace is found in the O.T. The kings were restrained by
objective law and the recognised rights of the people. David showed, not
merely to those who were about him, but also to the people at large, so
many human weaknesses, that he certainly appeared by no means
infallible; and Solomon distinguished himself, it is true, by rare
kingly wisdom, but when he surrounded himself with the glory of an
oriental potentate, and when Rehoboam began to assume the tone of a
despot, there arose an unhallowed breach between the theocratic kingdom
and the greatest portion of the people. The proverb, as Hitzig
translates and expounds it: "a divine utterance rests on the lips of the
king; in giving judgment his mouth deceives not," is both historically
and dogmatically impossible. The choice of the word קסם (from קסם, R. קש
קם, to make fast, to take an oath, to confirm by an oath, incantare,
vid., at [Isa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#002)), which does not
mean prediction (Luther), but speaking the truth, shows that 10a
expresses, not what falls from the lips of the king in itself, but
according to the judgment of the people: the people are wont to regard
the utterances of the king as oracular, as they shouted in the circus at
Caesarea of King Agrippa, designating his words as θεοῦ φωνὴ καὶ οὐκ
ἀνθρώπων ([Act 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#022)). Hence 10b
supplies an earnest warning to the king, viz., that his mouth should not
offend against righteousness, nor withhold it. לא ימעל is meant as
warning (Umbreit, Bertheau), like לא תבא, [Pro
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#024), and ב in מעל is here, as
always, that of the object; at least this is more probable than that מעל
stands without object, which is possible, and that ב designates the
situation.

[Proverbs 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 16:11</span></span>

11 The scale and balances of a right kind are Jahve's;

His work are the weights of the bag.

Regarding פּלס, statera, a level or steelyard (from פּלס, to make even),
vid., [Pro 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026); מאזנים (from אזן, to
weigh), libra, is another form of the balance: the shop-balance
furnished with two scales. אבני are here the stones that serve for
weights, and כּים, which at [Pro 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#014)
properly means the money-bag, money-purse (cf. [Pro
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#020)), is here, as at [Mic
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#011), the bag in which the merchant
carries the weights. The genit. משׁפּט belongs also to פּלס, which, in
our edition, is pointed with the disjunctive Mehuppach legarme, is
rightly accented in Cod. 1294 (vid., Torath Emeth, p. 50) with the
conjunctive Mehuppach. משׁפט, as 11b shows, is not like מרמה, the word
with the principal tone; 11a says that the balance thus, or thus
constructed, which weighs accurately and justly, is Jahve's, or His
arrangement, and the object of His inspection, and 11b, that all the
weight-stones of the bag, and generally the means of weighing and
measuring, rest upon divine ordinance, that in the transaction and
conduct of men honesty and certainty might rule. This is the declared
will of God, the lawgiver; for among the few direct determinations of
His law with reference to trade this stands prominent, that just weights
and just measures shall be used, [Lev
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#036); [Deu
25:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#013). The expression of the poet
here frames itself after this law; yet 'ה is not exclusively the God of
positive revelation, but, as agriculture in [Isa
28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029), cf. Sirach 7:15, so here the
invention of normative and normal means of commercial intercourse is
referred to the direction and institution of God.

[Proverbs 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 16:12</span></span>

12 It is an abomination to kings to commit wickedness,

For by righteousness the throne is established.

As 10b uttered a warning to the king, grounded on the fact of 10a, so
12a indirectly contains a warning, which is confirmed by the fact 12b.
It is a fact that the throne is established by righteousness (יכּון as
expressive of a rule, like הוּכן, [Isa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005), as expressive of an event); on
this account it is an abomination to kings immediately or mediately to
commit wickedness, i.e., to place themselves in despotic self-will above
the law. Such wicked conduct shall be, and ought to be, an abhorrence to
them, because they know that they thereby endanger the stability of
their throne. This is generally the case, but especially was it so in
Israel, where the royal power was never absolutistic; where the king as
well as the people were placed under God's law; where the existence of
the community was based on the understood equality of right; and the
word of the people, as well as the word of the prophets, was free.
Another condition of the stability of the throne is, after [Pro
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005), the removal of godless men from
nearness to the king. Rehoboam lost the greater part of his kingdom by
this, that he listened to the counsel of the young men who were hated by
the people.

[Proverbs 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 16:13</span></span>

History is full of such warning examples, and therefore this proverb
continues to hold up the mirror to princes.

Well-pleasing to kings are righteous lips,

And whoever speaketh uprightly is loved.

Rightly the lxx ἀγαπᾶ, individ. plur., instead of the plur. of genus,
מלכים; on the contrary, Jerome and Luther give to the sing. the most
general subject (one lives), in which case it must be distinctly said,
that that preference of the king for the people who speak out the truth,
and just what they think, is shared in by every one. צדק, as the
property of the שׂפתי, accords with the Arab. ṣidḳ, truth as the
property of the lasân (the tongue or speech). ישׁרים, from ישׁר, means
recta, as נגידים, principalia, [Pro
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#006), and ריקים, inania, [Pro
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#011). ישׁרים, [Dan
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#010), neut. So neut. וישׁר, [Psa
111:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#008); but is rather, with Hitzig and
Riehm, to be read וישׁר. What the proverb ways cannot be meant of all
kings, for even the house of David had murderers of prophets, like
Manasseh and Joiakim; but in general it is nevertheless true that noble
candour, united with true loyalty and pure love to the king and the
people, is with kings more highly prized than mean flattery, seeking
only its own advantage, and that, though this (flattery) may for a time
prevail, yet, at last, fidelity to duty, and respect for truth, gain the
victory.

[Proverbs 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 16:14</span></span>

14 The wrath of the king is like messengers of death;

But a wise man appeaseth him.

The clause: the wrath of the king is many messengers of death, can be
regarded as the attribution of the effect, but it falls under the point
of view of likeness, instead of comparison: if the king is angry, it is
as if a troop of messengers or angels of death went forth to visit with
death him against whom the anger is kindled; the plur. serves for the
strengthening of the figure: not one messenger of death, but at the same
time several, the wrinkled brow, the flaming eye, the threatening voice
of the king sends forth (Fleischer). But if he against whom the wrath of
the king has thus broken forth is a wise man, or one near the king who
knows that ὀργὴ ἀνδρὸς δικαιοσύνην Θεοῦ οὐ κατεργάζεται ([Jam
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#020)), he will seek to discover the
means (and not without success) to cover or to propitiate, i.e., to
mitigate and appease, the king's anger. The Scripture never uses כּפּר,
so that God is the object (expiare Deum), because, as is shown in the
Comm. zum Hebrerbrief, that were to say, contrary to the decorum
divinum, that God's holiness or wrath is covered, or its energy bound,
by the offering up of sacrifices or of things in which there is no
inherent virtue of atonement, and which are made the means of
reconciliation only by the accommodative arrangement of God. On the
contrary, כּפּר is used here and at [Gen
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#021) of covering = reconciling
(propitiating) the wrath of a man.

[Proverbs 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 16:15</span></span>

15 In the light on the king's countenance there is life,

And his favour is as a cloud of the latter rains.

Hitzig regards אור as the inf. (cf. [Pro
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018)), but one says substantively אור
פּני, [Job 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#024), etc., and in a
similar sense מאור עינים, [Pro 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#030);
light is the condition of life, and the exhilaration of life, wherefore
אור החיּים, Ps. 56:14, [Job 33:30](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#030), is
equivalent to a fresh, joyous life; in the light of the king's
countenance is life, means that life goes forth from the cheerful
approbation of the king, which shows itself in his face, viz., in the
showing of favour, which cheers the heart and beautifies the life. To
speak of liberality as a shower is so common to the Semitic, that it has
in Arab. the general name of nadnâ, rain. 15b conforms itself to this.
מלקושׁ (cf. [Job 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#023)) is the latter
rain, which, falling about the spring equinox, brings to maturity the
barley-harvest; on the contrary, מורה (יורה) is the early rain, which
comes at the time of ploughing and sowing; the former is thus the
harvest rain, and the latter the spring rain. Like a cloud which
discharges the rain that mollifies the earth and refreshes the growing
corn, is the king's favour. The noun עב, thus in the st. constr.,
retains its Kametz. Michlol 191b. This proverb is the contrast to [Pro
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#014). [Pro
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#002) has also the anger of the king as
its theme. In [Pro 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012) the figures
of the darkness and the light stand together as parts of one proverb.
The proverbs relating to the king are now at an end. [Pro
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#010) contains a direct warning for
the king; [Pro 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#012) an indirect
warning, as a conclusion arising from 12b (cf. [Pro
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028), where יצּרוּ is not to be
translated tueantur; the proverb has, however, the value of a nota
bene). [Pro 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#013) in like manner
presents an indirect warning, less to the king than to those who have
intercourse with him (cf. [Pro 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005)),
and [Pro 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#014) and [Pro
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#015) show what power of good and
evil, of wrath and of blessing, is given to a king, whence so much the
greater responsibility arises to him, but, at the same time also, the
duty of all to repress the lust to evil that may be in him, and to
awaken and foster in him the desire for good.

[Proverbs 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 16:16</span></span>

Five proverbs regarding wisdom, righteousness, humility, and trust in
God, forming, as it were, a succession of steps, for humility is the
virtue of virtues, and trust in God the condition of all salvation.
Three of these proverbs have the word טוב in common.

16 To gain wisdom, how much better is it than gold;

And to attain understanding to be preferred to silver.

Commendation of the striving after wisdom (understanding) with which all
wisdom begins, for one gains an intellectual possession not by
inheritance, but by acquisition, [Pro
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007). A similar "parallel-comparative
clause" (Fl.), with the interchange of טוב and נבחר, is [Pro
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#001), but yet more so is [Pro
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#003), where נבחר, as here, is neut.
pred. (not, as at [Pro 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#010) and
elsewhere, adj.), and עשׂה, such an anomalous form of the inf. constr.
as here קנה, Gesen. 75, Anm. 2; in both instances it could also be
regarded as the inf. absol. (cf. [Pro
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#027)) (Lehrgebude, 109, Anm. 2); yet
the language uses, as in the case before us, the form גּלה only with the
force of an abl. of the gerund, as עשׂו occurs [Gen
31:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#038); the inf. of verbs 'ה'ל as nom.
(as here), genit. ([Gen 50:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#020)), and
accus. ([Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)), is always either
גּלות or גּלה. The meaning is not that to gain wisdom is more valuable
than gold, but that the gaining of wisdom exceeds the gaining of gold
and silver, the common comparatio decurtata (cf. [Job
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#018)). Regarding חרוּץ, vid., at [Pro
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#014).

[Proverbs 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 16:17</span></span>

17 The path of the righteous is the avoiding of evil,

And he preserveth his soul who giveth heed to his way.

The meaning of מסלּה, occurring only here in the Proverbs, is to be
learned from [Pro 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#019). The
attribution denotes that wherein the way they take consists, or by which
it is formed; it is one, a straight and an open way, i.e., unimpeded,
leading them on, because they avoid the evil which entices them aside to
the right and the left. Whoever then gives heed to his way, preserveth
his soul (שׁמר נפשׁו, as [Pro 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#003), on
the contrary [Pro 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005), subj.), that
it suffer not injury and fall under death, for סוּר מרע and סור ממוקשׁי
מות, [Pro 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#027), are essentially the
same. Instead of this distich, the lxx has three distichs; the thoughts
presented in the four superfluous lines are all already expressed in one
distich. Ewald and Hitzig find in this addition of the lxx a component
part of the original text.

[Proverbs 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 16:18</span></span>

18 Pride goeth before destruction,

And haughtiness cometh before a fall.

The contrast is לפני כבוד ענוה, [Pro
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#033), according to which the
"haughtiness comes before a fall" in [Pro
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#022) is expanded into the antithetic
distich. שׁבר means the fracture of the limbs, destruction of the
person. A Latin proverb says, "Magna cadunt, inflata crepant, tumefacta
premuntur."

(Note: An expression of similar meaning is אחרי דרגא תביר = after Darga
(to rise up) comes tebı̂r (breaking = destruction); cf. Zunz, in Geiger's
Zeitschrift, vi. 315ff.)

Here being dashed in pieces and overthrown correspond. שׁבר means
neither bursting (Hitzig) nor shipwreck (Ewald). כשּׁלון (like בּטּחון,
זכּרון, etc.), from כּשׁל or נכשׁל, to totter, and hence, as a
consequence, to come to ruin, is a ἅπαχ λεγ. This proverb, which stands
in the very centre of the Book of Proverbs, is followed by another in
praise of humility.

[Proverbs 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 16:19</span></span>

19 Better in humility to dwell among sufferers,

Than to divide spoil among the proud.

The form שׁפל is here not adj. as [Pro
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#023) (from שׁפל, like חסר, [Pro
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#032), from חסר), but inf. (like [Ecc
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014), and חסר, defectio, 10:21).
There existed here also no proper reason for changing עניּים (Chethı̂b)
into ענוים; Hitzig is right in saying that עני may also be taken in the
sense of ענו \[the idea "sufferer" is that which mediates\], and that
here the inward fact of humility and the outward of dividing spoil,
stand opposed to one another. It is better to live lowly, i.e., with a
mind devoid of earthly pride (Demut \[humility\] comes from do with the
deep e, diu, servant), among men who have experience of the vanity of
earthly joys, than, intoxicated with pride, to enjoy oneself amid
worldly wealth and greatness (cf. [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002)).

[Proverbs 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 16:20</span></span>

20 He that giveth heed to the word will find prosperity;

And he that trusteth in Jahve, blessed is he!

The "word" here is the word κατ ̓ ἐξ., the divine word, for משׂכּיל
על־דּבר is the contrast of בּז לדבר, [Pro
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#013), cf. [Neh
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#013). טוב is meant, as in [Pro
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#020), cf. [Pro
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#021), [Psa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006); to give heed to God's word is
the way to true prosperity. But at last all depends on this, that one
stand in personal fellowship with God by means of faith, which here, as
at [Pro 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#025); [Pro
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#025), is designated after its
specific mark as fiducia. The Mashal conclusion אשׁריו occurs, besides
here, only at [Pro 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#021); [Pro
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#018).

[Proverbs 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 16:21</span></span>

Four proverbs of wisdom with eloquence:

21 The wise in heart is called prudent,

And grace of the lips increaseth learning.

Elsewhere ([Pro 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#005); [Pro
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#009)) הוסיף לקח means more than to gain
learning, i.e., erudition in the ethico-practical sense, for sweetness
of the lips (dulcedo orationis of Cicero) is, as to learning, without
significance, but of so much the greater value for reaching; for grace
of expression, and of exposition, particularly if it be not merely
rhetorical, but, according to the saying pectus disertos facit, coming
out of the heart, is full of mind, it imparts force to the instruction,
and makes it acceptable. Whoever is wise of heart, i.e., of mind or
spirit (לב = the N.T. νοῦς or πνεῦμα), is called, and is truly, נבון
\[learned, intelligent\] (Fleischer compares to this the expression
frequent in Isaiah, "to be named" = to be and appear to be, the Arab.
du'ay lah); but there is a gift which highly increases the worth of this
understanding or intelligence, for it makes it fruitful of good to
others, and that is grace of the lips. On the lips ([Pro
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#013)) of the intelligent wisdom is
found; but the form also, and the whole manner and way in which he gives
expression to this wisdom, is pleasing, proceeding from a deep and
tender feeling for the suitable and the beneficial, and thus he produces
effects so much the more surely, and beneficently, and richly.

[Proverbs 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 16:22</span></span>

22 A fountain of life is understanding to its possessor;

But the correction of fools is folly.

Oetinger, Bertheau, and others erroneously understand מוּסר of the
education which fools bestow upon others; when fools is the subject
spoken of, מוּסר is always the education which is bestowed on them, [Pro
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022); [Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007); cf. [Pro
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#023); [Pro
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#005). Also מוסר does not here mean
education, disciplina, in the moral sense (Symmachus, ἔννοια; Jerome,
doctrina): that which fools gain from education, from training, is
folly, for מוסר is the contrast to מקור חיּים, and has thus the meaning
of correction or chastisement, [Pro
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#010), [Jer
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014). And that the fruits of
understanding ([Pro 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#008), cf. שׂכל
טוב, fine culture, [Pro 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#015))
represented by מקור חיים (vid., [Pro
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#011)) will accrue to the intelligent
themselves, is shown not only by the contrast, but also by the
expression: Scaturigo vitae est intellectus praeditorum eo, of those (=
to those) who are endowed therewith (The lxx well, τοῖς κεκτημένοις).
The man of understanding has in this intellectual possession a fountain
of strength, a source of guidance, and a counsel which make his life
secure, deepen, and adorn it; while, on the contrary, folly punishes
itself by folly (cf. to the form, [Pro
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#024)), for the fool, when he does not
come to himself ([Psa 107:17-22](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#017)),
recklessly destroys his own prosperity.

[Proverbs 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 16:23</span></span>

23 The heat of the wise maketh his mouth wise,

And learning mounteth up to his lips.

Regarding השׂכּיל as causative: to put into the possession of
intelligence, vid., at [Gen 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#006).
Wisdom in the heart produceth intelligent discourse, and, as the
parallel member expresses it, learning mounteth up to the lips, i.e.,
the learning which the man taketh into his lips ([Pro
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#018); cf. [Psa
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#004)) to communicate it to others, for
the contents of the learning, and the ability to communicate it, are
measured by the wisdom of the heart of him who possesses it. One can
also interpret הוסיף as extens. increasing: the heart of the wise
increaseth, i.e., spreads abroad learning, but then בּשׂפתיו ([Psa
119:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#013)) would have been more suitable;
על־שׂפתיו calls up the idea of learning as hovering on the lips, and
thus brings so much nearer, for הוסיף, the meaning of the exaltation of
its worth and impression.

[Proverbs 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 16:24</span></span>

24 A honeycomb are pleasant words,

Sweet to the soul, and healing to the bones.

Honeycomb, i.e., honey flowing from the צוּף, the comb or cell (favus),
is otherwise designated, [Psa 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#011).
מתוק, with מרפּא, is neut. אמרי־נעם are, according to [Pro
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#026), words which love suggests, and
which breathe love. Such words are sweet to the soul of the hearer, and
bring strength and healing to his bones ([Pro
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#030)); for מרפא is not only that
which restores soundness, but also that which preserves and advances it
(cf. θεραπεία, [Rev 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#002)).

[Proverbs 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 16:25</span></span>

A group of six proverbs follows, four of which begin with אישׁ, and five
relate to the utterances of the mouth.

25 There is a way which appears as right to a man;

But the end thereof are the ways of death.

This verse = [Pro 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012).

[Proverbs 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 16:26</span></span>

26 The hunger of the labourer laboureth for him,

For he is urged on by his mouth.

The Syr. translates: the soul of him who inflicts woe itself suffers it,
and from his mouth destruction comes to him; the Targ. brings this
translation nearer the original text (בּיפא, humiliation, instead of
אבדנא, destruction); Luther translates thus also, violently
abbreviating, however. But עמל (from עמל, Arab. 'amila, to exert
oneself, laborare) means, like laboriosus, labouring as well as enduring
difficulty, but not, as πονῶν τινα, causing difficulty, or (Euchel)
occupied with difficulty. And labour and the mouth stand together,
denoting that man labours that the mouth may have somewhat to eat (cf.
[Th2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#010); נפשׁ, however, gains in
this connection the meaning of ψυχὴ ὀρεκτική, and that of desire after
nourishment, vid., at [Pro 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#030); [Pro
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#003)). אכף also joins itself to this
circle of ideas, for it means to urge (Jerome, compulit), properly
(related to כּפף, incurvare, כּפה כּפא, to constrain, necessitate), to
bow down by means of a burden. The Aramaeo-Arab. signification, to
saddle (Schultens: clitellas imposuit ei os suum), is a secondary denom.
(vid., at [Job 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#007)). The Venet. well
renders it after Kimchi: ἐπεὶ κύπτει ἐπ ̓ αὐτὸν τὸ στόμα αὐτοῦ. Thus:
the need of nourishment on the part of the labourer works for him (dat.
commodi like [Isa 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#020)), i.e., helps
him to labour, for (not: if, ἐάν, as Rashi and others) it presses upon
him; his mouth, which will have something to eat, urges him. It is God
who has in this way connected together working and eating. The curse in
sudore vultus tui comedes panem conceals a blessing. The proverb has in
view this reverse side of the blessing in the arrangement of God.

[Proverbs 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 16:27</span></span>

27 A worthless man diggeth evil;

And on his lips is, as it were, scorching fire.

Regarding אישׁ בּליּעל, vid., [Pro
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#012), and regarding כּרה, to dig
round, or to bore out, vid., at [Gen
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005); [Gen
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#005); here the figure, "to dig for
others a pit," [Pro 26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027), [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016), etc.: to dig evil is equivalent
to, to seek to prepare such for others. צרבת Kimchi rightly explains as
a form similar to קשּׁבת; as a subst. it means, [Lev
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#023), the mark of fire (the healed
mark of a carbuncle), here as an adj. of a fire, although not flaming
(אשׁ להבה, [Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005), etc.); yet so
much the hotter, and scorching everything that comes near to it (from
צרב, to be scorched, cogn. שׁרב, to which also שׂרף is perhaps related
as a stronger power, like comburere to adurere). The meaning is clear: a
worthless man, i.e., a man whose disposition and conduct are the direct
contrast of usefulness and piety, uses words which, like an iron glowing
hot, scorches and burns; his tongue is φλογιζομένη ὑπὸ τῆς γεέννης ([Jam
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#006)).

[Proverbs 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 16:28</span></span>

28 A man of falsehood scattereth strife,

And a backbiter separateth confidential friends.

Regarding תּהפּכות (מדבר) אישׁ, vid., [Pro
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#012), and מדון ישׁלּח, [Pro
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014); the thought of 28b is found at
[Pro 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#019). נרגּן (with ן minusculum,
which occurs thrice with the terminal Nun) is a Niphal formation from
רגן, to murmur (cf. נזיד, from זיד), and denotes the whisperer, viz.,
the backbiter, ψίθυρος, Sir. 5:14, ψιθυριστής, susurro; the Arab. nyrj
is abbreviated from it, a verbal stem of נרג (cf. Aram. norgo, an axe,
Arab. naurag, a threshing-sledge = מורג) cannot be proved. Aquila is
right in translating by τονθρυστής, and Theodotion by γόγγυσος, from
רגן, Hiph. נרגּן, γογγύζειν. Regarding אלּוּף, confidential friend,
vid., p. 82; the sing., as [Pro 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#009),
is used in view of the mutual relationship, and מפריד proceeds on the
separation of the one, and, at the same time, of the other from it.
Luther, in translating by "a slanderer makes princes disagree," is in
error, for אלּוּף, φύλαρχος, is not a generic word for prince.

[Proverbs 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 16:29</span></span>

29 A man of violence enticeth his neighbour,

And leadeth him in a way which is not good.

Cf. [Gen 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#008). The subject is not moral
enticement, but enticement to some place or situation which facilitates
to the violent man the carrying out of his violent purpose
(misdemeanour, robbery, extortion, murder). חמס (here with אישׁ at [Pro
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#031)) is the injustice of club-law,
the conduct of him who puts his superior power in godless rudeness in
the place of God, [Hab 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011), cf. [Job
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006). "A way not good" (cf. [Psa
36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005)) is the contradictory contrast of
the good way: one altogether evil and destructive.

[Proverbs 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 16:30</span></span>

30 He who shutteth his eyes to devise falsehood;

He who biteth his lips bringeth evil to pass.

A physiognomical Caveto. The ἁπ. λεγ. עצה is connected with עצם, [Isa
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#015) (Arab. transp. ghamḍ),
comprimere, formed from it. Regarding קרץ of lips or eyes, vid., p. 144;
the biting of the lips is the action of the deceitful, and denotes
scorn, malice, knavery. The perf. denotes that he who is seen doing this
has some evil as good as accomplished, for he is inwardly ready for it;
Hitzig suitably compares [Sa1 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#007),
[Sa1 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#033). Our editions (also
Lwenstein) have כּלּה, but the Masora (vid., Mas. finalis, p. 1) numbers
the word among those which terminate in א, and always writes כּלּא.

[Proverbs 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 16:31</span></span>

[Pro 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#031)

31 A bright diadem is a hoary head,

In the way of righteousness it is found -

namely, this bright diadem, this beautiful crown ([Pro
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008)), which silver hair is to him who
has it as the result of his advanced age ([Pro
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#029)), for "thou shalt rise up before
the hoary head," [Lev 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#032); and the
contrast of an early death is to die in a good old age, [Gen
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#015), etc., but a long life is on one
side a self-consequence, and on another the promised reward of a course
of conduct regulated by God's will, God's law, and by the rule of love
to God and love to one's neighbour. From the N.T. standpoint that is
also so far true, as in all the world there is no better established
means of prolonging life than the avoidance of evil; but the clause
corresponding to the O.T. standpoint, that evil punishes itself by a
premature death, and that good is rewarded by long life, has indeed many
exceptions arising from the facts of experience against it, for we see
even the godless in their life of sin attaining to an advanced old age,
and in view of the veiled future it appears only as a one-sided truth,
so that the words, Wisd. 4:9, "discretion is to man the right grey
hairs, and an unstained life is the right old age," which is mediated by
life experiences, such as [Isa 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001).,
stand opposed to the above proverb as its reversed side. That old
Solomonic proverb is, however, true, for it is not subverted; and, in
contrast to self-destroying vice and wickedness; calling forth the
judgment of God, it is and remains true, that whoever would reach an
honoured old age, attains to it in the way of a righteous life and
conduct.

[Pro 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#032)

32 Better one slow to anger than a hero in war;

And whoever is master of his spirit, than he who taketh a city.

Regarding ארך אפּים, vid., [Pro 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#029),
where קצר־רוּח was the parallel of the contrast. The comparison is true
as regards persons, with reference to the performances expressed, and
(since warlike courage and moral self-control may be united in one
person) they are properly those in which the טוב determines the moral
estimate. In Pirke Aboth iv. 1, the question, "Who is the hero?" is
answered by, "he who overcomes his desire," with reference to this
proverb, for that which is here said of the ruling over the passion of
anger is true of all affections and passions.

"Yet he who reigns within himself, and rules

Passions, desires, and fears, is more a king

Which every wise and virtuous man attains."

(Note: Milton's Paradise Regained, ii. 466-8.)

On the other side, the comparison is suggested:

Break your head, not so sore;

Break your will - that is more.

(Note: "Zerbrich den Kopf dir nicht so sehr; Zerbreich den Willen - das
ist mehr." - Matth. Claudius)

[Pro 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033)

33 One casts the lot into the lap;

But all its decision cometh from Jahve.

The Tra knows only in one instance an ordeal (a judgment of God) as a
right means of proof, Num 5:12-31. The lot is nowhere ordained by it,
but its use is supported by a custom running parallel with the Mosaic
law; it was used not only in private life, but also in manifold ways
within the domain of public justice, as well as for the detection of the
guilty, [Jos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014)., [Sa1
14:40-42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#040). So that the proverb [Pro
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#018) says the same thing of the lot
that is said in the Epistle to the Heb; [Heb
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#016), of the oath. The above proverb
also explains the lot for an ordeal, for it is God who directs and
orders it that it fall out thus and not otherwise. A particular sanction
of the use of the lot does not lie in this, but it is only said, that
where the lot is cast, all the decision that results from it is
determined by God. That is in all cases true; but whether the
challenging of the divine decision in such a way be right in this or
that case is a question, and in no case would one, on the contrary,
venture to make the person of the transgressor discoverable by lot, and
let it decide regarding human life. But antiquity judged this matter
differently, as e.g., the Book of Jonah (chap. 1) shows; it was a
practice, animated by faith, in God's government of the world, which, if
it did not observe the boundary between faith and superstition, yet
stood high above the unbelief of the "Enlightenment." Like the Greek
κόλπος, חיק (from חוּק, Arab. ḥaḳ, khaḳ, to encompass, to stretch out)
means, as it is commonly taken, gremium as well as sinus, but the latter
meaning is the more sure; and thus also here it is not the lap as the
middle of the body, so that one ought to think on him who casts the lot
as seated, but also not the lap of the garment, but, like [Pro
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027), cf. [Isa
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011), the swelling, loose, external
part of the clothing covering the bosom (the breast), where the lot
covered by it is thrown by means of shaking and changing, and whence it
is drawn out. The construction of the passive הוּטל (from טוּל = Arab.
tall, to throw along) with the object. accus. follows the old scheme,
[Gen 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#018), and has its reason in this,
that the Semitic passive, formed by the change of vowels, has not wholly
given up the governing force of the active. משׁפּט signifies here
decision as by the Urim and Thummim, [Num
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021), but which was no lot-apparatus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 17](pro017)

</div>
