<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro024)  [Next](pro026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#001)

[Proverbs 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 25:1</span></span>

1 These also are proverbs of Solomon,

Which the men of Hezekiah the king of Judah have collected.

Hezekiah, in his concern for the preservation of the national
literature, is the Jewish Pisistratos, and the "men of Hezekiah" are
like the collectors of the poems of Homer, who were employed by
Pisistratos for that purpose. גּם־אלּה is the subject, and in Cod. 1294,
and in the editions of Bomberg 1515, Hartmann 1595, Nissel, Jablonsky,
Michaelis, has Dech. This title is like that of the second supplement,
[Pro 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#023). The form of the name
חזקיּה, abbreviated from יחזקיּהוּ (חזקיּהוּ), is not favourable to the
derivation of the title from the collectors themselves. The lxx
translates: Αὗται αἱ παιδεῖαι Σαλωμῶντος αἱ ἀδιάκριτοι (cf. [Jam
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#017)), ἃς ἐξεγράψαντο οἱ φίλοι
Ἐζεκίου, for which Aquila has ἃς μετῆραν ἄνδρες ἐζεκίου, Jerome,
transtulerunt. העתיק signifies, like (Arab.) nsaḥ, נסח, to snatch away,
to take away, to transfer from another place; in later Heb.: to
transcribe from one book into another, to translate from one language
into another: to take from another place and place together; the Whence?
remains undetermined: according to the anachronistic rendering of the
Midrash מגניזתם, i.e., from the Apocrypha; according to Hitzig, from the
mouths of the people; more correctly Euchel and others: from their
scattered condition, partly oral, partly written. Vid., regarding העתיק,
Zunz, in Deutsch-Morgenl. Zeitsch. xxv. 147f., and regarding the whole
title, vol. i. pp. 5, 6; regarding the forms of proverbs in this second
collection, vol. i. p. 17; regarding their relation to the first, and
their end and aim, vol. i. pp. 25, 26. The first Collection of Proverbs
is a Book for Youth, and this second a Book for the People.

[Proverbs 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 25:2</span></span>

It is characteristic of the purpose of the book that it begins with
proverbs of the king:

It is the glory of God to conceal a thing;

And the glory of the king to search out a matter.

That which is the glory of God and the glory of the king in itself, and
that by which they acquire glory, stand here contrasted. The glory of
God consists in this, to conceal a matter, i.e., to place before men
mystery upon mystery, in which they become conscious of the limitation
and insufficiency of their knowledge, so that they are constrained to
acknowledge, [Deu 29:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#028), that "secret
things belong unto the Lord our God." There are many things that are
hidden and are known only to God, and we must be contented with that
which He sees it good to make known to us.

(Note: Cf. von Lasaulx, Philosophie der Geschichte, p. 128f.: "God and
Nature love to conceal the beginning of things.")

The honour of kings, on the contrary, who as pilots have to steer the
ship of the state ([Pro 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#014)), and as
supreme judges to administer justice ([Kg1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#009)), consists in this, to search out
a matter, i.e., to place in the light things that are problematical and
subjects of controversy, in conformity with their high position, with
surpassing intelligence, and, in conformity with their responsibility,
with conscientious zeal. The thought that it is the glory of God to veil
Himself in secrecy ([Isa 55:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001) :15;
cf. [Kg1 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#012)), and of the king, on
the contrary, not to surround himself with an impenetrable nimbus, and
to withdraw into inaccessible remoteness - this thought does not,
immediately at least, lie in the proverb, which refers that which is
concealed, and its contrary, not to the person, but to a matter. Also
that God, by the concealment of certain things, seeks to excite to
activity human research, is not said in this proverb; for 2b does not
speak of the honour of wise men, but of kings; the searching out, 2b,
thus does not refer to that which is veiled by God. But since the honour
of God at the same time as the welfare of men, and the honour of the
king as well as the welfare of his people, is to be thought of, the
proverb states that God and the king promote human welfare in very
different ways - God, by concealing that which sets limits to the
knowledge of man, that he may not be uplifted; and the king, by
research, which brings out the true state of the matter, and thereby
guards the political and social condition against threatening danger,
secret injuries, and the ban of offences unatoned for. This proverb,
regarding the difference between that which constitutes the honour of
God and of the king, is followed by one which refers to that in which
the honour of both is alike.

[Proverbs 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 25:3</span></span>

3 The heavens in height, and the earth in depth,

And the heart of kings are unsearchable.

This is a proverb in the priamel-form, vid., p. 13. The praeambulum
consists of three subjects to which the predicate אין חקר \[= no
searching out\] is common. "As it is impossible to search through the
heavens and through the earth, so it is also impossible to search the
hearts of common men (like the earth), and the hearts of kings (like the
heavens)" (Fleischer). The meaning, however, is simple. Three
unsearchable things are placed together: the heavens, with reference to
their height, stretching into the impenetrable distance; the earth, in
respect to its depth, reaching down into the immeasurable abyss; and the
heart of kings - it is this third thing which the proverb particularly
aims at - which in themselves, and especially with that which goes on in
their depths, are impenetrable and unsearchable. The proverb is a
warning against the delusion of being flattered by the favour of the
king, which may, before one thinks of it, be withdrawn or changed even
into the contrary; and a counsel to one to take heed to his words and
acts, and to see to it that he is influenced by higher motives than by
the fallacious calculation of the impression on the view and disposition
of the king. The ל in both cases is the expression of the reverence, as
e.g., at [Ch2 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#022). וארץ, not = והארץ,
but like [Isa 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019); [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017), for וארץ, which generally
occurs only in the st. constr.

[Proverbs 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 25:4</span></span>

There now follows an emblematic (vid., vol. i. p. 10) tetrastich:

4 Take away the dross from silver,

So there is ready a vessel for the goldsmith;

5 Take away the wicked from the king,

And his throne is established by righteousness.

The form הגו (cf. the inf. Poal הגו, [Isa
59:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#013)) is regarded by Schultens as
showing a ground-form הגו; but there is also found e.g., עשׂו, whose
ground-form is עשׂי; the verb הגה, R. הג (whence Arab. hajr, discedere),
cf. יגה (whence הגה, semovit, [Sa2
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#013) = Syr. âwagy, cf. Arab. âwjay,
to withhold, to abstain from), signifies to separate, withdraw; here, of
the separation of the סיגים, the refuse, i.e., the dross (vid.,
regarding the plena scriptio, Baer's krit. Ausg. des Jesaia, under [Pro
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#022)); the goldsmith is designated by
the word צרף, from צרף morf, to turn, change, as he who changes the as
yet drossy metal by means of smelting, or by purification in water, into
that which is pure. In 5a הגה is, as at [Isa
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#008), transferred to a process of
moral purification; what kind of persons are to be removed from the
neighbourhood of the king is shown by [Isa
1:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#022). Here also (as at Isa. l.c.)
the emblem or figure of [Pro 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#004) is
followed in [Pro 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005) by its moral
antitype aimed at. The punctuation of both verses is wonderfully fine
and excellent. In [Pro 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#004), ויצא is
not pointed ויצא, but as the consecutive modus ויּצא; this first part of
the proverb refers to a well-known process of art: the dross is
separated from the silver (inf. absol., as [Pro
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#007); [Pro
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#022)), and so a vessel (utensil)
proceeds from the goldsmith, for he manufactures pure silver; the ל is
here similarly used as the designation of the subject in the passive,
[Pro 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#013); [Pro
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#020). In [Pro
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#005), on the contrary, ויּכּון
(ויּכּן) is not the punctuation used, but the word is pointed
indicatively ויכּון; this second part of the proverb expresses a moral
demand (inf. absol. in the sense of the imperative, Gesen. 131, 4b like
[Pro 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#012), or an optative or
concessive conjunction): let the godless be removed, לפני מלך, i.e., not
from the neighbourhood of the king, for which the words are מלּפני מלך;
also not those standing before the king, i.e., in his closest
neighbourhood (Ewald, Bertheau); but since, in the absolute, הגה, not an
act of another in the interest of the king, but of the king himself, is
thought of: let the godless be removed from before the king, i.e.,
because he administers justice (Hitzig), or more generally: because
after that Psalm (101), which is the "mirror of princes," he does not
suffer him to come into his presence. Accordingly, the punctuation is
בּצּדק, not בּצדק ([Pro 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#012));
because such righteousness is meant as separates the רשׁע from it and
itself from him, as [Isa 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005) (vid.,
Hitzig), where the punctuation of בּחסד denotes that favour towards Moab
seeking protection.

[Proverbs 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 25:6</span></span>

There now follows a second proverb with מלך, as the one just explained
was a second with מלכים: a warning against arrogance before kings and
nobles.

6 Display not thyself before the king,

And approach not to the place of the great.

7 For better than one say to thee, "Come up hither,"

Than that they humble thee before a prince,

Whom thine eyes had seen.

The גּדלים are those, like [Pro 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#016),
who by virtue of their descent and their office occupy a lofty place of
honour in the court and in the state. נדיב (vid., under [Pro
8:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#016)) is the noble in disposition and
the nobleman by birth, a general designation which comprehends the king
and the princes. The Hithpa. התהדּר is like the reflex forms [Pro
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#009); [Pro
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#007), for it signifies to conduct
oneself as הדוּר or נהדּר (vid., [Pro
20:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#029)), to play the part of one highly
distinguished. עמד has, 6b, its nearest signification: it denotes, not
like נצּב, standing still, but approaching to, e.g., [Jer
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#002). The reason given in [Pro
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#007) harmonizes with the rule of
wisdom, [Luk 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#010).: better is the
saying to thee, i.e., that one say to thee (Ewald, 304b), עלה הנּה (so
the Olewejored is to be placed), προσανάβηθι ἀνώτερον (thus in Luke),
than that one humble thee לפני נדיב, not: because of a prince (Hitzig),
for לפני nowhere means either pro ([Pro
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#018)) or propter, but before a
prince, so that thou must yield to him (cf. [Pro
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#019)), before him whom thine eyes had
seen, so that thou art not excused if thou takest up the place
appropriate to him. Most interpreters are at a loss to explain this
relative. Luther: "which thine eyes must see," and Schultens: ut videant
oculi tui. Michaelis, syntactically admissible: quem videre gestiverunt
oculi tui, viz., to come near to him, according to Bertheau, with the
request that he receives some high office. Otherwise Fleischer: before
the king by whom thou and thine are seen, so much the more felt is the
humiliation when it comes upon one after he has pressed so far forward
that he can be perceived by the king. But נדיב is not specially the
king, but any distinguished personage whose place he who has pressed
forward has taken up, and from which he must now withdraw when the right
possessor of it comes and lays claim to his place. אשׁר is never used in
poetry without emphasis. Elsewhere it is equivalent to נתנש, quippe
quem, here equivalent to רפנש, quem quidem. Thine eyes have seen him in
the company, and thou canst say to thyself, this place belongs to him,
according to his rank, and not to thee - the humiliation which thou
endurest is thus well deserved, because, with eyes to see, thou wert so
blind. The lxx, Syr., Symmachus (who reads 8a, לרב, εις πλῆθος), and
Jerome, refer the words "whom thine eyes had seen" to the proverb
following; but אשר does not appropriately belong to the beginning of a
proverb, and on the supposition that the word לרב is generally adopted,
except by Symmachus, they are also heterogeneous to the following
proverb:

[Proverbs 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 25:8</span></span>

8 Go not forth hastily to strife,

That it may not be said, "What wilt thou do in the end thereof,

When now thy neighbour bringeth disgrace upon thee?"

9 Art thou striving with thy neighbour? strive with him,

But disclose not the secret of another;

10 That he who heareth it may not despise thee,

And thine evil name depart no more.

Whether ריב in לריב is infin., as at [Jdg
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#022), or subst., as at [Ch2
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2019.htm#008), is not decided: ad litigandum
and ad litem harmonize. As little may it be said whether in אל־תּצא \[go
not forth\], a going out to the gate (court of justice), or to the place
where he is to be met who is to be called to account, is to be thought
of; in no respect is the sense metaphorical: let not thyself transgress
the bounds of moderation, ne te laisse pas emporter; יצא לרב is
correlate to בּוא לרוב, [Jdg 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#022).
The use of פּן in 8b is unprecedented. Euchel and Lwenstein regard it as
an imper.: reflect upon it (test it); but פּנה does not signify this,
and the interjectional הס does not show the possibility of an imper. Kal
פּן, and certainly not פּן (פּן). The conj. פּן is the connecting form
of an original subst. (= panj), which signifies a turning away. It is
mostly connected with the future, according to which Nolde, Oetinger,
Ewald, and Bertheau explain מה indefinite, something, viz., unbecoming.
In itself, it may, perhaps, be possible that פן מה was used in the sense
of ne quid (Venet. μήποτέ τι); but "to do something," for "to commit
something bad," is improbable; also in that case we would expect the
words to be thus: פן תעשׂה מה. Thus מה will be an interrogative, as at
[Sa1 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#010) (vid., Keil), and the
expression is brachyogical: that thou comest not into the situation not
to know what thou oughtest to do (Rashi: פן תבא לידי לא תדע הם לעשׂות),
or much rather anakoluth.; for instead of saying פּן־לא תדע מה־לּעשׂות,
the poet, shunning this unusual פן לא, adopts at once the interrogative
form: that it may not be said at the end thereof (viz., of the strife);
what wilt thou do? (Umbreit, Stier, Elster, Hitzig, and Zckler). This
extreme perplexity would occur if thy neighbour (with whom thou
disputest so eagerly and unjustly) put thee to shame, so that thou
standest confounded (כלם, properly to hurt, French blesser). If now the
summons 9a follows this warning against going out for the purpose of
strife: fight out thy conflict with thy neighbour, then ריבך, set forth
with emphasis, denotes not such a strife as one is surprised into, but
that into which one is drawn, and the tuam in causam tuam is accented in
so far as 9b localizes the strife to the personal relation of the two,
and warns against the drawing in of an אחר, i.e., in this case, of a
third person: and expose not the secret of another אל־תּגל (after
Michlol 130a, and Ben-Bileam, who places the word under the 'פ'פתחין בס,
is vocalized with Pathach on ג, as is Cod. 1294, and elsewhere in
correct texts). One ought not to bring forward in a dispute, as material
of proof and means of acquittal, secrets entrusted to him by another, or
secrets which one knows regarding the position and conduct of another;
for such faithlessness and gossiping affix a stigma on him who avails
himself of them, in the public estimation, [Pro
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#010); that he who hears it may not
blame thee (חסּד = Aram. חסּד, vid., under [Pro
14:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#034)), and the evil report concerning
thee continue without recall. Fleischer: ne infamia tua non recedat
i.e., nunquam desinat per ora hominum propagari, with the remark, "in
דבּה, which properly means in stealthy creeping on of the rumour, and in
שׁוּב lies a (Arab.) tarshyḥ," i.e., the two ideas stand in an
interchangeable relation with a play upon the words: the evil rumour,
once put in circulation, will not again retrace its steps; but, on the
contrary, as Virgil says:

Mobilitate viget viresque acquirit eundo.

In fact, every other can sooner rehabilitate himself in the public
estimation that he who is regarded as a prattler, who can keep no
secret, or as one so devoid of character that he makes public what he
ought to keep silent, if he can make any use of it in his own interest.
In regard to such an one, the words are continually applicable, hic
niger est, hunc tu, Romane, caveto, [Pro
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#019). The lxx has, instead of ודבתך
10b, read ומריבתך, and translated it with the addition of a long
appendix: "They quarrel, and hostilities will not cease, but will be to
thee like death. Kindness and friendship deliver, let these preserve
thee, that thou mayest not become one meriting reproaches (Jerome: ne
exprobrabilis fias), but guard thy ways, εὐσυναλλάκτως."

[Proverbs 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 25:11</span></span>

The first emblematical distich of this collection now follows:

11 Golden apples in silver salvers.

A word spoken according to its circumstances.

The Syr. and Jerome vocalize דּבר דּבר, and the Targ. דּבר דּבר; both
are admissible, but the figure and that which is represented are not
placed in so appropriate a relation as by דּבר דּבר; the wonderfully
penetrating expression of the text, which is rendered by the traditional
nikkud, agrees here with the often occurring דּבר (= מדבּר), also its
passive דּבוּר. The defective writing is like, e.g., בּטח, [Psa
112:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#007), and gives no authority to
prefer דּבּר = מדבּר (Bttcher). That דּברי, corresponding to the plur.
תּפּוּחי, is not used, arises from this, that דבר is here manifestly not
a word without connection, but a sentence of motive, contents, and aim
united. For על־אפניו, the meaning of בּעתּו presents itself from [Pro
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#023), according to which, among the
old interpreters, Symmachus, Jerome, and Luther render "at its time."
Abulwald compared the Arab. âiffan (âibban, also 'iffan, whence 'aly
'iffanihi, justo tempore), which, as Orelli has shown in his Synon. der
Zeitbegriffe, p. 21f., comes from the roots af ab, to drive (from
within) going out, time as consisting of individual moments, the one of
which drives on the other, and thus denotes time as a course of
succession. One may not hesitate as to the prep. על, for אפנים would,
like עתּות, denote the circumstances, the relations of the time, and על
would, as e.g., in על־פּי and על־דּברתי, have the meaning of κατά. But
the form אפניו, which like חפניו, [Lev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#012), sounds dualistic, appears to
oppose this. Hitzig supposes that אפנים may designate the time as a
circle, with reference to the two arches projecting in opposite
directions, but uniting themselves together; but the circle which time
describes runs out from one point, and, moreover, the Arab. names for
time âfaf, âifaf, and the like, which interchange with âiffan, show that
this does not proceed from the idea of circular motion. Ewald and others
take for אפניו the meaning of wheels (the Venet., after Kimchi, ἐπὶ τῶν
τροχῶν αὐτῆς), whereby the form is to be interpreted as dual of אפן =
אופן, "a word driven on its wheels," - so Ewald explains: as the potter
quickly and neatly forms a vessel on his wheels, thus a fit and quickly
framed word. But דבר signifies to drive cattle and to speak = to cause
words to follow one another (cf. Arab. syâḳ, pressing on = flow of
words), but not to drive = to fashion in that artisan sense. Otherwise
Bttcher, "a word fitly spoken, a pair of wheels perfect in their
motion," to which he compares the common people "in their jesting," and
adduces all kinds of heterogeneous things partly already rejected by
Orelli (e.g., the Homeric ἐπιτροχάδην, which is certainly no
commendation). But "jesting" is not appropriate here; for what man
conceives of human speech as a carriage, one only sometimes compares
that of a babbler to a sledge, or says of him that he shoves the cart
into the mud.

(Note: It is something different when the weaver's beam, minwâl in
Arab., is metaph. for kind and manner: they are 'aly minwâl wâḥad, is
equivalent to they are of a like calibre, Arab. kalib, which is derived
from καλόπους (καλοπόδιον), a shoemaker's last.)

Is it then thus decided that אפניו is a dual? It may be also like
אשׂריו, the plur. especially in the adverbial expression before us,
which readily carried the abbreviation with it (vid., Gesen. Lehrgebr.
134, Anm. 17). On this supposition, Orelli interprets אפן from אפן, to
turn, in the sense of turning about, circumstances, and reminds of this,
that in the post-bibl. Heb. this word is used as indefinitely as τρόπος,
e.g., באופן מה, quodammodo (vid., Reland's Analecta Rabbinica, 1723, p.
126). This late Talm. usage of the word can, indeed, signify nothing as
to the bibl. word; but that אפנים, abbreviated אפנים, can mean
circumstances, is warranted by the synon. אודות. Aquila and Theodotion
appear to have thus understood it, for their ἐπὶ ἁρμόζουσιν αὐτῷ, which
they substitute for the colourless οὕτως of the lxx, signifies: under
the circumstances, in accordance therewith. So Orelli thus rightly
defines: "אפנים denote the âḥwâl, circumstances and conditions, as they
form themselves in each turning of time, and those which are ascribed to
דבר by the suffix are those to which it is proper, and to which it fits
in. Consequently a word is commended which is spoken whenever the
precise time arrives to which it is adapted, a word which is thus spoken
at its time as well as at its place (van Dyk, fay mahllah), and the
grace of which is thereby heightened." Aben Ezra's explanation, על פנים
הראויים, in the approved way, follows the opinion of Abulwald and
Parchon, that אפניו is equivalent to פניו (cf. aly wajhihi, sua
ratione), which is only so far true, that both words are derived from R.
פן, to turn. In the figure, it is questionable whether by תּפּוּחי זהב,
apples of gold, or gold-coloured apples, are meant (Luther: as
pomegranates and citrons); thus oranges are meant, as at [Zac
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#012). הזּהב denotes golden oil. Since
כסף, besides, signifies a metallic substance, one appears to be under
the necessity of thinking of apples of gold; cf. the brazen
pomegranates. But (1) apples of gold of natural size and massiveness are
obviously too great to make it probable that such artistic productions
are meant; (2) the material of the emblem is usually not of less value
than that of which it is the emblem (Fleischer); (3) the Scriptures are
fond of comparing words with flowers and fruits, [Pro
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#031); [Pro
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#014); [Pro
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#002); [Pro
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#020), and to the essence of the word
which is rooted in the spirit, and buds and grows up to maturity through
the mouth and the lips, the comparison with natural fruits corresponds
better in any case than with artificial. Thus, then, we interpret
"golden apples" as the poetic name for oranges, aurea mala, the Indian
name of which with reference to or (gold) was changed into the French
name orange, as our pomeranze is equivalent to pomum aurantium.
משׂכּיּות is the plur. of משׂכּית, already explained, [Pro
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#011); the word is connected neither
with שׂכך, to twist, wreathe (Ewald, with most Jewish interpreters)

(Note: On this proceeds also the beautiful interpretation by Maimuni in
the preface to More Nebuchim: Maskiyyth sont des ciselures rticulaires,
etc., according to Munk's translation from the Arab. text, vid., Kohut's
Pers. Pentateuch-Uebers. (1871), p. 356. Accordingly Jewish interpreters
(e.g., Elia Wilna) understand under אפניו the four kinds of writing:
פשׁט, רמז, דרושׁ, and סוד, which are comprehended under the memorial
word פרדס.)

nor with שׂכה, to pierce, infigere (Redslob, vid., under [Psa
73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007)); it signifies medal or ornament,
from שׂכה, to behold (cf. שׂכיּה, θέα = θέαμα, [Isa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#006)), here a vessel which is a delight
to the eyes. In general the Venet. rightly, ἐν μορφώμασιν ἀργύρου;
Symmachus and Theodotion, more in accordance with the fundamental idea,
ἐν περιβλέπτοις ἀργύρου; the Syr. and Targ. specially: in vessels of
embossed work (נגוּדי, from נגד, to draw, to extend); yet more specially
the lxx, ἐν ὁρμίσκῳ σαρδίου, on a chain of cornelian stone, for which,
perhaps, ἐν φορμίσκῳ (Jger) ἀργυρίου, in a little silver basket, is the
original phrase. Aquila, after Bereschith rabba c. 93, translates by
μῆλα χρύσου ἐν δίσκοις ἀργυφίου. Jerome: in lectis argenteis, appears to
have fallen into the error of taking משב for משכב, lectus. Hitzig here
emends a self-made ἅπαξ λεγ. Luther's "golden apples in silver baskets"
is to be preferred.

(Note: A favourite expression of Goethe's, vid., Bchmann's Geflgelte
Worte, 1688.)

A piece of sculpture which represents fruit by golden little disks or
points within groups of leaves is not meant - for the proverb does not
speak of such pretty little apples - but golden oranges are meant. A
word in accordance with the circumstances which occasion it, is like
golden oranges which are handed round in silver salvers or on silver
waiters. Such a word is, as adopting another figure we might say, like a
well-executed picture, and the situation into which it appropriately
fits is like its elegant frame. The comparison with fruit is, however,
more significant; it designates the right word as a delightful gift, in
a way which heightens its impression and its influences.

[Proverbs 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 25:12</span></span>

Another proverb continues the commendation of the effective word; for it
represents, in emblem, the interchangeable relation of speaker and
hearer:

A golden earring and an ornament of fine gold -

A wise preacher to an ear that heareth;

i.e., as the former two ornaments form a beautiful ensemble, so the
latter two, the wise preacher of morality and an attentive ear, form a
harmonious whole: על, down upon, is explained by [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002). נזם, at [Pro
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#012), standing along with באף, meant
a ring for the nose; but here, as elsewhere, it means an earring (lxx,
Jerome, Venet.), translated by the Syr. and Targ. by קדשׁא, because it
serves as a talisman. A ring for the nose

(Note: Vid., Gieger's Zeitschrift, 1872, pp. 45-48, where it is
endeavoured to be shown that נזם, as an earring, is rejected from the
later biblical literature, because it had become "an object used in the
worship of idols," and that the word was used only of a ring for the
nose as a permissible ornament, while עגיל was used for the earring. But
that does not apply to the Solomonic era; for that, in the passage under
review, נזם signifies a ring for the nose, is only a supposition of
Geiger's, because it accords with his construction of history.)

cannot also be here thought of, because this ornament is an emblem of
the attentive ear: willingly accepted chastisement or instruction is an
ear-ornament to him who hears (Stier). But the gift of the wise
preacher, which consists in rightly dividing the word of truth, [Ti2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#015), is as an ornament for the neck
or the breast חלי (= Arab. khaly, fem. חליה = ḥilyt), of fine gold
(כּתם, jewel, then particularly precious gold, from כּתם, Arab. katam,
recondere).

(Note: Hitzig compares Arab. kumêt; but this means bayard, as Lagarde
remarks, the Greek κόμαιθος; and if by כתם gold foxes (gold money) are
to be thought of, yet they have nothing whatever to do with bayards
(red-brown horses); cf. Beohmer, de colorum nominibus equinorum, in his
Roman. Stud. Heft 2, 1872, p. 285.)

The Venet. well: κόσμος ἀπυροχρύσου (fine gold); on the contrary
(perhaps in want of another name for gold), כתם is translated, by the
lxx and Syr., by sardine; by the Targ., by emerald; and by Jerome, by
margaritum.

(Note: Another Greek translates πίνωσις χρυσῆ. This πίνωσις is a
philological mystery, the solution of which has been attempted by
Bochart, Letronne, and Field.)

It looks well when two stand together, the one of whom has golden
earrings, and the other wears a yet more precious golden necklace - such
a beautiful mutual relationship is formed by a wise speaker and a hearer
who listens to his admonitions.

[Proverbs 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 25:13</span></span>

The following comparative tristich refers to faithful service rendered
by words:

Like the coolness of snow on a harvest day

Is a faithful messenger to them that send him:

He refresheth the soul of his master.

The coolness (צנּה from צנן, צנן, to be cool) of snow is not that of a
fall of snow, which in the time of harvest would be a calamity, but of
drink cooled with snow, which was brought from Lebanon or elsewhere,
from the clefts of the rocks; the peasants of Damascus store up the
winter's snow in a cleft of the mountains, and convey it in the warm
months to Damascus and the coast towns. Such a refreshment is a faithful
messenger (vid., regarding ציר, [Pro
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#017), here following קציר as a kind
of echo) to them that send him (vid., regarding this plur. at [Pro
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#026), cf. [Pro
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#021)); he refreshes, namely (ו
explicativum, as e.g., [Eze 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#019),
etenim filius, like the ו et quidem, [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011), different from the ו of
conditional clause [Pro 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#003)), the
soul of his master; for the answer which he brings to his master
refreshes him, as does a drink of snow-cooled water on a hot harvest
day.

[Proverbs 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 25:14</span></span>

This proverb relates to the word which promises much, but remains
unaccomplished:

Clouds and wind, and yet no rain -

A man who boasteth with a false gift.

Incorrectly the lxx and Targ. refer the predicate contained in the
concluding word of the first line to all the three subjects; and equally
incorrectly Hitzig, with Heidenheim, interprets מתּת שׁקר, of a gift
that has been received of which one boasts, although it is in reality of
no value, because by a lying promise a gift is not at all obtained. But
as לחם כזבים, [Pro 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#003), is bread
which, as it were, deceives him who eats it, so מתת שׁקר is a gift which
amounts to a lie, i.e., a deceitful pretence. Rightly Jerome: vir
gloriosus et promissa non complens. In the Arab. ṣaliḍ, which Fleischer
compares, the figure 14a and its counterpart 14b are amalgamated, for
this word signifies both a boaster and a cloud, which is, as it were,
boastful, which thunders much, but rains only sparsely or not at all.
Similar is the Arab. khullab, clouds which send forth lightning, and
which thunder, but yet give no rain; we say to one, magno promissor
hiatu: thou art (Arab.) kabaraḳn khullabin, i.e., as Lane translates it:
"Thou art only like lightning with which is no rain." Schultens refers
to this proverbial Arabic, fulmen nubis infecundae. Liberality is called
(Arab.) nadnay, as a watering, cf. [Pro
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#025). The proverb belongs to this
circle of figures. It is a saying of the German peasants, "Wenn es sich
wolket, so will es regnen" \[when it is cloudy, then there will be
rain\]; but according to another saying, "nicht alle Wolken regnen" \[it
is not every cloud that yields rain\]. "There are clouds and wind
without rain."

[Proverbs 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 25:15</span></span>

Three proverbs follow, which have this in common, that they exhort to
moderation:

15 By forbearance is a judge won over,

And a gentle tongue breaketh the bone.

קצין (vid., [Pro 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#007)) does not denote
any kind of distinguished person, but a judge or a person occupying a
high official position. And פּתּה does not here mean, to talk over or
delude; but, like [Jer 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#007), to
persuade, to win over, to make favourable to one; for ארך אפּים (vid.,
[Pro 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#029)) is dispassionate calmness,
not breaking out into wrath, which finally makes it manifest that he who
has become the object of accusation, suspicion, or of disgrace, is one
who nevertheless has right on his side; for indecent, boisterous passion
injures even a just cause; while, on the contrary, a quiet, composed,
thoughtful behaviour, which is not embarrassed by injustice, either
experienced or threatened, in the end secures a decision in our favour.
"Patience overcomes" is an old saying. The soft, gentle tongue (cf. רך,
[Pro 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#001)) is the opposite of a
passionate, sharp, coarse one, which only the more increases the
resistance which it seeks to overcome. "Patience," says a German
proverb, "breaks iron;" another says, "Patience is stronger than a
diamond." So here: a gentle tongue breaketh the bone (גּרם = עצם, as at
[Pro 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#022)), it softens and breaks to
pieces that which is hardest. Sudden anger makes the evil still worse;
long-suffering, on the contrary, operates convincingly; cutting,
immoderate language, embitters and drives away; gentle words, on the
contrary, persuade, if not immediately, yet by this, that they remain as
it were unchangeable.

[Proverbs 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 25:16</span></span>

Another way of showing self-control:

Hast thou found honey? eat thy enough,

Lest thou be surfeited with it, and vomit it up.

Honey is pleasant, salutary, and thus to be eaten sparingly, [Pro
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#013), but ne quid nimis. Too much is
unwholesome, 27a: αὐτοῦ καὶ μέλιτος τὸ πλέον ἐστὶ χολή, i.e., even honey
enjoyed immoderately is as bitter as gall; or, as Freidank says: des
honges seze erdruizet s mans ze viel geniuzet \[the sweetness of honey
offends when one partakes too much of it\]. Eat if thou hast found any
in the forest or the mountains, דּיּךּ, thy enough (lxx τὸ ἱκανόν; the
Venet. τὸ ἀρκοῦν σοι), i.e., as much as appeases thine appetite, that
thou mayest not become surfeited and vomit it out (והקאתו with Tsere,
and א quiesc., as at [Sa2 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#010); vid.,
Michlol 116a, and Parchon under קוא). Fleischer, Ewald, Hitzig, and
others, place [Pro 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#016) and [Pro
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#017) together, so as to form an
emblematic tetrastich; but he who is surfeited is certainly, in [Pro
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#016), he who willingly enjoys, and in
17, he to whom it is given to enjoy without his will; and is not, then,
[Pro 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#016) a sentence complete in
itself in meaning? That it is not to be understood in a purely dietetic
sense (although thus interpreted it is a rule not to be despised), is
self-evident. As one can suffer injury from the noblest of food if he
overload his stomach therewith, so in the sphere of science,
instruction, edification, there is an injurious overloading of the mind;
we ought to measure what we receive by our spiritual want, the right
distribution of enjoyment and labour, and the degree of our ability to
change it in succum et sanguinem, - else it at last awakens in us
dislike, and becomes an evil to us.

[Proverbs 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 25:17</span></span>

This proverb is of a kindred character to the foregoing. "If thy comrade
eats honey," says an Arabic proverb quoted by Hitzig, "do not lick it
all up." But the emblem of honey is not continued in this verse:

Make rare thy foot in thy neighbour's house,

Lest he be satiated with thee, and hate thee.

To make one's foot rare or dear from a neighbour's house is equivalent
to: to enter it seldom, and not too frequently; הוקר includes in itself
the idea of keeping at a distance (Targ. כּלה רגלך; Symmachus,
ὑπόστειλον; and another: φίμωσον πόδα σου), and מן has the sense of the
Arab. 'an, and is not the comparative, as at [Isa
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#012) : regard thy visit dearer than
the house of a neighbour (Heidenheim). The proverb also is significant
as to the relation of friend to friend, whose reciprocal love may be
turned into hatred by too much intercourse and too great fondness. But
רעך is including a friend, any one with whom we stand in any kind of
intercourse. "Let him who seeks to be of esteem," says a German proverb,
"come seldom;" and that may be said with reference to him whom his heart
draws to another, and also to him who would be of use to another by
drawing him out of the false way and guiding on the right path - a
showing of esteem, a confirming of love by visiting, should not
degenerate into forwardness which appears as burdensome servility, as
indiscreet self-enjoyment; nor into a restless impetuosity, which seeks
at once to gain by force that which one should allow gradually to ripen.

[Proverbs 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 25:18</span></span>

This group of proverbs has the word רע in each of them, connecting them
together. The first of the group represents a false tongue:

[Pro 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#018)

18 A hammer, and a sword, and a sharp arrow -

A man that beareth false witness against his neighbour.

An emblematic, or, as we might also say, an iconological proverb; for
18a is a quodlibet of instruments of murder, and 18b is the subscription
under it: that which these weapons of murder accomplish, is done to his
neighbour by a man who bears false witness against him - he ruins his
estate, takes away his honour, but yet more: he murders him, at one time
more grossly, at another time with more refinement; at one time slowly,
at another time more quickly. מפיץ, from פּוּץ, is equivalent to מפּץ,
and מפּץ from נפץ; the Syr. and Targ. have instead פדועא (פדיעא) from
פּדע = פּצע; the word פּריעא, on which Hitzig builds a conjecture, is an
error of transcription (vid., Lagarde and Levy). The expression, 18b, is
from the decalogue, [Exo 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#016); [Deu
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#017). It is for the most part
translated the same here as there: he who speaks against his neighbour
as a false witness. But rightly the lxx, Jerome, the Venet., and Luther:
false testimony. As אל sA .y signifies both that which is mighty =
power, and Him who is mighty = God, so עד signifies both him who bears
testimony and the testimony that is borne, properly that which repeats
itself and thereby strengthens itself; accordingly we say ענה עד, to
give testimony in reply - viz. to the judge who asks - or generally to
offer testimony (even unasked); as well as ענה לעד, [Deu
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#021), i.e., as evidence (Jerome, pro
testimonio). The prep. ב with this ענה has always the meaning of contra,
also at [Sa1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003); [Gen
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#033) is, however, open to question.

[Pro 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#019)

19 A worthless tooth and an unsteady foot -

Trust in a faithless man in the day of need.

The form רעה (with Mercha on the antepenult), [Isa
29:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#019), takes the place of an inf.
absol.; רעה here (about the tone syllable of which Dech does not decide,
thus without doubt Milra) is certainly not a subst.: tooth of breaking
(Gesen.); for how strange such a designation of a worthless tooth! שׁן
is indeed mas. in [Sa1 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#005), but it
can also be used as fem., as רגל, which is for the most part fem., also
occurs as mas., Gttche. 650. Bttcher, in the new Aehrenlese, and in the
Lehrbuch, takes רעה as fem. of an adj. רע, after the form חל; but חל is
not an adj., and does not form a fem., although it means not merely
profanity, but that which is profane; this is true also of the Aram.
חוּל; for חוּלתּא, [Est 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#009), Targ., is
a female name mistaken by Buxtorf. Are we then to read רעה, with Hitzig,
after the lxx? - an unimportant change. We interpret the traditional
רעה, with Fleischer, as derived from רועעה, from רועע, breaking to
pieces (crumbling), in an intransitive sense. The form מוּעדת is also
difficult. Bttcher regards it as also, e.g., Aben Ezra after the example
of Gecatilia as part. Kal. = מועדת, "only on account of the pausal tone
and the combination of the two letters מע with instead of ." But this
vocal change, with its reasons, is merely imaginary. מוּעדת is the part.
Pual, with the preformative מ struck out, Ewald 169d. The objection that
the part. Pual should be ממעד, after the form מבער, does not prove
anything to the contrary; for מועדת cannot be the fem. so as not to
coincide with the fem. of the part. Kal, cf. besides to the long the
form without the Dagesh יוּקשׁים, [Ecc
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#012) = מיקּשׁים (Arnheim, Gramm. p.
139). רגל מוּעדת is a leg that has become tottering, trembling. He who
in a time of need makes a faithless man his ground of confidence, is
like one who seeks to bite with a broken tooth, and which he finally
crushes, and one who supports himself on a shaking leg, and thus
stumbles and falls. The gen. connection מבטח בוגד signifies either the
ground of confidence consisting in a faithless man, or the confidence
placed in one who is faithless. But, after the Masora, we are to read
here, as at [Psa 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006), מבטח, which
Michlol 184a also confirms, and as it is also found in the Venice 1525,
Basel 1619, and in Norzi. This מבטה is constr. according to Kimchi,
notwithstanding the Kametz; as also משׁקל, [Ezr
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#030) (after Abulwald, Kimchi, and
Norzi). In this passage before us, מבטח בוגד may signify a deceitful
ground of confidence (cf. [Hab 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#005)),
but the two other passages present a genit. connection of the words. We
must thus suppose that the ā of מבטח and משׁקל, in these three passages,
is regarded as fixed, like the of the form (Arab.) mif'âl.

[Pro 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#020)

The above proverb, which connects itself with [Pro
25:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#018), not only by the sound רע, but
also by שׁן, which is assonant with שׁנון, is followed by another with
the catchword רע:

20 He that layeth aside his coat on a day of frost, vinegar on nitre,

And he who welcomes with songs a dejected heart.

Is not this intelligible, sensible, ingenious? All these three things
are wrong. The first is as wrong as the second, and the third, which the
proverb has in view, is morally wrong, for one ought to weep with those
that weep, [Rom 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015); he, on the
contrary, who laughs among those who weep, is, on the most favourable
judgment, a fool. That which is wrong in 20a, according to Bttcher in
the Aehrenlese, 1849, consists in this, that one in severe cold puts on
a fine garment. As if there were not garments which are at the same time
beautiful, and keep warm? In the new Aehrenlese he prefers the reading
משׁנּה: if one changes his coat. But that surely he might well enough
do, if the one were warmer than the other! Is it then impossible that
מעדה, in the connection, means transire faciens = removens? The Kal עדה,
tarnsiit, occurs at [Job 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#008). So
also, in the poetic style. העדה might be used in the sense of the Aram.
אעדּי. Rightly Aquila, Symmachus, περιαιρῶν; the Venet. better,
ἀφαιρούμενος (Mid.). בּגד is an overcoat or mantle, so called from
covering, as לבוּשׁ (R. לב, to fasten, fix), the garment lying next the
body, vid., at [Psa 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019). Thus, as it
is foolish to lay off upper clothing on a frosty day, so it is foolish
also to pour vinegar on nitre; carbonic acid nitre, whether it be
mineral (which may be here thought of) or vegetable, is dissolved in
water, and serves diverse purposes (vid., under [Isa
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#025)); but if one pours vinegar on it,
it is destroyed. לב־רע

(Note: The writing wavers between על לב־רע (cf. על עם־דּל) and על־בל רע
dna )על ע.)

is, at [Pro 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#023) and elsewhere, a
heart morally bad, here a heart badly disposed, one inclined to that
which is evil; for שׁר שׁיר is the contrast of קונן קינה, and always the
consequence of a disposition joyfully excited; the inconsistency lies in
this, that one thinks to cheer a sorrowful heart by merry singing, if
the singing has an object, and is not much more the reckless expression
of an animated pleasure in view of the sad condition of another. שׁיר על
.rehtona signifies, as at [Job 33:27](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#027),
to sing to any one, to address him in singing; cf. דּבּר על, [Jer
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#010), and particularly על־לב, [Hos
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#016); [Isa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#002). The ב of בּשּׁרים is neither the
partitive, [Pro 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#005), nor the
transitive, [Pro 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#030), but the
instrumental; for, as e.g., at [Exo
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020), the obj. of the action is
thought of as its means (Gesen. 138, Anm. 3\*); one sings "with songs,"
for definite songs underlie his singing. The lxx, which the Syr., Targ.,
and Jerome more or less follow, has formed from this proverb one quite
different: "As vinegar is hurtful to a wound, so an injury to the body
makes the heart sorrowful; as the moth in clothes, and the worm in wood,
so the sorrow of a man injures his heart." The wisdom of this pair of
proverbs is not worth much, and after all inquiry little or nothing
comes of it. The Targ. at least preserves the figure 20b: as he who
pours vinegar (Syr. chalo) on nitre; the Peshito, however, and here and
there also the Targum, has jathro (arrow-string) instead of methro
(nitre). Hitzig adopts this, and changes the tristich into the distich:

He that meeteth archers with arrow on the string,

Is like him who singeth songs with a sad heart.

The Hebrew of this proverb of Hitzig's (מרים קרה על־יתר) is unhebraic,
the meaning dark as an oracle, and its moral contents nil.

[Pro 25:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021)

21 If thine enemy hunger, feed him with bread;

And if he thirst, give him water to drink.

22 For thereby thou heapest burning coals on his head,

And Jahve will recompense it to thee.

The translation of this proverb by the lxx is without fault; Paul cites
therefrom [Rom 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020). The participial
construction of 22a, the lxx, rightly estimating it, thus renders: for,
doing this, thou shalt heap coals on his head. The expression, "thou
shalt heap" (σωρεύσεις), is also appropriate; for חתה certainly means
first only to fetch or bring fire (vid., [Pro
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#027)); but here, by virtue of the
constructio praegnans with על, to fetch, and hence to heap up - to pile
upon. Burning pain, as commonly observed, is the figure of burning
shame, on account of undeserved kindness shown by an enemy (Fleischer).
But how burning coals heaped on the head can denote burning shame, is
not to be perceived, for the latter is a burning on the cheeks;
wherefore Hitzig and Rosenmller explain: thou wilt thus bring on him the
greatest pain, and appease thy vengeance, while at the same time Jahve
will reward thy generosity. Now we say, indeed, that he who rewards evil
with good takes the noblest revenge; but if this doing of good proceed
from a revengeful aim, and is intended sensibly to humble an adversary,
then it loses all its moral worth, and is changed into selfish,
malicious wickedness. Must the proverb then be understood in this
ignoble sense? The Scriptures elsewhere say that guilt and punishment
are laid on the head of any one when he is made to experience and to
bear them. Chrysostom and others therefore explain after [Psa
140:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#010) and similar passages, but
thereby the proverb is morally falsified, and [Pro
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#022) accords with [Pro
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021), which counsels not to the
avenging of oneself, but to the requital of evil with good. The burning
of coals laid on the head must be a painful but wholesome consequence;
it is a figure of self-accusing repentance (Augustine, Zckler), for the
producing of which the showing of good to an enemy is a noble motive.
That God rewards such magnanimity may not be the special motive; but
this view might contribute to it, for otherwise such promises of God as
[Isa 58:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008) were without moral right.
The proverb also requires one to show himself gentle and liberal toward
a needy enemy, and present a twofold reason for this: first, that
thereby his injustice is brought home to his conscience; and, secondly,
that thus God is well-pleased in such practical love toward an enemy,
and will reward it; - by such conduct, apart from the performance of a
law grounded in our moral nature, one advances the happiness of his
neighbour and his own.

[Proverbs 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 25:23</span></span>

The next group of proverbs extends from [Pro
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#023) to [Pro
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#028).

23 Wind from the north produceth rain;

And a secret tongue a troubled countenance.

The north is called צפון, from צפן, to conceal, from the firmament
darkening itself for a longer time, and more easily, like the old
Persian apâkhtara, as (so it appears) the starless, and, like aquilo,
the north wind, as bringing forward the black clouds. But properly the
"fathers of rain" are, in Syria, the west and the south-west; and so
little can צפון here mean the pure north wind, that Jerome, who knew
from his own experience the changes of weather in Palestine, helps
himself, after Symmachus (διαλύει βροχήν), with a quid pro quo out of
the difficulty: ventus aquilo dissipat pluvias; the Jewish interpreters
(Aben Ezra, Joseph Kimchi, and Meri) also thus explain, for they connect
together תחולל, in the meaning תמנע, with the unintelligible חלילה (far
be it!). But צפון may also, perhaps like ζόφος (Deutsch. Morgenl.
Zeitsch. xxi. 600f.), standing not without connection therewith, denote
the northwest; and probably the proverb emphasized the northern
direction of the compass, because, according to the intention of the
similitude, he seeks to designate such rain as is associated with raw,
icy-cold weather, as the north wind ([Pro
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#016), lxx, Sir. 43:20) brings along
with it. The names of the winds are gen. fem., e.g., [Isa
43:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#006). תּחולל (Aquila, ὠδίνει; cf. [Pro
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#024), ὠδινήθην) has in Codd., e.g.,
the Jaman., the tone on the penult., and with Tsere Metheg (Thorath
Emeth, p. 21) serving as העמדה. So also the Arab. nataj is used of the
wind, as helping the birth of the rain-clouds. Manifestly פנים נזעמים,
countenances manifesting extreme displeasure (vid., the Kal זעם, [Pro
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#024)), are compared to rain. With
justice Hitzig renders פנים, as e.g., [Joh
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#006), in the plur. sense; because, for
the influence which the tongue slandering in secret ([Psa
101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)) has on the slandered, the
"sorrowful countenance" would not be so characteristic as for the
influence which it exercises on the mutual relationships of men: the
secret babbler, the confidential communication throwing suspicion, now
on this one and now on that one, behind their backs, excites men against
one another, so that one shows to another a countenance in which deep
displeasure and suspicion express themselves.

[Proverbs 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 25:24</span></span>

24 Better to sit on the top of a roof,

Than a quarrelsome woman and a house in common.

A repetition of [Pro 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#009).

[Proverbs 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 25:25</span></span>

25 Fresh water to a thirsty soul;

And good news from a far country.

Vid., regarding the form of this proverb, vol. i. p. 9; we have a
similar proverb regarding the influence of good news at [Pro
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#030). Fresh cold water is called at
[Jer 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#014) מים קרים; vid., regarding
קר, 18:27. "עיף, cogn. יעף, and עוּף, properly to become darkened,
therefore figuratively like (Arab.) gushiya 'alyh, to become faint, to
become feeble unto death, of the darkness which spreads itself over the
eyes" (Fleischer).

This proverb, with the figure of "fresh water," is now followed by one
with the figure of a "fountain":

[Proverbs 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 25:26</span></span>

26 A troubled fountain and a ruined spring -

A righteous man yielding to a godless man.

For the most part, in מט one thinks of a yielding in consequence of
being forced. Thus e.g., Fleischer: as a troubled ruined spring is a
misfortune for the people who drink out of it, or draw from it, so is it
a misfortune for the surrounding of the righteous, when he is driven
from his dwelling or his possession by an unrighteous man. And it is
true: the righteous can be compared to a well (מעין, well-spring, from
עין, a well, as an eye of the earth, and מקור, fountain, from קוּר, R.
קר, כר, to round out, to dig out), with reference to the blessing which
flows from it to its surroundings (cf. [Pro
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#011) and [Joh
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)). But the words "yielding to"
(contrast "stood before," [Kg2 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#004),
or [Jos 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#012)), in the phrase "yielding
to the godless," may be understood of a spontaneous as well as of a
constrained, forced, wavering and yielding, as the expression in the
Psalm בּל־אמּוט \[non movebor, [Psa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#006)\] affirms the certainty of being
neither inwardly nor outwardly ever moved or shaken. The righteous shall
stand fast and strong in God without fearing the godless ([Isa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012).), unmoveable and firm as a
brazen wall ([Jer 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#017).). If, however,
he is wearied with resistance, and from the fear of man, or the desire
to please man, or from a false love of peace he yields before it, and so
gives way - then he becomes like to a troubled fountain (רפשׂ, cogn.
רמס, [Eze 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#018); [Isa
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025); Jerome: fans turbatus pede), a
ruined spring; his character, hitherto pure, is now corrupted by his own
guilt, and now far from being a blessing to others, his wavering is a
cause of sorrow to the righteous, and an offence to the weak - he is
useful no longer, but only injurious. Rightly Lagarde: "The verse, one
of the most profound of the whole book, does not speak of the
misfortunate, but of the fall of the righteous, whose sin compromises
the holy cause which he serves, [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)." Thus also e.g., Lwenstein,
with reference to the proverb Sanhedrin 92b: also in the time of danger
let not a man disown his honour. Bachja, in his Ethics, referring to
this figure, 26a, thinks of the possibility of restoration: the
righteous wavers only for the moment, but at last he comes right (מתמוטט
ועולה). But this interpretation of the figure destroys the point of the
proverb.

[Proverbs 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 25:27</span></span>

This verse, as it stands, is scarcely to be understood. The Venet.
translates 27b literally: ἔρευνά τε δόξας αὐτῶν δόξα; but what is the
reference of this כּבדם? Euchel and others refer it to men, for they
translate: "to set a limit to the glory of man is true glory;" but the
"glory of man" is denoted by the phrase כּבד אדם, not by כּבדם; and,
besides, חקר does not mean measure and limit. Oetinger explains: "To eat
too much honey is not good; whereas the searching after their glory,
viz., of pleasant and praiseworthy things, which are likened to honey,
is glory, cannot be too much done, and is never without utility and
honour;" but how can כּבדם be of the same meaning as כּבד הדברים אשׁר or
הנמשׁלים כּדּבשׁ - such an abbreviation of the expression is impossible.
Schultens, according to Rashi: vestigatio gravitatis eorum est gravitas,
i.e., the searching out of their difficulty is a trouble; better
Vitringa (since כבוד nowhere occurs in this sense of gravitas molesta ac
pondere oppressura): investigatio praestantiae eorum est gloriosa; but
Vitringa, in order to gain a connection to 27a, needs to introduce
etiamsi, and in both explanations the reference of the כּבדם is
imaginary, and it by no means lies near, since the Scripture uses the
word כבוד of God, and His kingdom and name, but never of His law or His
revelation. Thus also is an argument against Bertheau, who translates:
the searching out of their glory (viz., of the divine law and
revelation) is a burden, a strenuous occupation of the mind, since חקר
does not in itself mean searching out, and is equivocally, even
unintelligibly, expressed, since כבוד denotes, it is true, here and
there, a great multitude, but never a burden (as כּבד). The thought
which Jerome finds in 27b: qui scrutator est majestatis opprimetur a
gloria, is judicious, and connects itself synonym. with 27a; but such a
thought is unwarranted, for he disregards the suff. of כּבדם, and
renders כבוד in the sense of difficulty (oppression). Or should it
perhaps be vocalized כּבדם (Syr., Targ., Theodotion, δεδοξασμένα =
נכבּדות)? Thus vocalized, Umbreit renders it in the sense of honores;
Elster and Zckler in the sense of difficultates (difficilia); but this
plur., neither the biblical, nor, so far as I know, the post-bibl. usage
of the word has ever adopted. However, the sense of the proverb which
Elster and Zckler gain is certainly that which is aimed at. We
accordingly translate:

To surfeit oneself in eating honey is not good,

But as an inquirer to enter on what is difficult is honour.

We read כּבדם instead of כּבדם. This change commends itself far more
than כּבד מכּבוד (וחקר), according to which Gesenius explains: nimium
studium honoris est sine honore - impossible, for חקר does not signify
nimium studium, in the sense of striving, but only that of inquiry: one
strives after honour, but does not study it. Hitzig and Ewald, after the
example of J. D. Michaelis, Arnoldi, and Ziegler, betake themselves
therefore to the Arabic; Ewald explains, for he leaves the text
unchanged: "To despise their honour (that is, of men) is honour (true,
real honour);" Hitzig, for he changes the text like Gesenius: "To
despise honour is more than honour," with the ingenious remark: To
obtain an order \[insigne ordinis\] is an honour, but not to wear it
then for the first time is its bouquet. Nowhere any trace either in
Hebrew or in Aramaic is to be found of the verb חקר, to despise (to be
despised), and so it must here remain without example.

(Note: The Hebrew meaning investigare, and the equivalent Arabic ḥaḳr,
contemnere (contemtui esse), are derivations from the primary meaning
(R. חק): to go down from above firmly on anything, and thus to press in
(to cut in), or also to press downward.)

Nor have we any need of it. The change of כּבדם into כּבדם is enough.
The proverb is an antithetic distich; 27a warns against inordinate
longing after enjoyments, 27b praises earnest labour. Instead of דּבשׁ
הרבּות, if honey in the mass were intended, the words would have been
דּבשׁ הרבּה ([Ecc 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011); [Kg1
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#010)), or at least הרבּות דּבשׁ ([Amo
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009)); הרבות can only be a n. actionis,
and אכל דּבשׁ its inverted object (cf. [Jer
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#004)), as Bttcher has discerned: to
make much of the eating of honey, to do much therein is not good (cf.
[Pro 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#016)). In 27b Luther also partly
hits on the correct rendering: "and he who searches into difficult
things, to him it is too difficult," for which it ought to be said: to
him it is an honour. כּבדם, viz., דברים, signifies difficult things, as
ריקים, [Pro 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#011), vain things. The
Heb. כּבד, however, never means difficult to be understood or
comprehended (although more modern lexicons say this),

(Note: Cf. Sir. 3:20f. with Ben-Sira's Heb. text in my Gesch. der jd.
Poesie, p. 204 (vv. 30-32); nowhere does this adj. כבד appears here in
this warning against meditating over the transcendental.)

but always only burdensome and heavy, gravis, not difficilis. כבדם are
also things of which the חקר, i.e., the fundamental searching into them
([Pro 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#017); [Pro
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#002).), costs an earnest effort, which
perhaps, according to the first impression, appears to surpass the
available strength (cf. [Exo 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#018)).
To overdo oneself in eating honey is not good; on the contrary, the
searching into difficult subjects is nothing less than an eating of
honey, but an honour. There is here a paronomasia. Fleischer translates
it: explorare gravia grave est; but we render grave est not in the sense
of molestiam creat, but gravitatem parit (weight = respect, honour).

[Proverbs 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 25:28</span></span>

This verse, counselling restraint as to the spirit, is connected with
the foregoing, which counsels to self-control as to enjoyment:

A city broken through, now without walls -

A man without self-control over his spirit.

A "city broken down" is one whose wall is "broken," [Ch2
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#005), whether it has met with breaches
(פּרצים), or is wholly broken; in the former case also the city is
incapable of being defended, and it is all one as if it had no wall.
Such a city is like a man "who hath no control over his own spirit" (for
the accentuation of the Heb. words here, vid., Thorath Emeth, p. 10):
cujus spiritui nulla cohibitio (Schultens), i.e., qui animum suum
cohibere non potest (Fleischer: עצר, R. צר, to press together, to
oppress, and thereby to hold back). As such a city can be plundered and
laid waste without trouble, so a man who knows not to hold in check his
desires and affections is in constant danger of blindly following the
impulse of his unbridled sensuality, and of being hurried forward to
outbreaks of passion, and thus of bringing unhappiness upon himself.
There are sensual passions (e.g., drunkenness), intellectual (e.g.,
ambition), mingled (e.g., revenge); but in all of these a false ego
rules, which, instead of being held down by the true and better ego,
rises to unbounded supremacy.

(Note: Vid., Drbal's Empirische Psychologie, 137.)

Therefore the expression used is not לנפשׁו, but לרוּחו; desire has its
seat in the soul, but in the spirit it grows into passion, which in the
root of all its diversities is selfishness (Psychol. p. 199);
self-control is accordingly the ruling of the spirit, i.e., the
restraining (keeping down) of the false enslaved ego-life by the true
and free, and powerful in God Himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 26](pro026)

</div>
