<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa086)  [Next](psa088) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 87](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 87:0</span></span>

The City of the New Birth of the Nations

The mission thought in [Psa 86:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009)
becomes the ruling thought in this Korahitic Psalm. It is a prophetic
Psalm in the style, boldly and expressively concise even to obscurity
(Eusebius, σφόδρα αἰνιγματώδης καὶ σκοτεινῶς εἰρημένος), in which the
first three oracles of the tetralogy [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001), and the passage [Isa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006), [Isa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007) - a passage designed to be as it
were a memorial exhibition - are also written. It also resembles these
oracles in this respect, that [Psa
87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001) opens the whole arsis-like by a
solemn statement of its subject, like the emblematical inscriptions
there. As to the rest, [Isa 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005) is
the key to its meaning. The threefold ילּד here corresponds to the
threefold זה in that passage.

Since Rahab and Babylon as the foremost worldly powers are mentioned
first among the peoples who come into the congregation of Jahve, and
since the prospect of the poet has moulded itself according to a present
rich in promise and carrying such a future in its bosom, it is natural
(with Tholuck, Hengstenberg, Vaihinger, Keil, and others) to suppose
that the Psalm was composed when, in consequence of the destruction of
the Assyrian army before Jerusalem, offerings and presents were brought
from many quarters for Jahve and the king of Judah ([Ch2
32:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#023)), and the admiration of
Hezekiah, the favoured one of God, had spread as far as Babylon. Just as
Micah ([Mic 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010)) mentions Babylon as
the place of the chastisement and of the redemption of his nation, and
as Isaiah, about the fourteenth year of Hezekiah's reign, predicts to
the king a carrying away of his treasures and his posterity to Babylon,
so here Egypt and Babylon, the inheritress of Assyria, stand most
prominent among the worldly powers that shall be obliged one day to bow
themselves to the God of Israel. In a similar connection Isaiah ([Isa
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)) does not as yet mention Babylon
side by side with Egypt, but Assyria.

[Psalms 87:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 87:1</span></span>

The poet is absorbed in the contemplation of the glory of a matter which
he begins to celebrate, without naming it. Whether we render it: His
founded, or (since מיסּד and מוּסּד are both used elsewhere as part.
pass.): His foundation (after the form מלוּכה, poetically for יסוד, a
founding, then that which is set fast = a foundation), the meaning
remains the same; but the more definite statement of the object with
שׁערי ציּון is more easily connected with what precedes by regarding it
as a participle. The suffix refers to Jahve, and it is Zion, whose
praise is a favourite theme of the Korahitic songs, that is intended. We
cannot tell by looking to the accents whether the clause is to be taken
as a substantival clause (His founded city is upon the holy mountains)
or not. Since, however, the expression is not יסוּדתו היא בהררי־קדשׁ,
יסודתו בהררי קדשׁ is an object placed first in advance (which the
antithesis to the other dwellings of Jacob would admit of), and in [Psa
87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002) a new synonymous object is
subordinated to אהב by a similar turn of the discourse to [Jer
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027); [Jer
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#002) (Hitzig). By altering the division
of the verses as Hupfeld and Hofmann do (His foundation or founded city
upon the holy mountains doth Jahve love), [Psa
87:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#002) is decapitated. Even now the
God-founded city (surrounded on three sides by deep valleys), whose firm
and visible foundation is the outward manifestation of its imperishable
inner nature, rises aloft above all the other dwelling-places of Israel.
Jahve stands in a lasting, faithful, loving relationship (אהב, not 3
praet. אהב) to the gates of Zion. These gates are named as a periphrasis
for Zion, because they bound the circuit of the city, and any one who
loves a city delights to go frequently through its gates; and they are
perhaps mentioned in prospect of the fulness of the heathen that shall
enter into them. In [Psa 87:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#003) the lxx
correctly, and at the same time in harmony with the syntax, renders:
Δεδοξασμένα ἐλαλήθη περὶ σοῦ. The construction of a plural subject with
a singular predicate is a syntax common in other instances also, whether
the subject is conceived of as a unity in the form of the plural (e.g.,
[Psa 66:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#003); [Psa
119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137); [Isa
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008)), or is individualized in the
pursuance of the thought (as is the case most likely in [Gen
27:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#029), cf. [Psa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)); here the glorious things are
conceived of as the sum-total of such. The operation of the construction
of the active (Ew. 295, b) is not probable here in connection with the
participle. בּ beside דּבּר may signify the place or the instrument,
substance and object of the speech (e.g., [Psa
119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046)), but also the person against
whom the words are spoken (e.g., [Psa
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020)), or concerning whom they are
uttered (as the words of the suitor to the father or the relatives of
the maiden, [Sa1 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039); [Sol
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008); cf. on the construction, [Sa1
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#003)). The poet, without doubt, here
refers to the words of promise concerning the eternal continuance and
future glory of Jerusalem: Glorious things are spoken, i.e., exist as
spoken, in reference to thee, O thou city of God, city of His choice and
of His love.

The glorious contents of the promise are now unfolded, and that with the
most vivid directness: Jahve Himself takes up the discourse, and
declares the gracious, glorious, world-wide mission of His chosen and
beloved city: it shall become the birth-place of all nations. Rahab is
Egypt, as in [Psa 89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011); [Isa
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#007); [Isa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009), the southern worldly power, and
Babylon the northern. הזכּיר, as frequently, of loud ([Jer
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#016)) and honourable public mention or
commemoration, Ps 45:18. It does not signify "to record or register in
writing;" for the official name מזכּיר, which is cited in support of
this meaning, designates the historian of the empire as one who keeps in
remembrance the memorable events of the history of his time. It is
therefore impossible, with Hofmann, to render: I will add Rahab and
Babylon to those who know me. In general ל is not used to point out to
whom the addition is made as belonging to them, but for what purpose, or
as what (cf. [Sa2 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003); [Isa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003)), these kingdoms, hitherto hostile
towards God and His people, shall be declared: Jahve completes what He
Himself has brought about, inasmuch as He publicly and solemnly declares
them to be those who know Him, i.e., those who experimentally (vid.,
[Psa 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#011)) know Him as their God.
Accordingly, it is clear that זה ילּד־שׁם is also meant to refer to the
conversion of the other three nations to whom the finger of God points
with הנּה, viz., the war-loving Philistia, the rich and proud Tyre, and
the adventurous and powerful Ethiopia ([Isa
18:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001)). זה does not refer to the
individuals, nor to the sum-total of these nations, but to nation after
nation (cf. זה העם, [Isa 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#013)), by
fixing the eye upon each one separately. And שׁם refers to Zion. The
words of Jahve, which come in without any intermediary preparation,
stand in the closest connection with the language of the poet and seer.
Zion appears elsewhere as the mother who brings forth Israel again as a
numerous people ([Isa 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#007); [Psa
54:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001)): it is the children of the
dispersion (diaspora) which Zion regains in [Isa
60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004).; here, however, it is the
nations which are born in Zion. The poet does not combine with it the
idea of being born again in the depth of its New Testament meaning; he
means, however, that the nations will attain a right of citizenship in
Zion (πολιτεία τοῦ Ἰσραήλ, [Eph 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012))
as in their second mother-city, that they will therefore at any rate
experience a spiritual change which, regarded from the New Testament
point of view, is the new birth out of water and the Spirit.

[Psalms 87:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 87:5</span></span>

Inasmuch now as the nations come thus into the church (or congregation)
of the children of God and of the children of Abraham, Zion becomes by
degrees a church immeasurably great. To Zion, however, or of Zion (ל of
reference to), shall it be said אישׁ ואישׁ ילּד־בּהּ. Zion, the one
city, stands in contrast to all the countries, the one city of God in
contrast to the kingdoms of the world, and אישׁ ואישׁ in contrast to זה.
This contrast, upon the correct apprehension of which depends the
understanding of the whole Psalm, is missed when it is said, "whilst in
relation to other countries it is always only the whole nation that
comes under consideration, Zion is not reckoned up as a nation, but by
persons" (Hofmann). With this rendering the ילּד retires into the
background; in that case this giving of prominence to the value of the
individual exceeds the ancient range of conception, and it is also an
inadmissible appraisement that in Zion each individual is as important
as a nation as a whole. Elsewhere אישׁ אישׁ, [Lev
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010), [Lev
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013), or אישׁ ואישׁ, [Est
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#008), signifies each and every one;
accordingly here אישׁ ואישׁ (individual and, or after, individual)
affirms a progressus in infinitum, where one is ever added to another.
Of an immeasurable multitude, and of each individual in this multitude
in particular, it is said that he was born in Zion. Now, too, והוּא
כוננה עליון has a significant connection with what precedes. Whilst from
among foreign peoples more and more are continually acquiring the right
of natives in Zion, and thus are entering into a new national alliance,
so that a breach of their original national friendships is taking place,
He Himself (cf. [Sa1 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#009)), the Most
High, will uphold Zion ([Psa 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009)), so
that under His protection and blessing it shall become ever greater and
more glorious. [Psa 87:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#006) tells us what
will be the result of such a progressive incorporation in the church of
Zion of those who have hitherto been far removed, viz., Jahve will
reckon when He writeth down (כּתוב as in [Jos
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#008)) the nations; or better - since
this would more readily be expressed by בּכתבו, and the book of the
living ([Isa 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003)) is one already
existing from time immemorial - He will reckon in the list (כתוב after
the form חלום, חלו, פּקוד = כּתב, [Eze
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009)) of the nations, i.e., when He
goes over the nations that are written down there and chosen for the
coming salvation, "this one was born there;" He will therefore
acknowledge them one after another as those born in Zion. The end of all
history is that Zion shall become the metropolis of all nations. When
the fulness of the Gentiles is thus come in, then shall all and each one
as well singing as dancing say (supply יאמרוּ): All my fountains are in
thee. Among the old translators the rendering of Aquila is the best: καὶ
ᾄδοντες ὡς χοροί· πᾶσαι πηγαὶ ἐν σοί, which Jerome follows, et cantores
quasi in choris: omnes fontes mei in te. One would rather render
cholaliym, "flute-players" (lxx ὡς ἐν αὐλοῖς); but to pipe or play the
flute is חלּל (a denominative from חליל), [Kg1
1:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#040), whereas to dance is חלל (Pilel
of חוּל); it is therefore = מחוללים, like לצצים, [Hos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#005). But it must not moreover be
rendered, "And singers as well as dancers (will say);" for "singers" is
משׁררים, not שׁרים, which signifies cantantes, not cantores. Singing as
dancing, i.e., making known their festive joy as well by the one as by
the other, shall the men of all nations incorporated in Zion say: All my
fountains, i.e., fountains of salvation (after [Isa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003)), are in thee (O city of God). It
has also been interpreted: my looks (i.e., the object on which my eye is
fixed, or the delight of my eyes), or: my thoughts (after the modern
Hebrew עיּן of spiritual meditation); but both are incongruous. The
conjecture, too, of Bttcher, and even before him of Schnurrer
(Dissertationes, p. 150), כל־מעיני, all who take up their abode (instead
of which Hupfeld conjectures מעיני, all my near-dwellers, i.e., those
who dwell with me under the same roof)

(Note: Hupfeld cites Rashi as having thus explained it; but his gloss is
to be rendered: my whole inmost part (after the Aramaic = מעי) is with
thee, i.e., they salvation.)),

is not Hebrew, and deprives us of the thought which corresponds to the
aim of the whole, that Jerusalem shall be universally regarded as the
place where the water of life springs for the whole of mankind, and
shall be universally praised as this place of fountains.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 88](psa088)

</div>
