<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa006)  [Next](psa008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 7:0</span></span>

(In the Hebrew, v.1 is the designation 'A Shiggayon of David, which he
sang....'; from then on v.1-17 in English translation corresponds to
v.2-18 in the Hebrew)

Appeal to the Judge of the Whole Earth against Slander and Requiting
Good with Evil

In the second part of [Psa 6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001)
David meets his enemies with strong self-confidence in God. Ps 7, which
even Hitzig ascribes to David, continues this theme and exhibits to us,
in a prominent example taken from the time of persecution under Saul,
his purity of conscience and joyousness of faith. One need only read 1
Sam 24-26 to see how this Psalm abounds in unmistakeable references to
this portion of David's life. The superscribed statement of the events
that gave rise to its composition point to this. Such statements are
found exclusively only by the Davidic Psalms.

(Note: Viz. [Psa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001), [Psa
59:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#001), [Psa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001), [Psa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001), [Psa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001), [Psa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001), [Psa
142:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001), [Psa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001) (belonging to the time of the
persecution under Saul), [Psa 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001),
[Psa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001) (to the persecution under
Absolom), [Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001) (David's
adultery), [Psa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001) (the
Syro-Ammonitish war).)

The inscription runs: Shiggajon of David, which he sang to Jahve on
account of the sayings of Cush a Benjamite. על־דּברי is intentionally
chosen instead of על which has other functions in these superscriptions.
Although דּבר and דּברי can mean a thing, business, affairs ([Exo
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008); [Sa1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002), and freq.) and על־דּברי "in
reference to" ([Deu 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#021); [Jer
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#022)) or "on occasion of" ([Jer
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001)), still we must here keep to the
most natural signification: "on account of the words (speeches)." Cûsh
(lxx falsely Χουσί = כּוּשׁי; Luther, likewise under misapprehension,
"the Moor") must have been one of the many servants of Saul, his
kinsman, one of the talebearers like Doeg and the Ziphites, who
shamefully slandered David before Saul, and roused him against David.
The epithet בּן־ימיני (as in [Sa1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001),
[Sa1 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#021), cf. אישׁ־ימיני [Sa2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001)) describes him as "a Benjamite"
and does not assume any knowledge of him, as would be the case if it
were הבּנימיני, or rather (in accordance with biblical usage)
בּן־הימיני. And this accords with the actual fact, for there is no
mention of him elsewhere in Scripture history. The statement וגו על־דברי
is hardly from David's hand, but written by some one else, whether from
tradition or from the דברי הימים of David, where this Psalm may have
been interwoven with the history of its occasion. Whereas there is
nothing against our regarding לדוד שׁגּיון, or at least שׁגיון, as a
note appended by David himself.

Since שׁגּיון (after the form הזּיון a vision) belongs to the same class
as superscribed appellations like מזמור and משׂכּיל, and the Tephilla of
Habakkuk, [Hab 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001) (vid., my
Commentary), has the addition על־שׁגינות, שׁגיון must be the name of a
kind of lyric composition, and in fact a kind described according to the
rhythm of its language or melody. Now since שׁגה means to go astray,
wander, reel, and is cognate with שׁגע (whence comes שׁגּעון madness, a
word formed in the same manner) שׁגיון may mean in the language of
prosody a reeling poem, i.e., one composed in a most excited movement
and with a rapid change of the strongest emotions, therefore a
dithyrambic poem, and שׁגינות dithyrambic rhythms, variously and
violently mixed together. Thus Ewald and Rdiger understand it, and thus
even Tarnov, Geier, and other old expositors who translate it cantio
erratica. What we therefore look for is that this Psalm shall consist,
as Ainsworth expresses it (1627), "of sundry variable and wandering
verses," that it shall wander through the most diverse rhythms as in a
state of intoxication - an expectation which is in fact realized. The
musical accompaniment also had its part in the general effect produced.
Moreover, the contents of the Psalm corresponds to this poetic musical
style. It is the most solemn pathos of exalted self-consciousness which
is expressed in it. And in common with Hab it gives expression to the
joy which arises from zealous anger against the enemies of God and from
the contemplation of their speedy overthrow. Painful unrest, defiant
self-confidence, triumphant ecstasy, calm trust, prophetic certainty-all
these states of mind find expression in the irregular arrangement of the
strophes of this Davidic dithyramb, the ancient customary Psalm for the
feast of Purim (Sofrim xviii. 2).

[Psalms 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 7:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 7:2-3) With this word of faith, love, and hope בּך חסיתּי (as in
[Psa 141:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#008)), this holy captatio
benevolentiae, David also begins in [Psa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001); [Psa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001); [Psa
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#002), cf. [Psa
71:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#001). The perf. is inchoative: in Thee
have I taken my refuge, equivalent to: in Thee do I trust. The
transition from the multitude of his persecutors to the sing. in [Psa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003) is explained most naturally, as
one looks at the inscription, thus: that of the many the one who is just
at the time the worst of all comes prominently before his mind. The verb
טרף from the primary signification carpere (which corresponds still more
exactly to חרף) means both to tear off and to tear in pieces (whence
טרפה that which is torn in pieces); and פּרק from its primary
signification frangere means both to break loose and to break in pieces,
therefore to liberate, e.g., in [Psa
136:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#024), and to break in small pieces,
[Kg1 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011). The persecutors are
conceived of as wild animals, as lions which rend their prey and craunch
its bones. Thus blood-thirsty are they for his soul, i.e., his life.
After the painful unrest of this first strophe, the second begins the
tone of defiant self-consciousness.

[Psalms 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 7:3</span></span>

(Heb.: 7:4-6) According to the inscription זאת points to the substance
of those slanderous sayings of the Benjamite. With בּכפּי אם־ישׁ־עול one
may compare David's words to Saul אין בּידי רעה [Sa1
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#012); [Sa1
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#018); and from this comparison one
will at once see in a small compass the difference between poetical and
prose expression. שׁלמי (Targ. לבעל שׁלמי) is the name he gives (with
reference to Saul) to him who stands on a peaceful, friendly footing
with him, cf. the adject. שׁלום, [Psa
55:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#021), and אישׁ שׁלום, [Psa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010). The verb גּמל, cogn. גּמר,
signifies originally to finish, complete, (root גם, כם ,גם t, cf. כּימה
to be or to make full, to gather into a heap). One says טּוב גּמל and
גּמל רע, and also without a material object גּמל עלי or גּמלני benefecit
or malefecit mihi. But we join גּמלתּי with רע according to the Targum
and contrary to the accentuation, and not with שׁלמי (Olsh., Bttch.,
Hitz.), although שׁלם beside משׁלּם, as e.g., דּבר beside מדבּר might
mean "requiting." The poet would then have written: אם שׁלּמתּי גּמלי רע
i.e., if I have retaliated upon him that hath done evil to me. In [Psa
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005) we do not render it according the
meaning to הלּץ which is usual elsewhere: but rather I rescued... (Louis
de Dieu, Ewald 345, a, and Hupfeld). Why cannot הלּץ in accordance with
its primary signification expedire, exuere (according to which even the
signification of rescuing, taken exactly, does not proceed from the idea
of drawing out, but of making loose, exuere vinclis) signify here exuere
= spoliare, as it does in Aramaic? And how extremely appropriate it is
as an allusion to the incident in the cave, when David did not rescue
Saul, but, without indeed designing to take חליצה, exuviae, cut off the
hem of his garment! As Hengstenberg observes, "He affirms his innocence
in the most general terms, thereby showing that his conduct towards Saul
was not anything exceptional, but sprang from his whole disposition and
mode of action." On the 1 pers. fut. conv. and ah, vid., on [Psa
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006). ריקם belongs to צוררי, like [Psa
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#003); [Psa
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005).

In the apodosis, [Psa 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006), the fut.
Kal of רדף is made into three syllables, in a way altogether without
example, since, by first making the Sheb audible, from ירדּף it is
become ירדף (like יצחק [Gen 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#006),
תּהלך [Psa 73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009); [Exo
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023), שׁמעה [Psa
39:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#013)), and this is then sharpened by
an euphonic Dag. forte.

(Note: The Dag. is of the same kind as the Dag. in גּמלּים among nouns;
Arabic popular dialect farassı̂ (my horse), vid., Wetzstein's Inshriften
S. 366.)

Other ways of explaining it, as that by Cahjg = יתרדף, or by Kimchi as a
mixed form from Kal and Piel,

(Note: Pinsker's view, that the pointing ירדף is designed to leave the
reader at liberty to choose between the reading ירדּף and ירדּף, cannot
be supported. There are no safe examples for the supposition that the
variations of tradition found expression in this way.)

have been already refuted by Baer, Thorath Emeth, p. 33. This dactylic
jussive form of Kal is followed by the regular jussives of Hiph. ישּׂג
and ישׁכּן. The rhythm is similar so that in the primary passage [Exo
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009), which also finds its echo in
[Psa 18:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#038), - viz. iambic with
anapaests inspersed. By its parallelism with נפשׁי and חיּי, כּבודי
acquires the signification "my soul," as Saadia, Gecatilia and Aben-Ezra
have rendered it - a signification which is secured to it by [Psa
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009); 30:13; [Psa
57:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#009); [Psa
108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002), [Gen
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006). Man's soul is his doxa, and this
it is as being the copy of the divine doxa (Bibl. Psychol. S. 98, \[tr.
p. 119\], and frequently). Moreover, "let him lay in the dust" is at
least quite as favourable to this sense of כבודי as to the sense of
personal and official dignity ([Psa
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004); [Psa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003)). To lay down in the dust is
equivalent to: to lay in the dust of death, [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016). שׁכני עפר, [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019), are the dead. According to the
biblical conception the soul is capable of being killed ([Num
35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011)), and mortal ([Num
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010)). It binds spirit and body
together and this bond is cut asunder by death. David will submit
willingly to death in case he has ever acted dishonourably.

Here the music is to strike up, in order to give intensity to the
expression of this courageous confession. In the next strophe is
affirmation of innocence rises to a challenging appeal to the
judgment-seat of God and a prophetic certainty that that judgment is
near at hand.

[Psalms 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 7:6</span></span>

(Heb.: 7:7-9) In the consciousness of his own innocence he calls upon
Jahve to sit in judgment and to do justice to His own. His vision widens
and extends from the enemies immediately around to the whole world in
its hostility towards Jahve and His anointed one. In the very same way
special judgments and the judgment of the world are portrayed side by
side, as it were on one canvas, in the prophets. The truth of this
combination lies in the fact of the final judgment being only the finale
of that judgment which is in constant execution in the world itself. The
language here takes the highest and most majestic flight conceivable. By
קוּמה (Milra, ass in [Psa 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008)), which
is one of David's words of prayer that he has taken from the lips of
Moses ([Psa 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020); [Psa
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#012)), he calls upon Jahve to
interpose. The parallel is הנּשׂא lift Thyself up, show thyself in Thy
majesty, [Psa 94:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#002), [Isa
33:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#010). The anger, in which He is to
arise, is the principle of His judicial righteousness. With this His
anger He is to gird Himself ([Psa
76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011)) against the ragings of the
oppressors of God's anointed one, i.e., taking vengeance on their many
and manifold manifestations of hostility. עברות is a shorter form of the
construct (instead of עברות [Job
40:11](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#011), cf. [Psa
21:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001) :31) of עברה which describes
the anger as running over, breaking forth from within and passing over
into words and deeds (cf. Arab. fšš, used of water: it overflows the
dam, of wrath: it breaks forth). It is contrary to the usage of the
language to make משׁפּט the object to עוּרה in opposition to the
accents, and it is unnatural to regard it as the accus. of direction =
למּשׂפט ([Psa 35:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#023)), as Hitzig does.
The accents rightly unite עוּרה אלי: awake (stir thyself) for me i.e.,
to help me (אלי like לקלאתי, [Psa
59:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#005)). The view, that צוּית is then
precative and equivalent to צוּה: command judgment, is one that cannot
be established according to syntax either here, or in [Psa
71:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#003). It ought at least to have been
וצוּית with Waw consec. On the other hand the relative rendering: Thou
who hast ordered judgment (Maurer, Hengst.), is admissible, but
unnecessary. We take it by itself in a confirmatory sense, not as a
circumstantial clause: having commanded judgment (Ewald), but as a
co-ordinate clause: Thou hast indeed enjoined the maintaining of right
(Hupfeld).

The psalmist now, so to speak, arranges the judgment scene: the assembly
of the nations is to form a circle round about Jahve, in the midst of
which He will sit in judgment, and after the judgment He is to soar away
([Gen 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#022)) aloft over it and return
to the heights of heaven like a victor after the battle (see [Psa
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)). Although it strikes one as
strange that the termination of the judgment itself is not definitely
expressed, yet the rendering of Hupfeld and others: sit Thou again upon
Thy heavenly judgment-seat to judge, is to be rejected on account of the
שׁוּבה (cf. on the other hand 21:14) which is not suited to it; שׁוב
למּרום can only mean Jahve's return to His rest after the execution of
judgment. That which [Psa 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007) and [Psa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008) in the boldness of faith desire,
the beginning of [Psa 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009) expresses as
a prophetic hope, from which proceeds the prayer, that the Judge of the
earth may also do justice to him (שׁפתני vindica me, as in [Psa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001); [Psa
35:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#024)) according to his righteousness
and the purity of which he is conscious, as dwelling in him. עלי is to
be closely connected with תּמּי, just as one says נפשׁי עלי (Psychol. S.
152 \[tr. p. 180\]). That which the individual as ego, distinguishes
from itself as being in it, as subject, it denotes by עלי. In explaining
it elliptically: "come upon me" (Ew., Olsh., Hupf.) this psychologically
intelligible usage of the language is not recognised. On תּם vid., on
[Psa 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#021); [Psa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001).

[Psalms 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 7:9</span></span>

(Heb.: 7:10-11) In this strophe we hear the calm language of courageous
trust, to which the rising and calmly subsiding caesural schema is
particularly adapted. He is now concerned about the cessation of evil:
Oh let it come to an end (גּמר intransitive as in [Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002); [Psa
77:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)).... His prayer is therefore not
directed against the individuals as such but against the wickedness that
is in them. This Psalm is the key to all Psalms which contain prayers
against one's enemies. Just in the same manner וּתכונן is intended to
express a wish; it is one of the comparatively rare voluntatives of the
2 pers. (Ew. 229): and mayst Thou be pleased to establish.... To the
termination of evil which is desired corresponds, in a positive form of
expression, the desired security and establishment of the righteous,
whom it had injured and whose continuance was endangered by it. וּבחן is
the beginning of a circumstantial clause, introduced by ו, but without
the personal pronoun, which is not unfrequently omitted both in the
leading participial clause, as in [Isa
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#008) (which see), and in the minor
participial clause as here (cf. [Psa
55:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020)): cum sis = quoniam es. The
reins are the seat of the emotions, just as the heart is the seat of the
thoughts and feelings. Reins and heart lie naked before God-a
description of the only kardiognoo'stees, which is repeated in [Jer
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020); [Jer
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#012), [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023). In the thesis the adjective is
used with אלהים in the sing. as in [Psa
78:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056), cf. Ps 58:12. God is the
righteous God, and by his knowledge of the inmost part He is fully
capable of always showing Himself both righteous in anger and righteous
in mercy according to the requirements and necessity of the case.
Therefore David can courageously add על־אלהים מגנּי, my shield doth God
carry; ל [Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019)) would signify: He
has it, it (my shield) belongs to Him, על ([Ch1
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#007)) signifies: He bears it, or if
one takes shield in the sense of protection: He has taken my protection
upon Himself, has undertaken it (as in [Psa
62:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#008), cf. [Jdg
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020)), as He is in general the
Saviour of all who are devoted to Him with an upright heart, i.e., a
heart sincere, guileless (cf. [Psa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001) with [Psa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#002)). צדּים is intentionally repeated
at the end of the first two lines - the favourite palindrome, found more
especially in [Isa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001). And to the
mixed character of this Psalm belongs the fact of its being both
Elohimic and Jehovic. From the calm language of heartfelt trust in God
the next strophe passes over into the language of earnest warning, which
is again more excited and somewhat after the style of didactic poetry.

[Psalms 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 7:11</span></span>

(Heb.: 7:12-14) If God will in the end let His wrath break forth, He
will not do it without having previously given threatenings thereof
every day, viz., to the ungodly, cf. [Isa
66:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#014); [Mal
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004). He makes these feel His זעם
beforehand in order to strike a wholesome terror into them. The subject
of the conditional clause אם־לא ישׁוּב is any ungodly person whatever;
and the subject of the principal clause, as its continuation in [Psa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#014) shows, is God. If a man (any one)
does not repent, then Jahve will whet His sword (cf. [Deu
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041)). This sense of the words
accords with the connection; whereas with the rendering: "forsooth He
(Elohim) will again whet His sword" (Bttch., Ew., Hupf.) ישׁוּב, which
would moreover stand close by ילטושׁ (cf. e.g., [Gen
30:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#031)), is meaningless; and the אם־לא
of asseveration is devoid of purpose. Judgment is being gradually
prepared, as the fut. implies; but, as the perff. imply, it is also on
the other hand like a bow that is already strung against the sinner with
the arrow pointed towards him, so that it can be executed at any moment.
כּונן of the making ready, and הכין of the aiming, are used alternately.
לו, referring to the sinner, stands first by way of emphasis as in [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010); [Sa1
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#003), and is equivalent to אליו, [Eze
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#003). "Burning" arrows are fire-arrows
(זקּים, זיקות, malleoli); and God's fire-arrows are the lightnings sent
forth by Him, [Psa 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015); [Zac
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014). The fut. יפעל denotes the
simultaneous charging of the arrows aimed at the sinner, with the fire
of His wrath. The case illustrated by Cush is generalised: by the sword
and arrows the manifold energy of the divine anger is symbolised, and it
is only the divine forbearance that prevents it from immediately
breaking forth. The conception is not coarsely material, but the
vividness of the idea of itself suggests the form of its embodiment.

[Psalms 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 7:14</span></span>

(Heb.: 7:15-18) This closing strophe foretells to the enemy of God, as
if dictated by the judge, what awaits him; and concludes with a prospect
of thanksgiving and praise. Man brings forth what he has conceived, he
reaps what he has sown. Starting from this primary passage, we find the
punishment which sin brings with it frequently represented under these
figures of הדה and ילד (הוליד, חבּל, חיל), זרע and קצר, and first of all
in [Job 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035). The act, guilt, and
punishment of sin appear in general as notions that run into one
another. David sees in the sin of his enemies their self-destruction. It
is singular, that travail is first spoken of, and then only afterwards
pregnancy. For חבּל signifies, as in [Sol
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#005), ὠδίνειν, not: to conceive
(Hitz.). The Arab. ḥabila (synonym of ḥamala) is not to conceive in
distinction from being pregnant, but it is both: to be and to become
pregnant. The accentuation indicates the correct relationship of the
three members of the sentence. First of all comes the general statement:
Behold he shall travail with, i.e., bring forth with writhing as in the
pains of labour, און, evil, as the result which proceeds from his
wickedness. Then, by this thought being divided into its two factors
(Hupf.) it goes on to say: that is, he shall conceive (concipere) עמל,
and bear שׁקר. The former signifies trouble, molestia, just as πονηρία
signifies that which makes πόνον; the latter falsehood, viz.,
self-deception, delusion, vanity, inasmuch as the burden prepared for
others, returns as a heavy and oppressive burden upon the sinner
himself, as is said in [Psa 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#017); cf.
[Isa 59:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004), where און instead of שׁקר
denotes the accursed wages of sin which consist in the unmasking of its
nothingness, and in the undeceiving of its self-delusion. He diggeth a
pit for himself, is another turn of the same thought, [Psa
57:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007); [Ecc
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#008). [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016) mentions the digging, and [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016) the subsequent falling into the
pit; the aorist ויּפּל is, for instance, like [Psa
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#013), [Psa
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009); [Psa
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010). The attributive יפעל is
virtually a genitive to שׁחת, and is rightly taken by Ges. 124, 3, a as
present: in the midst of the execution of the work of destruction
prepared for others it becomes his own. The trouble, עמל, prepared for
others returns upon his own head (בּראשׁו, clinging to it, just as
על־ראשׁו signifies descending and resting upon it), and the violence,
חמס, done to others, being turned back by the Judge who dwells above
([Mic 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012)), descends upon his own
pate (קדקדו with o by q, as e.g., in [Gen
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)). Thus is the righteousness of
God revealed in wrath upon the oppressor and in mercy upon him who is
innocently oppressed. Then will the rescued one, then will David, give
thanks unto Jahve, as is due to Him after the revelation of His
righteousness, and will sing of the name of Jahve the Most High (עליון
as an appended name of God is always used without the art., e.g., [Psa
57:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#003)). In the revelation of Himself He
has made Himself a name. He has, however, revealed Himself as the
almighty Judge and Deliverer, as the God of salvation, who rules over
everything that takes place here below. It is this name, which He has
made by His acts, that David will then echo back to Him in his song of
thanksgiving.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 8](psa008)

</div>
