<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa046)  [Next](psa048) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 47:0</span></span>

Exultation at the Lord's Triumphant Ascension

Whilst between Ps 45 and [Psa 46:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)
scarcely any other bond of relationship but the similar use of the
significant על־כּן can be discovered, [Psa
47:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001) has, in common with [Psa
46:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001), not only the thought of the
kingly exaltation of Jahve over the peoples of the earth, but also its
historical occasion, viz., Jehoshaphat's victory over the allied
neighbouring nations, - a victory without a conflict, and consequently
all the more manifestly a victory of Jahve, who, after having fought for
His people, ascended again amidst the music of their celebration of
victory; an event that was outwardly represented in the conducting of
the Ark back to the temple ([Ch2
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#028)). [Psa
47:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001) has grown out of this event.
The strophe schema cannot be mistaken, viz., 8. 8. 4.

On account of the blowing of the trumpet

(Note: In connection with which, עלה then is intended to point to the
fact that, when the sound of the trumpets of Israel begins, God rises
from the throne of justice and takes His seat upon the throne of mercy:
vid., Buxtorf, Lex. Talmud. col. 2505.)

mentioned in [Psa 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#006), this Psalm is
the proper new year's Psalm in the synagogue (together with Ps 81, the
Psalm of the second new year's feast day); and on account of the mention
of the ascension of Jahve, it is the Psalm for Ascension day in the
church. Luther styles it, the "Christ ascended to Heaven of the sons of
Korah." Paulus Burgensis quarrels with Lyra because he does not
interpret it directly of the Ascension; and Bakius says: Lyranus a
Judaeis seductus, in cortice haeret. The whole truth here, as is often
the case, is not to be found on either side. The Psalm takes its
occasion from an event in the reign of Jehoshaphat. But was the church
of the ages succeeding required to celebrate, and shall more especially
the New Testament church still celebrate, that defeat of the allied
neighbouring peoples? This defeat brought the people of God repose and
respect for a season, but not true and lasting peace; and the ascent at
that time of Jahve, who had fought here on earth on behalf of His
people, was not as yet the ascent above the powers that are most hurtful
to His people, and that stand most in the way of the progress of
salvation, viz., those powers of darkness which form the secret
background of everything that takes place upon earth that is in
opposition to God. Hence this Psalm in the course of history has gained
a prophetic meaning, far exceeding its first occasion, which has only
been fully unravelled by the ascension of Christ.

[Psalms 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 47:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 47:2-4) "Thereupon the fear of Elohim" - so closes the chronicler
([Ch2 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#029)) the narrative of the
defeat of the confederates - "came upon all kingdoms of the countries,
when they heard that Jahve had fought against the enemies of Israel."
The psalmist, however, does not in consequence or this particular event
call upon them to tremble with fear, but to rejoice; for fear is an
involuntary, extorted inward emotion, but joy a perfectly voluntary one.
The true and final victory of Jahve consists not in a submission that is
brought about by war and bloodshed and in consternation that stupefies
the mind, but in a change in the minds and hearts of the peoples, so
that they render joyful worship unto Him. In order that He may thus
become the God of all peoples, He has first of all become the God of
Israel; and Israel longs that this the purpose of its election may be
attained. Out of this longing springs the call in [Psa
47:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002). The peoples are to show the God
of revelation their joy by their gestures and their words; for Jahve is
absolutely exalted (עליון, here it is a predicate, just as in [Psa
78:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#056) it is an attribute), terrible,
and the sphere of His dominion has Israel for its central point, not,
however, for its limit, but it extends over the whole earth. Everything
must do homage to Him in His own people, whether willingly or by
constraint. According to the tenses employed, what is affirmed in [Psa
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004) appears to be a principle derived
from their recent experience, inasmuch as the contemporary fact is not
expressed in an historical form, but generalized and idealised. But
יבחר, [Psa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005), is against this,
since the choosing (election) is an act done once for all and not a
continued act; we are therefore driven to regard the futures, as in [Num
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007); [Jdg
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#001), as a statement of historical
facts. Concerning ידבּר, He bent, made to stoop, vid., [Psa
18:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#048). There is now no necessity for
altering יבחר into ירחב, and more especially since this is not suited to
the fact which has given occasion to the Psalm. On the contrary, יבחר
presupposes that in the event of the day God has shown Himself to be a
faithful and powerful Lord \[lit. feudal Lord\] of the land of Israel;
the hostile confederation had thought of nothing less than driving
Israel entirely out of its inheritance ([Ch2
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#011)). The Holy Land is called the
pride (גּאון) of Jacob, as being the gift of grace of which this, the
people of God's love, can boast. In [Amo
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#008) גאון יעקב has a different meaning
(of the sin of pride), and again another sense in [Nah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#003) (of the glory of all Israel in
accordance with the promise); here it is similar to [Isa
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019). את has a conjunctive accent
instead of being followed by Makkeph, as in [Psa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002); [Pro
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#012) (these are the only three
instances). The strophe which follows supports the view that the poet,
in [Psa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005), has a recent act of God
before his mind.

[Psalms 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 47:4</span></span>

(Heb.: 47:5-9) The ascent of God presupposes a previous descent, whether
it be a manifestation of Himself in order to utter some promise ([Gen
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#022); [Jdg
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#020)) or a triumphant execution of
judgment ([Psa 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008); [Psa
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)). So here: God has come down to
fight on behalf of His people. They return to the Holy City and He to
His throne, which is above on Zion, and higher still, is above in
heaven. On בּתרוּעה and קול שׁופר cf. [Psa
98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006); [Ch1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#028), but more especially [Amo
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#002); for the "shout" is here the
people's shout of victory, and "the sound of the horn" the clear sound
of the horns announcing the victory, with reference to the celebration
of the victory in the Valley of praise and the homeward march amidst the
clanging music ([Ch2 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#026).). The
poet, who has this festival of victory before his mind as having
recently taken place, desires that the festive sounds may find an
unending and boundless echo unto the glory of God. זמּר is first
construed with the accusative as in [Psa
68:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#033), then with the dative.
Concerning משׂכּיל = ᾠδὴ πενυματική ([Eph
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019); [Col
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016)), vid., on [Psa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001). That which excites to songs of
praise is Jahve's dominion of the world which has just been made
manifest. מלך is to be taken in just the same historical sense as
ἐβασίλευσας, [Rev 11:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015). What has
taken place is a prelude of the final and visible entering upon the
kingdom, the announcement of which the New Testament seer there hears.
God has come down to earth, and after having obtained for Himself a
recognition of His dominion by the destruction of the enemies of Israel,
He has ascended again in visible kingly glory. Imago conscensi a Messia
throni gloriae, says Chr. Aug. Crusius, tune erat deportatio arcae
faederis in sedem regni.

[Psalms 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 47:9</span></span>

(Heb.: 47:10) In the mirror of the present event, the poet reads the
great fact of the conversion of all peoples to Jahve which closes the
history of the world. The nobles of the peoples (נדיבי with the twofold
meaning of generosi), the "shields (i.e., the lords who are the
defenders of their people) of the earth" ([Hos
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#018)), enter into the society of the
people of the God of Abraham; πέρας αἱ πρὸς τὸν πατριάρχην Ἀβραὰμ ἔλαβον
ὑποσχέσεις, as Theodoret observes. The promise concerning the blessing
of the tribes of the nations in the seed of the patriarch is being
fulfilled; for the nobles draw the peoples who are protected by them
after themselves. It is unnecessary to read עם instead of עם with Ewald,
and following the lxx and Syriac; and it is also inadmissible, since one
does not say נאסף עם, but ל or אל. Even Eusebius has rightly praised
Symmachus and Theodotion, because they have translated the ambiguous ἀμ
by λαὸς (τοῦ Θεοῦ Ἀβραάμ), viz., as being a nominative of the effect or
result, as it is also understood by the Targum, Jerome, Luther, and most
of the Jewish expositors, and among modern expositors by Crusius,
Hupfeld, and Hitzig: They gather and band themselves together as a
people or into a people of the God of Abraham, they submit themselves
with Israel to the one God who is proved to be so glorious.

(Note: It is also accented accordingly, viz., נאספו with Rebia magnum,
which (and in this respect it is distinguished from Mugrash) makes a
pause; and this is then followed by the supplementing clause with
Zinnor, Galgal, and Olewejored.)

The conclusion (v. 11) reminds one of the song of Hannah, [Sa1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008). Thus universal homage is rendered
to Him: He is gone up in triumph, and is in consequence thereof highly
exalted (נעלה, 3rd praet., the result of consequence of the עלה in [Psa
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#006)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 48](psa048)

</div>
