<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa068)  [Next](psa070) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 69](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 69:0</span></span>

Prayer out of the Depth of Affliction Borne for the Sake of the Truth

This Psalm follows Ps 68 because in vv. 36f. the very same thought is
expressed in unfigurative language, that we found in [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011) represented under a figure,
viz., Thy creatures dwelt therein. In other respects the two Psalms are
as different as day and night. Psalms 69 is not a martial and triumphal
Psalm, but a Psalm of affliction which does not brighten until near the
close; and it is not the church that is the speaker here, as in the
preceding Psalm, but an individual. This individual, according to the
inscription, is David; and if David, it is not the ideal righteous man
(Hengstenberg), but David the righteous, and that when he was unjustly
persecuted by Saul. The description of suffering harmonizes in many
points with the Psalms belonging to the time of Saul, even the
estrangement of his nearest adherents, [Psa
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009); [Psa
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#012) (cf. [Psa
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010)); the fasting till he is
thoroughly enfeebled, [Psa 69:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#011); [Psa
109:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#024); the curse upon his foes, in
which respect Ps 35; Ps 69, and Ps 109 form a fearful gradation; and the
inspiriting call to the saints who are his companions in suffering, [Psa
69:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#033); [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027); Ps 31:25. Were there no doubt
about Ps 40 being Davidic, then the Davidic origin of Ps 69 would at the
same time be firmly established; but instead of their inscriptions לדוד
being mutually confirmatory, they tend, on the contrary, to shake our
confidence. These two Psalms are closely related as twin-Psalms: in both
the poet describes his suffering as a sinking into a miry pit; in both
we meet with the same depreciation of ceremonial sacrifice; the same
method of denoting a great multitude, "more than the hairs of my head,"
[Psa 69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005); [Psa
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013); and the same prospect of the
faith of the saints being strengthened, [Psa
69:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#033), [Psa
69:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#007); [Psa
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017), [Psa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004).

But whilst in Ps 40 it is more the style and in general the outward form
than the contents that militate against its Davidic authorship, in Ps 69
it is not so much in form as in subject-matter that we find much that
does not accord with David's authorship. For this reason Clericus and
Vogel (in his dissertation Inscriptiones Psalmorum serius demum additas
videri, 1767) have long ago doubted the correctness of the לדוד; and
Hitzig has more fully supported the conjecture previously advanced by
Seiler, von Bengel, and others, that Psalms 69, as also Ps 40, is by
Jeremiah. The following points favour this view: (1) The martyrdom which
the author endured in his zeal for the house of God, in his
self-mortification, and in this consuming of himself with the scorn and
deadly hostility of his foes; we may compare more particularly [Jer
15:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015), a confession on the part of
the prophet very closely allied in spirit to both these Psalms. (2) The
murderous animosity which the prophet had to endure from the men of
Anathoth, [Jer 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#018)., with which the
complaint of the psalmist in [Psa 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)
fully accords. (3) The close of the Psalm, vv. 35-37, which is like a
summary of that which Jeremiah foretells in the Book of the Restoration,
[Psa 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#001). (4) The peculiar character
of Jeremiah's sufferings, who was cast by the princes, as being an enemy
to his country, into the waterless but muddy cistern of prince Malchiah
(Malkja) in the court of the guard, and there as it were buried alive.
It is true, in [Jer 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#006) it is said of
this cistern that there was "no water, but only mire," which seems to
contradict the language of the Psalm; but since he sank into the mud,
the meaning is that just then there was no water standing in it as at
other times, otherwise he must at once have been drowned. Nevertheless,
that he was in peril of his life is clear to us from the third kı̂nah
(Lam. 3), which in other respects also has many points of close contact
with Psalms 69; for there in [Lam 3:53](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#053)
he says: "They cut off my life in the pit and cast stones at me. Waters
flowed over my head; I thought: I am undone. I called upon Thy name,
Jahve, out of the lowest pit. Thou didst hear my cry: Hide not Thine ear
from the outpouring of my heart, from my cry for help! Thou didst draw
near in the day that I cried, Thou saidst: Fear not." The view of
Hitzig, that in Psalms 69 we have this prayer out of the pit, has many
things in its favour, and among them, (5) the style, which on the whole
is like that of Jeremiah, and the many coincidences with the prophet's
language and range of thought visible in single instance. But how could
this Psalm have obtained the inscription לדוד? Could it be on account of
the similarity between the close of Psalms 69 and the close of Ps 22?
And why should not Ps 71, which is to all appearance by Jeremiah, also
have the inscription לדוד? Psalms 69 is wanting in that imitative
character by which Ps 71 so distinctly points to Jeremiah. Therefore we
duly recognise the instances and considerations brought forward against
the Jeremianic authorship by Keil (Luth. Zeitschrift, 1860, S. 485f.)
and Kurtz (Dorpater Zeitschrift, 1865, S. 58ff.), whilst, on the
contrary, we still maintain, as formerly, that the Psalm admits of being
much more satisfactorily explained from the life of Jeremiah than that
of David.

The passion Psalms are the part of the Old Testament Scriptures most
frequently cited in the New Testament; and after Ps 22 there is no Psalm
referred to in so many ways as Ps 69. (1) The enemies of Jesus hated Him
without a cause: this fact, according to [Joh
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#025), is foretold in [Psa
69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005). It is more probable that the
quotation by John refers to [Psa 69:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#005)
than to [Psa 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019). (2) When Jesus
drove the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, [Psa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#010) received its fulfilment,
according to [Joh 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#017) : the fierce
flame of zeal against the profanation of the house of God consumes Him,
and because of this zeal He is hated and despised. (3) He willingly bore
this reproach, being an example to us; [Joh
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#010) of our Psalm being, according to
[Rom 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#003), fulfilled in Him. (4)
According to [Act 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020), the
imprecation in [Psa 69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026) has received
its fulfilment in Judas Iscariot. The suffixes in this passage are
plural; the meaning can therefore only be that indicated by J. H.
Michaelis, quod ille primus et prae reliquis hujus maledictionis se
fecerit participem. (5) According to [Rom
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#009)., [Psa
69:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023). of the Psalm have been
fulfilled in the present rejection of Israel. The apostle does not put
these imprecations directly into the mouth of Jesus, just as in fact
they are not appropriate to the lips of the suffering Saviour; he only
says that what the psalmist there, in the zealous ardour of the
prophetic Spirit - a zeal partaking of the severity of Sinai and of the
spirit of Elias - invokes upon this enemies, has been completely
fulfilled in those who wickedly have laid violent hands upon the Holy
One of God. The typically prophetic hints of the Psalm are far from
being exhausted by these New Testament quotations. One is reminded, in
connection with [Psa 69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012), of the
mockery of Jesus by the soldiers in the praetorium, [Mat
27:27-30](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027); by [Psa
69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021), of the offer of vinegar mingled
with gall (according to [Mar 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023),
wine mingled with myrrh) which Jesus refused, before the crucifixion,
[Mat 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034), and of the sponge dipped
in vinegar which they put to the mouth of the crucified One by means of
a stalk of hyssop, [Joh 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029). When
John there says that Jesus, freely and consciously preparing Himself to
die, only desired a drink in order that, according to God's appointment,
the Scripture might receive its utmost fulfilment, he thereby points
back to [Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016) and [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022). And what an amount of New
Testament light, so to speak, falls upon [Psa
69:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#027) when we compare with it [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001) and [Zac
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#007)! The whole Psalm is typically
prophetic, in as far as it is a declaration of a history of life and
suffering moulded by God into a factual prediction concerning Jesus the
Christ, whether it be the story of a king or a prophet; and in as far as
the Spirit of prophecy has even moulded the declaration itself into the
language of prophecy concerning the future One.

The Psalm falls into three parts, consisting of the following strophes:
(1) 3. 5. 6. 6. 7; (2) 5. 6. 7; (3) 6. 6. 6. 6. 6. Does שׁושׁנּים
perhaps point to the preponderating six-line strophes under the emblem
of the six-leaved lily? This can hardly be the case. The old expositors
said that the Psalm was so inscribed because it treats of the white rose
of the holy innocence of Christ, and of the red rose of His precious
blood. שׁושׁן properly does not signify a rose; this flower was
altogether unknown in the Holy Land at the time this Psalm was written.
The rose was not transplanted thither out of Central Asia until much
later, and was called ורד (ῥόδον); שׁושׁן, on the other hand, is the
white, and in the Holy Land mostly red, lily - certainly, as a plant, a
beautiful emblem of Christ. Propter me, says Origen, qui in convalle
eram, Sponsus descendit et fit lilium.

[Psalms 69:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 69:1</span></span>

Out of deep distress, the work of his foes, the complaining one cries
for help; he thinks upon his sins, which is sufferings bring to his
remembrance, but he is also distinctly conscious that he is an object of
scorn and hostility for God's sake, and from His mercy he looks for help
in accordance with His promises. The waters are said to rush in unto the
soul (עד־נפשׁ), when they so press upon the imperilled one that the
soul, i.e., the life of the body, more especially the breath, is
threatened; cf. [Jon 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#006); [Jer
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010). Waters are also a figure of
calamities that come on like a flood and drag one into their vortex,
[Psa 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#017); [Psa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006); [Psa
124:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#005), cf. [Psa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012); [Psa
88:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#008), [Psa
88:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#018); here, however, the figure is
cut off in such a way that it conveys the impression of reality
expressed in a poetical form, as in Ps 40, and much the same as in
Jonah's psalm. The soft, yielding morass is called יון, and the eddying
deep מצוּלה. The Nomen Hophal. מעמד signifies properly a being placed,
then a standing-place, or firm standing (lxx ὑπόστασις), like מטּה, that
which is stretched out, extension, [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008). שׁבּלת (Ephraimitish סבּלת) is a
streaming, a flood, from שׁבל, Arab. sbl, to stream, flow (cf. note on
[Psa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009)). בּוא בּ, to fall into, as
in [Psa 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012), and שׁטף with an
accusative, to overflow, as in [Psa
124:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#004). The complaining one is nearly
drowned in consequence of his sinking down, for he has long cried in
vain for help: he is wearied by continual crying (יגע בּ, as in [Psa
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007), [Jer
45:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#003)), his throat is parched (נחר from
חרר; lxx and Jerome: it is become hoarse), his eyes have failed ([Jer
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#006)) him, who waits upon his God. The
participle מיחל, equal to a relative clause, is, as in 18:51, [Kg1
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#006), attached to the suffix of the
preceding noun (Hitzig). Distinct from this use of the participle
without the article is the adverbially qualifying participle in [Gen
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#008); [Sol
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#002), cf. חי, [Sa2
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#021); [Sa2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014). There is no necessity for the
correction of the text מיּחל (lxx apo' τοῦ elpi'zein me). Concerning the
accentuation of רבּוּ vid., on [Psa
38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020). Apart from the words "more than
the hairs of my head" ([Psa 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013)),
the complaint of the multitude of groundless enemies is just the same as
in [Psa 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020); [Psa
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#019), cf. [Psa
109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003), both in substance and
expression. Instead of מצמיתי, my destroyers, the Syriac version has the
reading מעצמותי (more numerous than my bones), which is approved by
Hupfeld; but to reckon the multitude of the enemy by the number of one's
own bones is both devoid of taste and unheard of. Moreover the reading
of our text finds support, if it need any, in [Lam
3:52](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#052). The words, "what I have not
taken away, I must then restore," are intended by way of example, and
perhaps, as also in [Jer 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010), as a
proverbial expression: that which I have not done wrong, I must suffer
for (cf. [Jer 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010), and the similar
complaint in [Psa 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#011)). One is
tempted to take אז in the sense of "nevertheless" (Ewald), a meaning,
however, which it is by no means intended to convey. In this passage it
takes the place of זאת (cf. οὕτως for ταῦτα, [Mat
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)), inasmuch as it gives prominence
to the restitution desired, as an inference from a false assumption:
then, although I took it not away, stole it not.

The transition from the bewailing of suffering to a confession of sin is
like [Psa 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#013). In the undeserved
persecution which he endures at the hand of man, he is obliged
nevertheless to recognise well-merited chastisement from the side of
God. And whilst by אתּה ידעתּ (cf. [Psa
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#010), [Jer
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015); [Jer
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016); [Jer
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#023), and on ל as an exponent of the
object, [Jer 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#016); [Jer
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#002)) he does not acknowledge himself
to be a sinner after the standard of his own shortsightedness, but of
the divine omniscience, he at the same time commends his sinful need,
which with self-accusing modesty he calls אוּלת ([Psa
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)) and אשׁמות ([Ch2
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#010)), to the mercy of the omniscient
One. Should he, the sinner, be abandoned by God to destruction, then all
those who are faithful in their intentions towards the Lord would be
brought to shame and confusion in him, inasmuch as they would be taunted
with this example. קויך designates the godly from the side of the
πίστις, and מבקשׁיךa from the side of the ἀγάπη. The multiplied names of
God are so many appeals to God's honour, to the truthfulness of His
covenant relationship. The person praying here is, it is true, a sinner,
but that is no justification of the conduct of men towards him; he is
suffering for the Lord's sake, and it is the Lord Himself who is reviled
in him. It is upon this he bases his prayer in [Psa
69:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#008). עליך, for thy sake, as in [Psa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023); [Jer
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015). The reproach that he has to
bear, and ignominy that has covered his face and made it quite
unrecognisable ([Psa 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#016), cf. [Psa
83:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#017)), have totally estranged ([Psa
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012), cf. [Psa
88:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#009), [Job
19:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#013); [Jer
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006)) from him even his own brethren
(אחי, parallel word בּני אמּי, as in [Psa
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#020); cf. on the other hand, [Gen
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008), where the interchange designedly
takes another form of expression); for the glow of his zeal (קנאהּ from
קנא, according to the Arabic, to be a deep or bright red) for the house
of Jahve, viz., for the sanctity of the sanctuary and of the
congregation gathered about it (which is never directly called "the
house of Jahve" in the Old Testament, vid., Khler on [Zac
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008), but here, as in [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007); [Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001), is so called in conjunction with
the sanctuary), as also for the honour of His who sits enthroned
therein, consumes him, like a fire burning in his bones which
incessantly breaks forth and rages all through him ([Jer
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009); [Jer
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009)), and therefore all the malice of
those who are estranged from God is concentrated upon and against him.

He now goes on to describe how sorrow for the sad condition of the house
of God has brought noting but reproach to him (cf. [Psa
109:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#024).). It is doubtful whether נפשׁי
is an alternating subject to ואבכּה (fut. consec. without being
apocopated), cf. [Jer 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017), or a more
minutely defining accusative as in [Isa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009) (vid., on [Psa
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#005)), or whether, together with
בּצּום, it forms a circumstantial clause (et flevi dum in jejunio esset
anima mea), or even whether it is intended to be taken as an accusative
of the object in a pregnant construction (= בּכה ושׁפך נפשׁו, [Psa
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#005); [Sa1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015)): I wept away my soul in fasting.
Among all these possible renderings, the last is the least probable, and
the first, according to [Psa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#003);
83:19, by far the most probable, and also that which is assumed by the
accentuation.

(Note: The Munach of בצום is a transformation of Dech (just as the
Munach of לחרפות is a transformation of Mugrash), in connection with
which נקשי might certainly be conceived of even as object (cf. [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)); but this after ואבכּה (not
ואבכּה), and as being without example, could hardly have entered the
minds of the punctuists.)

The reading of the lxx ואענּה, καὶ συνέκαψα (Olshausen, Hupfeld, and
Bttcher), is a very natural ([Psa
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013)) exchange of the poetically bold
expression for one less choice and less expressive (since ענּה נפשׁ is a
phrase of the Pentateuch equivalent to צוּם). The garb of mourning, like
the fasting, is an expression of sorrow for public distresses, not, as
in [Psa 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013), of personal condolence;
concerning ואתּנה, vid., on [Psa 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006).
On account of this mourning, reproach after reproach comes upon him, and
they fling gibes and raillery at him; everywhere, both in the gate, the
place where the judges sit and where business is transacted, and also at
carousals, he is jeered at and traduced ([Lam
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014), cf. [Lam
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#014); [Job
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009)). שׂיח בּ signifies in itself
fabulari de... without any bad secondary meaning (cf. [Pro
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#022), confabulabitur tecum); here it
is construed first with a personal and then a neuter subject (cf. [Amo
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#003)), for in [Psa
69:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#013) neither הייתי ([Job
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009); [Lam
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014)) nor אני ([Lam
3:63](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#063)) is to be supplied. [Psa
69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014) tells us how he acts in the face
of such hatred and scorn; ואני, as in [Psa
109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004), sarcasmis hostium suam opponit
in precibus constantiam (Geier). As for himself, his prayer is directed
towards Jahve at the present time, when his affliction as a witness for
God gives him the assurance that He will be well-pleased to accept it
(עת רצון = בעת רצון, [Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)). It is
addressed to Him who is at the same time Jahve and Elohim, - the
revealed One in connection with the history of redemption, and the
absolute One in His exaltation above the world, - on the ground of the
greatness and fulness of His mercy: may He then answer him with or in
the truth of His salvation, i.e., the infallibility with which His
purpose of mercy verifies itself in accordance with the promises given.
Thus is [Psa 69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014) to be explained in
accordance with the accentuation. According to [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008), it looks as though עת רצון must
be drawn to ענני (Hitzig), but [Psa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006) sets us right on this point; and
the fact that ברב־חסדך is joined to [Psa
69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014) also finds support from [Psa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008). But the repetition of the divine
name perplexes one, and it may be asked whether or not the accent that
divides the verse into its two parts might not more properly stand
beside רצון, as in [Psa 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006) beside
מצא; so that [Psa 69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014) runs: Elohim,
by virtue of the greatness of Thy mercy hear me, by virtue of the truth
of Thy salvation.

[Psalms 69:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 69:14</span></span>

In this second part the petition by which the first is as it were
encircled, is continued; the peril grows greater the longer it lasts,
and with it the importunity of the cry for help. The figure of sinking
in the mire or mud and in the depths of the pit (בּאר, Ps 55:24, cf.
בור, [Psa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#003)) is again taken up, and
so studiously wrought out, that the impression forces itself upon one
that the poet is here describing something that has really taken place.
The combination "from those who hate me and from the depths of the
waters" shows that "the depths of the waters" is not a merely rhetorical
figure; and the form of the prayer: let not the pit (the well-pit or
covered tank) close (תּאטּר with Dagesh in the Teth, in order to guard
against its being read תּאטר; cf. on the signification of אטּר, clausus
= claudus, scil. manu) its mouth (i.e., its upper opening) upon me,
exceeds the limits of anything that can be allowed to mere rhetoric.
"Let not the water-flood overflow me" is intended to say, since it has,
according to [Psa 69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003), already
happened, let it not go further to my entire destruction. The "answer
me" in [Psa 69:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#017) is based upon the
plea that God's loving-kindness is טּוב, i.e., good, absolutely good (as
in the kindred passion-Psalm, [Psa
109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021)), better than all besides ([Psa
63:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#004)), the means of healing or
salvation from all evil. On [Psa 69:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#017)
cf. [Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003), [Lam
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#032). In [Psa
69:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#018) the prayer is based upon the
painful situation of the poet, which urgently calls for speedy help (מהר
beside the imperative, [Psa 102:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#003);
[Psa 143:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#007); [Gen
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#022); [Est
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010), is certainly itself not an
imperative like הרב, [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004), but an
adverbial infinitive as in [Psa 79:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#008)).
קרבה, or, in order to ensure the pronunciation ḳorbah in distinction
from ḳārbah, [Deu 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#009), קרבה (in Baer,

(Note: Originally - was the sign for every kind of o6, hence the Masora
includes the חטוף also under the name קמץ חטף; vid., Luther.
Zeitschrift, 1863, S. 412,f., cf. Wright, Genesis, p. xxix.))

is imperat. Kal; cf. the fulfilment in [Lam
3:57](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#057). The reason assigned, "because of
mine enemies," as in [Psa 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009); [Psa
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#011), and frequently, is to be
understood according to [Psa 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005) :
the honour of the all-holy One cannot suffer the enemies of the
righteous to triumph over him.

(Note: Both נפשׁי and איבי, contrary to logical interpunction, are
marked with Munach; the former ought properly to have Dech, and the
latter Mugrash. But since neither the Athnach-word nor the Silluk-word
has two syllables preceding the tone syllable, the accents are
transformed according to Accentuationssystem, xviii. 2, 4.)

The accumulation of synonyms in [Psa
69:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#020) is Jeremiah's custom, [Jer
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#014); [Jer
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#005), [Jer
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007); [Jer
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037), and is found also in Ps 31
([Psa 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010)) and Ps 44 ([Psa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004), [Psa
44:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#017), [Psa
44:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#025)). On הרפּה שׁברה לבּי, cf. [Psa
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019), [Jer
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#009). The ἅπαξ γεγραμ, ואנוּשׁה
(historical tense), from נוּשׁ, is explained by ענוּשׁ from אנשׁ,
sickly, dangerously ill, evil-disposed, which is a favourite word in
Jeremiah. Moreover נוּד in the signification of manifesting pity, not
found elsewhere in the Psalter, is common in Jeremiah, e.g., [Psa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005); it signifies originally to nod
to any one as a sign of a pity that sympathizes with him and recognises
the magnitude of the evil. "To give wormwood for meat and מי־ראשׁ to
drink" is a Jeremianic ([Jer 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014);
[Jer 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#014); [Jer
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#015)) designation for inflicting the
extreme of pain and anguish upon one. ראשׁ (רושׁ) signifies first of all
a poisonous plant with an umbellated head of flower or a capitate fruit;
but then, since bitter and poisonous are interchangeable notions in the
Semitic languages, it signifies gall as the bitterest of the bitter. The
lxx renders: καὶ ἔδωκαν εἰς τὸ βρῶμά μου χολήν, καὶ εἰς τὴν δίψαν μου
ἐπότισάν με ὄξος. Certainly נתן בּ can mean to put something into
something, to mix something with it, but the parallel word לצמאי (for my
thirst, i.e., for the quenching of it, [Neh
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#015), [Neh
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#020)) favours the supposition that the
בּ of בּברוּתי is Beth essentiae, after which Luther renders: "they give
me gall to eat." The ἅπαξ γεγραμ. בּרוּת ([Lam
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010) בּרות) signifies βρῶσις, from
בּרה, βιβρώσκειν (root βορ, Sanscrit gar, Latin vor-are).

[Psalms 69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 69:22</span></span>

The description of the suffering has reached its climax in [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022), at which the wrath of the
persecuted one flames up and bursts forth in imprecations. The first
imprecation joins itself upon [Psa
69:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#022). They have given the sufferer
gall and vinegar; therefore their table, which was abundantly supplied,
is to be turned into a snare to them, from which they shall not be able
to escape, and that לפניהם, in the very midst of their banqueting,
whilst the table stands spread out before them ([Eze
23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041)). שׁלומים (collateral form of
שׁלמים) is the name given to them as being carnally secure; the word
signifies the peaceable or secure in a good ([Psa
55:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#021)) and in a bad sense. Destruction
is to overtake them suddenly, "when they say: Peace and safety" ([Th1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003)). The lxx erroneously renders: καὶ
εἰς ἀνταπόδοσιν = וּלשׁלּוּמים. The association of ideas in [Psa
69:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#024) is transparent. With their eyes
they have feasted themselves upon the sufferer, and in the strength of
their loins they have ill-treated him. These eyes with their
bloodthirsty malignant looks are to grow blind. These loins full of
defiant self-confidence are to shake (המעד, imperat. Hiph. like הרחק,
[Job 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#021), from המעיד, for which in
[Eze 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#007), and perhaps also in [Dan
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#014), we find העמיד). Further: God is
to pour out His wrath upon them ([Psa
79:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#006); [Hos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#010); [Jer
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#025)), i.e., let loose against them
the cosmical forces of destruction existing originally in His nature.
זעמּך has the Dagesh in order to distinguish it in pronunciation from
זעמך. In [Psa 69:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#026) טירה (from טוּר,
to encircle) is a designation of an encamping or dwelling-place (lxx
ἔπαυλις) taken from the circular encampments (Arabic ṣı̂rât, ṣirât, and
dwâr, duâr) of the nomads ([Gen
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016)). The laying waste and
desolation of his own house is the most fearful of all misfortunes to
the Semite (Job, note to [Psa 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#015)).
The poet derives the justification of such fearful imprecations from the
fact that they persecute him, who is besides smitten of God. God has
smitten him on account of his sins, and that by having placed him in the
midst of a time in which he must be consumed with zeal and solicitude
for the house of God. The suffering decreed for him by God is therefore
at one and the same time suffering as a chastisement and as a witnessing
for God; and they heighten this suffering by every means in their power,
not manifesting any pity for him or any indulgence, but imputing to him
sins that he has not committed, and requiting him with deadly hatred for
benefits for which they owed him thanks.

There are also some others, although but few, who share this martyrdom
with him. The psalmist calls them, as he looks up to Jahve, חלליך, Thy
fatally smitten ones; they are those to whom God has appointed that they
should bear within themselves a pierced or wounded heart (vid., [Psa
109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022), cf. [Jer
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018)) in the face of such a godless
age. Of the deep grief (אל, as in [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007)) of these do they tell, viz., with
self-righteous, self-blinded mockery (cf. the Talmudic phrase ספר בלשׁון
הרע or ספר לשׁון הרע, of evil report or slander). The lxx and Syriac
render יוסיפוּ (προσέθηκαν): they add to the anguish; the Targum,
Aquila, Symmachus, and Jerome follow the traditional text. Let God
therefore, by the complete withdrawal of His grace, suffer them to fall
from one sin into another - this is the meaning of the da culpam super
culpam eorum - in order that accumulated judgment may correspond to the
accumulated guilt ([Jer 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#018)). Let
the entrance into God's righteousness, i.e., His justifying and
sanctifying grace, be denied to them for ever. Let them be blotted out
of ספר חיּים ([Exo 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032), cf. [Isa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003); [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)), that is to say, struck out of
the list of the living, and that of the living in this present world;
for it is only in the New Testament that we meet with the Book of Life
as a list of the names of the heirs of the ζωὴ αἰώνιος. According to the
conception both of the Old and of the New Testament the צדיקים are the
heirs of life. Therefore [Psa 69:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#029)
wishes that they may not be written by the side of the righteous, who,
according to [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004), "live," i.e.,
are preserved, by their faith. With ואני the poet contrasts himself, as
in Ps 40:18, with those deserving of execration. They are now on high,
but in order to be brought low; he is miserable and full of poignant
pain, but in order to be exalted; God's salvation will remove him from
his enemies on to a height that is too steep for them ([Psa
59:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#002); [Psa
91:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#014)). Then will he praise (הלּל) and
magnify (גּדּל) the Name of God with song and thankful confession. And
such spiritual תּודה, such thank-offering of the heart, is more pleasing
to God than an ox, a bullock, i.e., a young ox (= פּר השּׁור, an
ox-bullock, [Jdg 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#025), according to
Ges. 113), one having horns and a cloven hoof (Ges. 53, 2). The
attributives do not denote the rough material animal nature
(Hengstenberg), but their legal qualifications for being sacrificed.
מקרין is the name for the young ox as not being under three years old
(cf. [Sa1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024), lxx ἐν μόσχῳ
τριετίζοντι); מפריס as belonging to the clean four-footed animals, viz.,
those that are cloven-footed and chew the cud, Lev. 11. Even the most
stately, full-grown, clean animal that may be offered as a sacrifice
stands in the sight of Jahve very far below the sacrifice of grateful
praise coming from the heart.

When now the patient sufferers (ענוים) united with the poet by community
of affliction shall see how he offers the sacrifice of thankful
confession, they will rejoice. ראוּ is a hypothetical preterite; it is
neither וראוּ (perf. consec.), nor יראוּ ([Psa
40:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#004); [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008); [Psa
107:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042); [Job
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#019)). The declaration conveying
information to be expected in [Psa
69:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#033) after the Waw apodoseos changes
into an apostrophe of the "seekers of Elohim:" their heart shall revive,
for, as they have suffered in company with him who is now delivered,
they shall now also refresh themselves with him. We are at once reminded
of [Psa 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027), where this is as it
were the exhortation of the entertainer at the thank-offering meal. It
would be rash to read שׁמע in [Psa
69:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023), after [Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025), instead of שׁמע (Olshausen);
the one object in that passage is here generalized: Jahve is attentive
to the needy, and doth not despise His bound ones ([Psa
107:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010)), but, on the contrary, He
takes an interest in them and helps them. Starting from this
proposition, which is the clear gain of that which has been experienced,
the view of the poet widens into the prophetic prospect of the bringing
back of Israel out of the Exile into the Land of Promise. In the face of
this fact of redemption of the future he calls upon (cf. [Isa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023)) all created things to give
praise to God, who will bring about the salvation of Zion, will build
again the cities of Judah, and restore the land, freed from its
desolation, to the young God-fearing generation, the children of the
servants of God among the exiles. The feminine suffixes refer to ערי
(cf. [Jer 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#015); [Jer
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#006) Chethb). The tenor of [Isa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009) is similar. If the Psalm were
written by David, the closing turn from [Psa
69:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#023) onwards might be more difficult
of comprehension than [Psa 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007);
51:20f. If, however, it is by Jeremiah, then we do not need to persuade
ourselves that it is to be understood not of restoration and
re-peopling, but of continuance and completion (Hofmann and Kurtz).
Jeremiah lived to experience the catastrophe he foretold; but the nearer
it came to the time, the more comforting were the words with which he
predicted the termination of the Exile and the restoration of Israel.
[Jer 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#007) shows us how natural to him,
and to him in particular, was the distinction between Jerusalem and the
cities of Judah. The predictions in [Jer
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#001), which sound so in accord with
[Psa 69:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#036)., belong to the time of the
second siege. Jerusalem was not yet fallen; the strong places of the
land, however, already lay in ruins.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 70](psa070)

</div>
