<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa000)  [Next](psa002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

The Radically Distinct Lot of the Pious and the Ungodly

The collection of the Psalms and that of the prophecies of Isaiah
resemble one another in the fact, that the one begins with a discourse
that bears no superscription, and the other with a Psalm of the same
character; and these form the prologues to the two collections. From
[Act 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033), where the words: Thou art
My Son... are quoted as being found ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ ψαλμῷ, we see that in
early times [Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) was regarded as
the prologue to the collection. The reading ἐν τῷ ψαλμῷ τῷ δευτέρῳ,
rejected by Griesbach, is an old correction. But this way of numbering
the Psalms is based upon tradition. A scholium from Origen and Eusebius
says of [Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) and [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) : ἐν τῷ Ἑβραΐκῷ συνημμένοι, and
just so Apollinaris:

Ἐπιγραφῆς ὁ ψαλμὸς εὑρέθη δίχα

Ἡνωμένος δὲ τοῖς παῤ Ἑβραίοις στίχοις.

For it is an old Jewish way of looking at it, as Albertus Magnus
observes: Psalmus primus incipit a beatitudine et terminatur a
beatitudine, i.e., it begins with אשׁרי [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) and ends with אשׁרי [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012), so that consequently [Psa
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) and [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001), as is said in B. Berachoth 9b
(cf. Jer. Taanith ii. 2), form one Psalm (חדא פרשׁה). As regards the
subject-matter this is certainly not so. It is true [Psa
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) and [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) coincide in some respects (in
the former יהגה, in the latter יהגו; in the former תאבד...ודרך, in the
latter ותאכדו דוך; in the former אשׁרי at the beginning, in the latter,
at the end), but these coincidences of phraseology are not sufficient to
justify the conclusion of unity of authorship (Hitz.), much less that
the two Psalms are so intimately connected as to form one whole. These
two anonymous hymns are only so far related, as that the one is adapted
to form the proaemium of the Psalter from its ethical, the other from
its prophetic character. The question, however, arises whether this was
in the mind of the collector. Perhaps [Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) is only attached to [Psa
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) on account of those
coincidences; [Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) being the
proper prologue of the Psalter in its pentateuchal arrangement after the
pattern of the Tפra. For the Psalter is the Yea and Amen in the form of
hymns to the word of God given in the Tפra. Therefore it begins with a
Psalm which contrasts the lot of him who loves the Tפra with the lot of
the ungodly, - an echo of that exhortation, [Jos
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008), in which, after the death of
Moses, Jahve charges his successor Joshua to do all that is written in
the book of the Tפra. As the New Testament sermon on the Mount, as a
sermon on the spiritualized Law, begins with maka'rioi, so the Old
Testament Psalter, directed entirely to the application of the Law to
the inner life, begins with אשׁרי. The First book of the Psalms begins
with two אשׁרי [Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012), and closes with two אשׁרי [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005); [Psa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002). A number of Psalms begin with
אשׁרי, [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001); [Psa
41:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001); [Psa
112:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001); Ps 119; [Psa
128:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001); but we must not therefore
suppose the existence of a special kind of ashr-psalms; for, e.g., [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001) is a משׂיל, [Psa
112:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001) a Hallelujah, [Psa
128:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001) a שׁיר המעלות.

As regards the time of the composition of the Psalm, we do not wish to
lay any stress on the fact that [Ch2
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#005) sounds like an allusion to it.
But 1st, it is earlier than the time of Jeremiah; for Jeremiah was
acquainted with it. The words of curse and blessing, [Jer
17:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005), are like an expository and
embellished paraphrase of it. It is customary with Jeremiah to reproduce
the prophecies of his predecessors, and more especially the words of the
Psalms, in the flow of his discourse and to transform their style to his
own. In the present instance the following circumstance also favours the
priority of the Psalm: Jeremiah refers the curse corresponding to the
blessing to Jehoiakim and thus applies the Psalm to the history of his
own times. It is 2ndly, not earlier than the time of Solomon. For לצים
occurring only here in the whole Psalter, a word which came into use,
for the unbelievers, in the time of the Chokma (vid., the definition of
the word, [Pro 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#024)), points us to
the time of Solomon and onwards. But since it contains no indications of
contemporary history whatever, we give up the attempt to define more
minutely the date of its composition, and say with St. Columba (against
the reference of the Psalm to Joash the proteg of Jehoiada, which some
incline to): Non audiendi sunt hi, qui ad excludendam Psalmorum veram
expositionem falsas similitudines ab historia petitas conantur inducere.

(Note: Vid., Zeuss, Grammatica Celtica (1853) ii. 1065. The Commentary
of Columba on the Psalms, with Irish explanations, and coming from the
monastery of Bobbio, is among the treasures of the Ambrosiana.)

[Psalms 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 1:1</span></span>

The exclamatory אשׁרי, as also [Psa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#002); [Psa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#005); [Pro
8:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#034), has Gaja (Metheg) by the Aleph,
and in some Codd. even a second by שׁ, because it is intended to be read
asherê as an exception, on account of the significance of the word
(Baer, in Comm. ii. 495). It is the construct of the pluralet. אשׁרים
(from אשׁר, cogn.ישׁר, כּשׁר, to be straight, right, well-ordered), and
always in the form אשׁרי, even before the light suffixes (Olsh. 135, c),
as an exclamation: O the blessedness of so and so. The man who is
characterised as blessed is first described according to the things he
does not do, then (which is the chief thought of the whole Ps.)
according to what he actually does: he is not a companion of the
unrighteous, but he abides by the revealed word of God. רשׁעים are the
godless, whose moral condition is lax, devoid of stay, and as it were
gone beyond the reasonable bounds of true unity (wanting in stability of
character), so that they are like a tossed and stormy sea, [Isa
57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020).;

(Note: Nevertheless we have not to compare רעשׁ, רגשׁ, for רשׁע, but the
Arabic in the two roots Arab. rs' and rsg shows for רשׁע the primary
notion to be slack, loose, in opposition to Arab. tsdq, צדק to be hard,
firm, tight; as Arab. rumhun tsadqun, i.e., according to the Kamus Arab.
rmh ṣlb mtı̂n mstwin, a hard, firm and straight spear. We too transfer
the idea of being lax and loose to the province of ethics: the
difference is only one of degree. The same two primary notions are also
opposed to one another in speaking of the intellect: Arab. hakuma, wise,
prop. thick, firm, stout, solid, and Arab. sachufa, foolish, simple,
prop. thin, loose, without stay, like a bad piece of weaving, vid.,
Fleischer's translation of Samachschari's Golden Necklace pp. 26 and 27
Anm. 76. Thus רשׁע means the loose man and indeed as a moral-religyous
notion loose from God, godless comp. Bibl. Psychol. p. 189. transl.\].)

חטּאים (from the sing. חטּא, instead of which חטא is usually found)
sinners, ἁμαρτωλοί, who pass their lives in sin, especially coarse and
manifest sin; לצים (from לוּץ, as מת from מוּת) scoffers, who make that
which is divine, holy, and true a subject of frivolous jesting. The
three appellations form a climax: impii corde, peccatores opere,
illusores ore, in accordance with which עצה (from יעץ figere, statuere),
resolution, bias of the will, and thus way of thinking, is used in
reference to the first, as in [Job
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016); [Job
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#018); in reference to the second,
דּרך mode of conduct, action, life; in reference to the third, מושׁב
which like the Arabic mglis signifies both seat ([Job
29:7](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#007)) and assembling ([Psa
107:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#032)), be it official or social (cf.
[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)., [Jer
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#017)). On הלך בּ, in an ethical
sense, cf. [Mic 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#016); [Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024). Therefore: Blessed is he who
does not walk in the state of mind which the ungodly cherish, much less
that he should associate with the vicious life of sinners, or even
delight in the company of those who scoff at religion. The description
now continues with כּי אם (imo si, Ges. 155, 2, 9): but (if) his delight
is, = (substantival instead of the verbal clause:) he delights (חפץ cf.
Arab. chfd f. i. with the primary notion of firmly adhering, vid., on
[Job 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#017)) in תורת ה, the teaching of
Jahve, which is become Israel's νόμος, rule of life; in this he
meditates profoundly by day and night (two acc. with the old accusative
terminations am and ah). The perff. in [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001) describe what he all along has
never done, the fut. יהגּה, what he is always striving to do; הגה of a
deep (cf. Arab. hjj, depressum esse), dull sound, as if vibrating
between within and without, here signifies the quiet soliloquy (cf.
Arab. hjs, mussitando secum loqui) of one who is searching and thinking.

With והיה,

(Note: By the Sheb stands Metheg (Gaja), as it does wherever a word,
with Sheb in the first syllable, has Olewejored, Rebia magnum, or Dech
without a conjunctive preceding, in case at least one vowel and no
Metheg-except perhaps that standing before Sheb compos. - lies between
the Sheb and the tone, e.g., ננתּקה (with Dech) [Psa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003), ואענהוּ [Psa
91:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#015) and the like. The intonation of
the accent is said in these instances to begin, by anticipation, with
the fugitive ĕ.)

in [Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003), the development of the
אשׁרי now begins; it is the praet. consec.: he becomes in consequence of
this, he is thereby, like a tree planted beside the water-courses, which
yields its fruit at the proper season and its leaf does not fall off. In
distinction from נטוּע, according to Jalkut 614, שׁתוּל means firmly
planted, so that no winds that may rage around it are able to remove it
from its place (אין מזיזין אתו ממקומו). In פּלגי מים, both מים and the
plur. serve to give intensity to the figure; פּלג (Arab. fal'g, from פלג
to divide, [Job 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#025)) means the brook
meandering and cleaving its course for itself through the soil and
stones; the plur. denotes either one brook regarded from its abundance
of water, or even several which from different directions supply the
tree with nourishing and refreshing moisture. In the relative clause the
whole emphasis does not rest on בּעתּו (Calvin: impii, licet praecoces
fructus ostentent, nihil tamen producunt nisi abortivum), but פּריו is
the first, בּעתּו the second tone-word: the fruit which one expects from
it, it yields (equivalent to יעשׂה it produces, elsewhere), and that at
its appointed, proper time (= בּעדתּו, for עת is = עדת or עדת, like רדת,
לדת, from ועד), without ever disappointing that hope in the course of
the recurring seasons. The clause ועלהוּ לא יבּול is the other half of
the relative clause: and its foliage does not fall off or wither (נבל
like the synon. Arab. dbl, from the root בל).

The green foliage is an emblem of faith, which converts the water of
life of the divine word into sap and strength, and the fruit, an emblem
of works, which gradually ripen and scatter their blessings around; a
tree that has lost its leaves, does not bring its fruit to maturity. It
is only with וכל, where the language becomes unemblematic, that the man
who loves the Law of God again becomes the direct subject. The
accentuation treats this member of the verse as the third member of the
relative clause; one may, however, say of a thriving plant צלח, but not
הצליח. This Hiph. (from צלח, Arab. tslh, to divide, press forward, press
through, vid., [Psa 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)) signifies
both causative: to cause anything to go through, or prosper ([Gen
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#023)), and transitive: to carry
through, and intransitive: to succeed, prosper ([Jdg
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#005)). With the first meaning, Jahve
would be the subject; with the third, the project of the righteous; with
the middle one, the righteous man himself. This last is the most
natural: everything he takes in hand he brings to a successful issue (an
expression like [Ch2 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#011); [Ch2
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#021); [Dan
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#024)). What a richly flowing brook is
to the tree that is planted on its bank, such is the word of God to him
who devotes himself to it: it makes him, according to his position and
calling, ever fruitful in good and well-timed deeds and keeps him fresh
in his inner and outward life, and whatsoever such an one undertakes, he
brings to a successful issue, for the might of the word and of the
blessing of God is in his actions.

[Psalms 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 1:4</span></span>

The ungodly (הרשׁעים, with the demonstrative art.) are the opposite of a
tree planted by the water-courses: they are כּמּץ, like chaff (from מוּץ
to press out), which the wind drives away, viz., from the loftily
situated threshing-floor ([Isa 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013)),
i.e., without root below, without fruit above, devoid of all the vigour
and freshness of life, lying loose upon the threshing-floor and a prey
of the slightest breeze-thus utterly worthless and unstable. With על־כּן
an inference is drawn from this moral characteristic of the ungodly:
just on account of their inner worthlessness and instability they do not
stand בּמּשׁפּט. This is the word for the judgment of just recompense to
which God brings each individual man and all without exception with all
their words ([Ecc 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014)), - His
righteous government, which takes cognisance of the whole life of each
individual and the history of nations and recompenses according to
desert. In this judgment the ungodly cannot stand (קוּם to continue to
stand, like עמד [Psa 130:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#003) to keep
one's self erect), nor sinners בּעדת צדיקים. The congregation (עדה( noi
= ‛idah, from ועד, יעד) of the righteous is the congregation of Jahve
(עדת ה), which, according to its nature which is ordained and inwrought
by God, is a congregation of the righteous, to which consequently the
unrighteous belong only outwardly and visibly: ου ̓ γὰρ πάντες οἱ ἐξ
Ἰσραήλ οὗτοι Ἰσραήλ, [Rom 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006). God's
judgment, when and wheresoever he may hold it, shall trace back this
appearance to its nothingness. When the time of the divine decision
shall come, which also separates outwardly that which is now inwardly
separate, viz., righteous and unrighteous, wheat and chaff, then shall
the unrighteous be driven away like chaff before the storm, and their
temporary prosperity, which had no divine roots, come to a fearful end.
For Jahve knoweth the way of the righteous, יודע as in [Psa
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#018); [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023); [Ti2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019), and frequently. What is intended
is, as the schoolmen say, a nosse con affectu et effectu, a knowledge
which is in living, intimate relationship to its subject and at the same
time is inclined to it and bound to it by love. The way, i.e., the
life's course, of the righteous has God as its goal; God knows this way,
which on this very account also unfailingly reaches its goal. On the
contrary, the way of the ungodly תּאבד, perishes, because left to
itself, - goes down to אבדּון, loses itself, without reaching the goal
set before it, in darkest night. The way of the righteous only is דּרך
עולם, [Psa 139:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#024), a way that ends in
eternal life. [Psa 112:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001) which
begins with אשׁרי ends with the same fearful תאבד.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 2](psa002)

</div>
