<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa031)  [Next](psa033) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 32:0</span></span>

The Way to the Forgiveness of Sins

There are several prominent marks by which this Psalm is coupled with
the preceding (vid., Symbolae ֗52). In both Psalms, with the word
אמרתּי, the psalmist looks back upon some fact of his spiritual life;
and both close with an exhortation to the godly, which stands in the
relation of a general inference to the whole Psalm. But in other
respects the two Psalms differ. For Ps 31 is a prayer under
circumstances of outward distress, and [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001) is a didactic Psalm,
concerning the way of penitence which leads to the forgiveness of sins;
it is the second of the seven Psalmi paenitentiales of the church, and
Augustine's favourite Psalm. We might take Augustine's words as its
motto: intelligentia prima est ut te noris peccatorem. The poet bases it
upon his own personal experience, and then applies the general teaching
which he deduces from it, to each individual in the church of God. For a
whole year after his adultery David was like one under sentence of
condemnation. In the midst of this fearful anguish of soul he composed
Ps 51, whereas [Psa 32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001) was
composed after his deliverance from this state of mind. The former was
written in the very midst of the penitential struggle; the latter after
he had recovered his inward peace. The theme of this Psalm is the
precious treasure which he brought up out of that abyss of spiritual
distress, viz., the doctrine of the blessedness of forgiveness, the
sincere and unreserved confession of sin as the way to it, and the
protection of God in every danger, together with joy in God, as its
fruits.

In the signification psalmus didascalicus s. informatorius (Reuchlin: ut
si liceret dicere intellectificum vel resipiscentificum), משׂכּי would
after all be as appropriate a designation as we could have for this
Psalm which teachers the way of salvation. This meaning, however, cannot
be sustained. It is improbable that משׂכּיל, which, in all other
instances, signifies intelligens, should, as a technical term, mean
intelligentem faciens; because the Hiph. השׂכּיל, in the causative
meaning "to impart understanding," occurs only in solitary instances
([Psa 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008), [Pro
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#011)) in the Hebrew of the period
before the Exile, and only came into common use in the later language
(in Daniel, Chronicles, and Nehemiah). But, that which is decisive
against the meaning "a didactic poem" is the fact, that among the
thirteen Psalms which are inscribed משׂיל, there are only two ([Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001) and Ps 78) which can be
regarded as didactic poems. Ps 45 is called, in addition, שׁיר ידידת,
and [Psa 142:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001), תּפּלּה, two names
which ill accord with a didactic intention and plan. Even [Psa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#008), a passage of importance in the
determining of the right idea of the word, in which משׂיל occurs as an
accusative of the object, excludes the meaning "didactic poem." Ewald
observes (Dichter des Alten Bundes, i. 31) that "in [Psa
47:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#008) we have the safest guide to the
correct meaning of the word; in this passage משׂיל stands side by side
with זמּר as a more exact definition of the singing and there can be no
doubt, that an intelligent, melodious song must be equivalent to choice
or delicate, skillfully composed song." But in all other cases, משׂיל is
only found as an attribute of persons, because it is not that which
makes prudent, but that which is itself intelligent, that is so named.
Even in [Ch2 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#022), where allusion is
made to the Maskı̂l Psalms, it is the Levite musicians themselves who are
called (שׂכל טוב) המשׂכילים (i.e., those who play skillfully with
delicate tact). Thus then we are driven to the Hiphil meaning of pensive
meditation in [Psa 106:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#007), cf. [Psa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002), [Pro
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#020); so that משׂכּיל signifies that
which meditates, then meditation, just like מכבּיר, that which
multiplies, and then fulness; משׁחית, that which destroys, and then
destruction. From the Maskı̂l Psalms, as e.g., from [Psa
54:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001) and [Psa
142:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#001), we cannot discover anything
special as to the technical meaning or use of the word. The word means
just pia meditatio, a devout meditation, and nothing more.

[Psalms 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 32:1</span></span>

The Psalm begins with the celebration of the happiness of the man who
experiences God's justifying grace, when he gives himself up
unreservedly to Him. Sin is called פּשׁע, as being a breaking loose or
tearing away from God; חטאה, as a deviation from that which is
well-pleasing to God; עון, as a perversion, distortion, misdeed. The
forgiveness of sin is styled נשׂא ([Exo
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007)), as a lifting up and taking
away, αἴρειν and ἀφαιρεῖν, [Exo 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#007);
כּסּה ([Psa 85:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#003), [Pro
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#012), [Neh
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#005)), as a covering, so that it
becomes invisible to God, the Holy One, and is as though it had never
taken place; לא חשׁב ([Sa2 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#020), cf.
Arab. ḥsb, to number, reckon, ου ̓ λογίζεσθαι, [Rom
4:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#006)), as a non-imputing; the
δικαιοσύνη χωρὶς ἔργων is here distinctly expressed. The justified one
is called נשׂוּי־פּשׁע, as being one who is exempted from transgression,
praevaricatione levatus (Ges. ֗135, 1); נשׂוּי, instead of נשׁא, [Isa
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#024), is intended to rhyme with
כּסוּי (which is the part. to כּסּה, just as בּרוּך is the participle to
כּרך); vid., on [Isa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013). One
"covered of sin" is one over whose sin lies the covering of expiation
(כּפּר, root כף, to cover, cogn. Arab. gfr, chfr, chmr, gmr) before the
holy eyes of God. The third designation is an attributive clause: "to
whom Jahve doth not reckon misdeed," inasmuch as He, on the contrary,
regards it as discharged or as settled. He who is thus justified,
however, is only he in whose spirit there is no רמיּה, no deceit, which
denies and hides, or extenuates and excuses, this or that favourite sin.
One such sin designedly retained is a secret ban, which stands in the
way of justification.

[Psalms 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 32:3</span></span>

For, as his own experience has taught the poet, he who does not in
confession pour out all his corruption before God, only tortures himself
until he unburdens himself of his secret curse. Since [Psa
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#003) by itself cannot be regarded as
the reason for the proposition just laid down, כּי signifies either
"because, quod" (e.g., [Pro 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#022)) or
"when, quum" ([Jdg 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#016); [Hos
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#010). The שׁאגה was an outburst of
the tortures which his accusing conscience prepared for him. The more he
strove against confessing, the louder did conscience speak; and while it
was not in his power to silence this inward voice, in which the wrath of
God found utterance, he cried the whole day, viz., for help; but while
his heart was still unbroken, he cried yet received no answer. He cried
all day long, for God's punishing right hand ([Psa
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003); [Psa
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#011)) lay heavey upon him day and
night; the feeling of divine wrath left him no rest, cf. [Job
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#014). A fire burned within him which
threatened completely to devour him. The expression is בּחרבני (like
בעשׂן in [Psa 37:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#020); [Psa
102:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#004)), without כ, inasmuch as the
fears which burn fiercely within him even to his heart and, as it were,
scorch him up, he directly calls the droughts of summer. The בּ is the
Beth of the state or condition, in connection with which the change,
i.e., degeneration ([Job 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014)), took
place; for mutare in aliquid is expressed by הפך ל. The ל (which Saadia
and others have mistaken) in לשׁדּי is part of the root; לשׁד (from
לשׁד, Arab. lsd, to suck), inflected after the analogy of גּמל and the
like, signifies succus. In the summer-heat of anxiety his vital moisture
underwent a change: it burned and dried up. Here the music becomes
louder and does its part in depicting these torments of the awakened
conscience in connection with a heart that still remains unbroken. In
spite of this διάψαλμα, however, the historical connection still retains
sufficient influence to give אודיעך the force of the imperfect (cf. [Psa
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#009)): "I made known my sin and my
guilt did I not cover up (כּסּה used here as in [Pro
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#013); [Job
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#033)); I made the resolve: I will
confess my transgressions to the Lord (הודה = חתודּה, [Neh
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#006); [Neh
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#002); elsewhere construed with the
accusative, vid., [Pro 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013)) - then
Thou forgavest," etc. Hupfeld is inclined to place אמרתי before חטאתי
אודיעך, by which אודיעך and אודה would become futures; but ועוני לא
כסיתי sounds like an assertion of a fact, not the statement of an
intention, and ואתה נשׂאת is the natural continuation of the אמרתי which
immediately precedes. The form ואתה נשׂאת is designedly used instead of
ותּשּׂא. Simultaneously with his confession of sin, made fide supplice,
came also the absolution: then Thou forgavest the guilt (עון, misdeed,
as a deed and also as a matter of fact, i.e., guilt contracted, and
penance or punishment, cf. [Lam 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#006);
[Zac 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#019)) of my sin. Vox nondum est
in ore, says Augustine, et vulnus sanatur in corde. The סלה here is the
antithesis of the former one. There we have a shrill lament over the
sinner who tortures himself in vain, here the clear tones of joy at the
blessed experience of one who pours forth his soul to God - a musical
Yea and Amen to the great truth of justifying grace.

[Psalms 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 32:6</span></span>

For this mercy, which is provided for every sinner who repents and
confesses his sin, let then, every חסיד, who longs for חסד, turn in
prayer to Jahve לעת מצא, at the time ([Psa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#010); [Ch1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022); cf. בּעת, [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008)) when He, and His mercy, is to be
found (cf. [Deu 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029) with [Jer
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#013); [Isa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#006), בּהמּצאו). This hortatory wish
is followed by a promissory assurance. The fact of לשׁטף מים רבּים being
virtually a protasis: quam inundant aquae magnae (ל of the time), which
separates רק from אליו, prohibits our regarding רק as belonging to אליו
in this instance, although like אף, אך, גּם, and פּן, רק is also placed
per hypallage at the head of the clause (as in [Pro
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#010) : with pride there is only
contention), even when belonging to a part of the clause that follows
further on. The restrictive meaning of רק here, as is frequently the
case ([Deu 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006); [Jdg
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#016); [Kg1
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#025), cf. [Psa
91:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#008)), has passed over to the
affirmative: certo quum, etc. Inundation or flooding is an
exemplificative description of the divine judgment (cf. [Nah
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#008)); [Psa
32:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#006) is a brief form of expressing the
promise which is expanded in Ps 91. In [Psa
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#007), David confirms it from his own
experience. The assonance in מצּר תּצּרני (Thou wilt preserve me, so
that צר, angustum = angustiae, does not come upon me, [Psa
119:143](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#143)) is not undesigned; and after
תצרני comes רני, just like כלו after בהיכלו in [Psa
29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009). There is no sufficient ground
for setting aside רני, with Houbigant and others, as a repetition of the
half of the word תצרני. The infinitive רן ([Job
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#007)) might, like רב, plur. רבּי, חק,
plur. חקּי, with equal right be inflected as a substantive; and פּלּט
(as in [Psa 56:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#008)), which is likewise
treated as a substantive, cf. נפּץ, [Dan
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007), presents, as a genitive, no more
difficulty than does דעת in the expression אישׁ דּעת. With songs of
deliverance doth Jahve surround him, so that they encompass him on all
sides, and on occasion of exulting meets him in whatever direction he
turns. The music here again for the third time becomes forte, and that
to express the highest feeling of delight.

[Psalms 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 32:8</span></span>

It is not Jahve, who here speaks in answer to the words that have been
thus far addressed to Him. In this case the person addressed must be the
poet, who, however, has already attained the knowledge here treated of.
It is he himself who now directly adopts the tone of the teacher (cf.
[Psa 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#012)). That which David, in [Psa
51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015), promises to do, he here takes
in hand, viz., the instruction of sinners in the way of salvation. It is
unnecessary to read איעצך instead of איעצה, as Olshausen does; the
suffix of אשׂכּילך and אורך (for אורך) avails also for this third verb,
to which עליך עיני, equivalent to שׂם עליך עיני (fixing my eye upon
thee, i.e., with sympathising love taking an interest in thee), stands
in the relation of a subordinate relative clause. The lxx renders it by
ἐπιστηριῶ ἐπὶ σὲ τοὺς ὀφθαλμούς μου, so that it takes יעץ, in accordance
with its radical signification firmare, as the regens of עיני (I will
fix my eye steadfastly upon thee); but for this there is no support in
the general usage of the language. The accents give a still different
rendering; they apparently make עיני an accus. adverb. (Since אעצה עליך
עיני is transformed from איעצה עליך עיני: I will counsel thee with mine
eye; but in every other instance, יעץ על means only a hostile
determination against any one, e.g., [Isa
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#005). The form of address, without
changing its object, passes over, in [Psa
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009), into the plural and the
expression becomes harsh in perfect keeping with the perverted character
which it describes. The sense is on the whole clear: not constrained,
but willing obedience is becoming to man, in distinction from an
irrational animal which must be led by a bridle drawn through its mouth.
The asyndeton clause: like a horse, a mule (פּרד as an animal that is
isolated and does not pair; cf. Arab. fard, alone of its kind, single,
unlike, the opposite of which is Arab. zawj, a pair, equal number), has
nothing remarkable about it, cf. [Psa
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#014); [Isa
38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014). But it is not clear what עדיו
is intended to mean. We might take it in its usual signification
"ornament," and render "with bit and bridle, its ornament," and perhaps
at once recognise therein an allusion to the senseless servility of the
animal, viz., that its ornament is also the means by which it is kept in
check, unless עדי, ornament, is perhaps directly equivalent to
"harness." Still the rendering of the lxx is to be respected: in camo et
fraeno - as Jerome reproduces it - maxilas eorum constringere qui non
approximant ad te. If עדי means jaw, mouth or check, then עדיו לבלום is
equivalent to ora eorum obturanda sunt (Ges. 132, rem. 1), which the lxx
expressed by ἄγξαι, constringe, or following the Cod. Alex., ἄγξις
(ἄγξεις), constringes. Like Ewald and Hitzig (on [Eze
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#007)), we may compare with עדי, the
cheek, the Arabic chadd, which, being connected with גּדוּד, a furrow,
signifies properly the furrow of the face, i.e., the indented part
running downwards from the inner corners of the eyes to both sides of
the nose, but then by synecdoche the cheek. If \`dyw refers to the mouth
or jaws, then it looks as if בּל קרב אליך must be translated: in order
that they may not come too near thee, viz., to hurt thee (Targ., Syriac,
Rashi, etc.); but this rendering does not produce any point of
comparison corresponding to the context of this Psalm. Therefore, it is
rather to be rendered: otherwise there is no coming near to thee. This
interpretation takes the emphasis of the בל into account, and assumes
that, according to a usage of the language that is without further
support, one might, for instance, say: בּל לכתּי שׁמּה, "I will never go
thither." In [Pro 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#017), בל also
includes within itself the verb to be. So here: by no means an
approaching to thee, i.e., there is, if thou dost not bridle them, no
approaching or coming near to thee. These words are not addressed to
God, but to man, who is obliged to use harsh and forcible means in
taming animals, and can only thus keep them under his control and near
to him. In the antitype, it is the sinner, who will not come to God,
although God only is his help, and who, as David has learned by
experience, must first of all endure inward torture, before he comes to
a right state of mind. This agonising life of the guilty conscience
which the ungodly man leads, is contrasted in [Psa
32:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#010) with the mercy which encompasses
on all sides him, who trusts in God. רבּים, in accordance with the
treatment of this adjective as if it were a numeral (vid., [Psa
89:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#051)), is an attributive or adjective
placed before its noun. The final clause might be rendered: mercy
encompasses him; but the Poel and [Psa
32:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#007) favour the rendering: with mercy
doth He encompass him.

[Psalms 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 32:11</span></span>

After the doctrine of the Psalm has been unfolded in three unequal
groups of verses, there follows, corresponding to the brief
introduction, a still shorter close, which calls upon those whose happy
state is there celebrated, to join in songs of exultant joy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 33](psa033)

</div>
