<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa060)  [Next](psa062) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 61](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 61:0</span></span>

Prayer and Thanksgiving of an Expelled King on His Way Back to the
Throne

The Davidic Michtammı̂m are now ended, and there follows a short Davidic
song על־נגינת. Does this expression mean "with the accompaniment of
stringed instruments?" Not strictly, for this is expressed by the
inscription בּנגינות ([Psa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001), cf.
[Isa 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#029), [Isa
30:32](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#032)). But the formula may signify
"upon the music of stringed instruments," i.e., upon stringed
instruments. And this is more probable than that נגינת is the beginning
of a standard song. The termination ath is not necessarily the construct
state. It was the original feminine termination; and the prevailing one
in Phoenician.

Some expositors, like Kster, Ewald, Hitzig, and Olshausen, feel
themselves here also bound, by reason of the לדוד of the inscription, to
seek a place for this Psalm as far down as the Babylonian exile and the
times of the Ptolemies and the Seleucidae. Hupfeld deals somewhat more
kindly with the לדוד in this instance, and Bttcher (De Inferis, p. 204)
refutes the hypotheses set up in its stead in order finally to decide in
favour of the idea that the king of whom the Psalm speaks is Cyrus -
which is only another worthless bubble. We abide by the proudly ignored
לדוד, and have as our reward a much more simple interpretation of the
Psalm, without being obliged with Ewald to touch it up by means of a
verse of one's own invention interwoven between [Psa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005) and [Psa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#006). It is a Psalm of the time of
Absalom, composed in Mahanaim or elsewhere in Gilead, when the army of
the king had smitten the rebels in the wood of Ephraim. It consists of
two parts of eight lines.

[Psalms 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 61:1</span></span>

Hurled out of the land of the Lord in the more limited sense

(Note: Just as in [Num 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029). the
country east of Jordan is excluded from the name "the land of Canaan" in
the stricter sense, so by the Jewish mind it was regarded from the
earliest time to a certain extent as a foreign country (חוצה לארץ),
although inhabited by the two tribes and a half; so that not only is it
said of Moses that he died in a foreign land, but even of Saul that he
is buried in a foreign land (Numeri Rabba, ch. viii. and elsewhere).)

into the country on the other side of the Jordan, David felt only as
though he were banished to the extreme corner of the earth (not: of the
land, cf. [Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010); [Deu
28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049), and frequently), far from the
presence of God (Hengstenberg). It is the feeling of homelessness and of
separation from the abode of God by reason of which the distance, in
itself so insignificant (just as was the case with the exiles later on),
became to him immeasurably great. For he still continually needed God's
helpful intervention; the enveloping, the veiling, the faintness of his
heart still continues (עטף, Arab. ‛tf, according to its radical
signification: to bend and lay anything round so that it lies or draws
over something else and covers it, here of a self-enveloping); a rock of
difficulties still ever lies before him which is too high for his
natural strength, for his human ability, therefore insurmountable. But
he is of good courage: God will lead him up with a sure step, so that,
removed from all danger, he will have rocky ground under his feet. He is
of good courage, for God has already proved Himself to be a place of
refuge to him, to be a strong tower, defying all attack, which enclosed
him, the persecuted one, so that the enemy can gain no advantage over
him (cf. [Pro 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010)). He is already on
the way towards his own country, and in fact his most dearly loved and
proper home: he will or he has to (in accordance with the will of God)
dwell (cf. the cohortative in [Isa
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#010); [Jer
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#021)) in God's tabernacle (vid., on
[Psa 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001)) throughout aeons (an
utterance which reminds one of the synchronous [Psa
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#006)). With גּוּר is combined the idea
of the divine protection (cf. Arabic ǵâr ollah, the charge or proteg of
God, and Beduinic ǵaur, the protecting hearth; ǵawir, according to its
form = גּר, one who flees for refuge to the hearth). A bold figure of
this protection follows: he has to, or will trust, i.e., find refuge,
beneath the protection of God's wings. During the time the tabernacle
was still being moved from place to place we hear no such mention of
dwelling in God's tabernacle or house. It was David who coined this
expression for loving fellowship with the God of revelation,
simultaneously with his preparation of a settled dwelling-place for the
sacred Ark. In the Psalms that belong to the time of his persecution by
Saul such an expression is not yet to be found; for in [Psa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007), when it is desired that Doeg may
have the opposite of an eternal dwelling-place, it is not the sacred
tent that is meant. We see also from its second part that this [Psa
61:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001) does not belong to the time of
Saul; for David does not speak here as one who has drawn very near to
his kingly office (cf. [Psa 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#008)), but
as one who is entering upon a new stage in it.

[Psalms 61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 61:5</span></span>

The second part begins with a confirmation of the gracious purpose of
God expressed in [Psa 61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005). David
believes that he shall experience what he gives expression to in [Psa
61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005); for God has already practically
shown him that neither his life nor his kingship shall come to an end
yet; He has answered the prayers of His chosen one, that, blended with
vows, resulted from the lowly, God-resigned spirit which finds
expression in [Sa2 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#025)., and He has
given or delivered up to him the land which is his by inheritance, when
threatened by the rebels as robbers, - the land to which those who fear
the covenant God have a just claim. It is clear enough that the
receivers are "those who fear the name of Jahve;" the genitive relation
describes the ירשּׁה as belonging to them in opposition to those who had
usurped it. Or does ירשּׁה here perhaps mean the same as ארשׁת in [Psa
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#003)? Certainly not. נתן ירשּׁה ל is a
customary phrase, the meaning of which, "to give anything to any one as
his inheritance or as his own property," is to be retained (e.g., [Deu
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019)). God has acknowledged David's
cause; the land of Israel is again wrested from those to whom it does
not belong; and now begins a new era in the reign of its rightful king.
In view of this the king prays, in [Psa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#007), [Psa
61:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#008), that God would add another
goodly portion to the duration of his life. The words sound like
intercession, but the praying one is the same person as in [Psa
61:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#002). The expression מלכּא משׁיחא
(the King Messiah) of the Targum shows to whom the church referred the
word "king" after the extinction of the Davidic dynasty. The exalted
tone of the wish expressed in [Psa
61:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#007) (cf. [Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002)) favours this without absolutely
requiring it (cf. עולמים, [Psa 61:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#005),
[Psa 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#005), and the royal salutation,
[Kg1 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#031); [Dan
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#004), and frequently). There ought (as
also e.g., in [Psa 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008)) not to be any
question whether ישׁב in [Psa 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#008)
signifies "to sit enthroned," or "to sit" = "to abide;" when the person
spoken of is a king it means "to remain enthroned," for with him a being
settled down and continuous enthronement are coincident. מן in [Psa
61:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#008) is imperat. apoc. for מגּה (after
the form הס, נס, צו). The poet prays God to appoint mercy and truth as
guardian angels to the king ([Psa
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#012), [Pro
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028), where out of pause it is צּרוּ;
cf. on the other hand [Psa 78:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#007); [Pro
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#011); [Pro
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#002)). Since the poet himself is the
king for whom he prays, the transition to the first person in v. 9 is
perfectly natural. כּן signifies, as it always does, so or thus = in
accordance therewith, corresponding to the fulfilment of these my
petitions, thankfully responding to it. לשׁלּמי is the infinitive of the
aim or purpose. Singing praise and accompanying it with music, he will
make his whole life one continuous paying of vows.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 62](psa062)

</div>
