<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa062)  [Next](psa064) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 63](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 63:0</span></span>

Morning Hymn of One Who Is Persecuted, in a Waterless Desert

Now follows [Psa 63:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001), the morning
Psalm of the ancient church with which the singing of the Psalms was
always introduced at the Sunday service.

(Note: Constitutiones Apostolicae, ii. 59: Ἑεκάστης ἡμέρᾳς συναθροίζεσθε
ὄρθρου καὶ ἑσπέρας ψάλλοντες καὶ προσευχόμενοι ἐν τοῖς κυριακοῖς· ὄρθρου
μὲν λέγοντες ψαλμὸν τὸν ξβ ̓ ([Psa
63:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001)), ἐσπέρας δὲ τὸν ρμ ̓ ([Psa
141:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#001)). Athanasius says just the
same in his De virginitate: πρὸς ὄρθρον τὸν ψαλμὸν τοῦτον λέγετε κ. τ.
λ. Hence [Psa 63:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001) is called
directly ὁ ὀρθρινός (the morning hymn) in Constit. Apostol. viii. 37.
Eusebius alludes to the fact of its being so in Ps 91 (92), p. 608, ed.
Montfaucon. In the Syrian order of service it is likewise the morning
Psalm κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν, vid., Dietrich, De psalterii usu publico et divione
in Ecclesia Syriaca, p. 3. The lxx renders אשׁחרך in [Psa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002), πρὸς σὲ ὀρθρίχω, and באשׁמרות in
[Psa 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007), ἐν τοῖς ὄρθροις (in
matutinis).)

This Psalm is still more closely related to [Psa
61:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001) than [Psa
62:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001). Here, as in [Psa
61:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001), David gives utterance to his
longing for the sanctuary; and in both Psalms he speaks of himself as
king (vid., Symbolae, p. 56). All the three Psalms, [Psa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001), were composed during the time of
Absalom; for we must not allow ourselves to be misled by the
inscription, A Psalm, by David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah
(also lxx, according to the correct reading and the one preferred by
Euthymius, τῆς Ἰουδαίας, not τῆς Ἰδουμαίας), into transferring it, as
the old expositors do, to the time of Saul. During that period David
could not well call himself "the king" and even during the time of his
persecution by Absalom, in his flight, before crossing the Jordan, he
tarried one or two days בערבות המדבר, in the steppes of the desert ([Sa2
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#023), [Sa2
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#028); [Sa2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016)), i.e., of the wilderness of
Judah lying nearest to Jerusalem, that dreary waste that extends along
the western shore of the Dead Sea. We see clearly from [Sa2
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#002) (היּעף בּמּדבּר) and [Sa2
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#014) (עיפים, that he there found
himself in the condition of a עיף. The inscription, when understood
thus, throws light upon the whole Psalm, and verifies itself in the fact
that the poet is a king; that he longs for the God on Zion, where he has
been so delighted to behold Him, who is there manifest; and that he is
persecuted by enemies who have plotted his ruin. The assertion that he
is in the wilderness ([Psa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001)) is
therefore no mere rhetorical figure; and when, in [Sa2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010), he utters the imprecation over
his enemies, "let them become a portion for the jackals," the influence
of the desert upon the moulding of his thoughts is clearly seen in it.

We have here before us the Davidic original, or at any rate the
counterpart, to the Korahitic pair of Psalms, [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001), [Psa
43:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001). It is a song of the most
delicate form and deepest spiritual contents; but in part very difficult
of exposition. When we have, approximately at least, solved the riddle
of one Psalm, the second meets us with new riddles. It is not merely the
poetical classic character of the language, and the spiritual depth, but
also this half-transparent and half-opaque covering which lends to the
Psalms such a powerful and unvarying attractiveness. They are
inexhaustible, there always remains an undeciphered residue; and
therefore, though the work of exposition may progress, it does not come
to an end. But how much more difficult is it to adopt this choice
spiritual love-song as one's own prayer! For this we need a soul that
loves after the same manner, and in the main it requires such a soul
even to understand it rightly; for, as the saintly Bernard says, lingua
amoris non amanti barbara est.

[Psalms 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 63:1</span></span>

If the words in [Psa 63:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#002) were אלהים
אתּה אשׁחרך, then we would render it, with Bצttcher, after [Gen
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008) : Elohim, Thee do I seek, even
Thee! But אלי forbids this construction; and the assertion that
otherwise it ought to be, "Jahve, my God art Thou" ([Psa
140:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#007)), rests upon a non-recognition
of the Elohimic style. Elohim alone by itself is a vocative, and
accordingly has Mehupach legarme. The verb שׁחר signifies earnest,
importunate seeking and inquiring (e.g., [Psa
78:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#034)), and in itself has nothing to
do with שׁחר, the dawn; but since [Psa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007) looks back upon the night, it
appears to be chosen with reference to the dawning morning, just as in
[Isa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009) also, שׁחר stands by the
side of אוּה בלּילה. The lxx is therefore not incorrect when it renders
it: πρὸς δὲ ὀρθρίζω (cf. ὁ λαὸς ὤρθριζεν πρὸς αὐτὸν, [Luk
21:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#038)); and Apollinaris strikes the
right note when he begins his paraphrase,

Νύκτα μετ ̓ ἀμφιλύκην σὲ μάκαρ μάκαρ

ἀμφιχορεύσω -

At night when the morning dawns will I exult around Thee,

most blessed One.

The supposition that בּארץ is equivalent to כּאשׁר בּארץ, or even that
the Beth is Beth essentiae ("as a," etc.), are views that have no ground
whatever, except as setting the inscription at defiance. What is meant
is the parched thirsty desert of sand in which David finds himself. We
do not render it: in a dry and languishing land, for ציּה is not an
adjective, but a substantive - the transition of the feminine adjective
to the masculine primary form, which sometimes (as in [Kg1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011)) occurs, therefore has no
application here; nor: in the land of drought and of weariness, for who
would express himself thus? ואיף, referring to the nearest subject
בּשׂרי, continues the description of the condition (cf. [Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008)). In a region where he is
surrounded by sun-burnt aridity and a nature that bears only one uniform
ash-coloured tint, which casts its unrefreshing image into his inward
part, which is itself in much the same parched condition, his soul
thirsts, his flesh languishes, wearied and in want of water (languidus
deficiente aqua), for God, the living One and the Fountain of life.
כּמהּ (here with the tone drawn back, כּמהּ, like בּחר, [Ch1
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#010), עמד, [Hab
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#011)) of ardent longing which consumes
the last energies of a man (root כם, whence כּמן and כּמס to conceal,
and therefore like עטף, עלף, proceeding from the idea of enveloping;
Arabic Arab. kamiha, to be blind, dark, pale, and disconcerted). The lxx
and Theodotion erroneously read כּמּה (how frequently is this the
case!); whereas Aquila renders it ἐπετάθη, and Symmachus still better,
ἱμείρεται (the word used of the longing of love). It is not a small
matter that David is able to predicate such languishing desire after God
even of his felsh; it shows us that the spirit has the mastery within
him, and not only forcibly keeps the flesh in subjection, but also, so
far as possible, draws it into the realm of its own life - an experience
confessedly more easily attained in trouble, which mortifies our carnal
nature, than in the midst of the abundance of outward prosperity. The
God for whom he is sick \[lit. love-sick\] in soul and body is the God
manifest upon Zion.

Now as to the כּן in [Psa 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003) - a
particle which is just such a characteristic feature in the physiognomy
of this Psalm as אך is in that of the preceding Psalm - there are two
notional definitions to choose from: thus = so, as my God (Ewald), and:
with such longing desire (as e.g., Oettinger). In the former case it
refers back to the confession, "Elohim, my God art Thou," which stands
at the head of the Psalm; in the latter, to the desire that has just
been announced, and that not in its present exceptional character, but
in its more general and constant character. This reference to what has
immediately gone before, and to the modality, not of the object, but of
the disposition of mind, deserves the preference. "Thus" is accordingly
equivalent to "longing thus after Thee." The two כן in [Psa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003) and [Psa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005) are parallel and of like import.
The alternation of the perfect ([Psa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003)) and of the future ([Psa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005)) implies that what has been the
Psalmist's favourite occupation heretofore, shall also be so in the
future. Moreover, בארץ ציה and בּקּדשׁ form a direct antithesis. Just as
he does not in a dry land, so formerly in the sanctuary he looked forth
longingly towards God (חזה with the conjoined idea of solemnity and
devotion). We have now no need to take לראות as a gerundive (videndo),
which is in itself improbable; for one looks, peers, gazes at anything
just for the purpose of seeing what the nature of the object is ([Psa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002); [Isa
42:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#018)). The purpose of his gazing upon
God as to gain an insight into the nature of God, so far as it is
disclosed to the creature; or, as it is expressed here, to see His power
and glory, i.e., His majesty on its terrible and on its light and loving
side, to see this, viz., in its sacrificial appointments and sacramental
self-attestations. Such longing after God, which is now all the more
intense in the desert far removed from the sanctuary, filled and
impelled him; for God's loving-kindness is better than life, better than
this natural life (vid., on [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014)), which is also a blessing, and
as the prerequisite of all earthly blessings a very great blessing. The
loving-kindness of God, however, is a higher good, is in fact the
highest good and the true life: his lips shall praise this God of mercy,
his morning song shall be of Him; for that which makes him truly happy,
and after which he even now, as formerly, only and solely longs, is the
mercy or loving-kindness (חסד) of this God, the infinite wroth of which
is measured by the greatness of His power (עז) and glory (כבוד). It
might also be rendered, "Because Thy loving-kindness is better than
life, my lips shall praise Thee;" but if כּי is taken as demonstrative
(for), it yields a train of thought that that is brought about not
merely by what follows (as in the case of the relative because), but
also by what precedes: "for Thy loving-kindness...my lips shall then
praise Thee" (ישׁבּחוּנך with the suffix appended to the energetic
plural form ûn, as in [Isa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007), [Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010); [Jer
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024)).

[Psalms 63:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 63:4</span></span>

This strophe again takes up the כּן ([Psa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003)): thus ardently longing, for all
time to come also, is he set towards God, with such fervent longing
after God will he bless Him in his life, i.e., entirely filling up his
life therewith (בּחיּי as in [Psa
104:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#033); [Psa
146:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#002); cf. Baruch 4:20, ἐν ταῖς
ἡμέραις μου), and in His name, i.e., invoking it and appealing to it,
will he lift up his hands in prayer. The being occupied with God makes
him, even though as now in the desert he is obliged to suffer bodily
hunger, satisfied and cheerful like the fattest and most marrowy food:
velut adipe et pinguedine satiatur anima mea. From [Lev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017); [Lev
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#025), Grussetius and Frisch infer that
spiritualies epulae are meant. And certainly the poet cannot have had
the sacrificial feasts (Hupfeld) in his mind; for the חלב of the
shelamim is put upon the altar, and is removed from the part to be
eaten. Moreover, however, even the Tra does not bind itself in its
expression to the letter of that prohibition of the fat of animals,
vid., [Deu 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014), cf. [Jer
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#014). So here also the expression
"with marrow and fat" is the designation of a feast prepared from
well-fed, noble beasts. He feels himself satisfied in his inmost nature
just as after a feast of the most nourishing and dainty meats, and with
lips of jubilant songs (accus. instrum. according to Ges. 138, rem. 3),
i.e., with lips jubilant and attuned to song, shall his mouth sing
praise. What now follows in [Psa 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007)
we no longer, as formerly, take as a protasis subsequently introduced
(like [Isa 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#004).): "when I
remembered...meditated upon Thee," but so that [Psa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007) is the protasis and [Psa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#007) the apodosis, cf. [Psa
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#012); [Job
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#016) (Hitzig): When I remember Thee
(meminerim, Ew. 355, b) upon my bed (stratis meis, as in [Psa
132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003); [Gen
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004), cf. [Ch1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#001)) - says he now as the twilight
watch is passing gradually into the morning - I meditate upon Thee in
the night-watches (Symmachus, καθ ̓ ἑκάστην φυλακήν), or during,
throughout the night-watches (like בּחיּי in [Psa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#005)); i.e., it is no passing
remembrance, but it so holds me that I pass a great part of the night
absorbed in meditation on Thee. He has no lack of matter for his
meditation; for God has become a help (auxilio, vid., on [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003)) to him: He has rescued him in
this wilderness, and, well concealed under the shadow of His wings
(vid., on [Psa 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#008); [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008); [Psa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002)), which affords him a cool
retreat in the heat of conflict and protection against his persecutors,
he is able to exult (ארנּן, the potential). Between himself and God
there subsists a reciprocal relationship of active love. According to
the schema of the crosswise position of words (Chiasmus), אחריך and בּי
intentionally jostle close against one another: he depends upon God,
following close behind Him, i.e., following Him everywhere and not
leaving Him when He wishes to avoid him; and on the other side God's
right hand holds him fast, not letting him go, not abandoning him to his
foes.

[Psalms 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 63:9</span></span>

The closing strophe turns towards these foes. By והמּה he contrasts with
his own person, as in [Psa 59:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016).,
[Psa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#007)., the party of the enemy,
before which he has retreated into the desert. It is open to question
whether לשׁואה is intended to be referred, according to [Psa
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017), to the persecuted one (to
destroy my life), or, with Hupfeld, to the persecutors (to their own
destruction, they themselves for destruction). If the former reference
to the persecuted be adopted, we ought, in order to give prominence to
the evidently designed antithesis to [Psa
63:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#009), to translate: those, however,
who..., shall go down into the depths of the earth (Bttcher, and
others); a rendering which is hazardous as regards the syntax, after
המּה and in connection with this position of the words. Therefore
translate: On the other hand, those, to (their own) ruin do they seek my
soul. It is true this ought properly to be expressed by לשׁואתם, but the
absence of the suffix is less hazardous than the above relative
rendering of יבּקּשׁוּ. What follows in [Psa
63:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#010) is the expansion of לשׁואה.
The futures from יבאוּ onwards are to be taken as predictive, not as
imprecatory; the former accords better with the quiet, gentle character
of the whole song. It shall be with them as with the company of Korah.
תּחתּיּות הארץ is the interior of the earth down into its deepest
bottom; this signification also holds good in [Psa
139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015); [Isa
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023).

(Note: In this passage in Isaiah are meant the depths of the earth (lxx
θεμέλια τῆς γῆς), the earth down to its inmost part, with its caverns,
abysses, and subterranean passages. The apostle, however, in [Eph
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#009) by τὰ κατώτερα τῆς γῆς means
exactly the same as what in our passage is called in the lxx τὰ κατώτατα
τῆς γῆς: the interior of the earth = the under world, just as it is
understood by all the Greek fathers (so far as my knowledge extends);
the comparative κατώτερος is used just like ἐνέρτερος.)

The phrase הגּיר על־ידי חרב here and in [Jer
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#021); [Eze
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005) (Hiph., not of גּרר, to drag,
tear away, but נגר, to draw towards, flow), signifies properly to pour
upon = into the hands ([Job 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#011)),
i.e., to give over (הסגּיר) into the power of the sword; effundent eum
is (much the same as in [Job 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#019);
[Job 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#018), and frequently) equivalent
to effundetur. The enallage is like [Psa
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#010); [Psa
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#002)., and frequently: the singular
refers to each individual of the homogeneous multitude, or to this
multitude itself as a concrete persona moralis. The king, however, who
is now banished from Jerusalem to the habitation of jackals, will,
whilst they become a portion (מנת = מנות), i.e., prey, of the jackals
(vid., the fulfilment in [Sa2 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#007).),
rejoice in Elohim. Every one who sweareth by Him shall boast himself.
Theodoret understands this of swearing κατὰ τὴν τοῦ βασιλέως σωτηρίαν.
Hengstenberg compares the oath חי פרעה, [Gen
42:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#015). Ewald also (217, f) assumes
this explanation to be unquestionable. But the Israelite is to swear by
the name of Jahve and by no other, [Deu
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013); [Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016), cf. [Amo
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#014). If the king were meant, why was
it not rather expressed by הנשׁבּע לו, he who swears allegiance to him?
The syntax does not help us to decide to what the בּו refers. Neinrich
Moeller (1573) says of the בו as referred to the king: peregrinum est et
coactum; and A. H. Franke in his Introductio in Psalterium says of it as
referred to Elohim: coactum est. So far as the language is concerned,
both references are admissible; but as regards the subject-matter, only
the latter. The meaning, as everywhere else, is a searing by God. He
who, without allowing himself to turn from it, swore by Elohim, the God
of Israel, the God of David His anointed, and therefore acknowledged Him
as the Being exalted above all things, shall boast himself or "glory,"
inasmuch as it shall be practically seen how well-founded and wise was
this recognition. He shall glory, for the mouth of those who speak lies
shall be stopped, forcibly closed, viz., those who, together with
confidence in the Christ of God, have by falsehood also undermined the
reverence which is due to God Himself. [Psa
64:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#001) closes very similarly, and
hence is placed next in order.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 64](psa064)

</div>
