<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa050)  [Next](psa052) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 51](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 51:0</span></span>

Penitential Prayer and intercession for Restoration to Favour

The same depreciation of the external sacrifice that is expressed in Ps
50 finds utterance in Ps 51, which supplements the former, according as
it extends the spiritualizing of the sacrifice to the offering for sin
(cf. [Psa 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007)). This Psalm is the
first of the Davidic Elohim-Psalms. The inscription runs: To the
Precentor, a Psalm by David, when Nathan the prophet came to him, after
he had gone in to Bathsheba. The carelessness of the Hebrew style shows
itself in the fact that one and the same phrase is used of Nathan's
coming in an official capacity to David (cf. [Sa2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)) and of David's going in unto
Bathsheba (בּוא אל, as in [Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004);
[Psa 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002), cf. [Sa2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#004)). The comparative כּאשׁר, as a
particle of time in the whole compass of the Latin quum, holds together
that which precedes and that which subsequently takes place. Followed by
the perfect ([Sa2 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#021); [Sa1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#008)), it has the sense of postquam
(cf. the confusing of this כאשׁר with אחרי אשׁר, [Jos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#007)). By בּבוא the period within which
the composition of the Psalm falls is merely indicated in a general way.
The Psalm shows us how David struggles to gain an inward and conscious
certainty of the forgiveness of sin, which was announced to him by
Nathan ([Sa2 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)). In [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001) and [Psa
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001) we have already heard David, sick
in soul and body, praying for forgiveness; in Ps 51 he has even become
calmer and more cheerful in his soul, and there is nothing wanting to
him except the rapturous realization of the favour within the range of
which he already finds himself. On the other hand, [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001) lies even beyond Ps 51. For
what David promises in [Psa 51:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#015),
viz., that, if favour is again shown to him, he will teach the apostate
ones the ways of God, that he will teach sinners how they are to turn to
God, we heard him fulfil in the sententious didactic [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001).

Hitzig assigns Ps 51, like Ps 50, to the writer of [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001). But the manifold coincidences of
matter and of style only prove that this prophet was familiar with the
two Psalms. We discern in Ps 51 four parts of decreasing length. The
first part, [Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003), contains the
prayer for remission of sin; the second, [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012), the prayer for renewal; the
third, [Psa 51:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#016), the vow of
spiritual sacrifices; the fourth, vv. 20, 21, the intercession for all
Jerusalem. The divine name Elohim occurs five times, and is
appropriately distributed throughout the Psalm.

[Psalms 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 51:1</span></span>

Prayer for the remission of sin. Concerning the interchangeable names
for sin, vid., on [Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001). Although
the primary occasion of the Psalm is the sin of adultery, still David
says פּשׁעי, not merely because many other sins were developed out of
it, as his guilt of blood in the case of Uriah, the scandal put into the
mouths of the enemies of Jahve, and his self-delusion, which lasted
almost a whole year; but also because each solitary sin, the more it is
perceived in its fundamental character and, as it were, microscopically
discerned, all the more does it appear as a manifold and entangled skein
of sins, and stands forth in a still more intimate and terrible
relation, as of cause and effect, to the whole corrupt and degenerated
condition in which the sinner finds himself. In מחה sins are conceived
of as a cumulative debt (according to [Isa
44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022), cf. [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025), like a thick, dark cloud)
written down ([Jer 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)) against the
time of the payment by punishment. In כּבּסני (from כּבּס, πλύνειν, to
wash by rubbing and kneading up, distinguished from רחץ, λούειν, to wash
by rinsing) iniquity is conceived of as deeply ingrained dirt. In טהרני,
the usual word for a declarative and de facto making clean, sin is
conceived of as a leprosy, [Lev 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#006),
[Lev 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#034). the Kerמ runs הרב כּבּסני
(imperat. Hiph., like הרף, [Psa 37:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#008)),
"make great or much, wash me," i.e., (according to Ges. ֗142, 3, b) wash
me altogether, penitus et totum, which is the same as is expressed by
the Chethמb הרבּה (prop. multum faciendo = multum, prorsus, Ges. ֗131,
2). In כּרב ([Isa 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007)) and הרב is
expressed the depth of the consciousness of sin; profunda enim malitia,
as Martin Geier observes, insolitam raramque gratiam postulat.

[Psalms 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 51:3</span></span>

Substantiation of the prayer by the consideration, that his sense of sin
is more than superficial, and that he is ready to make a penitential
confession. True penitence is not a dead knowledge of sin committed, but
a living sensitive consciousness of it ([Isa
59:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#012)), to which it is ever present as
a matter and ground of unrest and pain. This penitential sorrow, which
pervades the whole man, is, it is true, no merit that wins mercy or
favour, but it is the condition, without which it is impossible for any
manifestation of favour to take place. Such true consciousness of sin
contemplates sin, of whatever kind it may be, directly as sin against
God, and in its ultimate ground as sin against Him alone (חטא with ל of
the person sinned against, [Isa 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024);
[Mic 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#009)); for every relation in which
man stands to his fellow-men, and to created things in general, is but
the manifest form of his fundamental relationship to God; and sin is
"that which is evil in the eyes of God" ([Isa
65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012); [Isa
66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004)), it is contradiction to the will
of God, the sole and highest Lawgiver and Judge. Thus it is, as David
confesses, with regard to his sin, in order that... This למען must not
be weakened by understanding it to refer to the result instead of to the
aim or purpose. If, however, it is intended to express intention, it
follows close upon the moral relationship of man to God expressed in לך
לבדּך and הרע בּעיניך, - a relationship, the aim of which is, that God,
when He now condemns the sinner, may appear as the just and holy One,
who, as the sinner is obliged himself to acknowledge, cannot do
otherwise than pronounce a condemnatory decision concerning him. When
sin becomes manifest to a man as such, he must himself say Amen to the
divine sentence, just as David does to that passed upon him by Nathan.
And it is just the nature of penitence so to confess one's self to be in
the wrong in order that God may be in the right and gain His cause. If,
however, the sinner's self-accusation justifies the divine righteousness
or justice, just as, on the other hand, all self-justification on the
part of the sinner (which, however, sooner or later will be undeceived)
accuses God of unrighteousness or injustice ([Job
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#008)): then all human sin must in the
end tend towards the glorifying of God. In this sense [Psa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006) is applied by Paul ([Rom
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)), inasmuch as he regards what is
here written in the Psalter - ὅπως ἂν δικαιωθῇς ἐν τοῖς λόγοις σου, καὶ
νικῃσεες ἐν τῷ κρίνεσθαί σε (lxx) - as the goal towards which the whole
history of Israel tends. Instead of בּדברך (infin. like שׁלחך, [Gen
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#017), in this instance for the sake
of similarity of sound

(Note: Cf. the following forms, chosen on account of their accord: -
נשׂוּי, [Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001); הנדּף, [Psa
68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003); צאינה, [Sol
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011); שׁתות, [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013); ממחים, ib. [Psa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#006); הלּוט, ib. [Psa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#007).)

instead of the otherwise usual form דּבּר), in Thy speaking, the lxx
renders ἐν τοῖς λόγοις σου = בּדבריך; instead of בּשׁפטך, ἐν τῷ
κρίνεσθαί σε = בּהשּׁפטך (infin. Niph.), provided κρίνεσθαι is intended
as passive and not (as in [Jer 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009)
lxx, cf. [Mat 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)) as middle. The
thought remains essentially unchanged by the side of these deviations;
and even the taking of the verb זכה, to be clean, pure, in the Syriac
signification νικᾶν, does not alter it. That God may be justified in His
decisive speaking and judging; that He, the Judge, may gain His cause in
opposition to all human judgment, towards this tends David's confession
of sin, towards this tends all human history, and more especially the
history of Israel.

[Psalms 51:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 51:5</span></span>

David here confesses his hereditary sin as the root of his actual sin.
The declaration moves backwards from his birth to conception, it
consequently penetrates even to the most remote point of life's
beginning. חוללתּי stands instead of נולדתּי, perhaps (although
elsewhere, i.e., in [Psa 90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002), the
idea of painfulness is kept entirely in the background) with reference
to the decree, "with pain shalt thou bring forth children," [Gen
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016) (Kurtz); instead of הרתה אתי,
with still more definite reference to that which precedes conception,
the expression is יחמתני (for יחמתני, following the same interchange of
vowel as in [Gen 30:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#039); [Jdg
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028)). The choice of the verb decides
the question whether by עון and חטא is meant the guilt and sin of the
child or of the parents. יחם (to burn with desire) has reference to
that, in coition, which partakes of the animal, and may well awaken
modest sensibilities in man, without עיון and חטא on that account
characterizing birth and conception itself as sin; the meaning is
merely, that his parents were sinful human begins, and that this sinful
state (habitus) has operated upon his birth and even his conception, and
from this point has passed over to him. What is thereby expressed is not
so much any self-exculpation, as on the contrary a self-accusation which
glances back to the ultimate ground of natural corruption. He is sinful
מלּדה וּמהריון ([Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004); [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021)), is טמא מטּמא, an unclean one
springing from an unclean ([Job 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004)),
flesh born of flesh. That man from his first beginning onwards, and that
this beginning itself, is stained with sin; that the proneness to sin
with its guilt and its corruption is propagated from parents to their
children; and that consequently in the single actual sin the
sin-pervaded nature of man, inasmuch as he allows himself to be
determined by it and himself resolves in accordance with it, become
outwardly manifest-therefore the fact of hereditary sin is here more
distinctly expressed than in any other passage in the Old Testament,
since the Old Testament conception, according to its special character,
which always fastens upon the phenomenal, outward side rather than
penetrates to the secret roots of a matter, is directed almost entirely
to the outward manifestation only of sin, and leaves its natural
foundation, its issue in relation to primeval history, and its demonic
background undisclosed. The הן in [Psa
51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007) is followed by a correlative
second הן in [Psa 51:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#008) (cf. [Isa
55:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#004)., [Isa
54:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#015).). Geier correctly says: Orat ut
sibi in peccatis concepto veraque cordis probitate carenti penitiorem ac
mysticam largiri velit sapientiam, cujus medio liberetur a peccati tum
reatu tum dominio. אמת is the nature and life of man as conformed to the
nature and will of God (cf. ἀλήθεια, [Eph
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#021)). חכמה, wisdom which is most
intimately acquainted with (eindringlich weiss) such nature and life and
the way to attain it. God delights in and desires truth בטּחות. The Beth
of this word is not a radical letter here as it is in [Job
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006), but the preposition. The reins
utpote adipe obducti, here and in [Job
38:36](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#036), according to the Targum,
Jerome, and Parchon, are called טחות (Psychol. S. 269; tr. p. 317).
Truth in the reins (cf. [Psa 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#009),
God's law in visceribus meis) is an upright nature in man's deepest
inward parts; and in fact, since the reins are accounted as the seat of
the tenderest feelings, in man's inmost experience and perception, in
his most secret life both of conscience and of mind ([Psa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007)). In the parallel member סתם
denotes the hidden inward part of man. Out of the confession, that
according to the will of God truth ought to dwell and rule in man even
in his reins, comes the wish, that God would impart to him (i.e., teach
him and make his own), - who, as being born and conceived in sin, is
commended to God's mercy, - that wisdom in the hidden part of his mind
which is the way to such truth.

[Psalms 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 51:7</span></span>

The possession of all possessions, however, most needed by him, the
foundation of all other possessions, is the assurance of the forgiveness
of his sins. The second futures in [Psa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009) are consequents of the first,
which are used as optatives. [Psa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009)
recalls to mind the sprinkling of the leper, and of one unclean by
reason of his contact with a dead body, by means of the bunch of hyssop
(Lev. 14, Num. 19), the βοτάνη καθαρτική (Bhr, Symbol. ii. 503); and
[Psa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009) recalls the washings which,
according to priestly directions, the unclean person in all cases of
uncleanness had to undergo. Purification and washing which the Law
enjoins, are regarded in connection with the idea implied in them, and
with a setting aside of their symbolic and carnal outward side, inasmuch
as the performance of both acts, which in other cases takes place
through priestly mediation, is here supplicated directly from God
Himself. Manifestly בּאזוב (not כבאזוב) is intended to be understood in
a spiritual sense. It is a spiritual medium of purification without the
medium itself being stated. The New Testament believer confesses, with
Petrarch in the second of his seven penitential Psalms: omnes sordes
meas una gutta, vel tenuis, sacri sanguinis absterget. But there is here
no mention made of atonement by blood; for the antitype of the atoning
blood was still hidden from David. The operation of justifying grace on
a man stained by the blood-red guilt of sin could not, however, be more
forcibly denoted than by the expression that it makes him whiter than
snow (cf. the dependent passage [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018)). And history scarcely records a
grander instance of the change of blood-red sin into dazzling whiteness
than this, that out of the subsequent marriage of David and Bathsheba
sprang Solomon, the most richly blessed of all kings. At the present
time David's very bones are still shaken, and as it were crushed, with
the sense of sin. דּכּית is an attributive clause like יפעל in [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016). Into what rejoicing will this
smitten condition be changed, when he only realizes within his soul the
comforting and joyous assuring utterance of the God who is once more
gracious to him! For this he yearns, viz., that God would hide His face
from the sin which He is now visiting upon him, so that it may as it
were be no longer present to Him; that He would blot out all his
iniquities, so that they may no longer testify against him. Here the
first part of the Psalm closes; the close recurs to the language of the
opening ([Psa 51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003)).

[Psalms 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 51:10</span></span>

In the second part, the prayer for justification is followed by the
prayer for renewing. A clean heart that is not beclouded by sin and a
consciousness of sin (for לב includes the conscience, Psychology, S.
134; tr. p. 160); a stedfast spirit (נכון, cf. [Psa
78:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#037); [Psa
112:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#007)) is a spirit certain respecting
his state of favour and well-grounded in it. David's prayer has
reference to the very same thing that is promised by the prophets as a
future work of salvation wrought by God the Redeemer on His people ([Jer
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#007); [Eze
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019); [Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026)); it has reference to those
spiritual facts of experience which, it is true, could be experienced
even under the Old Testament relatively and anticipatively, but to the
actual realization of which the New Testament history, fulfilling
ancient prophecy has first of all produced effectual and comprehensive
grounds and motives, viz., μετάνοια (לב = νοῦς), καινὴ κτίσις,
παλιγγενεσία καὶ ἀνακαὶνωσις πνεῦματος ([Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005)). David, without distinguishing
between them, thinks of himself as king, as Israelite, and as man.
Consequently we are not at liberty to say that רוּח הקּדשׁ (as in [Isa
63:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#016)), πνεῦμα ἁγιωσύνης = ἅγιον, is
here the Spirit of grace in distinction from the Spirit of office. If
Jahve should reject David as He rejected Saul, this would be the extreme
manifestation of anger ([Kg2 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#020))
towards him as king and as a man at the same time. The Holy Spirit is
none other than that which came upon him by means of the anointing, [Sa1
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013). This Spirit, by sin, he has
grieved and forfeited. Hence he prays God to show favour rather than
execute His right, and not to take this His Holy Spirit from him.

[Psalms 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 51:12</span></span>

In connection with רוּח נדיבה, the old expositors thought of נדיב, a
noble, a prince, and נדיבה, nobility, high rank, [Job
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015), lxx πνεύματι ἡγεμονικῷ (spiritu
principali) στήριξόν με, - the word has, however, without any doubt, its
ethical sense in this passage, [Isa
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008), cf. נדבה, Ps. 54:8; and the
relation of the two words רוח נדיבה is not to be taken as adjectival,
but genitival, since the poet has just used רוח in the same personal
sense in [Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012). Nor are they to
be taken as a nominative of the subject, but - what corresponds more
closely to the connection of the prayer - according to [Gen
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#037), as a second accusative of the
object: with a spirit of willingness, of willing, noble impulse towards
that which is good, support me; i.e., imparting this spirit to me,
uphold me constantly in that which is good. What is meant is not the
Holy Spirit, but the human spirit made free from the dominion of sin by
the Holy Spirit, to which good has become an inward, as it were
instinctive, necessity. Thus assured of his justification and fortified
in new obedience, David will teach transgressors the ways of God, and
sinners shall be converted to Him, viz., by means of the testimony
concerning God's order of mercy which he is able to bear as the result
of his own rich experience.

[Psalms 51:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 51:14</span></span>

The third part now begins with a doubly urgent prayer. The invocation of
God by the name Elohim is here made more urgent by the addition of אלהי
תשׁוּעתי; inasmuch as the prayers for justification and for renewing
blend together in the "deliver me." David does not seek to lessen his
guilt; he calls it in דּמים by its right name, - a word which signifies
blood violently shed, and then also a deed of blood and blood-guiltiness
([Psa 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013); [Psa
106:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#038), and frequently). We have also
met with הצּיל construed with מן of the sin in [Psa
39:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#009). He had given Uriah over to death
in order to possess himself of Bathsheba. And the accusation of his
conscience spoke not merely of adultery, but also of murder.
Nevertheless the consciousness of sin no longer smites him to the earth,
Mercy has lifted him up; he prays only that she would complete her work
in him, then shall his tongue exultingly praise (רנּן with an accusative
of the object, as in [Psa 59:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#017)) God's
righteousness, which, in accordance with the promise, takes the sinner
under its protection. But in order to perform what he vowed he would do
under such circumstances, he likewise needs grace, and prays, therefore,
for a joyous opening of his mouth. In sacrifices God delighteth not
([Psa 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007), cf. [Isa
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011)), otherwise he would bring some
(ואתּנה, darem, sc. si velles, vid., on [Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)); whole-burnt-offerings God doth
not desire: the sacrifices that are well-pleasing to Him and most
beloved by Him, in comparison with which the flesh and the dead work of
the עולות and the זבחים (שׁלמים) is altogether worthless, are
thankfulness ([Psa 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#023)) out of the
fulness of a penitent and lowly heart. There is here, directly at least,
no reference to the spiritual antitype of the sin-offering, which is
never called זבה. The inward part of a man is said to be broken and
crushed when his sinful nature is broken, his ungodly self slain, his
impenetrable hardness softened, his haughty vainglorying brought low, -
in fine, when he is in himself become as nothing, and when God is
everything to him. Of such a spirit and heart, panting after grace or
favour, consist the sacrifices that are truly worthy God's acceptance
and well-pleasing to Him (cf. [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015), where such a spirit and such a
heart are called God's earthly temple).

(Note: The Talmud finds a significance in the plural זבחי. Joshua ben
Levi (B. Sanhedrin 43b) says: At the time when the temple was standing,
whoever brought a burnt-offering received the reward of it, and whoever
brought a meat-offering, the reward of it; but the lowly was accounted
by the Scriptures as one who offered every kind of sacrifice at once
(כאילו הקריב כל הקרבנות כולן). In Irenaeaus, iv. 17, 2, and Clemens
Alexandrinus, Paedag. iii. 12, is found to θυσία τῷ Θεῷ καρδία
συντετριμμένη the addition: ὀσμὴ εὐωδίας τῷ Θεῷ καρδία δοξάζουσα τὸν
πεπλακότα αὐτήν.)

[Psalms 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 51:18</span></span>

From this spiritual sacrifice, well-pleasing to God, the Psalm now, in
vv. 20f., comes back to the material sacrifices that are offered in a
right state of mind; and this is to be explained by the consideration
that David's prayer for himself here passes over into an intercession on
behalf of all Israel: Do good in Thy good pleasure unto Zion. את־ may be
a sign of the accusative, for היטיב (הטיב) does take the accusative of
the person ([Job 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#021)); but also a
preposition, for as it is construed with ל and עם, so also with את in
the same signification ([Jer 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#010);
[Jer 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041)). זבח־צדק are here, as in
[Psa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006); [Deu
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019), those sacrifices which not
merely as regards their outward character, but also in respect of the
inward character of him who causes them to be offered on his behalf, are
exactly such as God the Lawgiver will have them to be. By כּליל beside
עולה might be understood the priestly vegetable whole-offering, [Lev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015). (מנחת חבתּין, Epistle to the
Hebrews, ii. 8), since every עולה as such is also כּליל; but
Psalm-poetry does not make any such special reference to the sacrificial
tra. וכליל is, like כליל in [Sa1 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009),
an explicative addition, and the combination is like ימינך וזרועך, [Psa
44:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#004), ארץ ותבל, [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002), and the like. A שׁלם כּליל
(Hitzig, after the Phoenician sacrificial tables) is unknown to the
Israelitish sacrificial worship. The prayer: Build Thou the walls of
Jerusalem, is not inadmissible in the mouth of David; since בּנה
signifies not merely to build up what has been thrown down, but also to
go on and finish building what is in the act of being built ([Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003)); and, moreover, the wall built
round about Jerusalem by Solomon ([Kg1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#001)) can be regarded as a fulfilment
of David's prayer.

Nevertheless what even Theodoret has felt cannot be denied: τοῖς ἐν
Βαβυλῶνι...ἁρμόττει τὰ ῥήματα. Through penitence the way of the exiles
led back to Jerusalem. The supposition is very natural that vv. 20f. may
be a liturgical addition made by the church of the Exile. And if the
origin of [Isa 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001) in the time of the
Exile were as indisputable as the reasons against such a position are
forcible, then it would give support not merely to the derivation of vv.
20f. (cf. [Isa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005), [Isa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007), [Isa
60:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#010)), but of the whole Psalm, from
the time of the Exile; for the general impress of the Psalm is,
according to the accurate observation of Hitzig, thoroughly
deutero-Isaianic. But the writer of [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001) shows signs in other respects
also of the most families acquaintance with the earlier literature of
the Shı̂r and the Mashal; and that he is none other than Isaiah reveals
itself in connection with this Psalm by the echoes of this very Psalm,
which are to be found not only in the second but also in the first part
of the Isaianic collection of prophecy (cf. on [Psa
51:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#009), [Psa
51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018)). We are therefore driven to the
inference, that Ps 51 was a favourite Psalm of Isaiah's, and that, since
the Isaianic echoes of it extend equally from the first verse to the
last, it existed in the same complete form even in his day as in ours;
and that consequently the close, just like the whole Psalm, so
beautifully and touchingly expressed, is not the mere addition of a
later age.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 52](psa052)

</div>
