<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa021)  [Next](psa023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 22:0</span></span>

Eli Eli Lama Asabtani

We have here a plaintive Psalm, whose deep complaints, out of the midst
of the most humiliating degradation and most fearful peril, stand in
striking contrast to the cheerful tone of [Psa
21:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa021.htm#001) - starting with a disconsolate
cry of anguish, it passes on to a trustful cry for help, and ends in
vows of thanksgiving and a vision of world-wide results, which spring
from the deliverance of the sufferer. In no Psalm do we trace such an
accumulation of the most excruciating outward and inward suffering
pressing upon the complainant, in connection the most perfect innocence.
In this respect Ps 69 is its counterpart; but it differs from it in this
particular, that there is not a single sound of imprecation mingled with
its complaints.

It is David, who here struggles upward out of the gloomiest depth to
such a bright height. It is a Davidic Psalm belonging to the time of the
persecution by Saul. Ewald brings it down to the time preceding the
destruction of Jerusalem, and Bauer to the time of the Exile. Ewald says
it is not now possible to trace the poet more exactly. And Maurer closes
by saying: illue unum equidem pro certo habeo, fuisse vatem hominem
opibus praeditum atque illustrem, qui magna auctoritate valeret non
solum apud suos, verum etiam apud barbaros. Hitzig persists in his view,
that Jeremiah composed the first portion when cast into prison as an
apostate, and the second portion in the court of the prison, when placed
under this milder restraint. And according to Olshausen, even here
again, the whole is appropriate to the time of the Maccabees. But it
seems to us to be confirmed at every point, that David, who was so
persecuted by Saul, is the author. The cry of prayer אל־תרחק ([Psa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012), [Psa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020); [Psa
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#022); [Psa
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022), borrowed in [Psa
71:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#012)); the name given to the soul,
יחידה ([Psa 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021); [Psa
35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017)); the designation of quiet and
resignation by דומיה ([Psa 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003); [Psa
39:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#003); [Psa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002), cf. [Psa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002)), are all regarded by us, since
we do not limit the genuine Davidic Psalms to [Psa
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001) as Hitzig does, as Davidic idioms.
Moreover, there is no lack of points of contact in other respects with
genuine old Davidic hymns (cf. [Psa
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030) with [Psa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001), those that go down to the dust,
to the grave; then in later Psalms as in [Psa
143:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#007), in Isaiah and Ezekiel), and
more especially those belonging to the time of Saul, as Ps 69 (cf. [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027) with [Psa
69:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#033)) and Ps 59 (cf. [Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017) with [Psa
59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015)). To the peculiar
characteristics of the Psalms of this period belong the figures taken
from animals, which are heaped up in the Psalm before us. The fact that
Ps 22 is an ancient Davidic original is also confirmed by the parallel
passages in the later literature of the Shı̂r ([Psa
71:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005). taken from [Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010).; [Psa
102:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#018). in imitation [Psa
22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025), [Psa
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031).), of the Chokma ([Pro
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003), גּל אל־ה taken from [Psa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009); [Psa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005)), and of prophecy (Isaiah, [Isa
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001), [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001); Jeremiah, in [Lam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004); cf. [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015), and many other similar
instances). In spite of these echoes in the later literature there are
still some expressions that remain unique in the Psalm and are not found
elsewhere, as the hapaxlegomena אילוּת and ענוּת. Thus, then, we
entertain no doubts respecting the truth of the לדוד. David speaks in
this Psalm, - he and not any other, and that out of his own inmost
being. In accordance with the nature of lyric poetry, the Psalm has
grown up on the soil of his individual life and his individual
sensibilities.

There is also in reality in the history of David, when persecuted by
Saul, a situation which may have given occasion to the lifelike picture
drawn in this Psalm, viz., [Sa1 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#025).
The detailed circumstances of the distress at that time are not known to
us, but they certainly did not coincide with the rare and terrible
sufferings depicted in this Psalm in such a manner that these can be
regarded as an historically faithful and literally exact copy of those
circumstances; cf. on the other hand [Psa
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001) which was composed at the same
period. To just as slight a degree have the prospects, which he connects
in this Psalm with his deliverance, been realised in David's own life.
On the other hand, the first portion exactly coincides with the
sufferings of Jesus Christ, and the second with the results that have
sprung from His resurrection. It is the agonising situation of the
Crucified One which is presented before our eyes in [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015) with such artistic faithfulness:
the spreading out of the limbs of the naked body, the torturing pain in
hands and feet, and the burning thirst which the Redeemer, in order that
the Scripture might be fulfilled, announced in the cry διψῶ, [Joh
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028). Those who blaspheme and those
who shake their head at Him passed by His cross, [Mat
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039), just as [Psa
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#008) says; scoffers cried out to Him:
let the God in whom He trusts help Him, [Mat
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043), just as [Psa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009) says; His garments were divided
and lots were cast for His coat, [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023)., in order that [Psa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019) of our Psalm might be fulfilled.
The fourth of the seven sayings of the dying One, Ἠελί, Ἠελί κ. τ. λ.,
[Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046); [Mar
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034), is the first word of our Psalm
and the appropriation of the whole. And the Epistle to the Hebrews, [Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011)., cites [Psa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023) as the words of Christ, to show
that He is not ashamed to call them brethren, whose sanctifier God has
appointed Him to be, just as the risen Redeemer actually has done, [Mat
28:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#010); [Joh
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017). This has by no means exhausted
the list of mutual relationships. The Psalm so vividly sets before us
not merely the sufferings of the Crucified One, but also the salvation
of the world arising out of His resurrection and its sacramental
efficacy, that it seems more like history than prophecy, ut non tam
prophetia, quam historia videatur (Cassiodorus). Accordingly the ancient
Church regarded Christ, not David, as the speaker in this Psalm; and
condemned Theodore of Mopsuestia who expounded it as contemporary
history. Bakius expresses the meaning of the older Lutheran expositors
when he says: asserimus, hunc Psalmum ad literam primo, proprie et
absque ulla allegoria, tropologia et ἀναγωῇ integrum et per omnia de
solo Christo exponendum esse. Even the synagogue, so far as it
recognises a suffering Messiah, hears Him speak here; and takes the
"hind of the morning" as a name of the Shechı̂na and as a symbol of the
dawning redemption.

To ourselves, who regard the whole Psalm as the words of David, it does
not thereby lose anything whatever of its prophetic character. It is a
typical Psalm. The same God who communicates His thoughts of redemption
to the mind of men, and there causes them to develop into the word of
prophetic announcement, has also moulded the history itself into a
prefiguring representation of the future deliverance; and the evidence
for the truth of Christianity which is derived from this factual
prophecy (Thatweissagung) is as grand as that derived from the verbal
prediction (Wortweissagung). That David, the anointed of Samuel, before
he ascended the throne, had to traverse a path of suffering which
resembles the suffering path of Jesus, the Son of David, baptized of
John, and that this typical suffering of David is embodied for us in the
Psalms as in the images reflected from a mirror, is an arrangement of
divine power, mercy, and wisdom. But Ps 22 is not merely a typical
Psalm. For in the very nature of the type is involved the distance
between it and the antitype. In Ps 22, however, David descends, with his
complaint, into a depth that lies beyond the depth of his affliction,
and rises, with his hopes, to a height that lies far beyond the height
of the reward of his affliction. In other words: the rhetorical figure
hyperbole (Arab. mubâlgt, i.e., depiction, with colours thickly laid
on), without which, in the eyes of the Semite, poetic diction would be
flat and faded, is here made use of by the Spirit of God. By this Spirit
the hyperbolic element is changed into the prophetic. This elevation of
the typical into the prophetic is also capable of explanation on
psychological grounds. Since David has been anointed with the oil of
royal consecration, and at the same time with the Holy Spirit, the
Spirit of the kingship of promise, he regards himself also as the
messiah of God, towards whom the promises point; and by virtue of this
view of himself, in the light of the highest calling in connection with
the redemptive history, the historical reality of his own experiences
becomes idealised to him, and thereby both what he experiences and what
he hopes for acquire a depth and height of background which stretches
out into the history of the final and true Christ of God. We do not by
this maintain any overflowing of his own consciousness to that of the
future Christ, an opinion which has been shown by Hengstenberg, Tholuck
and Kurtz to be psychologically impossible. But what we say is, that
looking upon himself as the Christ of God, - to express it in the light
of the historical fulfilment, - he looks upon himself in Jesus Christ.
He does not distinguish himself from the Future One, but in himself he
sees the Future One, whose image does not free itself from him till
afterwards, and whose history will coincide with all that is excessive
in his own utterances. For as God the Father moulds the history of Jesus
Christ in accordance with His own counsel, so His Spirit moulds even the
utterances of David concerning himself the type of the Future One, with
a view to that history. Through this Spirit, who is the Spirit of God
and of the future Christ at the same time, David's typical history, as
he describes it in the Psalms and more especially in this Psalm,
acquires that ideal depth of tone, brilliancy, and power, by virtue of
which it (the history) reaches far beyond its typical facts, penetrates
to its very root in the divine counsels, and grows to be the word of
prophecy: so that, to a certain extent, it may rightly be said that
Christ here speaks through David, insofar as the Spirit of Christ speaks
through him, and makes the typical suffering of His ancestor the medium
for the representation of His own future sufferings. Without recognising
this incontestable relation of the matter Ps 22 cannot be understood nor
can we fully enter into its sentiments.

The inscription runs: To the precentor, upon (after) the hind of the
morning's dawn, a Psalm of David. Luther, with reference to the fact
that Jesus was taken in the night and brought before the Sanhedrim,
renders it "of the hind, that is early chased," for

Patris Sapientia, Veritas divina,

Deus homo captus est hor matutin.

This interpretation is certainly a well-devised improvement of the ὑπὲρ
τῆς ἀντιλήπσεως τῆς ἑωθινῆς of the lxx (Vulg. pro susceptione matutina),
which is based upon a confounding of אילת with אילות ([Psa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020)), and is thus explained by
Theodoret: ἀντίληψις ἑωθινὴ ἡ τοῦ σωτῆρος ἡμῶν ἐπιφάνεια. Even the
Midrash recalls [Sol 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#008), and the
Targum the lamb of the morning sacrifice, which was offered as soon as
the watchman on the pinnacle of the Temple cried: ברק ברקאי (the first
rays of the morning burst forth). איּלת השּׁחר is in fact, according to
traditional definition, the early light preceding the dawn of the
morning, whose first rays are likened to the horns of a hind.

(Note: There is a determination of the time to this effect, which is
found both in the Jerusalem and in the Babylonian Talmud "from the hind
of the morning's dawn till the east is lighted up." In Jer. Berachoth,
ad init., it is explained: ומנהרין לעלמא אילת השחר כמין תרתי קרני דנהורא
סלקין ממדינחא, "like two horns of light, rising from the east and
filling the world with light.")

But natural as it may be to assign to the inscription a symbolical
meaning in the case of this Psalm, it certainly forms no exception to
the technical meaning, in connection with the music, of the other
inscriptions. And Melissus (1572) has explained it correctly "concerning
the melody of a common song, whose commencement was Ajleth Hashhar, that
is, The hind of the morning's dawn." And it may be that the choice of
the melody bearing this name was designed to have reference to the glory
which bursts forth in the night of affliction.

According to the course of the thoughts the Psalm falls into three
divisions, [Psa 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002), [Psa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013), [Psa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023), which are of symmetrical
compass, consisting of 21, 24, and 21 lines. Whether the poet has laid
out a more complete strophic arrangement within these three groups or
not, must remain undecided. But the seven long closing lines are
detached from the third group and stand to the column of the whole, in
the relation of its base.

[Psalms 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 22:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:2-3) In the first division, [Psa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002), the disconsolate cry of anguish,
beginning here in [Psa 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002) with the
lamentation over prolonged desertion by God, struggles through to an
incipient, trustfully inclined prayer. The question beginning with למּה
(instead of למּה before the guttural, and perhaps to make the
exclamation more piercing, vid., on [Psa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005); [Psa
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#001)) is not an expression of
impatience and despair, but of alienation and yearning. The sufferer
feels himself rejected of God; the feeling of divine wrath has
completely enshrouded him; and still he knows himself to be joined to
God in fear and love; his present condition belies the real nature of
his relationship to God; and it is just this contradiction that urges
him to the plaintive question, which comes up from the lowest depths:
Why hast Thou forsaken me? But in spite of this feeling of desertion by
God, the bond of love is not torn asunder; the sufferer calls God אלי
(my God), and urged on by the longing desire that God again would grant
him to feel this love, he calls Him, אלי אלי. That complaining question:
why hast Thou forsaken me? is not without example even elsewhere in [Psa
88:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#015), cf. [Isa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014). The forsakenness of the
Crucified One, however, is unique; and may not be judged by the standard
of David or of any other sufferers who thus complain when passing
through trial. That which is common to all is here, as there, this,
viz., that behind the wrath that is felt, is hidden the love of God,
which faith holds fast; and that he who thus complains even on account
of it, is, considered in itself, not a subject of wrath, because in the
midst of the feeling of wrath he keeps up his communion with God. The
Crucified One is to His latest breath the Holy One of God; and the
reconciliation for which He now offers himself is God's own eternal
purpose of mercy, which is now being realised in the fulness of times.
But inasmuch as He places himself under the judgment of God with the sin
of His people and of the whole human race, He cannot be spared from
experiencing God's wrath against sinful humanity as though He were
himself guilty. And out of the infinite depth of this experience of
wrath, which in His case rests on no mere appearance, but the sternest
reality,

(Note: Eusebius observes on [Psa 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002)
of this Psalm, δικαιοσύνης ὑπάρχων πηγὴ τὴν ἡμετέραν ἁμαρτίαν ἀνέλαβε
καὶ εὐλογίας ὢν πέλαγος τὴν ἐπικειμένην ἡμῖν ἐδέξατο κατάραν, and: τὴν
ὡρισμένην ἡμῖν παιδείαν ὑπῆλθεν ἑκὼν παιδεία γὰρ ειρήνης ἡμῶν ἐπ ̓
αὐτὸν, ᾗ φησὶν ὁ προφήτης.)

comes the cry of His complaint which penetrates the wrath and reaches to
God's love, ἠλὶ ἠλὶ λαμὰ σαβαχθανί, which the evangelists, omitting the
additional πρόσχες μοι

(Note: Vid., Jerome's Ep. ad Pammachium de optimo genere interpretandi,
where he cries out to his critics, sticklers for tradition, Reddant
rationem, cur septuaginta translatores interposuerunt "respice in me!")

of the lxx, render: Θεέ μου, θεέ μου, ἵνα τί με ἐγκατέλιπες. He does not
say עזתּני, but שׁבקתּני, which is the Targum word for the former. He
says it in Aramaic, not in order that all may understand it-for such a
consideration was far from His mind at such a time-but because the
Aramaic was His mother tongue, for the same reason that He called God
אבּא doG dellac in prayer. His desertion by God, as [Psa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002) says, consists in God's help and
His cry for help being far asunder. שׁאגה, prop. of the roar of the lion
(Aq. βρύχημα), is the loud cry extorted by the greatest agony, [Psa
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009); in this instance, however, as
דּברי shows, it is not an inarticulate cry, but a cry bearing aloft to
God the words of prayer. רחוק is not to be taken as an apposition of the
subject of עזבתני: far from my help, (from) the words of my crying
(Riehm); for דברי שׁאגתי would then also, on its part, in connection
with the non-repetition of the מן, be in apposition to מישׁועתי. But to
this it is not adapted on account of its heterogeneousness; hence Hitzig
seeks to get over the difficulty by the conjecture משּׁועתי ("from my
cry, from the words of my groaning"). Nor can it be explained, with
Olshausen and Hupfeld, by adopting Aben-Ezra's interpretation, "My God,
my God, why hast Thou forsaken me, far from my help? are the words of my
crying." This violates the structure of the verse, the rhythm, and the
custom of the language, and gives to the Psalm a flat and unlyrical
commencement. Thus, therefore, רחוק in the primary form, as in [Psa
119:155](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#155), according to Ges. 146, 4,
will by the predicate to דברי and placed before it: far from my
salvation, i.e., far from my being rescued, are the words of my cry;
there is a great gulf between the two, inasmuch as God does not answer
him though he cries unceasingly.

In [Psa 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003) the reverential name of
God אלחי takes the place of אלי the name that expresses His might; it is
likewise vocative and accordingly marked with Rebia magnum. It is not an
accusative of the object after [Psa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#004) (Hitzig), in which case the
construction would be continued with ולא יענה. That it is, however, God
to whom he calls is implied both by the direct address אלהי, and by ולא
תענה, since he from whom one expects an answer is most manifestly the
person addressed. His uninterrupted crying remains unanswered, and
unappeased. The clause ולא־דמיּה לּי is parallel to ולא תענה, and
therefore does not mean: without allowing me any repose ([Jer
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#017); [Lam
3:49](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#049)), but: without any rest being
granted to me, without my complaint being appeased or stilled. From the
sixth to the ninth hour the earth was shrouded in darkness. About the
ninth hour Jesus cried, after a long and more silent struggle, ἠλί, ἠλί.
The ἀνεβόησεν φωνῇ μεγάλῃ, [Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046),
and also the κραυγὴ ἰσχυρά of Hebr. [Psa
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#007), which does not refer exclusively
to the scene in Gethsemane, calls to mind the שׁאגתי of [Psa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#002). When His passion reached its
climax, days and nights of the like wrestling had preceded it, and what
then becomes audible was only an outburst of the second David's conflict
of prayer, which grows hotter as it draws near to the final issue.

[Psalms 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 22:3</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:4-6) The sufferer reminds Jahve of the contradiction between
the long season of helplessness and His readiness to help so frequently
and so promptly attested. ואתּה opens an adverbial clause of the
counterargument: although Thou art...Jahve is קדושׁ, absolutely pure,
lit., separated (root קד, Arab. qd, to cut, part, just as ṭahur, the
synonym of ḳadusa, as the intransitive of ṭahara = ab‛ada, to remove to
a distance, and בּר pure, clean, radically distinct from p-rus, goes
back to בּרר to sever), viz., from that which is worldly and common, in
one word: holy. Jahve is holy, and has shown Himself such as the תּהלּות
of Israel solemnly affirm, upon which or among which He sits enthroned.
תהלות are the songs of praise offered to God on account of His
attributes and deeds, which are worthy of praise (these are even called
תהלות in [Psa 78:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#004); [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011); [Isa
63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007)), and in fact presented in His
sanctuary ([Isa 64:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#010)). The
combination יושׁב תּהלּות (with the accusative of the verbs of dwelling
and tarrying) is like יושׁב כּרבים, [Psa
99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001); [Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002). The songs of praise, which
resounded in Israel as the memorials of His deeds of deliverance, are
like the wings of the cherubim, upon which His presence hovered in
Israel. In [Psa 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#005), the praying one
brings to remembrance this graciously glorious self-attestation of God,
who as the Holy One always, from the earliest times, acknowledged those
who fear Him in opposition to their persecutors and justified their
confidence in Himself. In [Psa 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#005)
trust and rescue are put in the connection of cause and effect; in [Psa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006) in reciprocal relation. פּלּט and
מלּט are only distinguished by the harder and softer sibilants, cf. [Psa
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#013) with [Psa
116:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#004). It need not seem strange that
such thoughts were at work in the soul of the Crucified One, since His
divine-human consciousness was, on its human side, thoroughly
Israelitish; and the God of Israel is also the God of salvation;
redemption is that which He himself determined, why, then, should He not
speedily deliver the Redeemer?

[Psalms 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 22:6</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:7-9)The sufferer complains of the greatness of his reproach,
in order to move Jahve, who is Himself involved therein, to send him
speedy succour. Notwithstanding his cry for help, he is in the deepest
affliction without rescue. Every word of [Psa
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007) is echoed in the second part of
the Book of Isaiah. There, as here, Israel is called a worm, [Isa
41:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#014); there all these traits of
suffering are found in the picture of the Servant of God, [Isa
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#007); [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003), cf. [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006), and especially [Isa
52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014) "so marred was His appearance,
that He no longer looked like a man." תּולעת is more particularly the
kermes, or cochineal (vermiculus, whence color vermiculi, vermeil,
vermiglio); but the point of comparison in the present instance is not
the blood-red appearance, but the suffering so utterly defenceless and
even ignominious. עם is gen. subj., like גּוי, [Isa
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#007). Jerome well renders the
ἐξουθένωμα λαοῦ of the lxx by abjectio (Tertullian: nullificamen)
plebis, not populi. The ἐξεμυκτήρισάν με, by which the lxx translates
ילעיגו לי, is used by Luke, [Luk
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#035), cf. [Luk
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014), in the history of the Passion;
fulfilment and prediction so exactly coincide, that no more adequate
expressions can be found in writing the gospel history than those
presented by prophecy. In הפטיר בּשׂפה, what appears in other instances
as the object of the action (to open the mouth wide, diducere labia), is
regarded as the means of its execution; so that the verbal notion being
rendered complete has its object in itself: to make an opening with the
mouth, cf. פּער בּפה, [Job 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#010), נתן
בּקול [Psa 68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034); Ges. 138, 1, rem. 3.
The shaking of the head is, as in [Psa
109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025), cf. [Psa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#015); [Psa
64:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#009), a gesture of surprise and
astonishment at something unexpected and strange, not a προσνεύειν
approving the injury of another, although נוּע, נוּד, נוּט, νεύ-ω,
nu-t-o, nic-to, neigen, nicken, all form one family of roots. In [Psa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009) the words of the mockers follow
without לאמר. גּל is not the 3 praet. (lxx, cf. [Mat
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043)) like אור, בּושׁ; it is not only
in Piel ([Jer 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#020); [Jer
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#012), where גּלּיתי = גּלּלתּי, Ew.
121, a) that it is transitive, but even in Kal; nor is it inf. absol. in
the sense of the imperative (Hitz., Bttch.), although this infinitive
form is found, but always only as an inf. intens. ([Num
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#025); [Rut
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#016), cf. [Isa
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#019)); but, in accordance with the
parallels [Psa 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005) (where it is
written גּול), [Pro 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#003), cf. [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023); [Pe1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#007), it is imperat.: roll, viz., thy
doing and thy suffering to Jahve, i.e., commit it to Him. The mockers
call out this גּל to the sufferer, and the rest they say of him with
malicious looks askance. כּי in the mouth of the foes is not
confirmatory as in [Psa 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020), but a
conditional ἐάν (in case, provided that).

[Psalms 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 22:9</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:10-12)The sufferer pleads that God should respond to his trust
in Him, on the ground that this trust is made an object of mockery. With
כּי he establishes the reality of the loving relationship in which he
stands to God, at which his foes mock. The intermediate thought, which
is not expressed, "and so it really is," is confirmed; and thus כי comes
to have an affirmative signification. The verb גּוּח (גּיח) signifies
both intransitive: to break forth (from the womb), [Job
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#008), and transitive: to push forward
(cf. Arab. jchcha), more especially, the fruit of the womb, [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010). It might be taken here in the
first signification: my breaking forth, equivalent to "the cause of my
breaking forth" (Hengstenberg, Baur, and others); but there is no need
for this metonymy. גּחי is either part. equivalent to גּחי, my pusher
forth, i.e., he who causes me to break forth, or, - since גוח in a
causative signification cannot be supported, and participles like בּוס
stamping and לוט veiling (Ges. 72, rem. 1) are nowhere found with a
suffix, - participle of a verb גּחהּ, to draw forth (Hitz.), which
perhaps only takes the place, per metaplasmum, of the Pil. גּחח with the
uneuphonic מגחחי (Ewald S. 859, Addenda). Ps 71 has גוזי ([Psa
71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006)) instead of גּחי, just as it has
מבטחי ([Psa 71:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#005)) instead of מבטיחי.
The Hiph. הבטיח does not merely mean to make secure (Hupf.), but to
cause to trust. According to biblical conception, there is even in the
new-born child, yea in the child yet unborn and only living in the womb,
a glimmering consciousness springing up out of the remotest depths of
unconsciousness (Psychol. S. 215; transl. p. 254). Therefore, when the
praying one says, that from the womb he has been cast

(Note: The Hoph. has o, not u, perhaps in a more neuter sense, more
closely approximating the reflexive (cf. [Eze
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#019) with [Eze
32:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#032)), rather than a purely passive.
Such is apparently the feeling of the language, vid., B. Megilla 13a
(and also the explanation in Tosefoth).)

upon Jahve, i.e., directed to go to Him, and to Him alone, with all his
wants and care ([Psa 55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023), cf. [Psa
71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006)), that from the womb onwards
Jahve was his God, there is also more in it than the purely objective
idea, that he grew up into such a relationship to God. Twice he mentions
his mother. Throughout the Old Testament there is never any mention made
of a human father, or begetter, to the Messiah, but always only of His
mother, or her who bare Him. And the words of the praying one here also
imply that the beginning of his life, as regards its outward
circumstances, was amidst poverty, which likewise accords with the
picture of Christ as drawn both in the Old and New Testaments. On the
ground of his fellowship with God, which extends so far back, goes forth
the cry for help ([Psa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012)), which
has been faintly heard through all the preceding verses, but now only
comes to direct utterance for the first time. The two כּי are alike.
That the necessity is near at hand, i.e., urgent, refers back
antithetically to the prayer, that God would not remain afar off; no one
doth, nor can help except He alone. Here the first section closes.

[Psalms 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 22:12</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:13-14)Looking back upon his relationship to God, which has
existed from the earliest times, the sufferer has become somewhat more
calm, and is ready, in [Psa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013), to
describe his outward and inner life, and thus to unburden his heart.
Here he calls his enemies פּרים, bullocks, and in fact אבּירי בּשׁן (cf.
[Psa 50:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#013) with [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014)), strong ones of Bashan, the
land rich in luxuriant oak forests and fat pastures (בשׁן = buthne,
which in the Beduin dialect means rich, stoneless meadow-land, vid., Job
S. 509f.; tr. ii. pp. 399f.) north of Jabbok extending as far as to the
borders of Hermon, the land of Og and afterwards of Manasseh ([Num
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#001)). They are so called on account
of their robustness and vigour, which, being acquired and used in
opposition to God is brutish rather than human (cf. [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001)). Figures like these drawn from
the animal world and applied in an ethical sense are explained by the
fact, that the ancients measured the instincts of animals according to
the moral rules of human nature; but more deeply by the fact, that
according to the indisputable conception of Scripture, since man was
made to fall by Satan through the agency of an animal, the animal and
Satan are the two dominant powers in Adamic humanity. כּתּר is a
climactic synonym of סבב. On [Psa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014) compare the echoes in Jeremiah,
[Lam 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#016); [Lam
3:46](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#046). Finally, the foes are all
comprehended under the figure of a lion, which, as soon as he sights his
prey, begins to roar, [Amo 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#004). The
Hebrew טרף, discerpere, according to its root, belongs to חרף, carpere.
They are instar leonis dilaniaturi et rugientis.

[Psalms 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 22:14</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:15-16)Now he described, how, thus encompassed round, he is
still just living, but already as it were dead. The being poured out
like water reminds us of the ignominious abandonment of the Crucified
One to a condition of weakness, in which His life, deprived of its
natural support, is in the act of dissolution, and its powers dried up
([Sa2 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014)); the bones being
stretched out, of the forcible stretching out of His body (חתפּרד, from
פּרד to separate, cf. Arab. frd, according to its radical signification,
which has been preserved in the common Arabic dialect: so to spread out
or apart that the thing has no bends or folds,

(Note: Vid., Bocthor, Dict. fran.-arabe, s. v. Etendre and Dployer.)

Greek ἐξαπλοῦν); the heart being melted, recalls His burning anguish,
the inflammation of the wounds, and the pressure of blood on the head
and heart, the characteristic cause of death by crucifixion. נמס, in
pause נמס, is 3 praet.; wax, דּונג, receives its name from its melting
(דנג, root דג, τηκ). In [Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016) the
comparison כּחרשׂ has reference to the issue of result (vid., [Psa
18:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#043)): my strength is dried up, so
that it is become like a potsherd. חכּי (Saadia) instead of כּחי
commends itself, unless, כּח perhaps, like the Talmudic כּיח cidumlaT
eht eki, also had the signification "spittle" (as a more dignified word
for רק). לשׁון, with the exception perhaps of [Pro
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#028), is uniformly feminine; here the
predicate has the masculine ground-form without respect to the subject.
The part. pass. has a tendency generally to be used without reference to
gender, under the influence of the construction laid down in Ges. 143,
1, b, according to which לשׁני may be treated as an accusative of the
object; מלקוחי, however, is acc. loci (cf. ל [Psa
137:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#006); [Job
29:10](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#010); אל [Lam
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#004); [Eze
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026)): my tongue is made to cleave to
my jaws, fauces meas. Such is his state in consequence of outward
distresses. His enemies, however, would not have power to do all this,
if God had not given it to them. Thus it is, so to speak, God Himself
who lays him low in death. שׁפת to put anywhere, to lay, with the
accompanying idea of firmness and duration, Arab. ṯbât, [Isa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#012); the future is used of that
which is just taking place. Just in like manner, in [Isa
53:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001), the death of the Servant of
God is spoken of not merely as happening thus, but as decreed; and not
merely as permitted by God, but as being in accordance with the divine
will. David is persecuted by Saul, the king of His people, almost to the
death; Jesus, however, is delivered over by the Sanhedrim, the authority
of His people, to the heathen, under whose hands He actually dies the
death of the cross: it is a judicial murder put into execution according
to the conditions and circumstances of the age; viewed, however, as to
its final cause, it is a gracious dispensation of the holy God, in whose
hands all the paths of the world's history run parallel, and who in this
instance makes sin subservient to its own expiation.

[Psalms 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 22:16</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:17-19)A continuation, referring back to [Psa
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012), of the complaint of him who is
dying and is already as it were dead. In the animal name כּלבים,
figuratively descriptive of character, beside shamelessness and
meanness, special prominence is given to the propensity for biting and
worrying, i.e., for persecuting; hence Symmachus and Theodotion render
it θηράται κυνηγέται. In [Psa 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017)
עדת מרעים takes the place of כלבים; and this again is followed by הקּיף
in the plur. (to do anything in a circle, to surround by forming a
circle round, a climactic synonym, like כּתּר to סבב) either per
attractionem (cf. [Psa 140:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#010); [Sa1
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#004)), or on account of the collective
עדה. Tertullian renders it synagoga maleficorum, Jerome concilium
pessimorum. But a faction gathered together for some evil purpose is
also called עדה, e.g., עדת קרח. In [Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017) the meaning of כּארי, instar
leonis, is either that, selecting a point of attack, they make the
rounds of his hands and feet, just as a lion does its prey upon which it
springs as soon as its prey stirs; or, that, standing round about him
like lions, they make all defence impossible to his hands, and all
escape impossible to his feet. But whether we take this ידי ורגלי as
accusative of the members beside the accusative of the person (vid.,
[Psa 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#011)), or as the object of the
הקּיפוּ to be supplied from [Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017), it still remains harsh and
drawling so far as the language is concerned. Perceiving this, the
Masora on [Isa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013) observes, that
כּארי, in the two passages in which it occurs ([Psa
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017); [Isa
38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013)), occurs in two different
meanings (לישׁני בתרי); just as the Midrash then also understands כארי
in the Psalm as a verb used of marking with conjuring, magic characters.

(Note: Hupfeld suspects this Masoretic remark (קמצין בתרי לישׁני כּארי
ב) as a Christian interpolation, but it occurs in the alphabetical
Masoreth register ותרויהון בתרי לישׁני ב ב. Even Elias Levita speaks of
it with astonishment (in his מסרת המסרת \[ed. Ginsburg, p. 253\])
without doubting its genuineness, which must therefore have been
confirmed, to his mind, by MS authority. Heidenheim also cites it in his
edition of the Pentateuch, \`ynym m'wr, on [Num
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#009); and down to the present time no
suspicion has been expressed on the part of Jewish critics, although all
kinds of unsatisfactory attempts have been made to explain this
Masoretic remark (e.g., in the periodical Biccure ha-'Ittim).)

Is the meaning of the Masora that כּארי, in the passage before us, is
equivalent to כּארים? If so the form would be doubly Aramaic: both the
participial form כּאר (which only occurs in Hebrew in verbs med. E) and
the apocopated plural, the occurrence of which in Hebrew is certainly,
with Gesenius and Ewald, to be acknowledged in rare instances (vid.,
[Psa 45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009), and compare on the other
hand [Sa2 22:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#044)), but which would here
be a capricious form of expression most liable to be misapprehended. If
כארי is to be understood as a verb, then it ought to be read כּארי.
Tradition is here manifestly unreliable. Even in MSS the readings כּארוּ
and כּארי are found. The former is attested both by the Masora on [Num
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#009) and by Jacob ben Chajim in the
Masora finalis as the MS Chethb.

(Note: The authenticity of this statement of the Masora כארי ידי ורגלי
כארו כתיב may be disputed, especially since Jacob ben Chajim became a
convert to Christianity, and other Masoretic testimonies do not mention
a קרי וכתיב to כארי; nevertheless, in this instance, it would be
premature to say that this statement is interpolated. Ant. Hulsius in
his edition of the Psalter (1650) has written כארו in the margin
according to the text of the Complutensis.)

Even the Targum, which renders mordent sicut leo manus et pedes meos,
bears witness to the ancient hesitancy between the substantival and
verbal rendering of the כארי. The other ancient versions have, without
any doubt, read כארו. Aquila in the 1st edition of his translation
rendered it ᾔσχυαν (from the Aramaic and Talmudic כּאר = כּער to soil,
part. כּאוּר, dirty, nasty); but this is not applicable to hands and
feet, and therefore has nothing to stand upon. In the 2nd edition of his
translation the same Aquila had instead of this, like Symmachus, "they
have bound,"

(Note: Also in Jerome's independent translation the reading vinxerunt is
found by the side of fixerunt, just as Abraham of Zante paraphrases it
in his paraphrase of the Psalter in rhyme גּם כּארי ידי ורגלי אסרוּ. The
want of a verb is too perceptible. Saadia supplies it in a different way
"they compass me as a lion, to crush my hands and feet.")

after כר, Arab. krr, to twist, lace; but this rendering is improbable
since the Hebrew has other words for "to bind," constringere. On the
other hand nothing of any weight can be urged against the rendering of
the lxx ὤρυξαν (Peshto בזעו, Vulg. foderunt, Jer. fixerunt); for (1)
even if we do not suppose any special verb כּארוּ ,כּאר can be expanded
from כּרוּ (כוּר) = כּרוּ (כּרה) just in the same manner as ראמה, [Zac
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#010) from רמה, cf. קאמיּא [Dan
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#016). And (2) that כוּר and כּרה can
signify not merely to dig out and dig into, engrave, but also to dig
through, pierce, is shown, - apart from the derivative מכרה (the
similarity of the sound of which to μάχαιρα from the root μαχ, maksh,
mraksh, is only accidental), - by the double meaning of the verbs נקר,
ὀρύσσειν (e.g., ὀρύσσειν τὸν ἰσθμόν Herod. i. 174), fodere (hast); the
lxx version of [Psa 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#007) would also
support this meaning, if κατετρήσω (from κατατιτρᾶν) in that passage had
been the original reading instead of κατηρτίσω. If כּארוּ be read, then
[Psa 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#017), applied to David, perhaps
under the influence of the figure of the attacking dogs (Bhl), says that
the wicked bored into his hands and feet, and thus have made him fast,
so that he is inevitably abandoned to their inhuman desires. The
fulfilment in the nailing of the hands and (at least, the binding fast)
of the feet of the Crucified One to the cross is clear. This is not the
only passage in which it is predicated that the future Christ shall be
murderously pierced; but it is the same in [Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005) where He is said to be pierced
(מחלל) on account of our sins, and in [Zac
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#010), where Jahve describes Himself
as ἐκκεντηθείς in Him.

Thus, therefore, the reading כּארוּ might at least have an equal right
to be recognised with the present recepta, for which Hupfeld and Hitzig
demand exclusive recognition; while Bttcher, - who reads כּארי, and
gives this the meaning"springing round about (after the manner of dogs),
- regards the sicut leo as "a production of meagre Jewish wit;" and also
Thenius after taking all possible pains to clear it up gives it up as
hopeless, and with Meier, adopting a different division of the verse,
renders it: "a mob of the wicked has encompassed me like lions. On my
hands and feet I can count all my bones." But then, how כּארי comes
limping on after the rest! And how lamely does ידי ורגלי precede [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018)! How unnaturally does it limit
עצמותי, with which one chiefly associates the thought of the breast and
ribs, to the hands and feet! אספּר is potientialis. Above in [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015) he has said that his bones are
out of joint. There is no more reason for regarding this "I can count
etc." as referring to emaciation from grief, than there is for regarding
the former as referring to writing with agony. He can count them because
he is forcibly stretched out, and thereby all his bones stand out. In
this condition he is a mockery to his foes. הבּיט signifies the turning
of one's gaze to anything, ראה בּ the fixing of one's sight upon it with
pleasure. In [Psa 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019) a new feature
is added to those that extend far beyond David himself: they part my
garments among them.... It does not say they purpose doing it, they do
it merely in their mind, but they do it in reality. This never happened
to David, or at least not in the literal sense of his words, in which it
has happened to Christ. In Him [Psa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019) and [Psa
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019) are literally fulfilled. The
parting of the בּגדים by the soldiers dividing his ἰμάτια among them
into four parts; the casting lots upon the לבוּשׁ by their not dividing
the χιτὼν ἄῤῥαφος, but casting lots for it, [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023). לבוּשׁ is the garment which is
put on the body that it may not be bare; בּגדים the clothes, which one
wraps around one's self for a covering; hence לבושׁ is punningly
explained in B. Sabbath 77b by לא בושׁה (with which one has no need to
be ashamed of being naked) in distinction from גלימא, a mantle (that
through which one appears כגולם, because it conceals the outline of the
body). In [Job 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007), and frequently,
לבושׁ is an undergarment, or shirt, what in Arabic is called absolutely
Arab. ṯwb, thôb "the garment," or expressed according to the Roman
distinction: the tunica in distinction from the toga, whose exact
designation is מעיל. With [Psa 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019)
of this Psalm it is exactly as with [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009), cf. [Mat
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#005); in this instance also, the
fulfilment has realised that which, in both phases of the synonymous
expression, is seemingly identical.

(Note: On such fulfilments of prophecy, literal beyond all expectation,
vid., Saat auf Hoffnung iii., 3, 47-51.)

[Psalms 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 22:19</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:20-22)In [Psa 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#019) the
description of affliction has reached its climax, for the parting of,
and casting lots for, the garments assumes the certain death of the
sufferer in the mind of the enemies. In [Psa
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#020), with ואתּה the looks of the
sufferer, in the face of his manifold torments, concentrate themselves
all at once upon Jahve. He calls Him אילוּתי nom. abstr. from איל, [Psa
88:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#005) : the very essence of strength,
as it were the idea, or the ideal of strength; lė‛ezrāthi has the accent
on the penult., as in [Psa 71:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#012) (cf.
on the other hand Ps 38:23), in order that two tone syllables may not
come together. In [Psa 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#021), חרב
means the deadly weapon of the enemy and is used exemplificatively. In
the expression מיּד כּלב, מיּד is not merely equivalent to מן, but יד
is, according to the sense, equivalent to "paw" (cf. כּף, [Lev
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#027)), as פּי is equivalent to jaws;
although elsewhere not only the expression "hand of the lion and of the
bear," [Sa1 17:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#037), but also "hands of
the sword," [Psa 63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011), and even "hand
of the flame," [Isa 47:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#014) are used,
inasmuch as יד is the general designation of that which acts, seizes,
and subjugates, as the instrument of the act. Just as in connection with
the dog יד, and in connection with the lion פי (cf. however, [Dan
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#028)) is mentioned as its weapon of
attack, the horns, not the horn (also not in [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017)), are mentioned in connection
with antilopes, רמים (a shorter form, occurring only in this passage,
for ראמים, [Psa 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006); [Psa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007)). Nevertheless, Luther following
the lxx and Vulgate, renders it "rescue me from the unicorns" (vid.,
thereon on [Psa 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006)). יהידה, as the
parallel member here and in [Psa 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#017)
shows, is an epithet of נפשׁ. The lxx in both instances renders it
correctly τὴν μονογενῆ μου, Vulg. unicam meam, according to [Gen
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002); [Jdg
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#034), the one soul besides which man
has no second, the one life besides which man has no second to lose,
applied subjectively, that is, soul or life as the dearest and most
precious thing, cf. Homer's fi'lon kee'r. It is also interpreted
according to [Psa 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016); [Psa
68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007) : my solitary one, solitarium,
the soul as forsaken by God and man, or at least by man, and abandoned
to its own self (Hupfeld, Kamphausen, and others). But the parallel
נפשׁי, and the analogy of כּבודי (= נפשׁי), stamp it as an universal
name for the soul: the single one, i.e., that which does not exist in
duplicate, and consequently that which cannot be replaced, when lost.
The praet. עניתני might be equivalent to ענני, provided it is a perf.
consec. deprived of its Waw convers. in favour of the placing of מקּרני
רמים first for the sake of emphasis; but considering the turn which the
Psalm takes in [Psa 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023), it must be
regarded as perf. confidentiae, inasmuch as in the very midst of his
supplication there springs up in the mind of the suppliant the assurance
of being heard and answered. To answer from the horns of the antilope is
equivalent to hearing and rescuing from them; cf. the equally pregnant
expression ענה בּ [Psa 118:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#005), perhaps
also [Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007).

(Note: Thrupp in his Emendations on the Psalms (Journal of Classic and
Sacred Philology, 1860) suggests עניּתי, my poverty (my poor soul),
instead of עניתני.)

[Psalms 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 22:22</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:23-24)In the third section, [Psa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023), the great plaintive prayer
closes with thanksgiving and hope. In certainty of being answered,
follows the vow of thanksgiving. He calls his fellow-country men, who
are connected with him by the ties of nature, but, as what follows,
viz., "ye that fear Jahve" shows, also by the ties of spirit,
"brethren." קהל (from קחל = קל, καλ-έω, cal-o, Sanscr. kal, to resound)
coincides with εκκλησία. The sufferer is conscious of the significance
of his lot of suffering in relation to the working out of the history of
redemption. Therefore he will make that salvation which he has
experienced common property. The congregation or church shall hear the
evangel of his rescue. In [Psa 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#024)
follows the introduction to this announcement, which is addressed to the
whole of Israel, so far as it fears the God of revelation. Instead of
וגורו the text of the Orientals (מדנחאי), i.e., Babylonians, had here
the Chethb יגורו with the Ker וגוּרוּ; the introduction of the jussive
([Psa 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#008)) after the two imperatives
would not be inappropriate. גּוּר מן (= יגר) is a stronger form of
expression for ירא מן, [Psa 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#008).

[Psalms 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 22:24</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:25) This tristich is the evangel itself. The materia laudis is
introduced by כּי. ענוּת (principal form ענוּת) bending, bowing down,
affliction, from ענה, the proper word to denote the Passion. For in
Isaiah, [Isa 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004), [Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007), the Servant of God is also said
to be מענּה and נענה, and Zechariah, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009), also introduces Him as עני and
נושׁע. The lxx, Vulgate, and Targum erroneously render it "cry." ענה
does not mean to cry, but to answer, ἀμείβεσθαι; here, however, as the
stem-word of ענות, it means to be bent. From the שׁקּץ (to regard as an
abhorrence), which alternates with בּזה, we see that the sufferer felt
the wrath of God, but this has changed into a love that sends help; God
did not long keep His countenance hidden, He hearkened to him, for his
prayer was well-pleasing to Him. שׁמע is not the verbal adjective, but,
since we have the definite fact of the rescue before us, it is a pausal
form for שׁמע, as in [Psa 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007), [Psa
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018); [Jer
36:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#013).

[Psalms 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 22:25</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:26-27) The call to thanksgiving is now ended; and there
follows a grateful upward glance towards the Author of the salvation;
and this grateful upward glance grows into a prophetic view of the
future. This fact, that the sufferer is able thus to glory and give
thanks in the great congregation ([Psa
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#010)), proceeds from Jahve (מאת as in
[Psa 118:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#023), cf. [Psa
71:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#006)). The first half of the verse,
according to Baer's correct accentuation, closes with בּקהל רב. יראיו
does not refer to קהל, but, as everywhere else, is meant to be referred
to Jahve, since the address of prayer passes over into a declarative
utterance. It is not necessary in this passage to suppose, that in the
mind of David the paying of vows is purely ethical, and not a
ritualistic act. Being rescued he will bring the שׁלמי נדר, which it is
his duty to offer, the thank-offerings, which he vowed to God when in
the extremest peril. When the sprinkling with blood (זריקה) and the
laying of the fat pieces upon the altar (הקטרה) were completed, the
remaining flesh of the shalemim was used by the offerer to make a joyous
meal; and the time allowed for this feasting was the day of offering and
on into the night in connection with the tda-shelamim offering, and in
connection with the shelamim of vows even the following day also ([Lev
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#015).). The invitation of the poor to
share in it, which the law does not command, is rendered probable by
these appointments of the law, and expressly commended by other and
analogous appointments concerning the second and third tithes. [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027) refers to this: he will invite
the ענוים, those who are outwardly and spiritually poor, to this "eating
before Jahve;" it is to be a meal for which they thank God, who has
bestowed it upon them through him whom He has thus rescued. [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027) is as it were the host's
blessing upon his guests, or rather Jahve's guests through him: "your
heart live for ever," i.e., may this meal impart to you ever enduring
refreshment. יחי optative of חיה, here used of the reviving of the
heart, which is as it were dead ([Sa1
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#037)), to spiritual joy. The
reference to the ritual of the peace offerings is very obvious. And it
is not less obvious, that the blessing, which, for all who can be saved,
springs from the salvation that has fallen to the lot of the sufferer,
is here set forth. But it is just as clear, that this blessing consists
in something much higher than the material advantage, which the share in
the enjoyment of the animal sacrifice imparts; the sacrifice has its
spiritual meaning, so that its outward forms are lowered as it were to a
mere figure of its true nature; it relates to a spiritual enjoyment of
spiritual and lasting results. How natural, then, is the thought of the
sacramental eucharist, in which the second David, like to the first,
having attained to the throne through the suffering of death, makes us
partakers of the fruits of His suffering!

[Psalms 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 22:27</span></span>

(Heb.: 22:28-32)The long line closing strophe, which forms as it were
the pedestal to the whole, shows how far not only the description of the
affliction of him who is speaking here, but also the description of the
results of his rescue, transcend the historical reality of David's
experience. The sufferer expects, as the fruit of the proclamation of
that which Jahve has done for him, the conversion of all peoples. The
heathen have become forgetful and will again recollect themselves; the
object, in itself clear enough in [Psa
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018), becomes clear from what follows:
there is a γνῶσις τοῦ θεοῦ (Psychol. S. 346ff.; tr. pp. 407ff.) among
the heathen, which the announcement of the rescue of this afflicted one
will bring back to their consciousness.

(Note: Augustin De trinitate xiv. 13, Non igitur sic erant oblitae istae
gentes Deum, ut ejus nec commemoratae recordarentur.)

This prospect ([Jer 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019).) is, in
[Psa 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029) (cf. [Jer
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#007)), based upon Jahve's right of
kingship over all peoples. A ruler is called משׁל as being exalted above
others by virtue of his office (משׁל according to its primary meaning =
Arab. mṯl, erectum stare, synonymous with כּחן, vid., on [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), cf. עמד [Mic
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003)). In וּמשׁל we have the part.,
used like the 3 praet., without any mark of the person (cf. [Psa
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010); [Psa
55:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020)), to express the pure praes.,
and, so to speak, as tempus durans: He rules among the nations (ἔθνη).
The conversion of the heathen by that sermon will, therefore, be the
realisation of the kingdom of God.

[Psa 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#029)

The eating is here again brought to mind. The perfect, אכלוּ, and the
future of sequence, ויּשׁתּחווּ, stand to one another in the relation of
cause and effect. It is, as is clear from [Psa
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#027), an eating that satisfies the
soul, a spiritual meal, that is intended, and in fact, one that is
brought about by the mighty act of rescue God has wrought. At the close
of Ps 69, where the form of the ritual thank-offering is straightway
ignored, ראוּ ([Psa 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023)) takes the
place of the אכלוּ. There it is the view of one who is rescued and who
thankfully glorifies God, which leads to others sharing with him in the
enjoyment of the salvation he has experienced; here it is an actual
enjoyment of it, the joy, springing from thankfulness, manifesting
itself not merely in words but in a thank-offering feast, at which, in
Israel, those who long for salvation are the invited guests, for with
them it is an acknowledgment of the mighty act of a God whom they
already know; but among the heathen, men of the most diversified
conditions, the richest and the poorest, for to them it is a favour
unexpectedly brought to them, and which is all the more gratefully
embraced by them on that account. So magnificent shall be the feast,
that all דּשׁני־ארץ, i.e., those who stand out prominently before the
world and before their own countrymen by reason of the abundance of
their temporal possessions (compare on the ascensive use of ארץ, [Psa
75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009); [Psa
76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010); [Isa
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#009)), choose it before this
abundance, in which they might revel, and, on account of the grace and
glory which the celebration includes within itself, they bow down and
worship. In antithesis to the "fat ones of the earth" stand those who go
down to the dust (עפר, always used in this formula of the dust of the
grave, like the Arabic turâb) by reason of poverty and care. In the
place of the participle יורדי we now have with ונפשׁו (= ואשׁר נפשׁו) a
clause with ולא, which has the value of a relative clause (as in Psalms
49:21; [Psa 78:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#039), [Pro
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#013), and frequently): and they who
have not heretofore prolonged and could not prolong their life (Ges.
123, 3, c). By comparing [Phi 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#010)
Hupfeld understands it to be those who are actually dead; so that it
would mean, His kingdom extends to the living and the dead, to this
world and the nether world. But any idea of a thankful adoration of God
on the part of the dwellers in Hades is alien to the Old Testament; and
there is nothing to force us to it here, since יורד עפר, can just as
well mean descensuri as qui descenderunt, and נפשׁו dna ,tnuredne חיּה
(also in [Eze 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#027)) means to preserve
his own life, - a phrase which can be used in the sense of vitam
sustentare and of conservare with equal propriety. It is, therefore,
those who are almost dead already with care and want, these also (and
how thankfully do these very ones) go down upon their knees, because
they are accounted worthy to be guests at this table. It is the same
great feast, of which Isaiah, [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006), prophesies, and which he there
accompanies with the music of his words. And the result of this evangel
of the mighty act of rescue is not only of boundless universality, but
also of unlimited duration: it propagates itself from one generation to
another.

Formerly we interpreted [Psa 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031) "a
seed, which shall serve Him, shall be reckoned to the Lord for a
generation;" taking יספּר as a metaphor applying to the census, [Ch2
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#016), cf. [Psa
87:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#006), and לדּור, according to [Psa
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#006) and other passages, as used of a
totality of one kind, as זרע of the whole body of those of the same
race. But the connection makes it more natural to take דור in a
genealogical sense; and, moreover, with the former interpretation it
ought to have been לדּור instead of לדּור. We must therefore retain the
customary interpretation: "a seed (posterity) shall serve Him, it shall
be told concerning the Lord to the generation (to come)." Decisive in
favour of this interpretation is לדּור with the following יבאוּ, by
which דור acquires the meaning of the future generation, exactly as in
[Psa 71:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#018), inasmuch as it at once
becomes clear, that three generations are distinctly mentioned, viz.,
that of the fathers who turn unto Jahve, [Psa
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030), that of the coming דור, [Psa
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031), and עם נולד, to whom the news
of the salvation is propagated by this דור, [Psa
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031) : "They shall come (בּוא as in
[Psa 71:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#018) : to come into being), and
shall declare His righteousness to the people that shall be born, that
He hath finished." Accordingly זרע is the principal notion, which
divides itself into (יבאו) דור and עם נולד; from which it is at once
clear, why the expression could be thus general, "a posterity," inasmuch
as it is defined by what follows. עם נולד is the people which shall be
born, or whose birth is near at hand ([Psa
78:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#006)); the lxx well renders it: λαῷ τῷ
τεχθησομένῳ (cf. [Psa 102:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#019) עם נברא
populus creandus). צדקתו is the dikaiosu'nee of God, which has become
manifest in the rescue of the great sufferer. That He did not suffer him
to come down to the very border of death without snatching him out of
the way of his murderous foes and raising him to a still greater glory,
this was divine צדקה. That He did not snatch him out of the way of his
murderous foes without suffering him to be on the point of death - even
this wrathful phase of the divine צדקה, is indicated in [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016), but then only very remotely.
For the fact, that the Servant of God, before spreading the feast
accompanying the shelamim (thank-offering) in which He makes the whole
world participants in the fruit of His suffering, offered Himself as an
asham (sin-offering), does not become a subject of prophetic revelation
until later on, and then under other typical relationships. The nature
of the עשׂה, which is in accordance with the determinate counsel of God,
is only gradually disclosed in the Old Testament. This one word, so full
of meaning (as in Ps 52:11; [Psa 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005);
[Isa 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023)), implying the carrying
through of the work of redemption, which is prefigured in David,
comprehends everything within itself. It may be compared to the לעשׂות,
[Gen 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#003), at the close of the history
of the creation. It is the last word of the Psalm, just as τετέλεσται is
the last word of the Crucified One. The substance of the gospel in its
preparatory history and its fulfilment, of the declaration concerning
God which passes from generation to generation, is this, that God has
accomplished what He planned when He anointed the son of Jesse and the
Son of David as mediator in His work of redemption; that He accomplished
it by leading the former through affliction to the throne, and making
the cross to the latter a ladder leading up to heaven.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 23](psa023)

</div>
