<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa076)  [Next](psa078) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 77](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 77:0</span></span>

Comfort Derived from the History of the Past during Years of Affliction

"The earth feared and became still," says [Psa
76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009); the earth trembled and shook,
says [Psa 77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019) : this common thought
is the string on which these two Psalms are strung. In a general way it
may be said of Psalms 77, that the poet flees from the sorrowful present
away into the memory of the years of olden times, and consoles himself
more especially with the deliverance out of Egypt, so rich in wonders.
As to the rest, however, it remains obscure what kind of national
affliction it is which drives him to find his refuge from the God who is
now hidden in the God who was formerly manifest. At any rate it is not a
purely personal affliction, but, as is shown by the consolation sought
in the earlier revelations of power and mercy in connection with the
national history, an affliction shared in company with the whole of his
people. In the midst of this hymnic retrospect the Psalm suddenly breaks
off, so that Olshausen is of opinion that it is mutilated, and Tholuck
that the author never completed it. But as Psalms 77 and Ps 81 show, it
is the Asaphic manner thus to close with an historical picture without
the line of thought recurring to its commencement. Where our Psalm
leaves off, Hab. 3 goes on, taking it up from that point like a
continuation. For the prophet begins with the prayer to revive that deed
of redemption of the Mosaic days of old, and in the midst of wrath to
remember mercy; and in expression and figures which are borrowed from
our Psalm, he then beholds a fresh deed of redemption by which that of
old is eclipsed. Thus much, at least, is therefore very clear, that
Psalms 77 is older than Habakkuk. Hitzig certainly calls the psalmist
the reader and imitator of Hab. 3; and Philippson considers even the
mutual relationship to be accidental and confined to a general
similarity of certain expressions. We, however, believe that we have
proved in our Commentary on Habakkuk (1843), S. 118-125, that the mutual
relationship is one that is deeply grounded in the prophetic type of
Habakkuk, and that the Psalm is heard to re-echo in Habakkuk, not
Habakkuk in the language of the psalmist; just as in general the Asaphic
Psalms are full of boldly sketched outlines to be filled in by later
prophetic writers. We also now further put this question: how was it
possible for the gloomy complaint of Psalms 77, which is turned back to
the history of the past, to mould itself after Hab. 3, that joyous
looking forward into a bright and blessed future? Is not the prospect in
Hab. 3 rather the result of that retrospect in Psalms 77, the confidence
in being heard which is kindled by this Psalm, the realizing as present,
in the certainty of being heard, of a new deed of God in which the
deliverances in the days of Moses are antitypically revived?

More than this, viz., that the Psalm is older than Habakkuk, who entered
upon public life in the reign of Josiah, or even as early as in the
reign of Manasseh, cannot be maintained. For it cannot be inferred from
[Psa 77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016) and [Psa
77:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003), compared with [Gen
37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035), that one chief matter of pain
to the psalmist was the fall of the kingdom of the ten tribes which took
place in his time. Nothing more, perhaps, than the division of the
kingdom which had already taken place seems to be indicated in these
passages. The bringing of the tribes of Joseph prominently forward is,
however, peculiar to the Asaphic circle of songs.

The task of the precentor is assigned by the inscription to Jeduthun
(Chethb: Jeduthun), for ל ([Psa 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001))
alternates with על ([Psa 62:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)); and
the idea that ידותון denotes the whole of the Jeduthunites ("overseer
over...") might be possible, but is without example.

The strophe schema of the Psalm is 7. 12. 12. 12. 2. The first three
strophes or groups of stichs close with Sela.

[Psalms 77:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 77:1</span></span>

The poet is resolved to pray without intermission, and he prays; fore
his soul is comfortless and sorely tempted by the vast distance between
the former days and the present times. According to the pointing, והאזין
appears to be meant to be imperative after the form הקטיל, which occurs
instead of הקטל and הקתילה, cf. [Psa
94:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#001); [Isa
43:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#008); [Jer
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#018), and the mode of writing הקטיל,
[Psa 142:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#005), [Kg2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#006), and frequently; therefore et audi
= ut audias (cf. [Sa2 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#003)). But such
an isolated form of address is not to be tolerated; והאזין has been
regarded as perf. consec. in the sense of ut audiat, although this
modification of האזין into האזין in connection with the appearing of the
Waw consec. cannot be supported in any other instance (Ew. ֗234, e), and
Kimchi on this account tries to persuade himself to that which is
impossible, viz., that והאזין in respect of sound stands for ויאזין. The
preterites in [Psa 77:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#003) express that
which has commenced and which will go on. The poet labours in his
present time of affliction to press forward to the Lord, who has
withdrawn from him; his hand is diffused, i.e., stretched out (not:
poured out, for the radical meaning of נגר, as the Syriac shows, is
protrahere), in the night-time without wearying and leaving off; it is
fixedly and stedfastly (אמוּנה, as it is expressed in [Exo
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012)) stretched out towards heaven.
His soul is comfortless, and all comfort up to the present rebounds as
it were from it (cf. [Gen 37:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#035); [Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015)). If he remembers God, who was
once near to him, then he is compelled to groan (cf. [Psa
55:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#018), [Psa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#003); and on the cohortative form of a
Lamed He verb, cf. Ges. ֗75, 6), because He has hidden Himself from him;
if he muses, in order to find Him again, then his spirit veils itself,
i.e., it sinks into night and feebleness (התעטּף as in [Psa
107:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#005); [Psa
142:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa142.htm#004); [Psa
143:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#004)). Each of the two members of
[Psa 77:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#004) are protasis and apodosis;
concerning this emotional kind of structure of a sentence, vid., Ewald,
֗357, b.

[Psalms 77:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 77:4</span></span>

He calls his eyelids the "guards of my eyes." He who holds these so that
they remain open when they want to shut together for sleep, is God; for
his looking up to Him keeps the poet awake in spite of all overstraining
of his powers. Hupfeld and others render thus: "Thou hast held, i.e.,
caused to last, the night-watches of mine eyes," - which is affected in
thought and expression. The preterites state what has been hitherto and
has not yet come to a close. He still endures, as formerly, such thumps
and blows within him, as though he lay upon an anvil (פּעם), and his
voice fails him. Then silent soliloquy takes the place of audible
prayer; he throws himself back in thought to the days of old ([Psa
143:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#005)), the years of past periods
([Isa 51:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#009)), which were so rich in the
proofs of the power and loving-kindness of the God who was then
manifest, but is now hidden. He remembers the happier past of his people
and his own, inasmuch as he now in the night purposely calls back to
himself in his mind the time when joyful thankfulness impelled him to
the song of praise accompanied by the music of the harp (בּלּילה belongs
according to the accents to the verb, not to נגינתי, although that
construction certainly is strongly commended by parallel passages like
[Psa 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007); [Psa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009); [Psa
92:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#003), cf. [Job
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010)), in place of which, crying and
sighing and gloomy silence have now entered. He gives himself up to
musing "with his heart," i.e., in the retirement of his inmost nature,
inasmuch as he allows his thoughts incessantly to hover to and fro
between the present and the former days, and in consequence of this
(fut. consec. as in [Psa 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006)) his
spirit betakes itself to scrupulizing (what the lxx reproduces with
σκάλλειν, Aquila with σκαλεύειν) - his conflict of temptation grows
fiercer. Now follow the two doubting questions of the tempted one: he
asks in different applications, [Psa
77:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#008) (cf. [Psa
85:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#006)), whether it is then all at an
end with God's loving-kindness and promise, at the same time saying to
himself, that this nevertheless is at variance with the unchangeableness
of His nature ([Mal 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)) and the
inviolability of His covenant. אפס (only occurring as a 3. praet.)
alternates with גּמר ([Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)).
חנּות is an infinitive construct formed after the manner of the Lamed He
verbs, which, however, does also occur as infinitive absolute (שׁמּות,
[Eze 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#003), cf. on [Psa
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#003)); Gesenius and Olshausen (who
doubts this infinitive form, 245, f) explain it, as do Aben-Ezra and
Kimchi, as the plural of a substantive חנּה, but in the passage cited
from Ezekiel (vid., Hitzig) such a substantival plural is syntactically
impossible. קפץ רחמים is to draw together or contract and draw back
one's compassion, so that it does not manifest itself outwardly, just as
he who will not give shuts (יקפּץ) his hand ([Deu
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#007); cf. supra, [Psa
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#010)).

[Psalms 77:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 77:10</span></span>

With ואמר the poet introduces the self-encouragement with which he has
hitherto calmed himself when such questions of temptation were wont to
intrude themselves upon him, and with which he still soothes himself. In
the rendering of הלּותי (with the tone regularly drawn back before the
following monosyllable) even the Targum wavers between מרעוּתי (my
affliction) and בּעוּתי (my supplication); and just in the same way, in
the rendering of [Psa 77:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011), between
אשׁתּניו (have changed) and שׁנין (years). שׁנות cannot possibly signify
"change" in an active sense, as Luther renders: "The right hand of the
Most High can change everything," but only a having become different
(lxx and the Quinta ἀλλοίωσις, Symmachus ἐπιδευτέρωσις), after which
Maurer, Hupfeld, and Hitzig render thus: my affliction is this, that the
right hand of the Most High has changed. But after we have read שׁנות in
[Psa 77:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#006) as a poetical plural of
שׁנה, a year, we have first of all to see whether it may not have the
same signification here. And many possible interpretations present
themselves. It can be interpreted: "my supplication is this: years of
the right hand of the Most High" (viz., that years like to the former
ones may be renewed); but this thought is not suited to the introduction
with ואמר. We must either interpret it: my sickness, viz., from the side
of God, i.e., the temptation which befalls me from Him, the affliction
ordained by Him for me (Aquila ἀῤῥωστία μου), is this (cf. [Jer
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#019)); or, since in this case the
unambiguous חלותי would have been used instead of the Piel: my being
pierced, my wounding, my sorrow is this (Symmachus τρῶσίς μου, inf. Kal
from חלל, [Psa 109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022), after the form
חנּות from חנן) - they are years of the right hand of the Most High,
i.e., those which God's mighty hand, under which I have to humble myself
([Pe1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)), has formed and measured
out to me. In connection with this way of taking [Psa
77:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#011), [Psa
77:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#012) is now suitably and easily
attached to what has gone before. The poet says to himself that the
affliction allotted to him has its time, and will not last for ever.
Therein lies a hope which makes the retrospective glance into the
happier past a source of consolation to him. In [Psa
77:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#012) the Chethb אזכיר is to be
retained, for the כי in [Psa 77:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#012) is
thus best explained: "I bring to remembrance, i.e., make known with
praise or celebrate ([Isa 63:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#007)), the
deeds of Jāh, for I will remember Thy wondrous doing from days of old."
His sorrow over the distance between the present and the past is now
mitigated by the hope that God's right hand, which now casts down, will
also again in His own time raise up. Therefore he will now, as the
advance from the indicative to the cohortative (cf. [Psa
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015)) imports, thoroughly console and
refresh himself with God's work of salvation in all its miraculous
manifestations from the earliest times. יהּ is the most concise and
comprehensive appellation for the God of the history of redemption, who,
as Habakkuk prays, will revive His work of redemption in the midst of
the years to come, and bring it to a glorious issue. To Him who then was
and who will yet come the poet now brings praise and celebration. The
way of God is His historical rule, and more especially, as in [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006), הליכות, His redemptive rule. The
primary passage [Exo 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011) (cf. [Psa
68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025)) shows that בּקּדשׁ is not to be
rendered "in the sanctuary" (lxx ἐν τῷ ἁγίῳ), but "in holiness"
(Symmachus ἐν ἁγιασμῷ). Holy and glorious in love and in anger. God goes
through history, and shows Himself there as the incomparable One, with
whose greatness no being, and least of all any one of the beingless
gods, can be measured. He is האל, the God, God absolutely and
exclusively, a miracle-working (עשׂה פלא, not עשׂה פלא cf. [Gen
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011))

(Note: The joining of the second word, accented on the first syllable
and closely allied in sense, on to the first, which is accented on the
ultima (the tone of which, under certain circumstances, retreats to the
penult., נסוג אחור) or monosyllabic, by means of the hardening Dagesh
(the so-called דחיק), only takes place when that first word ends in ה-
or ה-, not when it ends in ה-.))

God, and a God who by these very means reveals Himself as the living and
supra-mundane God. He has made His omnipotence known among the peoples,
viz., as [Exo 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#016) says, by the
redemption of His people, the tribes of Jacob and the double tribe of
Joseph, out of Egypt, - a deed of His arm, i.e., the work of His own
might, by which He has proved Himself to all peoples and to the whole
earth to be the Lord of the world and the God of salvation ([Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016); [Exo
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014)). בּזרוע, brachio scil. extenso
([Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006); [Deu
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034), and frequently), just as in [Psa
75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006), בּצוּאר, collo scil. erecto. The
music here strikes in; the whole strophe is an overture to the following
hymn in celebration of God, the Redeemer out of Egypt.

[Psalms 77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 77:16</span></span>

When He directed His lance towards the Red Sea, which stood in the way
of His redeemed, the waters immediately fell as it were into pangs of
travail (יחילוּ, as in [Hab 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#010), not
ויּחילו), also the billows of the deep trembled; for before the
omnipotence of God the Redeemer, which creates a new thing in the midst
of the old creation, the rules of the ordinary course of nature become
unhinged. There now follow in [Psa
77:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#018), [Psa
77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019) lines taken from the picture of
a thunder-storm. The poet wishes to describe how all the powers of
nature became the servants of the majestic revelation of Jahve, when He
executed judgment on Egypt and delivered Israel. זרם, Poel of זרם
(cognate זרב, זרף, Aethiopic זנם, to rain), signifies intensively: to
stream forth in full torrents. Instead of this line, Habakkuk, with a
change of the letters of the primary passage, which is usual in Jeremiah
more especially, has זרם מים עבר. The rumbling which the שׁחקים

(Note: We have indicated on [Psa
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012); [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006), that the שׁהקים are so called
from their thinness, but passages like [Psa
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#012) and the one before us do not
favour this idea. One would think that we have more likely to go back to
Arab. sḥq, to be distant (whence suḥḳ, distance; saḥı̂ḳ, distant), and
that שׁהקים signifies the distances, like שׁמים, the heights, from שׁחק
= suḥḳ, in distinction from שׁחק, an atom (Wetzstein). But the Hebrew
affords no trace of this verbal stem, whereas שׁחק, Arab. sḥq,
contundere, comminuere (Neshwn: to pound to dust, used e.g., of the
apothecary's drugs), is just as much Hebrew as Arabic. And the word is
actually associated with this verb by the Arabic mind, inasmuch as Arab.
saḥâbun saḥqun (nubes tenues, nubila tenuia) is explained by Arab. sḥâb
rqı̂q. Accordingly שׁהקים, according to its primary notion, signifies
that which spreads itself out thin and fine over a wide surface, and
according to the usage of the language, in contrast with the thick and
heavy פני הארץ, the uppermost stratum of the atmosphere, and then the
clouds, as also Arab. a‛nân, and the collective ‛anan and ‛anân (vid.,
Isaiah, at [Isa 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005), note), is not
first of all the clouds, but the surface of the sky that is turned to us
(Fleischer).)

cause to sound forth (נתנוּ, cf. [Psa
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034)) is the thunder. The arrows of
God (חצציך, in Habakkuk חצּיך) are the lightnings. The Hithpa. (instead
of which Habakkuk has יחלּכוּ) depicts their busy darting hither and
thither in the service of the omnipotence that sends them forth. It is
open to question whether גּלגּל denotes the roll of the thunder
(Aben-Ezra, Maurer, Bttcher): the sound of Thy thunder went rolling
forth (cf. [Psa 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#004)), - or the
whirlwind accompanying the thunder-storm (Hitzig); the usage of the
language ([Psa 83:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#014), also [Eze
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#013), Syriac golgolo) is in favour of
the latter. On [Psa 77:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#019) cf. the echo
in [Psa 97:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#004). Amidst such commotions
in nature above and below Jahve strode along through the sea, and made a
passage for His redeemed. His person and His working were invisible, but
the result which attested His active presence was visible. He took His
way through the sea, and cut His path (Chethb plural, שׁביליך, as in
[Jer 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015)) through great waters (or,
according to Habakkuk, caused His horses to go through), without the
footprints (עקּבות with Dag. dirimens) of Him who passes and passed
through being left behind to show it.

[Psalms 77:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 77:20</span></span>

If we have divided the strophes correctly, then this is the refrain-like
close. Like a flock God led His people by Moses and Aaron ([Num
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001)) to the promised goal. At this
favourite figure, which is as it were the monogram of the Psalms of
Asaph and of his school, the poet stops, losing himself in the old
history of redemption, which affords him comfort in abundance, and is to
him a prophecy of the future lying behind the afflictive years of the
present.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 78](psa078)

</div>
