<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa065)  [Next](psa067) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 66](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 66:0</span></span>

Thanksgiving for a National and Personal Deliverance

From [Psa 65:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#001) onwards we find
ourselves in the midst of a series of Psalms which, with a varying
arrangement of the words, are inscribed both מזמור and שׁיר (Ps 65-68).
The two words שׁיר מזמור stand according to the accents in the stat.
constr. ([Psa 88:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001)), and therefore
signify a Psalm-song.

(Note: If it were meant to be rendered canticum psalmus (not psalmi) it
would surely have been accented למנצּח שׁיר מזמור (for למנצח שׁיר מזמור,
according to section xviii. of the Accentuationssystem).)

This series, as is universally the case, is arranged according to the
community of prominent watchwords. In [Psa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#002) we read: "To Thee is the vow
paid," and in [Psa 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013) : "I will pay
Thee my vows;" in [Psa 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#020) :
"Blessed be Elohim," and in Psalms 67:8: "Elohim shall bless us."
Besides, Ps 66 and [Psa 67:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001) have
this feature in common, that למנצח, which occurs fifty-five times in the
Psalter, is accompanied by the name of the poet in every instance, with
the exception of these two anonymous Psalms. The frequently occurring
Sela of both Psalms also indicates that they were intended to have a
musical accompaniment. These annotations referring to the temple-music
favour the pre-exilic rather than the post-exilic origin of the two
Psalms. Both are purely Elohimic; only in one instance ([Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001) :18) does אדני, equally
belonging to this style of Psalm, alternate with Elohim.

On the ground of some deliverance out of oppressive bondage that has
been experienced by Israel arises in Psalms 66 the summons to the whole
earth to raise a shout of praise unto God. The congregation is the
subject speaking as far as [Psa 66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012).
From [Psa 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013) the person of the poet
appears in the foreground; but that which brings him under obligation to
present a thank-offering is nothing more nor less than that which the
whole congregation, and he together with it, has experienced. It is
hardly possible to define this event more minutely. The lofty
consciousness of possessing a God to whom all the world must bow,
whether cheerfully or against its will, became strong among the Jewish
people more especially after the overthrow of Assyria in the reign of
Hezekiah. But there is no ground for conjecturing either Isaiah or
Hezekiah to be the composer of this Psalm. If עולם in [Psa
66:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007) signified the world (Hitzig),
then he would be (vid., [Psa 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#009)) one
of the latest among the Old Testament writers; but it has the same
meaning here that it has everywhere else in Old Testament Hebrew.

In the Greek Church this Psalm is called Ψαλμὸς ἀναστάσεως; the lxx
gives it this inscription, perhaps with reference to [Psa
66:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#012), ἐξήγαγες ἡμᾶς εἰς ἀναψυχήν.

[Psalms 66:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 66:1</span></span>

The phrase שׂים כבוד ל signifies "to give glory to God" in other
passages ([Jos 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019); [Isa
42:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#012)), here with a second accusative,
either (1) if we take תּהלּתו as an accusative of the object: facite
laudationem ejus gloriam = gloriosam (Maurer and others), or (2) if we
take כבוד as an accusative of the object and the former word as an
accusative of the predicate: reddite honorem laudem ejus (Hengstenberg),
or (3) also by taking תהלתו as an apposition: reddite honorem, scil.
laudem ejus (Hupfeld). We prefer the middle rendering: give glory as His
praise, i.e., to Him as or for praise. It is unnecessary, with
Hengstenberg, to render: How terrible art Thou in Thy works! in that
case אתּה ought not to be wanting. מעשׂיך might more readily be singular
(Hupfeld, Hitzig); but these forms with the softened Jod of the root
dwindle down to only a few instances upon closer consideration. The
singular of the predicate (what a terrible affair) here, as frequently,
e.g., [Psa 119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137), precedes the
plural designating things. The song into which the Psalmist here bids
the nations break forth, is essentially one with the song of the
heavenly harpers in [Rev 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003)., which
begins, Μεγάλα καὶ θαυμαστὰ τὰ ἔργα σου.

[Psalms 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 66:5</span></span>

Although the summons: Come and see... (borrowed apparently from [Psa
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009)), is called forth by contemporary
manifestations of God's power, the consequences of which now lie open to
view, the rendering of [Psa 66:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#006),
"then will we rejoice in Him," is nevertheless unnatural, and, rightly
looked at, neither grammar nor the matter requires it. For since שׁם in
this passage is equivalent to אז, and the future after אז takes the
signification of an aorist; and since the cohortative form of the future
can also (e.g., after עד, [Psa 73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007),
and in clauses having a hypothetical sense) be referred to the past, and
does sometimes at least occur where the writer throws himself back into
the past ([Sa2 22:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#038)), the rendering:
Then did we rejoice in Him, cannot be assailed on syntactical grounds.
On the "we," cf. [Jos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001), Chethb,
[Hos 12:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001) :54. The church of all
ages is a unity, the separate parts being jointly involved in the whole.
The church here directs the attention of all the world to the mighty
deeds of God at the time of the deliverance from Egypt, viz., the laying
of the Red Sea and of Jordan dry, inasmuch as it can say in [Psa
66:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007), by reason of that which it has
experienced ibn the present, that the sovereign power of God is ever the
same: its God rules in His victorious might עולם, i.e., not "over the
world," because that ought to be בּעולם, but "in eternity" (accusative
of duration, as in [Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)., [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007)), and therefore, as in the former
days, so also in all time to come. His eyes keep searching watch among
the peoples; the rebellious, who struggle agaisnt His yoke and persecute
His people, had better not rise, it may go ill with them. The Chethb
runs ירימוּ, for which the Ker is ירוּמוּ. The meaning remains the same;
הרים can (even without יד, ראשׁ, קרן, [Psa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005)) mean "to practise exaltation,"
superbire. By means of למו this proud bearing is designated as being
egotistical, and as unrestrainedly boastful. Only let them not imagine
themselves secure in their arrogance! There is One more exalted, whose
eye nothing escapes, and to whose irresistible might whatever is not
conformed to His gracious will succumbs.

[Psalms 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 66:8</span></span>

The character of the event by which the truth has been verified that the
God who redeemed Israel out of Egypt still ever possesses and exercises
to the full His ancient sovereign power, is seen from this reiterated
call to the peoples to share in Israel's Gloria. God has averted the
peril of death and overthrow from His people: He has put their soul in
life (בּחיּים, like בּישׁע in [Psa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)), i.e., in the realm of life; He
has not abandoned their foot to tottering unto overthrow (mowT the
substantive, as in [Psa 121:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#003); cf. the
reversed construction in [Psa 55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023)).
For God has cast His people as it were into a smelting-furnace or
fining-pot in order to purify and to prove them by suffering; - this is
a favourite figure with Isaiah and Jeremiah, but is also found in [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009); [Mal
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003). [Eze
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#009) is decisive concerning the
meaning of מצוּדה, where הביא במצודות signifies "to bring into the holds
or prisons;" besides, the figure of the fowling-net (although this is
also called מצוּדה as well as מצודה) has no footing here in the context.
מצוּדה (vid., [Psa 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#003)) signifies
specula, and that both a natural and an artificial watch-post on a
mountain; here it is the mountain-hold or prison of the enemy, as a
figure of the total loss of freedom. The laying on of a heavy burden
mentioned by the side of it in [Psa
66:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#011) also accords well with this.
מוּעקה, a being oppressed, the pressure of a burden, is a Hophal
formation, like מטּה, a being spread out, [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008); cf. the similar masculine forms
in [Psa 69:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#003); [Isa
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013); [Isa
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#006); [Isa
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#003). The loins are mentioned because
when carrying heavy loads, which one has to stoop down in order to take
up, the lower spinal region is called into exercise. אנושׁ is frequently
([Psa 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020)., [Psa
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#018); [Psa
56:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#002), [Isa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#012); [Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010)) the word used for tyrants as
being wretched mortals, perishable creatures, in contrast with their all
the more revolting, imperious, and self-deified demeanour. God so
ordered it, that "wretched men" rode upon Israel's head. Or is it to be
interpreted: He caused them to pass over Israel (cf. [Psa
129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003); [Isa
51:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#023))? It can scarcely mean this,
since it would then be in dorso nostro, which the Latin versions
capriciously substitute. The preposition ל instead of על is used with
reference to the phrase ישׁב ל: sitting upon Israel's head, God caused
them to ride along, so that Israel was not able to raise its head
freely, but was most ignominiously wounded in its self-esteem. Fire and
water are, as in [Isa 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#002), a figure
of vicissitudes and perils of the most extreme character. Israel was
nigh to being burnt up and drowned, but God led it forth לרויה, to an
abundant fulness, to abundance and superabundance of prosperity. The
lxx, which renders εἰς ἀναψυχήν (Jerome absolutely: in refrigerium), has
read לרוחה; Symmachus, εἰς εὐρυχωρίαν, probably reading לרחבה ([Psa
119:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045); [Psa
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020)). Both give a stronger
antithesis. But the state of straitness or oppression was indeed also a
state of privation.

[Psalms 66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 66:13</span></span>

From this point onwards the poet himself speaks, but, as the diversity
and the kind of the sacrifices show, as being a member of the community
at large. The עולות stand first, the girts of adoring homage; בּ is the
Beth of the accompaniment, as in [Lev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#003); [Sa1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024), cf. [Heb
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#025). "My vows" refer more especially
to פּצה פּה ׃שׁלמי נדר also occurs elsewhere of the involuntary vowing
to do extraordinary things urged from one by great distress ([Jdg
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#035)). אשׁר is an accusative of the
object relating to the vows, quae aperuerunt = aperiendo nuncupaverunt
labia mea (Geier). In [Psa 66:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#015) עשׂה,
used directly (like the Aramaic and Phoenician עבד) in the signification
"to sacrifice" ([Exo 29:36-41](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036), and
frequently), alternates with העלה, the synonym of הקטיר. The sacrifices
to be presented are enumerated. מיחים (incorrect for מחים) are marrowy,
fat lambs; lambs and bullocks (בּקר) have the most universal
appropriation among the animals that were fit for sacrifices. The ram
(איל), on the contrary, is the animal for the whole burnt-offering of
the high priest, of the princes of the tribes, and of the people; and
appears also as the animal for the shelamim only in connection with the
shelamim of Aaron, of the people, of the princes of the tribes, and, in
[Num 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#014), of the Nazarite. The
younger he-goat (עתּוּד) is never mentioned as an animal for the whole
burnt-offering; but, indeed, as an animal for the shelamim of the
princes of the tribes in Num. 7. It is, therefore, probable that the
shelamim which were to be offered in close connection with the whole
burnt-offerings are introduced by עם, so that קטרת signifies the fat
portions of the shelamim upon the altar smoking in the fire. The mention
of "rams" renders it necessary that we should regard the poet as here
comprehending himself among the people when he speaks thus.

[Psalms 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 66:16</span></span>

The words in [Psa 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016) are addressed
in the widest extent, as in [Psa 66:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#005)
and [Psa 66:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#002), to all who fear God,
wheresoever such are to be found on the face of the earth. To all these,
for the glory of God and for their own profit, he would gladly relate
what God has made him to experience. The individual-looking expression
לנפשׁי is not opposed to the fact of the occurrence of a marvellous
answering of prayer, to which he refers, being one which has been
experienced by him in common with the whole congregation. He cried unto
God with his mouth (that is to say, not merely silently in spirit, but
audibly and importunately), and a hymn (רומם,

(Note: Kimchi (Michlol 146a) and Parchon (under רמם) read רומם with
Pathach; and Heidenheim and Baer have adopted it.)

something that rises, collateral form to רומם, as עולל and שׁובב to עולל
and שׁובב) was under my tongue; i.e., I became also at once so sure of
my being heard, that I even had the song of praise in readiness (vid.,
[Psa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007)), with which I had
determined to break forth when the help for which I had prayed, and
which was assured to me, should arrive. For the purpose of his heart was
not at any time, in contradiction to his words, און, God-abhorred
vileness or worthlessness; ראה with the accusative, as in [Gen
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#010); [Psa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037) : to aim at, or design anything,
to have it in one's eye. We render: If I had aimed at evil in my heart,
the Lord would not hear; not: He would not have heard, but: He would not
on any occasion hear. For a hypocritical prayer, coming from a heart
which has not its aim sincerely directed towards Him, He does not hear.
The idea that such a heart was not hidden behind his prayer is refuted
in [Psa 66:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#019) from the result, which
is of a totally opposite character. In the closing doxology the
accentuation rightly takes תּפלּתי וחסדּו as belonging together. Prayer
and mercy stand in the relation to one another of call and echo. When
God turns away from a man his prayer and His mercy, He commands him to
be silent and refuses him a favourable answer. The poet, however,
praises God that He has deprived him neither of the joyfulness of prayer
nor the proof of His favour. In this sense Augustine makes the following
practical observation on this passage: Cum videris non a te amotam
deprecationem tuam, securus esto, quia non est a te amota misericordia
ejus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 67](psa067)

</div>
