<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa098)  [Next](psa100) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 99](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 99:0</span></span>

Song of Praise in Honour of the Thrice Holy One

This is the third of the Psalms ([Psa
93:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa093.htm#001), [Psa
97:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001), [Psa
99:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)) which begin with the watchword
מלך ה. It falls into three parts, of which the first ([Psa
99:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)) closes with קדושׁ הוּא, the
second ([Psa 99:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#004), [Psa
99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005)) with קדושׁ הוּא, and the third,
more full-toned, with אלחנוּ קדושׁ ה - an earthly echo of the trisagion
of the seraphim. The first two Sanctuses are two hexastichs; and two
hexastichs form the third, according to the very same law by which the
third and the sixth days of creation each consists of two creative
works. This artistic form bears witness against Olshausen in favour of
the integrity of the text; but the clare-obscure of the language and
expression makes no small demands upon the reader.

Bengel has seen deepest into the internal character of this Psalm. He
says, "The 99th Psalm has three parts, in which the Lord is celebrated
as He who is to come, as He who is, and as He who was, and each part is
closed with the ascription of praise: He is holy." The Psalm is laid out
accordingly by Oettinger, Burk, and C. H. Rieger.

[Psalms 99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 99:1</span></span>

The three futures express facts of the time to come, which are the
inevitable result of Jahve's kingly dominion bearing sway from heaven,
and here below from Zion, over the world; they therefore declare what
must and will happen. The participle insidens cherubis ([Psa
80:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#002), cf. [Psa
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)) is a definition of the manner
(Olshausen): He reigns, sitting enthroned above the cherubim. נוּט, like
Arab. nwd, is a further formation of the root na, nu, to bend, nod. What
is meant is not a trembling that is the absolute opposite of joy, but a
trembling that leads on to salvation. The Breviarium in Psalterium,
which bears the name of Jerome, observes: Terra quamdiu immota fuerit,
sanari non potest; quando vero mota fuerit et intremuerit, tunc recipiet
sanitatem. In [Psa 99:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#003) declaration
passes over into invocation. One can feel how the hope that the "great
and fearful Name" ([Deu 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017)) will be
universally acknowledged, and therefore that the religion of Israel will
become the religion of the world, moves and elates the poet. The fact
that the expression notwithstanding is not קדושׁ אתּה, but קדושׁ הוּא,
is explained from the close connection with the seraphic trisagion in
[Isa 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003). הוּא refers to Jahve; He and
His Name are notions that easily glide over into one another.

[Psalms 99:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 99:4</span></span>

The second Sanctus celebrates Jahve with respect to His continuous
righteous rule in Israel. The majority of expositors construe it: "And
(they shall praise) the might of the king, who loves right;" but this
joining of the clause on to יודוּ over the refrain that stands in the
way is hazardous. Neither can ועז מלך משׁפּט אהב, however, be an
independent clause, since אהב cannot be said of עז, but only of its
possessor. And the dividing of the verse at אהב, adopted by the lxx,
will therefore not hold good. משפט אהב is an attributive clause to מלך
in the same position as in [Psa 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007);
and עז, with what appertains to it, is the object to כּוננתּ placed
first, which has the king's throne as its object elsewhere ([Psa
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008), [Sa2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013); [Ch1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#012)), just as it here has the might
of the king, which, however, here at the same time in מישׁרים takes
another and permutative object (cf. the permutative subject in [Psa
72:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017)), as Hitzig observes; or rather,
since מישׁרים is most generally used as an adverbial notion, this
מישׁרים ([Psa 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002); [Psa
75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003); [Psa
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009), and frequently), usually as a
definition of the mode of the judging and reigning, is subordinated: and
the might of a king who loves the right, i.e., of one who governs not
according to dynastic caprice but moral precepts, hast Thou established
in spirit and aim (directed to righteousness and equity). What is meant
is the theocratic kingship, and [Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004) says what Jahve has constantly
accomplished by means of this kingship: He has thus maintained right and
righteousness (cf. e.g., [Sa2 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#015);
[Ch1 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#014); [Kg1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#009); [Isa
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005)) among His people. Out of this
manifestation of God's righteousness, which is more conspicuous, and can
be better estimated, within the nation of the history of redemption than
elsewhere, grows the call to highly exalt Jahve the God of Israel, and
to bow one's self very low at His footstool. להדם רגליו, as in [Psa
132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007), is not a statement of the
object (for [Isa 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014) is of another
kind), but (like אל in other instances) of the place in which, or of the
direction (cf. [Psa 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#014)) in which the
προσκύνησις is to take place. The temple is called Jahve's footstool
([Ch1 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002), cf. [Lam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#001); [Isa
60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013)) with reference to the ark, the
capporeth of which corresponds to the transparent sapphire ([Exo
24:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#010)) and to the crystal-like
firmament of the mercaba ([Eze 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022),
cf. [Ch1 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#018)).

[Psalms 99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 99:6</span></span>

The vision of the third Sanctus looks into the history of the olden time
prior to the kings. In support of the statement that Jahve is a living
God, and a God who proves Himself in mercy and in judgment, the poet
appeals to three heroes of the olden time, and the events recorded of
them. The expression certainly sounds as though it had reference to
something belonging to the present time; and Hitzig therefore believes
that it must be explained of the three as heavenly intercessors, after
the manner of Onias and Jeremiah in the vision 2 Macc. 15:12-14. But
apart from this presupposing an active manifestation of life on the part
of those who have fallen happily asleep, which is at variance with the
ideas of the latest as well as of the earliest Psalms concerning the
other world, this interpretation founders upon [Psa
99:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#007), according to which a celestial
discourse of God with the three "in the pillar of cloud" ought also to
be supposed. The substantival clauses [Psa
99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006) bear sufficient evident in
themselves of being a retrospect, by which the futures that follow are
stamped as being the expression of the contemporaneous past. The
distribution of the predicates to the three is well conceived. Moses was
also a mighty man in prayer, for with his hands uplifted for prayer he
obtained the victory for his people over Amalek ([Exo
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#011).), and on another occasion
placed himself in the breach, and rescued them from the wrath of God and
from destruction ([Psa 106:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#023); [Exo
32:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030); cf. also [Num
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#013)); and Samuel, it is true, is
only a Levite by descent, but by office in a time of urgent need a
priest (cohen), for he sacrifices independently in places where, by
reason of the absence of the holy tabernacle with the ark of the
covenant, it was not lawful, according to the letter of the law, to
offer sacrifices, he builds an altar in Ramah, his residence as judge,
and has, in connection with the divine services on the high place (Bama)
there, a more than high-priestly position, inasmuch as the people do not
begin the sacrificial repasts before he has blessed the sacrifice ([Sa1
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#013)). But the character of a mighty
man in prayer is outweighed in the case of Moses by the character of the
priest; for he is, so to speak, the proto-priest of Israel, inasmuch as
he twice performed priestly acts which laid as it were a foundation for
all times to come, viz., the sprinkling of the blood at the ratification
of the covenant under Sinai (Ex. 24), and the whole ritual which was a
model for the consecrated priesthood, at the consecration of the priests
(Lev. 8). It was he, too, who performed the service in the sanctuary
prior to the consecration of the priests: he set the shew-bread in
order, prepared the candlestick, and burnt incense upon the golden altar
([Exo 40:22-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#022)). In the case of
Samuel, on the other hand, the character of the mediator in the
religious services is outweighed by that of the man mighty in prayer: by
prayer he obtained Israel the victory of Ebenezer over the Philistines
([Sa1 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#008).), and confirmed his words
of warning with the miraculous sign, that at his calling upon God it
would thunder and rain in the midst of a cloudless season ([Sa1
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016), cf. Sir. 46:16f.).

The poet designedly says: Moses and Aaron were among His priests, and
Samuel among His praying ones. This third twelve-line strophe holds
good, not only of the three in particular, but of the twelve-tribe
nation of priests and praying ones to which they belong. For [Psa
99:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#007) cannot be meant of the three,
since, with the exception of a single instance ([Num
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#005)), it is always Moses only, not
Aaron, much less Samuel, with whom God negotiates in such a manner.
אליהם refers to the whole people, which is proved by their interest in
the divine revelation given by the hand of Moses out of the cloudy
pillar ([Exo 33:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007).). Nor can [Psa
99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006) therefore be understood of the
three exclusively, since there is nothing to indicate the transition
from them to the people: crying (קראים, syncopated like חטאים, [Sa1
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011)) to Jahve, i.e., as often as
they (these priests and praying ones, to whom a Moses, Aaron, and Samuel
belong) cried unto Jahve, He answered them-He revealed Himself to this
people who had such leaders (choragi), in the cloudy pillar, to those
who kept His testimonies and the law which He gave them. A glance at
[Psa 99:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#008) shows that in Israel itself
the good and the bad, good and evil, are distinguished. God answered
those who could pray to Him with a claim to be answered. [Psa
99:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#007), is, virtually at least, a
relative clause, declaring the prerequisite of a prayer that may be
granted. In [Psa 99:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#008) is added the
thought that the history of Israel, in the time of its redemption out of
Egypt, is not less a mirror of the righteousness of God than of the
pardoning grace of God. If [Psa 99:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#007)
are referred entirely to the three, then עלילות and נקם, referred to
their sins of infirmity, appear to be too strong expressions. But to
take the suffix of עלילותם objectively (ea quae in eos sunt moliti Core
et socii ejus), with Symmachus (καὶ ἔκδικος ἐπὶ ταῖς ἐπηρείναις αὐτῶν)
and Kimchi, as the ulciscens in omnes adinventiones eorum of the Vulgate
is interpreted,

(Note: Vid., Raemdonck in his David propheta cet. 1800: in omnes
injurias ipsis illatas, uti patuit in Core cet.)

is to do violence to it. The reference to the people explains it all
without any constraint, and even the flight of prayer that comes in here
(cf. [Mic 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#018)). The calling to mind
of the generation of the desert, which fell short of the promise, is an
earnest admonition for the generation of the present time. The God of
Israel is holy in love and in wrath, as He Himself unfolds His Name in
[Exo 34:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006). Hence the poet calls upon
his fellow-countrymen to exalt this God, whom they may with pride call
their own, i.e., to acknowledge and confess His majesty, and to fall
down and worship at (ל cf. אל, [Psa
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#008)) the mountain of His holiness, the
place of His choice and of His presence.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 100](psa100)

</div>
