<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa048)  [Next](psa050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 49:0</span></span>

Of the Vanity of Earthly Prosperity and Good: A Didactic Poem

To the pair of [Psa 47:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001) and [Psa
48:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001) is appended Psalms 49, which
likewise begins with an appealing "all ye peoples;" in other respects,
being a didactic song, it has nothing in common with the national and
historical Psalms, [Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001). The poet
here steps forward as a preacher in the midst of men. His theme is the
transitoriness of the prosperity of the ungodly, and, on the other hand,
the hope of the upright which rests on God. Accordingly the Psalm falls
into the following divisions: an introduction, [Psa
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#002), which by its very promissory
tone reminds one of the speeches of Elihu in the Book of Job, and the
two parts of the sermon following thereupon, [Psa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006), [Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014), which are marked out by a
refrain, in which there is only a slight variation of expression. In its
dogmatic character it harmonizes with the Psalms of the time of David,
and by its antique and bold form takes rank with such Psalms as [Psa
17:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#001) by David and Ps 83 by Asaph.
Since also in the didactic Psalms of David and Asaph we meet with a
style differing from that of their other Psalms, and, where the doings
of the ungodly are severely rebuked, we find a harsher and more concise
mode of expression and a duller, heavier tone, there is nothing at
variance with the assumption that Ps 49 was composed by the writer of
[Psa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001) and [Psa
84:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#001); and more especially since David
has composed Psalms of a kindred character ([Psa
39:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001) and [Psa
62:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#001)) in the time of the
persecution by Absalom. Nothing, however, is involved in this unity of
the author.

[Psalms 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 49:1</span></span>

(Heb.: 49:2-5) Introduction. Very similarly do the elder (in the reign
of Jehoshaphat) and the younger Micha (Micah) introduce their prophecies
([Kg1 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028); [Mic
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002)); and Elihu in the Book of Job his
didactic discourses ([Psa 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#002), cf.
[Psa 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002)). It is an universal theme
which the poet intends to take up, hence he calls upon all peoples and
all the inhabitants of the חלד. Such is the word first of all for this
temporal life, which glides by unnoticed, them for the present
transitory world itself (vid., on [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014)). It is his intention to declare
to the rich the utter nothingness or vanity of their false ground of
hope, and to the poor the superiority of their true ground of hope;
hence he wishes to have as hearers both בני אדם, children of the common
people, who are men and have otherwise nothing distinctive about them,
and בּני־אישׁ, children of men, i.e., of rank and distinction (vid., on
[Psa 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#003)) - rich and poor, as he adds
to make his meaning more clear. For his mouth will, or shall, utter
הכמות, not: all sorts of wise teachings, but: weighty wisdom. Just in
like manner תּבוּנות signifies profound insight or understanding; cf.
plurals like בּינות, [Isa 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#011),
ישּׁוּעת, Ps. 42:12 and frequently, שׁלוּת, [Jer
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#021). The parallel word תּבוּנות in
the passage before us, and the plural predicate in [Pro
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#007), show that חכמות, here and in
[Pro 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020); [Pro
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001), cf. [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001), is not to be regarded, with
Hitzig, Olshausen, and others, as another form of the singular חכמוּת.
Side by side with the speaking of the mouth stands חגוּת לב (with an
unchangeable Kametz before the tone-syllable, Ew. 166, c): the
meditation (lxx μελέτη) of the heart, and in accordance therewith the
well-thought-out discourse. What he intends to discourse is, however,
not the creation of his own brain, but what he has received. A משׁל, a
saying embodying the wisdom of practical life, as God teaches men it,
presents itself to his mind demanding to be heard; and to this he
inclines his ear in order that, from being a diligent scholar of the
wisdom from above, he may become a useful teacher of men, inasmuch as he
opens up, i.e., unravels, the divine Mashal, which in the depth and
fulness of its contents is a חידה, i.e., an involved riddle (from חוּד,
cogn. אגד, עקד), and plays the cithern thereby (ב of the accompaniment).
The opening of the riddle does not consist in the solving of it, but in
the setting of it forth. פּתח, to open = to propound, deliver of a
discourse, comes from the phrase את־ּפּיו-פּתח, [Pro
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#026); cf. [Psa
119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130), where פּתח, an opening, is
equivalent to an unlocking, a revelation.

[Psalms 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 49:5</span></span>

(Heb.: 49:6-13) First division of the sermon. Those who have to endure
suffering from rich sinners have no need to fear, for the might and
splendour of their oppressors is hastening towards destruction. ימי רע
are days in which one experiences evil, as in [Psa
94:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#013), cf. [Amo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003). The genitive r\` is continued in
[Amo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#006) in a clause that is
subordinate to the בימי of [Psa 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#006)
(cf. [Sa1 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#015); [Job
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#002); [Psa
90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015)). The poet calls his crafty and
malicious foes עקבי. There is no necessity for reading עקבי as Bttcher
does, since without doubt a participial noun עקב, supplantator, can be
formed from עקב, supplantare; and although in its branchings out it
coincides with עקב, planta, its meaning is made secure by the
connection. To render the passage: "when wickedness surrounds me about
my heels," whether with or without changing עון into עון (Hupfeld, von
Ortenberg), is proved on all sides to be inadmissible: it ought to have
been עול instead of עון; but even then it would still be an awkward
expression, "to surround any one's heels,"

(Note: This might be avoided if it were possible for עון עקבי to mean
"the sin that follows my heels, that follows me at the heels;" but apart
from עון being unsuitable with this interpretation, an impossible
meaning is thereby extorted from the genitive construction. This,
however, is perhaps what is meant by the expression of the lxx, ἡ ἀνομία
τῆς πτέρνης μου, so much spoken of in the Greek Church down to the
present day.)

and the הבּטחים, which follows, would be unconnected with what precedes.
This last word comes after עקבי, giving minuteness to the description,
and is then continued quite regularly in [Psa
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#007) by the finite verb. Up to this
point all is clear enough; but now the difficulties accumulate. One
naturally expects the thought, that the rich man is not able to redeem
himself from death. Instead of this it is said, that no man is able to
redeem another from death. Ewald, Bttcher, and others, therefore, take
אח, as in [Eze 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#010); [Eze
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#020) (vid., Hitzig), to be a careless
form of writing for אך, and change יפדּה into the reflexive יפּדה; but
the thought that is sought thus to be brought to is only then arrived at
with great difficulty: the words ought to be אך אישׁ לא יפדּה נפשׁו. The
words as they stand assert: a brother (אח, as a prominently placed
object, with Rebia magnum, = אהיו, cf. [Eze
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010); [Eze
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#018); [Mic
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#006); [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006)) can a man by no means redeem,
i.e., men cannot redeem one another. Hengstenberg and Hitzig find the
thought that is to be expected in [Psa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008): the rich ungodly man can with
all his riches not even redeem another (אח), much less then can he
redeem himself, offer a כּפר for himself. But if the poet meant to be so
understood, he must have written ולא and כּפר נפשׁו. [Psa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008) and [Psa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008) bear no appearance of referring
to different persons; the second clause is, on the contrary, the
necessary supplement of the first: Among men certainly it is possible
under some circumstances for one who is delivered over to death to be
freed by money, but no כּפר (= פּדיון נפשׁ, [Exo
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#030) and frequently) can be given to
God (לאלהים).

All idea of the thought one would most naturally look for must therefore
be given up, so far as it can be made clear why the poet has given no
direct expression to it. And this can be done. The thought of a man's
redeeming himself is far from the poet's mind; and the contrast which he
has before his mind is this: no man can redeem another, Elohim only can
redeem man. That one of his fellow-men cannot redeem a man, is expressed
as strongly as possible by the words לא־פדה יפדּה; the negative in other
instances stands after the intensive infinitive, but here, as in [Gen
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#004); [Amo
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008); [Isa
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#028), before it. By an easy flight of
irony, [Psa 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#009) says that the lu'tron
which is required to be paid for the souls of men is too precious, i.e.,
exorbitant, or such as cannot be found, and that he (whoever might wish
to lay it down) lets it alone (is obliged to let it alone) for ever Thus
much is clear enough, so far as the language is concerned (וחדל
according to the consec. temp. = ויחדּל), and, although somewhat fully
expressed, is perfectly in accordance with the connection. But how is
[Psa 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#010) attached to what precedes?
Hengstenberg renders it, "he must for ever give it up, that he should
live continually and not see the grave." But according to the syntax,
ויהי cannot be attached to וחדל, but only to the futures in [Psa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008), ranking with which the
voluntative ויחי, ut vivat (Ew. 347, a). Thus, therefore, nothing
remains but to take [Psa 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#009) (which
von Ortenberg expunges as a gloss upon [Psa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#008)) as a parenthesis; the principal
clause affirms that no man can give to God a ransom that shall protect
another against death, so that this other should still continue (עוד) to
live, and that without end (לנצח), without seeing the grave, i.e.,
without being obliged to go down into the grave. The כּי in [Psa
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011) is now confirmatory of what is
denied by its opposite; it is, therefore, according to the sense, imo
(cf. [Kg1 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#015)): ...that he may not
see the grave - no indeed, without being able to interpose and alter it,
he must see how all men, without distinction, succumb to death.
Designedly the word used of the death of wise men is מוּת, and of the
death of the fool and the stupid man, אבד. Kurtz renders: "together with
the fool and the slow of understanding;"; but יחד as a proposition
cannot be supported; moreover, ועזבוּ would then have "the wise" as its
subject, which is surely not the intention of the poet. Everything
without distinction, and in mingled confusion, falls a prey to death;
the rich man must see it, and yet he is at the same time possessed by
the foolish delusion that he, with his wealth, is immortal.

The reading קברם (lxx, Targ., Syr.), preferred by Ewald, and the
conjecture קברם, adopted by Olshausen and Riehm, give a thought that is
not altogether contrary to the connection, viz., the narrow grave is the
eternal habitation of those who called broad lands their own; but this
thought appears here, in view of [Psa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012), too early. קרב denotes the
inward part, or that which is within, described according to that which
encircles or contains it: that which is within them is, "their houses
(pronounce bāttēmo) are for ever" (Hengstenberg, Hitzig); i.e., the
contents of their inward part is the self-delusion that their houses are
everlasting, and their habitations so durable that one generation after
another will pass over them; cf. the similar style of expression in [Psa
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#004), [Est
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#007). Hitzig further renders: men
celebrate their names in the lands; קרא בשׁם, to call with a name =
solemnly to proclaim it, to mention any one's name with honour ([Isa
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005)). But it is unlikely that the
subject of קראוּ should now again be any other than the rich men
themselves; and עלי אדמות for בּכל־הארץ or בּארצות is contrary to the
usage of the language. אדמה is the earth as tillage, אדמות (only in this
passage) in this connection, fields, estates, lands; the proclaiming of
names is, according to [Sa2 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#028);
[Kg1 8:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#043); [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012), equivalent to the calling of the
lands or estates after their (the possessors') names (Bצttcher, Hupfeld,
Kurtz). The idea of the rich is, their houses and dwelling-places (and
they themselves who have grown up together with them) are of eternal
duration; accordingly they solemnly give their own names to their lands,
as being the names of immortals. But, adds the poet, man בּיקר, in the
pomp of his riches and outward show, abideth not (non pernoctat = non
permanet). ביקר is the complement of the subject, although it logically
(cf. [Psa 45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013)) also belongs to
בּל־ילין. Bttcher has shown the impropriety of reading בּל־יבין here
according to [Psa 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020). There are
other instances also of refrains that are not exact repetitions; and
this correction is moreover at once overthrown by the fact that בל will
not suit יבין, it would stamp each man of rank, as such, as one
deficient in intelligence. On the other hand, this emotional negative בל
is admirably suitable to ילין: no indeed, he has no abiding. He is
compared (נמשׁל like the New Testament ὡμοιώθη), of like kind and lot,
to cattle (כּ as in [Job 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019)). נדמוּ
is an attributive clause to כּבּהמות: like heads of cattle which are cut
off or destroyed. The verb is so chosen that it is appropriate at the
same time to men who are likened to the beasts ([Hos
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#007), [Hos
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#015), [Oba
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#005), [Isa
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#005)).

[Psalms 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 49:13</span></span>

(Heb.: 49:14-21) Second part of the discourse, of equal compass with the
first. Those who are thought to be immortal are laid low in Hades;
whilst, on the other hand, those who cleave to God can hope to be
redeemed by Him out of Hades. Olshausen complains on this passage that
the expression is abrupt, rugged, and in part altogether obscure. The
fault, however, lies not, as he thinks, in a serious corruption of the
text, but in the style, designedly adopted, of Psalms like this of a
gloomy turn. זה דרכּם refers back to [Psa
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013), which is the proper mashal of
the Psalm: this is their way or walk (דּרך as in [Psa
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005), cf. [Hag
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#005)). Close upon this follows כּסל למו
(their way), of those (cf. [Psa 69:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#004))
who possess self-confidence; כּסל signifies confidence both in a good
and bad sense, self-confidence, impudence, and even ([Ecc
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#025)) in general, folly. The
attributive clause is continued in [Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014): and of those who after them
(i.e., when they have spoken, as Hitzig takes it), or in a more
universal sense: after or behind them (i.e., treading in their
footsteps), have pleasure in their mouth, i.e., their haughty, insolent,
rash words (cf. [Jdg 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#038)). If the
meaning were "and after them go those who," etc., then one would expect
to find a verb in connection with אחריהם (cf. [Job
21:33](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#033)). As a collateral definition,
"after them = after their death," it would, however, without any reason,
exclude the idea of the assent given by their contemporaries. It is
therefore to be explained according to [Job
29:22](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#022), or more universally according
to [Deu 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#030). It may seem remarkable
that the music here strikes in forte; but music can on its part, in
mournfully shrill tones, also bewail the folly of the world.

[Psa 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014), so full of eschatological
meaning, now describes what becomes of the departed. The subject of
שׁתּוּ (as in [Psa 73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009), where it is
Milra, for שׁתוּ) is not, as perhaps in the case of ἀπαιτοῦσιν, [Luk
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020), higher powers that are not
named; but שׁוּת (here שׁתת), as in [Psa
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#007), [Hos
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#011); [Isa
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#007), is used in a semi-passive sense:
like a herd of sheep they lay themselves down or they are made to lie
down לשׁאול (thus it is pointed by Ben-Asher; whereas Ben-Naphtali
points לשׁאול, with a silent Sheb), to Hades = down into Hades (cf. [Psa
88:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#007)), so that they are shut up in it
like sheep in their fold. And who is the shepherd there who rules these
sheep with his rod? מות ירעם. Not the good Shepherd ([Psa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001)), whose pasture is the land of
the living, but Death, into whose power they have fallen irrecoverably,
shall pasture them. Death is personified, as in [Job
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#014), as the king of terrors. The
modus consecutivus, ויּרדּוּ, now expresses the fact that will be
realized in the future, which is the reverse side of that other fact.
After the night of affliction has swiftly passed away, there breaks
forth, for the upright, a morning; and in this morning they find
themselves to be lords over these their oppressors, like conquerors, who
put their feet upon the necks of the vanquished (the lxx well renders it
by κατακυριεύσουσιν). Thus shall it be with the upright, whilst the rich
at their feet beneath, in the ground, are utterly destroyed. לבּקר has
Rebia magnum, ישׁרים has Asla-Legarme; accordingly the former word does
not belong to what follows (in the morning, then vanishes...), but to
what precedes. צוּר or ציר (as in [Isa
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016)) signifies a form or image, just
as צוּרה (Arab. tsûrat) is generally used; properly, that which is
pressed in or pressed out, i.e., primarily something moulded or
fashioned by the pressure of the hand (as in the case of the potter,
יצר) or by means of some instrument that impresses and cuts the
material. Here the word is used to denote materiality or corporeity,
including the whole outward appearance (φαντασία, [Act
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#023)). The לו which refers to this,
shows that וצוּרם is not a contraction of וצוּרתם (vid., on [Psa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#005)). Their materiality, their whole
outward form belonging to this present state of being, becomes (falls
away) לבלּות שׁאול. The Lamed is used in the same way as in היה לבער,
[Isa 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#013); and שׁאול is subject, like,
e.g., the noun that follows the infinitive in [Psa
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019); [Job
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#022). The same idea is obtained if it
is rendered: and their form Hades is ready to consume (consumturus est);
but the order of the words, though not making this rendering impossible
(cf. [Psa 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009), so far as עדיו there
means "its cheek"), is, however, less favourable to it (cf. [Pro
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#008); [Est
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#011)). בּלּה was the most appropriate
word for the slow, but sure and entire, consuming away ([Job
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#028)) of the dead body which is
gnawed or destroyed in the grave, this gate of the lower world. To this
is added מזּבל לו as a negative definition of the effect: so that there
no longer remains to it, i.e., to the pompous external nature of the
ungodly, any dwelling-place, and in general any place whatever; for
whatever they had in and about themselves is destroyed, so that they
wander to and fro as bare shadows in the dreary waste of Hades. To them,
who thought to have built houses for eternity and called great districts
of country after their own names, there remains no longer any זבל of
this corporeal nature, inasmuch as Hades gradually and surely destroys
it; it is for ever freed from its solid and dazzling shell, it wastes
away lonesome in the grave, it perishes leaving no trace behind.
Hupfeld's interpretation is substantially the same, and that of Jerome
even is similar: et figura eorum conteretur in infero post habitaculum
suum; and Symmachus: τὸ δὲ κρατερὸν αὐτῶν παλαιώσει ᾴδης ἀπὸ τῆς
οἰκήσεως τῆς ἐντίμου αὐτῶν.

Other expositors, it is true, solve the riddle of the half-verse in a
totally different way. Mendelssohn refers צוּרם to the upright: whose
being lasts longer than the grave (survives it), hence it cannot be a
habitation (eternal dwelling) to it; and adds, "the poet could not speak
more clearly of the resurrection (immortality)."

(Note: In the fragments of a commentary to his translation of Psalms,
contributed by David Friedlnder.)

A modern Jewish Christian, Isr. Pick, looked upon in Jerusalem as dead,
sees here a prediction of the breaking through of the realm of the dead
by the risen One: "Their Rock is there, to break through the realm of
the dead, that it may no longer serve Him as an abode."

(Note: In a fugitive paper of the so-called Amen Congregation, which noo
unhappily exists no longer, in Mnchen-Gladbach.)

Von Hofmann's interpretation (last of all in his Schriftbeweis ii. 2,
499, 2nd edition) lays claim to a more detailed consideration, because
it has been sought to maintain it against all objections. By the morning
he understands the end of the state or condition of death both of the
righteous and of the ungodly. "In the state of death have they both
alike found themselves: but now the dominion of death is at an end, and
the dominion of the righteous beings." But those who have, according to
[Psa 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015), died are only the ungodly,
not the righteous as well. Hofmann then goes on to explain: their bodily
form succumbs to the destruction of the lower world, so that it no
longer has any abode; which is said to convey the thought, that the
ungodly, "by means of the destruction of the lower world, to which their
corporeal nature in common with themselves becomes subject, lose its
last gloomy abode, but thereby lose their corporeal nature itself, which
has now no longer any continuance:" "their existence becomes henceforth
one absolutely devoid of possessions and of space, \["the exact opposite
of the time when they possessed houses built for eternity, and broad
tracts of country bore their name."\] But even according to the teaching
of the Old Testament concerning the last things, in the period after the
Exile, the resurrection includes the righteous and the unrighteous ([Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)); and according to the teaching
of the New Testament, the damned, after Death and Hades are cast into
the lake of fire, receive another זבול, viz., Gehenna, which stands in
just the same relation to Hades as the transformed world does to the old
heavens and the old earth. The thought discovered in [Psa
49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015), therefore, will not bear being
put to the proof. There is, however, this further consideration, that
nothing whatever is known in any other part of the Old Testament of such
a destruction of Shel; and לבלּות found in the Psalm before us would be
a most inappropriate word to express it, instead of which it ought to
have been לכלּות; for the figurative language in [Psa
102:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027); [Isa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006), is worthless as a justification
of this word, which signifies a gradual wearing out and using up or
consuming, and must not, in opposition to the usage of the language, be
explained according to עב and בּלי. For this reason we refrain from
making this passage a locus classicus in favour of an eschatological
conception which cannot be supported by any other passage in the Old
Testament. On the other side, however, the meaning of לבּקר is limited
if it be understood only of the morning which dawns upon the righteous
one after the night of affliction, as Kurtz does. What is, in fact,
meant is a morning which not merely for individuals, but for all the
upright, will be the end of oppression and the dawn of dominion: the
ungodly are totally destroyed, and they (the upright) now triumph above
their graves. In these words is expressed, in the manner of the Old
Testament, the end of all time. Even according to Old Testament
conception human history closes with the victory of good over evil. So
far [Psa 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#015) is really a "riddle" of
the last great day; expressed in New Testament language, of the
resurrection morn, in which οἱ ἅγιοι τὸν κόσμον κρινοῦσι ([Co1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#002)).

With אך, in [Psa 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016) (used here
adversatively, as e.g., in [Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015),
and as אכן is more frequently used), the poet contrasts the totally
different lot that awaits him with the lot of the rich who are satisfied
in themselves and unmindful of God. אך belongs logically to נפשׁי, but
(as is moreover frequently the case with רק, גּם, and אף) is,
notwithstanding this relation to the following member of the sentence,
placed at the head of the sentence: yet Elohim will redeem my soul out
of the hand of Shel ([Psa 89:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#049); [Hos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#014)). In what sense the poet means
this redemption to be understood is shown by the allusion to the history
of Enoch ([Gen 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024)) contained in כּי
יקּחני. Bttcher shrewdly remarks, that this line of the verse is all the
more expressive by reason of its relative shortness. Its meaning cannot
be: He will take me under His protection; for לקח does not mean this.
The true parallels are [Psa 73:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#024),
[Gen 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024). The removals of Enoch and
Elijah were, as it were, fingerposts which pointed forward beyond the
cheerless idea they possessed of the way of all men, into the depth of
Hades. Glancing at these, the poet, who here speaks in the name of all
upright sufferers, gives expression to the hope, that God will wrest him
out of the power of Sheפl and take him to Himself. It is a hope that
possesses not direct word of God upon which it could rest; it is not
until later on that it receives the support of divine promise, and is
for the present only a "bold flight" of faith. Now can we, for this very
reason, attempt to define in what way the poet conceived of this
redemption and this taking to Himself. In this matter he himself has no
fully developed knowledge; the substance of his hope is only a dim
inkling of what may be. This dimness that is only gradually lighted up,
which lies over the last things in the Old Testament, is the result of a
divine plan of education, in accordance with which the hope of eternal
life was gradually to mature, and to be born as it were out of this
wrestling faith itself. This faith is expressed in [Psa
49:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#016); and the music accompanies his
confidence in cheerful and rejoicing strains.

After this, in [Psa 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017), there is a
return from the lyric strain to the gnomic and didactic. It must not,
with Mendelssohn, be rendered: let it (my soul) not be afraid; but,
since the psalmist begins after the manner of a discourse: fear thou
not. The increasing כבוד, i.e., might, abundance, and outward show (all
these combined, from כּבד, grave esse), of the prosperous oppressor is
not to make the saint afraid: he must after all die, and cannot take
hence with him הכּל, the all = anything whatever (cf. לכּל, for anything
whatever, [Jer 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#007)). כּי, [Psa
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#017), like ἐάν, puts a supposable
case; כּי, [Psa 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018), is
confirmatory; and כּי, [Psa 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#019), is
concessive, in the sense of גּם־כּי, according to Ew. 362, b: even
though he blessed his soul during his life, i.e., called it fortunate,
and flattered it by cherished voluptuousness (cf. [Deu
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018), התבּרך בּנפשׁו, and the
soliloquy of the rich man in [Luk
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019)), and though they praise thee, O
rich man, because thou dost enjoy thyself ([Luk
16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025)), wishing themselves equally
fortunate, still it (the soul of such an one) will be obliged to come or
pass עד־דּור אבותיו. There is no necessity for taking the noun דּור here
in the rare signification dwelling (Arabic dâr, synonym of Menzı̂l), and
it appears the most natural way to supply נפשׁו as the subject to תּבוא
(Hofmann, Kurtz, and others), seeing that one would expect to find
אבותיך in the case of תבוא being a form of address. And there is then no
need, in order to support the synallage, which is at any rate inelegant,
to suppose that the suffix יו-takes its rise from the formula אל־אבתיו
(נאסף) בּוא, and is, in spite of the unsuitable grammatical connection,
retained, just as יחדּו and כּלּם, without regard to the suffixes,
signify "together" and "all together" (Bttcher). Certainly the poet
delights in difficulties of style, of which quite sufficient remain to
him without adding this to the list. It is also not clear whether [Psa
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#020) is intended to be taken as a
relative clause intimately attached to אבותיו, or as an independent
clause. The latter is admissible, and therefore to be preferred: there
are the proud rich men together with their fathers buried in darkness
for ever, without ever again seeing the light of a life which is not a
mere shadowy life.

The didactic discourse now closes with the same proverb as the first
part, [Psa 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#013). But instead of
בּל־ילין the expression here used is ולא יבין, which is co-ordinate with
בּיקר as a second attributive definition of the subject (Ew. 351, b): a
man in glory and who has no understanding, viz., does not distinguish
between that which is perishable and that which is imperishable, between
time and eternity. The proverb is here more precisely expressed. The
gloomy prospect of the future does not belong to the rich man as such,
but to the worldly and carnally minded rich man.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 50](psa050)

</div>
