<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa067)  [Next](psa069) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 68](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 68:0</span></span>

Hymn of War and Victory in the Style of Deborah

Is it not an admirably delicate tact with which the collector makes the
מזמור שׁיר [Psa 68:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001) follow upon the
מזמור שׁיר [Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001)? The latter began
with the echo of the benediction which Moses puts into the mouth of
Aaron and his sons, the former with a repetition of those memorable
words in which, at the breaking up of the camp, he called upon Jahve to
advance before Israel ([Num 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035)).
"It is in reality," says Hitzig of Psalms 68, "no easy task to become
master of this Titan." And who would not agree with him in this remark?
It is a Psalm in the style of Deborah, stalking along upon the highest
pinnacle of hymnic feeling and recital; all that is most glorious in the
literature of the earlier period is concentrated in it: Moses' memorable
words, Moses' blessing, the prophecies of Balaam, the Deuteronomy, the
Song of Hannah re-echo here. But over and above all this, the language
is so bold and so peculiarly its own, that we meet with no less than
thirteen words that do no occur anywhere else. It is so distinctly
Elohimic in its impress, that the simple Elohim occurs twenty-three
times; but in addition to this, it is as though the whole cornucopia of
divine names were poured out upon it: יהוה in [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017); אדני six times; האל twice;
שׁדּי in [Psa 68:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015); יהּ in [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005); אדני יהוה in [Psa
68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021); אלהים yh in [Psa
68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019); so that this Psalm among all
the Elohimic Psalms is the most resplendent. In connection with the
great difficulty that is involved in it, it is no wonder that
expositors, more especially the earlier expositors, should differ widely
in their apprehension of it as a whole or in separate parts. This
circumstance has been turned to wrong account by Ed. Reuss in his essay,
"Der acht-und-sechzigste Psalm, Ein Denkmal exegetischer Noth und Kunst
zu Ehren unsrer ganzen Zunft, Jena, 1851," for the purpose of holding up
to ridicule the uncertainty of Old Testament exegesis, as illustrated in
this Psalm.

The Psalm is said, as Reuss ultimately decides, to have been written
between the times of Alexander the Great and the Maccabees, and to give
expression to the wish that the Israelites, many of whom were far
removed from Palestine and scattered abroad in the wide earth, might
soon be again united in their fatherland. But this apprehension rests
entirely upon violence done to the exegesis, more particularly in the
supposition that in v. 23 the exiles are the persons intended by those
whom God will bring back. Reuss makes out those who are brought back out
of Bashan to be the exiles in Syria, and those who are brought back out
of the depths of the sea he makes out to be the exiles in Egypt. He
knows nothing of the remarkable concurrence of the mention of the
Northern tribes (including Benjamin) in [Psa
68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028) with the Asaphic Psalms: Judah
and Benjamin, to his mind, is Judaea; and Zebulun and Naphtali, Galilee
in the sense of the time after the return from exile. The "wild beast of
the reed" he correctly takes to be an emblem of Egypt; but he makes use
of violence in order to bring in a reference to Syria by the side of it.
Nevertheless Olshausen praises the services Reuss has rendered with
respect to this Psalm; but after incorporating two whole pages of the
"Denkmal" in his commentary he cannot satisfy himself with the period
between Alexander and the Maccabees, and by means of three
considerations arrives, in this instance also, at the common refuge of
the Maccabaean period, which possesses such an irresistible attraction
for him.

In opposition to this transplanting of the Psalm into the time of the
Maccabees we appeal to Hitzig, who is also quick-sighted enough, when
there is any valid ground for it, in finding out Maccabaean Psalms. He
refers the Psalm to the victorious campaign of Joram against faithless
Moab, undertaking in company with Jehoshaphat. Bצttcher, on the other
hand, sees in it a festal hymn of triumph belonging to the time of
Hezekiah, which was sung antiphonically at the great fraternizing
Passover after the return home of the young king from one of his
expeditions against the Assyrians, who had even at that time fortified
themselves in the country east of the Jordan (Bashan). Thenius
(following the example of Rצdiger) holds a different view. He knows the
situation so very definitely, that he thinks it high time that the
discussion concerning this Psalm was brought to a close. It is a song
composed to inspirit the army in the presence of the battle which Josiah
undertook against Necho, and the prominent, hateful character in [Psa
68:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#022) is Pharaoh with his lofty
artificial adornment of hair upon his shaven head. It is, however, well
known what a memorably tragical issue for Israel that battle had; the
Psalm would therefore be a memorial of the most lamentable
disappointment.

All these and other recent expositors glory in hot advancing any proof
whatever in support of the inscribed לדוד. And yet there are two
incidents in David's life, with regard to which the Psalm ought first of
all to be accurately looked at, before we abandon this לדוד to the winds
of conjecture. The first is the bringing home of the Ark of the covenant
to Zion, to which, e.g., Franz Volkmar Reinhard (in vol. ii. of the
Velthusen Commentationes Theol. 1795), Stier, and Hofmann refer the
Psalm. But the manner in which the Psalm opens with a paraphrase of
Moses' memorable words is at once opposed to this; and also the
impossibility of giving unity to the explanation of its contents by such
a reference is against it. Jahve has long since taken up His abode upon
the holy mountain; the poet in this Psalm, which is one of the Psalms of
war and victory describes how the exalted One, who now, however, as in
the days of old, rides along through the highest heavens at the head of
His people, casts down all powers hostile to Him and to His people, and
compels all the world to confess that the God of Israel rules from His
sanctuary with invincible might. A far more appropriate occasion is,
therefore, to be found in the Syro-Ammonitish war of David, in which the
Ark was taken with them by the people ([Sa2
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#011)); and the hymn was not at that
time first of all composed when, at the close of the war, the Ark was
brought back to the holy mountain (Hengstenberg, Reinke), but when it
was set in motion from thence at the head of Israel as they advanced
against the confederate kings and their army ([Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006)). The war lasted into the second
year, when a second campaign was obliged to be undertaken in order to
bring it to an end; and this fact offers at least a second possible
period for the origin of the Psalm. It is clear that in [Psa
68:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012), and still more clear that in
[Psa 68:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020) (and from a wider point
of view, [Psa 68:29-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029)), the victory
over the hostile kings is only hoped for, and in [Psa
68:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025), therefore, the pageantry of
victory is seen as it were beforehand. It is the spirit of faith, which
here celebrates beforehand the victory of Jahve, and sees in the single
victory a pledge of His victory over all the nations of the earth. The
theme of the Psalm, generalized beyond its immediate occasion, is the
victory of the God of Israel over the world. Regarded as to the nature
of its contents, the whole divides itself into two halves, vv. 2-19,
20-35, which are on the whole so distinct that the first dwells more
upon the mighty deed God has wrought, the second upon the impressions it
produces upon the church and upon the peoples of the earth; in both
parts it is viewed now as future, now as past, inasmuch as the longing
of prayer and the confidence of hope soar aloft to the height of
prophecy, before which futurity lies as a fulfilled fact. The musical
Sela occurs three times ([Psa 68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008),
[Psa 68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020), [Psa
68:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#033)). These three forte passages
furnish important points of view for the apprehension of the collective
meaning of the Psalm.

But is David after all the author of this Psalm? The general character
of the Psalm is more Asaphic than Davidic (vid., Habakkuk, S. 122). Its
references to Zalmon, to Benjamin and the Northern tribes, to the song
of Deborah, and in general to the Book of Judges (although not in its
present form), give it an appearance of being Ephraimitish. Among the
Davidic Psalms it stands entirely alone, so that criticism is quite
unable to justify the לדוד. And if the words in [Psa
68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029) are addressed to the king, it
points to some other poet than David. But is it to a contemporary poet?
The mention of the sanctuary on Zion in [Psa
68:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030), 36, does not exclude such an
one. Only the threatening of the "wild beast of the sedge" ([Psa
68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031)) seems to bring us down beyond
the time of David; for the inflammable material of the hostility of
Egypt, which broke out into a flame in the reign of Rehoboam, was first
gathering towards the end of Solomon's reign. Still Egypt was never
entirely lost sight of from the horizon of Israel; and the circumstance
that it is mentioned in the first rank, where the submission of the
kingdoms of this world to the God of Israel is lyrically set forth in
the prophetic prospect of the future, need not astonish one even in a
poet of the time of David. And does not [Psa
68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028) compel us to keep on this side
of the division of the kingdom? It ought then to refer to the common
expedition of Jehoram and Jehoshaphat against Moab (Hitzig), the
indiscriminate celebration of which, however, was no suitable theme for
the psalmist.

[Psalms 68:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 68:1</span></span>

The Psalm begins with the expression of a wish that the victory of God
over all His foes and the triumphant exultation of the righteous were
near at hand. Ewald and Hitzig take יקום אלהים hypothetically: If God
arise, He enemies will be scattered. This rendering is possible in
itself so far as the syntax is concerned, but here everything conspires
against it; for the futures in [Psa
68:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#002) form an unbroken chain; then a
glance at the course of the Psalm from [Psa
68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020) onwards shows that the
circumstances of Israel, under which the poet writes, urged forth the
wish: let God arise and humble His foes; and finally the primary
passage, [Num 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035), makes it clear
that the futures are the language of prayer transformed into the form of
the wish. In [Psa 68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003) the wish is
addressed directly to God Himself, and therefore becomes petition. הנדּן
is inflected (as vice versג ירדף, [Psa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006), from ירדּף) from הנּדף (like
הנּתן, [Jer 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#004)); it is a violation
of all rule in favour of the conformity of sound (cf. הקצות for הקצות,
[Lev 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#043), and supra on [Psa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006)) with תּנדּף, the object of which
is easily supplied (dispellas, sc. hostes tuos), and is purposely
omitted in order to direct attention more stedfastly to the omnipotence
which to every creature is so irresistible. Like smoke, wax (דּונג, root
דג, τηκ, Sanscrit tak, to shoot past, to run, Zend taḱ, whence vitaḱina,
dissolving, Neo-Persic gudâchten; causative: to cause to run in
different directions = to melt or smelt) is an emblem of human
feebleness. As Bakiuds observes, Si creatura creaturam non fert, quomodo
creatura creatoris indignantis faciem ferre possit? The wish expressed
in [Psa 68:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#004) forms the obverse of the
preceding. The expressions for joy are heaped up in order to describe
the transcendency of the joy that will follow the release from the yoke
of the enemy. לפני is expressively used in alternation with מפני in [Psa
68:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#002), [Psa
68:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#003) : by the wrathful action, so to
speak, that proceeds from His countenance just as the heat radiating
from the fire melts the wax the foes are dispersed, whereas the
righteous rejoice before His gracious countenance.

As the result of the challenge that has been now expressed in [Psa
68:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#002), Elohim, going before His
people, begins His march; and in [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005) an appeal is made to praise Him
with song, His name with the music of stringed instrument, and to make a
way along which He may ride בּערבות. In view of [Psa
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034) we cannot take צרבות, as do the
Targum and Talmud (B. Chagiga 12b), as a name of one of the seven
heavens, a meaning to which, apart from other considerations, the verb
ערב, to be effaced, confused, dark, is not an appropriate stem-word; but
it must be explained according to [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003). There Jahve calls in the aid of
His people, here He goes forth at the head of His people; He rides
through the steppes in order to right against the enemies of His people.
Not merely the historical reference assigned to the Psalm by Hitzig, but
also the one adopted by ourselves, admits of allusion being made to the
"steppes of Moab;" for the way to Mdeb, where the Syrian mercenaries of
the Ammonites had encamped ([Ch1
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#007)), lay through these steppes, and
also the way to Rabbath Ammon ([Sa2
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#007).). סלּוּ calls upon them to make
a way for Him, the glorious, invincible King (cf. [Isa
57:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014); [Isa
62:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#010)); סלל signifies to cast up, heap
up or pave, viz., a raised and suitable street or highway, Symmachus
katastroo'sate. He who thus rides along makes the salvation of His
people His aim: " is His name, therefore shout with joy before Him." The
Beth in בּיהּ (Symmachus, Quinta: ἴα) is the Beth essentiae, which here,
as in [Isa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#004), stands beside the
subject: His name is (exists) in יה, i.e., His essential name is yh, His
self-attestation, by which He makes Himself capable of being known and
named, consists in His being the God of salvation, who, in the might of
free grace, pervades all history. This Name is a fountain of exultant
rejoicing to His people.

This Name is exemplificatively unfolded in [Psa
68:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#006). The highly exalted One, who sits
enthroned in the heaven of glory, rules in all history here below and
takes an interest in the lowliest more especially, in all circumstances
of their lives following after His own to succour them. He takes the
place of a father to the orphan. He takes up the cause of the widow and
contests it to a successful issue. Elohim is one who makes the solitary
or isolated to dwell in the house; בּיתה with He locale, which just as
well answers the question where? as whither? בּית, a house = family
bond, is the opposite of יהיד, solitarius, recluse, [Psa
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#016). Dachselt correctly renders it,
in domum, h.e. familiam numerosam durabilemque eos ut patres-familias
plantabit. He is further One who brings forth (out of the dungeon and
out of captivity) those who are chained into abundance of prosperity.
כּושׁרות, occurring only here, is a pluralet. from כּשׁר morf .tela,
synonym אשׁר, to be straight, fortunate. [Psa
68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007) briefly and sharply expresses the
reverse side of this His humanely condescending rule among mankind. אך
is here (cf. [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004); [Lev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#004)) restrictive or adversative (as
is more frequently the case with אכן); and the preterite is the
preterite of that which is an actual matter of experience. The סוררים,
i.e., (not from סוּר, the apostate ones, Aquila afista'menoi, but as in
[Psa 66:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#007), from סרר) the rebellious,
Symmachus ἀπειθεῖς, who were not willing to submit to the rule of so
gracious a God, had ever been excluded from these proofs of favour.
These must inhabit צחיחה (accusative of the object), a sun-scorched
land; from צחח, to be dazzlingly bright, sunny, dried or parched up.
They remain in the desert without coming into the land, which,
fertilized by the waters of grace, is resplendent with a fresh verdure
and with rich fruits. If the poet has before his mind in connection with
this the bulk of the people delivered out of Egypt, ὧν τὰ κῶλα ἔπεσαν ἐν
τῇ ἐρήμω ([Heb 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#017)), then the
transition to what follows is much more easily effected. There is,
however, no necessity for any such intermediation. The poet had the
march through the desert to Canaan under the guidance of Jahve, the
irresistible Conqueror, in his mind even from the beginning, and now he
expressly calls to mind that marvellous divine leading in order that the
present age may take heart thereat.

[Psalms 68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 68:7</span></span>

In [Psa 68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007). the poet repeats the
words of Deborah ([Jdg 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004).), and her
words again go back to [Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002), cf.
[Exo 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015).; on the other hand, our
Psalm is the original to Hab. 3. The martial verb יצא represents Elohim
as, coming forth from His heavenly dwelling-place ([Isa
26:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#021)), He places Himself at the head
of Israel. The stately verb צעד represents Him as He accompanies the
hosts of His people with the step of a hero confident of victory; and
the terrible name for the wilderness, ישׁימון, is designedly chosen in
order to express the contrast between the scene of action and that which
they beheld at that time. The verb to זה סיני is easily supplied;
Dachselt's rendering according to the accents is correct: hic mons Sinai
(sc. in specie ita tremuit). The description fixes our attention upon
Sinai as the central point of all revelations of God during the period
of deliverance by the hand of Moses, as being the scene of the most
gloriously of them all (vid., on Hab. p. 136f.). The majestic phenomena
which proclaimed the nearness of God are distributed over the whole
journeying, but most gloriously concentrated themselves at the giving of
the Law of Sinai. The earth trembled throughout the extended circuit of
this vast granite range, and the heavens dropped, inasmuch as the
darkness of thunder clouds rested upon Sinai, pierced by incessant
lightnings (Ex. 19). There, as the original passages describe it, Jahve
met His people; He came from the east, His people from the west; there
they found themselves together, and shaking the earth, breaking through
the heavens, He gave them a pledge of the omnipotence which should
henceforth defend and guide them. The poet has a purpose in view in
calling Elohim in this passage "the God of Israel;" the covenant
relationship of God to Israel dates from Sinai, and from this period
onwards, by reason of the Tra, He became Israel's King ([Deu
33:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#005)). Since the statement of a fact
of earlier history has preceded, and since the preterites alternate with
them, the futures that follow in [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010), [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011) are to be understood as
referring to the synchronous past; but hardly so that [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010) should refer to the miraculous
supply of food, and more especially the rain of manna, during the
journeyings through the wilderness. The giving of the Law from Sinai has
a view to Israel being a settled, stationary people, and the deliverance
out of the land of bondage only finds its completion in the taking and
maintaining possession of the Land of Promise. Accordingly [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010), [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011) refer to the blessing and
protection of the people who had taken up their abode there.

The נחלהּ of God (genit. auctoris, as in 2 Macc. 2:4) is the land
assigned by Him to Israel as an inheritance; and גּשׁם נדבות an emblem
of the abundance of gifts which God has showered down upon the land
since Israel took up its abode in it. נדבה is the name given to a deed
and gift springing from an inward impulse, and in this instance the
intensive idea of richness and superabundance is associated therewith by
means of the plural; גּשׁם נדבות is a shower-like abundance of good
gifts descending from above. The Hiphil הניף here governs a double
accusative, like the Kal in [Pro 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#017),
in so far, that is, as נחלתך is drawn to [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010); for the accentuation, in
opposition to the Targum, takes נחלתך ונלאה together: Thine inheritance
and that the parched one (Waw epexeget. as in [Sa1
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003); [Amo
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#011); [Amo
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#010)). But this "and that" is devoid
of aim; why should it not at once be read הנּלאה? The rendering of
Bttcher, "Thy sickened and wearied," is inadmissible, too, according to
the present pointing; for it ought to be נחלתך or נחלתך. And with a
suffix this Niphal becomes ambiguous, and more especially so in this
connection, where the thought of נחלה, an inherited possession, a
heritage, lies so naturally at hand. נחלתך is therefore to be drawn to
[Psa 68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010), and [Psa
68:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#010) must begin with ונלאה, as in the
lxx, καὶ ἠσθένησε σὺ δὲ κατεερτίσω αὐτήν. It is true נלאה is not a
hypothetical preteriet equivalent to ונלאתה; but, as is frequently the
case with the anarthrous participle (Ew. 341, b), it has the value of a
hypothetical clause: "and if it (Israel's inheritance) were in a
parched, exhausted condition (cf. the cognate root להה, [Gen
47:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#013)), then hast Thou always made it
again firm" ([Psa 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#004); [Psa
15:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#001) :17), i.e., strengthened,
enlivened it. Even here the idea of the inhabitants is closely
associated with the land itself; in [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011) they are more especially thought
of: "They creatures dwelt therein." Nearly all modern expositors take
חיּה either according to [Sa2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#011),
[Sa2 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013) (cf. [Ch1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015)), in the signification
tent-circle, ring-camp (root חו, Arab. ḥw, to move in a circle, to
encircle, to compass), or in the signification of Arab. ḥayy (from Arab.
ḥayiya = חיי, חיה), a race or tribe, i.e., a collection of living beings
(cf. חיּי, [Sa1 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#018)). But the
Asaphic character of this Psalm, which is also manifest in other points,
is opposed to this rendering. This style of Psalm is fond of the
comparison of Israel to a flock, so that also in [Psa
74:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#019) חית עניין signifies nothing else
than "the creatures \[Getheir, collective\] of Thy poor, Thy poor
creatures." This use of חיה is certainly peculiar; but not so remarkable
as if by the "creatures of God" we had to understand, with Hupfeld, the
quails (Ex. 16). The avoiding of בּהמה on account of the idea of brutum
([Psa 73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022)) which is inseparable from
this word, is sufficient to account for it; in חיה, ζῷον, there is
merely the notion of moving life. We therefore are to explain it
according to [Mic 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014), where Israel
is called a flock dwelling in a wood in the midst of Carmel: God brought
it to pass, that the flock of Israel, although sorely persecuted,
nevertheless continued to inhabit the land. בּהּ, as in [Mic
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#015), refers to Canaan. עני in [Psa
68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011) is the ecclesia pressa
surrounded by foes on every side: Thou didst prepare for Thy poor with
Thy goodness, Elohim, i.e., Thou didst regale or entertain Thy poor
people with Thy possessions and Thy blessings. הכין ל, as in [Gen
43:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016); [Ch1
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#039), to make ready to eat, and
therefore to entertain; טובה as in [Psa
65:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#012), טוּב ה, [Jer
31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012). It would be quite inadmissible,
because tautological, to refer תּכין to the land according to [Psa
65:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#010) (Ewald), or even to the desert
(Olshausen), which the description has now left far behind.

[Psalms 68:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 68:11</span></span>

The futures that now follow are no longer to be understood as referring
to previous history; they no longer alternate with preterites. Moreover
the transition to the language of address in [Psa
68:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014) shows that the poet here looks
forth from his present time and circumstances into the future; and the
introduction of the divine name אדני, after Elohim has been used eleven
times, is an indication of a new commencement. The prosperous condition
in which God places His church by giving it the hostile powers of the
world as a spoil is depicted. The noun אמר, never occurring in the
genitival relationship, and never with a suffix, because the specific
character of the form would be thereby obliterated, always denotes an
important utterance, more particularly God's word of promise ([Psa
77:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#009)), or His word of power ([Hab
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#009)), which is represented elsewhere
as a mighty voice of thunder ([Psa
68:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#034), [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030)), or a trumpet-blast ([Zac
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014)); in the present instance it is
the word of power by which the Lord suddenly changes the condition of
His oppressed church. The entirely new state of things which this
omnipotent behest as it were conjures into existence is presented to the
mind in v. 12b: the women who proclaim the tidings of victory - a great
host. Victory and triumph follow upon God's אמר, as upon His creative
יהי. The deliverance of Israel from the army of Pharaoh, the deliverance
out of the hand of Jabin by the defeat of Sisera, the victory of
Jephthah over the Ammonites, and the victorious single combat of David
with Goliath were celebrated by singing women. God's decisive word shall
also go forth this time, and of the evangelists, like Miriam (Mirjam)
and Deborah, there shall be a great host.

[Psa 68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012) describes the subject of
this triumphant exultation. Hupfeld regards [Psa
68:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013) as the song of victory
itself, the fragment of an ancient triumphal ode (epinikion) reproduced
here; but there is nothing standing in the way that should forbid our
here regarding these verses as a direct continuation of [Psa
68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012). The "hosts" are the numerous
well-equipped armies which the kings of the heathen lead forth to the
battle against the people of God. The unusual expression "kings of
hosts" sounds very much like an ironically disparaging antithesis to the
customary "Jahve of Hosts" (Bttcher). He, the Lord, interposes, and they
are obliged to flee, staggering as they go, to retreat, and that, as the
anadiplosis (cf. [Jdg 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#007); [Jdg
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#020)) depicts, far away, in every
direction. The fut. energicum with its ultima-accentuation gives
intensity to the pictorial expression. The victors then turn homewards
laden with rich spoils. נות בּית, here in a collective sense, is the
wife who stays at home ([Jdg 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#024))
while the husband goes forth to battle. It is not: the ornament (נוה as
in [Jer 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#002)) of the house, which
Luther, with the lxx, Vulgate, and Syriac, adopts in his version,

(Note: "Hausehre," says he, is the housewife or matron as being the
adornment of the house; vid., F. Dietrich, Frau und Dame, a lecture
bearing upon the history of language (1864), S. 13.)

but: the dweller or homely one (cf. נות, a dwelling-lace, [Job
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#006)) of the house, ἡ οἰκουρός. The
dividing of the spoil elsewhere belongs to the victors; what is meant
here is the distribution of the portions of the spoil that have fallen
to the individual victors, the further distribution of which is left for
the housewife ([Jdg 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#030)., [Sa2
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#024)). Ewald now recognises in [Psa
68:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014). the words of an ancient song of
victory; but v. 13b is unsuitable to introduce them. The language of
address in [Psa 68:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014) is the poet's
own, and he here describes the condition of the people who are
victorious by the help of their God, and who again dwell peaceably in
the land after the war. אם passes out of the hypothetical signification
into the temporal, as e.g., in [Job
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#014) (vid., on [Psa
59:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#016)). The lying down among the
sheep-folds (שׁפתּים = משׁפּתים, cf. שׁפט, משׁפּט, the staked-in folds
or pens consisting of hurdles standing two by two over against one
another) is an emblem of thriving peace, which (like [Psa
68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008), [Psa
68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028)) points back to Deborah's song,
[Jdg 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#016), cf. [Gen
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#014). Just such a time is now also
before Israel, a time of peaceful prosperity enhanced by rich spoils.
Everything shall glitter and gleam with silver and gold. Israel is God's
turtle-dove, [Psa 74:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#019), cf. [Psa
56:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#001), [Hos
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#011); [Hos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011). Hence the new circumstances of
ease and comfort are likened to the varied hues of a dove disporting
itself in the sun. Its wings are as though overlaid with silver (נחפּה,
not 3. praet, but part. fem. Niph. as predicate to כּנפי, cf. [Sa1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#015); [Mic
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011); [Mic
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009); Ew. 317 a), therefore like silver
wings (cf. Ovid, Metam. ii. 537: Niveis argentea pennis Ales); and its
pinions with gold-green,

(Note: Ewald remarks, "Arabian poets also call the dove Arab. 'l-wrq'â,
the greenish yellow, golden gleaming one, vid., Kosegarten, Chrestom. p.
156, 5." But this Arabic poetical word for the dove signifies rather the
ash-green, whity blackish one. Nevertheless the signification greenish
for the Hebrew ירקרק is established. Bartenoro, on Negaim xi. 4, calls
the colour of the wings of the peacock ירקרק; and I am here reminded of
what Wetzstein once told me, that, according to an Arab proverb, the
surface of good coffee ought to be "like the neck of the dove," i.e., so
oily that it gleams like the eye of a peacock. A way for the transition
from green to grey in aurak as the name of a colour is already, however,
opened up in post-biblical Hebrew, when to frighten any one is expressed
by פנים הוריק, Genesis Rabba, 47a. The intermediate notions that of fawn
colour, i.e., yellowish grey. In the Talmud the plumage of the
full-grown dove is called זהוב and צהוב, Chullin, 22b.)

and that, as the reduplicated form implies, with the iridescent or
glistening hue of the finest gold (חרוּץ, not dull, but shining gold).

Side by side with this bold simile there appears in v. 15 an equally
bold but contrastive figure, which, turning a step or two backward,
likewise vividly illustrates the results of their God-given victory. The
suffix of בּהּ refers to the land of Israel, as in [Isa
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#021); [Isa
65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009). צלמום, according to the usage of
the language so far as it is now preserved to us, is not a common noun:
deep darkness (Targum = צלמות), it is the name of a mountain in Ephraim,
the trees of which Abimelech transported in order to set fire to the
tower of Shechem ([Jdg 9:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#048).). The
Talmudic literature was acquainted with a river taking its rise there,
and also somewhat frequently mentions a locality bearing a similar name
to that of the mountain. The mention of this mountain may in a general
way be rendered intelligible by the consideration that, like Shiloh
([Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)), it is situated about in
the centre of the Holy Land.

(Note: In Tosifta Para, ch. viii., a river of the name of יורדת הצלמון
is mentioned, the waters of which might not be used in preparing the
water of expiation (מי חטאת), because they were dried up at the time of
the war, and thereby hastened the defeat of Israel (viz., the overthrow
of Barcochba). Grtz "Geschichte der Juden, iv. 157, 459f.) sees in it
the Nahar Arsuf, which flows down the mountains of Ephraim past Bethar
into the Mediterranean. The village of Zalmon occurs in the Mishna,
Jebamoth xvi. 6, and frequently. The Jerusalem Gemara (Maaseroth i. 1)
gives pre-eminence to the carob-trees of Zalmona side by side with those
of Shitta and Gadara.)

השׁליג signifies to bring forth snow, or even, like Arab. aṯlj, to
become snow-white; this Hiph. is not a word descriptive of colour, like
הלבּין. Since the protasis is בּפרשׂ, and not בּפרשׂך, תּשׁלג is
intended to be impersonal (cf. [Psa
50:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#003); [Amo
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#007), Mich. [Psa
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#006)); and the voluntative form is
explained from its use in apodoses of hypothetical protases (Ges. 128,
2). It indicates the issue to which, on the supposition of the other, it
must and shall come. The words are therefore to be rendered: then it
snows on Zalmon; and the snowing is either an emblem of the glistening
spoil that falls into their hands in such abundance, or it is a figure
of the becoming white, whether from bleached bones (cf. Virgil, Aen. v.
865: albi ossibus scopuli; xii. 36: campi ossibus albent; Ovid, Fasti i.
558: humanis ossibus albet humus) or even from the naked corpses ([Sa2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#019), על־בּמותיך חלל). Whether we
consider the point of comparison to lie in the spoil being abundant as
the flakes of snow, and like to the dazzling snow in brilliancy, or in
the white pallid corpses, at any rate בּצלמון is not equivalent to
כּבצלמון, but what follows "when the Almighty scatters kings therein" is
illustrated by Zalmon itself. In the one case Zalmon is represented as
the battle-ground (cf. [Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)), in
the other (which better corresponds to the nature of a wooded mountain)
as a place of concealment. The protasis בפרשׂ וגו favours the latter;
for פּרשׂ signifies to spread wide apart, to cause a compact whole - and
the host of "the kings" is conceived of as such - to fly far asunder
into many parts ([Zac 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#010), cf. the
Niph. in [Eze 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#021)). The hostile host
disperses in all directions, and Zalmon glitters, as it were with snow,
from the spoil that is dropped by those who flee. Homer also (Iliad,
xix. 357-361) likens the mass of assembled helmets, shields, armour, and
lances to the spectacle of a dense fall of snow. In this passage of the
Psalm before us still more than in Homer it is the spectacle of the
fallen and far seen glistening snow that also is brought into the
comparison, and not merely that which is falling and that which covers
everything (vid., Iliad, xii. 277ff.). The figure is the pendant of the
figure of the dove.

(Note: Wetzstein gives a different explanation (Reise in den beiden
Trachonen und um das Haura=ngebirge in the Zeitscheift fr allgem.
Erdkunde, 1859, S. 198). "Then fell snow on Zalmon, i.e., the mountain
clothed itself in a bright garment of light in celebration of this
joyous event. Any one who has been in Palestine knows how very
refreshing is the spectacle of the distant mountain-top capped with
snow. The beauty of this poetical figure is enhanced by the fact that
Zalmon (Arab. ḏlmân), according to its etymology, signifies a mountain
range dark and dusky, either from shade, forest, or black rock. The last
would well suit the mountains of Haurn, among which Ptolemaeus (p. 365
and 370, Ed. Wilberg) mentions a mountain (according to one of the
various readings) Ἀσαλμάνος.")

[Psalms 68:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 68:15</span></span>

This victory of Israel over the kings of the Gentiles gives the poet the
joyful assurance that Zion is the inaccessible dwelling-place of Elohim,
the God of the heavenly hosts. The mention of Zalmon leads him to
mention other mountains. He uses the mountains of Bashan as an emblem of
the hostile powers east of Jordan. These stand over against the people
of God, as the mighty mountains of Bashan rising in steep, only slightly
flattened peaks, to little hill-like Zion. In the land on this side
Jordan the limestone and chalk formation with intermingled strata of
sandstone predominates; the mountains of Bashan, however, are throughout
volcanic, consisting of slag, lava, and more particularly basalt
(basanites), which has apparently taken its name from Bashan (Basan).

(Note: This is all the more probable as Semitism has no proper word for
basalt; in Syria it is called hag'ar aswad, "black stone.")

As a basalt range the mountains of Bashan are conspicuous among other
creations of God, and are therefore called "the mountain of Elohim:" the
basalt rises in the form of a cone with the top lopped off, or even
towers aloft like so many columns precipitous and rugged to sharp
points; hence the mountains of Bashan are called הר גּבננּים, i.e., a
mountain range (for הר, as is well known, signifies both the single
eminence and the range of summits) of many peaks = a many-peaked
mountain; גּבנן is an adjective like רענן, אמלל. With this boldly formed
mass of rock so gloomily majestic, giving the impression of antiquity
and of invincibleness, when compared with the ranges on the other side
of unstable porous limestone and softer formations, more particularly
with Zion, it is an emblem of the world and its powers standing over
against the people of God as a threatening and seemingly invincible
colossus. The poet asks these mountains of Bashan "why," etc.? רצד is
explained from the Arabic rṣd, which, in accordance with its root Arab.
rṣ, signifies to cleave firmly to a place (firmiter inhaesit loco),
properly used of a beast of prey couching down and lying in wait for
prey, of a hunter on the catch, and of an enemy in ambush; hence then:
to lie in wait for, lurk, ἐνεδρεύειν, craftily, insidiose (whence râṣid,
a lier-in-wait, tarraṣṣud, an ambush), here: to regard enviously,
invidiose. In Arabic, just as in this instance, it is construed as a
direct transitive with an accusative of the object, whereas the original
signification would lead one to look for a dative of the object (רצד ל),
which does also really occur in the common Arabic. Olewejored is placed
by גבננים, but what follows is not, after all, the answer: "the mountain
- Elohim has chosen it as the seat of His throne," but ההר is the object
of the interrogative clause: Quare indiviose observatis, montes
cacuminosi, hunc montem (δεικτικῶς: that Zion yonder), quem, etc. (an
attributive clause after the determinate substantive, as in [Psa
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009); [Psa
89:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#050), and many other instances,
contrary to the Arabic rule of style). Now for the first time, in [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017), follows that which is
boastfully and defiantly contrasted with the proud mountains: "Jahve
will also dwell for ever;" not only that Elohim has chosen Zion as the
seat of His throne, it will also continue to be the seat of His throne,
Jahve will continue to dwell \[there\] for ever. Grace is superior to
nature, and the church superior to the world, powerful and majestic as
this may seem to be. Zion maintains its honour over against the
mountains of Bashan.

[Psa 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018)

[Psa 68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018) now describes the kind of
God, so to speak, who sits enthroned on Zion. The war-chariots of the
heavenly hosts are here collectively called רכב, as in [Kg2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017). רבּתים (with Dech, not
Olewejored) is a dual from רבּות; and this is either an abstract noun
equivalent to רבּוּת (from which comes the apocopated רבּו = רבּוּ), a
myriad, consequently רבּתים, two myriads, or a contracted plural out of
רבּאחת, [Ezr 2:69](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#069), therefore the dual
of a plural (like הומותים, לוּהותים): an indefinite plurality of
myriads, and this again doubled (Hofmann). With this sense, in
comparison with which the other is poor and meagre, also harmonies the
expression אלפי שׂנאן, thousands of repetition (ἅπαξ λεγομ = שׂנין),
i.e., thousands and again thousands, numberless, incalculable thousands;
cf. the other and synonymous expression in [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010).

(Note: Tradition (Targum, Saadia, and Abulwald) takes שׂנאן forthwith as
a synonym of מלאך, an angel. So also the lxx (Jerome): χιλιάδες
εὐθηνούντων (שׁנאן = שׁאנן), and Symmachus, χιλιάδες ὴχούντων (from
שׁאה?). The stem-word is, however, שׁנה, just as שׁנים, Arabic thinân,
ithnân, is also formed from a singular that is to be assumed, viz., שׁן,
Arab. ṯinun (iṯnun), and this from שׁנה, Arab. ṯnâ (cf. בּן from בּנה,
Arab. banâ).)

It is intended to give a conception of the "hosts" which Elohim is to
set in array against the "kings of hosts," i.e., the martial power of
the kingdom of the world, for the protection and for the triumph of His
own people. Chariots of fire and horses of fire appear in [Kg2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011); [Kg2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#017) as God's retinue; in [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010) it is angelic forces that thus
make themselves visible. They surround Him on both sides in many
myriads, in countless thousands. אדני בם (with Beth raphatum),

(Note: This is one of the three passages (the others being [Isa
34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011); [Eze
23:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#042); cf. Ew. 93, b) in which the
dageshing of the opening mute of the following word is given up after a
soft final consonant, when the words are connected by a conjunctive
accent or Makkeph.))

the Lord is among them (cf. [Isa
45:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#014)), i.e., they are round about
Him, He has them with Him ([Jer
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#015)), and is present with them. It
now becomes clear why Sinai is mentioned, viz., because at the giving of
the Law Jahve revealed Himself on Sinai surrounded by "ten thousands of
saints" ([Deu 33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002).). But in what
sense is it mentioned? Zion, the poet means, presents to the spiritual
eye now a spectacle such as Sinai presented in the earlier times,
although even Sinai does not belong to the giants among the mountains:

(Note: Cf. the epigram in Sadi's Garden of Roses, "Of all mountains
Sinai is the smallest, and yet the greatest in rank and worth in the
estimation of God," etc. On the words סיני בקדשׁ which follow we may to
a certain extent compare the name of honour given to it in Arabic, ṭûr
m‛ana, "Sinai of Pensiveness" (Pertsch, Die persischen Handschriften der
Gothaer Bibliothek, 1859, S. 24).)

God halts there with His angel host as a protection and pledge of
victory to His people. The conjectures בא מסיני and בם מסיני (Hitzig)
are of no use to us. We must either render it: Sinai is in the
sanctuary, i.e., as it were transferred into the sanctuary of Zion; or:
a Sinai is it in holiness, i.e., it presents a spectacle such as Sinai
presented when God by His appearing surrounded it with holiness. The use
of the expression בּקּדשׂ in [Psa
68:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025), [Psa
77:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014); [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011), decides in favour of the latter
rendering.

With [Psa 68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019) the Psalm changes to
prayer. According to [Psa 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008); [Psa
47:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#006), למּרום appears to be the height
of heaven; but since in [Psa 68:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016)
Zion is spoken of as Jahve's inaccessible dwelling-place, the connection
points to מרום ציּון, [Jer 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#012), cf.
[Eze 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023); [Eze
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#040). Moreover the preterites, which
under other circumstances we should be obliged to take as prophetic,
thus find their most natural explanation as a retrospective glance at
David's storming of "the stronghold of Zion" ([Sa2
5:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)) as the deed of Jahve Himself.
But we should exceed the bounds of legitimate historical interpretation
by referring לקחתּ מתּנות בּאדם to the Nethı̂nim, [Ezr
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#020) (cf. [Num
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#006)), those bondmen of the sanctuary
after the manner of the Gibeonites, [Jos
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#023). The Beth of באדם is not Beth
substantiae: gifts consisting of men, so that these themselves are the
thing given (J. D. Michaelis, Ewald), but the expression signifies inter
homines, as in [Psa 78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060); [Sa2
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#003); [Jer
32:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#020). עלית למּרום mentions the
ascending of the triumphant One; שׁבית שּׁבי (cf. [Jdg
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#012)), the subjugation of the enemy;
לקחתּ וגו, the receiving of the gifts betokening homage and allegiance
([Deu 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038), and frequently), which
have been presented to Him since He has taken possession of Zion - there
He sits enthroned henceforth over men, and receives gifts like to the
tribute which the vanquished bring to the victor. These He has received
among men, and even (ואף, atque etiam, as in [Lev
26:29-32](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#029)) among the rebellious ones.
Or does a new independent clause perhaps begin with ואף סוררים? This
point will be decided by the interpretation of the words that follow.
Side by side with an infinitive with ל expressing a purpose, the one
following noun (here a twofold name) has the assumption against it of
being the subject. Is יה אלהים then consequently the object, or is it an
apostrophe? If it be taken as the language of address, then the
definition of the purpose, לשׁכן, ought, as not being suited to what
immediately precedes, to refer back to עלית; but this word is too far
off. Thus, therefore, the construction of יה אלהים with לשכן, as its
object, is apparently intended (Ewald, Hupfeld): and even the rebellious
are to dwell (Ges. 132, rem. 1) with Jāh Elohim descend and dwell; the
Syriac version: and even the rebellious will ("not" is probably to be
crossed out) dwell before God (יעמדון קדם אלהא); and Jerome: insuper et
non credentes inhabitare Dominum Deum. Thus Theodoret also understands
the versions of the lxx and of Aquila: "Thou hast not regarded their
former disobedience, but notwithstanding their rebellion hast Thou
continually been gracious to them ἕως αὐτοὺς oikeetee'rion oikei'on
ape'feenas." The expression, however, sounds too grand to have "the
rebellious ones" as its subject, and more particularly in view of [Psa
68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007). Hence we take ואף סוררים with
בּאדם: and even among rebellious ones (hast Thou received gifts), or:
and even rebellious ones (give Thee); and לשׁכן as a clause denoting the
purpose, followed by the subject (as e.g., in [Sa2
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#020)): in order that Jāh Elohim may
dwell, i.e., continue to dwell (as in [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017), cf. [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)).

The first half of the Psalm ends here. With the words Jāh Elohim the
Psalm has reached a summit upon which it takes its rest. God has broken
forth on behalf of His people against their enemies, and He now triumphs
over and on behalf of men. The circumstance of Elohim arising is the
raise of the final glory, and His becoming manifest as Jāh Elohim is its
zenith. Paul ([Eph 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#008)) gathers up the
meaning of [Psa 68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019), without
following the lxx, in the following manner: ἀναβὰς εἰς ὕψος ᾐχμαλώτευσεν
αιχμαλωσίαν καὶ ἔδωκε δόματα τοῖς ἀνθρώποις. Might he perhaps have had
the Targum, with which the Syriac version agrees, in his mind at the
time: יחבתּא להון מתנן לבני נשׂא? He interprets in the light and in the
sense of the history that realizes it. For the ascension of Elohim in
its historical fulfilment is none other than the ascension of Christ.
This latter was, however, as the Psalm describes it, a triumphal
procession ([Col 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015)); and what the
Victor has gained over the powers of darkness and of death, He has
gained not for His own aggrandisement, but for the interests of men. It
is מתּנות בּאדם, gifts which He now distributes among men, and which
benefit even the erring ones. So the apostle takes the words, inasmuch
as he changes ἔλαβες into ἔδωκε. The gifts are the charismata which come
down from the Exalted One upon His church.

(Note: In this respect Ps 68 is the most appropriate Psalm for the
Dominica Pentecostes, just as it is also, in the Jewish ritual, the
Psalm of the second Shabuoth day.)

It is a distribution of gifts, a dispensing of blessing, which stands
related to His victory as its primary cause; for as Victor He is also
the possessor of blessing, His gifts are as it were the spoils of the
victory He has gained over sin, death, and Satan.

(Note: Just so Hlemann in the second division of his Bibelstudien
(1861); whereas to Hormann (Schriftbeweis, ii. 482ff.) the New Testament
application of the citation from the Psalm is differently brought about,
because he refers neither ᾐχμαλώτευσεν αἰχμαλωσίαν nor κατέβη εἰς τὰ
κατώτερα μέρη τῆς γῆς to the descent of the Lord into Hades.)

The apostle is the more warranted in this interpretation, since Elohim
in what follows is celebrated as the Lord who also brings out of death.
This praise in the historical fulfilment applies to Him, who, as
Theodoret observes on [Psa 68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021), has
opened up the prison-house of death, which for us had no exit, and burst
the brazen doors, and broken asunder the iron bolts,

(Note: Just so that portion of the Gospel of Nicodemus that treats of
Christ's descent into Hades; vis. Tischendorf, Evangelia Apocryph.
(1853), p. 307.)

viz., to Jesus Christ, who now has the keys of Death and of Hades.

[Psalms 68:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 68:19</span></span>

Now begins the second circuit of the hymn. Comforted by the majestic
picture of the future that he has beheld, the poet returns to the
present, in which Israel is still oppressed, but yet not forsaken by
God. The translation follows the accentuation, regular and in accordance
with the sense, which has been restored by Baer after Heidenheim, viz.,
אדני has Zarka, and יעמס לנוּ Olewejored preceded by the sub-distinctive
Rebia parvum; it is therefore: Benedictus Dominator: quotidie bajulat
nobis, - with which the Targum, Rashi, and Kimchi agree.

(Note: According to the customary accentuation the second יום has Mercha
or Olewejored, and יעמס־לנוּ, Mugrash. But this Mugrash has the position
of the accents of the Silluk-member against it; for although it does
exceptionally occur that two conjunctives follow Mugrash (Accentsystem,
xvii. 5), yet these cannot in any case be Mahpach sarkatum and Illui.)

עמס, like נשׂא and סבל, unites the significations to lay a burden upon
one ([Zac 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#003); [Isa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001), [Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003)), and to carry a burden; with על
it signifies to lay a burden upon any one, here with ל to take up a
burden for any one and to bear it for him. It is the burden or pressure
of the hostile world that is meant, which the Lord day by day helps His
church to bear, inasmuch as He is mighty by His strength in her who of
herself is so feeble. The divine name אל, as being the subject of the
sentence, is האל: God is our salvation. The music here again strikes in
forte, and the same thought that is emphasized by the music in its turn,
is also repeated in [Psa 68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021) with
heightened expression: God is to us a God למושׁעות, who grants us help
in rich abundance. The pluralet. denotes not so much the many single
proofs of help, as the riches of rescuing power and grace. In [Psa
68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021) למּות corresponds to the לנוּ;
for it is not to be construed תּוצאות למּות: Jahve's, the Lord, are the
outgoings to death (Bttcher), i.e., He can command that one shall not
fall a prey to death. תוצאות, the parallel word to מושׁעות, signifies,
and it is the most natural meaning, the escapings; יצא, evadere, as in
[Sa1 14:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#041); [Kg2
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#005); [Ecc
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#018). In Jahve's power are means of
deliverance for death, i.e., even for those who are already abandoned to
death. With אך a joyously assuring inference is drawn from that which
God is to Israel. The parallelism of the correctly divided verse shows
that ראשׁ here, as in [Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006),
signifies caput in the literal sense, and not in the sense of princeps.
The hair-covered scalp is mentioned as a token of arrogant strength, and
unhumbled and impenitent pride, as in [Deu
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042), and as the Attic koma'n
directly signifies to strut along, give one's self airs. The genitival
construction is the same as in [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001), [Isa
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013). The form of expression refers
back to [Num 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017), and so to speak
inflects this primary passage very similarly to [Jer
48:45](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#045). If קדקד שׂער be an object, then
ראשׁ ought also to be a second object (that of the member of the body);
the order of the words does not in itself forbid this (cf. [Psa
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#008) with [Deu
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#011)), but would require a different
arrangement in order to avoid ambiguities.

In [Psa 68:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023) the poet hears a divine
utterance, or records one that he has heard: "From Bashan will I bring
back, I will bring back from the eddies of the sea (from צוּל = צלל, to
whiz, rattle; to whirl, eddy), i.e., the depths or abysses of the sea."
Whom? When after the destruction of Jerusalem a ship set sail for Rome
with a freight of distinguished and well-formed captives before whom was
the disgrace of prostitution, they all threw themselves into the sea,
comforting themselves with this passage of Scripture (Gittin 57b, cf.
Echa Rabbathi 66a). They therefore took [Psa
68:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023) to be a promise which has Israel
as its object;

(Note: So also the Targum, which understands the promise to refer to the
restoration of the righteous who have been eaten by wild beasts and
drowned in the sea (Midrash: מבשׁן = מבין שׁני אריות); cf. also the
things related from the time of the Khaliphs in Jost's Geschichte des
Judenthums, ii. 399, and Grtz' Gesch. der Juden, v. 347.)

but the clause expressing a purpose, [Psa
68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024), and the paraphrase in [Amo
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002)., show that the foes of Israel are
conceived of as its object. Even if these have hidden themselves in the
most out-of-the-way places, God will fetch them back and make His own
people the executioners of His justice upon them. The expectation is
that the flight of the defeated foes will take a southernly direction,
and that they will hide themselves in the primeval forests of Bashan,
and still farther southward in the depths of the sea, i.e., of the Dead
Sea (ים as in [Isa 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#008); [Ch2
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#002)). Opposite to the hiding in the
forests of the mountainous Bashan stands the hiding in the abyss of the
sea, as the extreme of remoteness, that which is in itself impossible
being assumed as possible. The first member of the clause expressing the
purpose, [Psa 68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024), becomes more easy
and pleasing if we read תּרחץ (lxx, Syriac, and Vulgate, ut intingatur),
according to [Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011). So far as the
letters are concerned, the conjecture תּחמץ (from which תמחץ, according
to Chajug', is transposed), after [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), is still more natural (Hitzig):
that thy foot may redden itself in blood. This is certainly somewhat
tame, and moreover מדּם would be better suited to this rendering than
בּדם. As the text now stands, תּמחץ

(Note: The Gaja of the first closed syllable warns one to make a proper
pause upon it, in order that the guttural of the second, so apt to be
slurred over, may be distinctly pronounced; cf. תּבחר, [Psa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#005); הרחיק, [Psa
103:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#012). So also with the sibilants at
the beginning of the second syllable, e.g., תּדשׁא, [Gen
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#011), in accordance with which, in
[Gen 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#001); 53:2, we must write השׁתיתו
והתעיבו.)

is equivalent to תּמחצם (them, viz., the enemies), and רגלך בּדם is an
adverbial clause (setting or plunging thy foot in blood). It is,
however, also possible that מחץ is used like Arab. machaḍa (vehementer
commovere): ut concutias s. agites pedem tuam in sanguine. Can it now be
that in [Psa 68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024) from among the
number of the enemies of the one who goes about glorying in his sins,
the רשׁע κατ ̓ ἐξοχήν (cf. [Isa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004);
[Hab 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013), and other passages), is
brought prominently forward by מנּהוּ? Hardly so; the absence of תּלק
(lambat) cannot be tolerated, cf. [Kg1
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#019); [Kg1
22:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#038). It is more natural, with
Simonis, to refer מנּהוּ back to לשׁון (a word which is usually fem.,
but sometimes perhaps is masc., [Psa
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016); [Pro
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#028)); and, since side by side with
ממּנוּ only מנהוּ occurs anywhere else (Ew. 263, b), to take it in the
signification pars ejus (מן from מנן = מגה, after the form גּז, חן, קץ,
of the same meaning as מגה, מנת, [Psa
63:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#011)), in favour of which Hupfeld
also decides.

What is now described in [Psa
68:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#025), is not the rejoicing over a
victory gained in the immediate past, nor the rejoicing over the earlier
deliverance at the Red Sea, but Israel's joyful celebration when it
shall have experienced the avenging and redemptive work of its God and
King. According to [Psa 77:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014); [Hab
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#006), הליכות appears to be God's march
against the enemy; but what follows shows that the pompa magnifica of
God is intended, after He has overcome the enemy. Israel's festival of
victory is looked upon as a triumphal procession of God Himself, the
King, who governs in holiness, and has now subjugated and humbled the
unholy world; בּקּדשׁ as in [Psa
68:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#018). The rendering "in the
sanctuary' is very natural in this passage, but [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011); [Psa
77:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#014), are against it. The subject of
ראוּ is all the world, more especially those of the heathen who have
escaped the slaughter. The perfect signifies: they have seen, just as
קדּמוּ, they have occupied the front position. Singers head the
procession, after them (אחר,

(Note: This אחר, according to B. Nedarim 37b, is a so-called עטור סופרים
(ablatio scribarum), the sopherim (sofrim) who watched over the faithful
preservation of the text having removed the reading ואחר, so natural
according to the sense, here as in [Gen
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#005); [Gen
24:55](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#055); [Num
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#002), and marked it as not genuine.)

an adverb as in [Gen 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013); [Exo
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#001)) players upon citherns and harps
(נגנים, participle to נגּן), and on either side virgins with timbrels
(Spanish adufe); תּופפות, apocopated part. Poel with the retension of ē
(cf. שׁוקקה, [Psa 107:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#009)), from תּפף,
to strike the תּף (Arab. duff). It is a retrospective reference to the
song at the Sea, now again come into life, which Miriam and the women of
Israel sang amidst the music of timbrels. The deliverance which is now
being celebrated is the counterpart of the deliverance out of Egypt.
Songs resound as in [Psa 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027), "in
gatherings of the congregation (and, so to speak, in full choirs) praise
ye Elohim." מקהלות (מקהלים, [Psa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012)) is the plural to קהל ([Psa
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#023)), which forms none of its own
(cf. post-biblical קהלּות from קהלּה). [Psa
68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027) is abridged from ברכו אדני אשׁר
אתם ממקור ישראל, praise ye the Lord, ye who have Israel for your
fountainhead. אדני, in accordance with the sense, has Mugrash. Israel is
here the name of the patriarch, from whom as from its fountainhead the
nation has spread itself abroad; cf. [Isa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#001); [Isa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#001), and as to the syntax ממּך, those
who descend from thee, [Isa 58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012). In
the festive assembly all the tribes of Israel are represented by their
princes. Two each from the southern and northern tribes are mentioned.
Out of Benjamin was Israel's first king, the first royal victor over the
Gentiles; and in Benjamin, according to the promise ([Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012)) and according to the accounts
of the boundaries ([Jos 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016)., [Jos
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007).), lay the sanctuary of Israel.
Thus, therefore, the tribe which, according both to order of birth ([Gen
43:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#029).) and also extent of
jurisdiction and numbers ([Sa1 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#021)),
was "little," was honoured beyond the others.

(Note: Tertullian calls the Apostle Paul, with reference to his name and
his Benjamitish origin, parvus Benjamin, just as Augustine calls the
poetess of the Magnificat, nostra tympanistria.)

Judah, however, came to the throne in the person of David, and became
for ever the royal tribe. Zebulun and Naphtali are the tribes highly
praised in Deborah's song of victory ([Jdg
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#018), cf. [Psa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006)) on account of their patriotic
bravery. רדם, giving no sense when taken from the well-known verb רדם,
falls back upon רדה, and is consequently equivalent to רדם (cf. [Lam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013)), subduing or ruling them;
according to the sense, equivalent to רדה בם (1 Kings 5:30; [Kg1
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#023); [Ch2
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2008.htm#010)), like המּצלם, not "their leader
up," but ὁ ἀναγαγὼν αὐτοὺς, [Isa
63:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#011), not = רדיהם (like עשׂיהם,
ראיהם), which would signify their subduer or their subduers. The verb
רדה, elsewhere to subjugate, oppress, hold down by force, [Eze
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#004); [Lev
25:53](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#053), is here used of the peaceful
occupation of the leader who maintains the order of a stately and
gorgeous procession. For the reference to the enemies, "their subduer,"
is without any coherence. But to render the parallel word רגמתם "their
(the enemies') stoning" (Hengstenberg, Vaihinger, and others, according
to Bttcher's "Proben"), is, to say nothing more, devoid of taste;
moreover רגם does not mean to throw stones with a sling, but to stone as
a judicial procedure. If we assign to the verb רגם the primary
signification congerere, accumulare, after Arab. rajama VIII, and
rakama, then רגמתם signifies their closely compacted band, as Jewish
expositors have explained it (קהלם או קבוצם). Even if we connect רגם
with רקם, variegare, or compare the proper name regem = Arab. rajm,
socius (Bttcher), we arrive at much the same meaning. Hupfeld's
conjecture רגשׁתם is consequently unnecessary.

[Psalms 68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 68:28</span></span>

The poet now looks forth beyond the domain of Israel, and describes the
effects of Jahve's deed of judgment and deliverance in the Gentile
world. The language of [Psa 68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029) is
addressed to Israel, or rather to its king ([Psa
86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016); [Psa
110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)): God, to whom everything is
subject, has given Israel עז, victory and power over the world. Out of
the consciousness that He alone can preserve Israel upon this height of
power upon which it is placed, who has placed it thereon, grows the
prayer: establish (עוּזּה with וּ for ŭ, as is frequently the case, and
with the accent on the ultima on account of the following Aleph, vid.,
on [Psa 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#005)), Elohim, that which Thou
hast wrought for us; עזז, roborare, as in [Pro
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#028); [Ecc
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#019), lxx δυνάμωσον, Symmachus
ἐνίσχυσον. It might also be interpreted: show Thyself powerful (cf.
רוּמה, 21:14), Thou who ([Isa 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#024))
hast wrought for us (פּעל as in [Isa
43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013), with ל, like עשׂה ל, [Isa
64:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#003)); but in the other way of taking
it the prayer attaches itself more sequentially to what precedes, and
[Psa 62:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#012) shows that זוּ can also
represent the neuter. Hitzig has a still different rendering: the
powerful divine help, which Thou hast given us; but although - instead
of -ת in the stat. construct. is Ephraimitish style (vid., on [Psa
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005)), yet עוּזּה for עז is an unknown
word, and the expression "from Thy temple," which is manifestly
addressed to Elohim, shows that פּעלתּ is not the language of address to
the king (according to Hitzig, to Jehoshaphat). The language of
prayerful address is retained in [Psa
68:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030). From the words מהיכלך על
ירושׁלם there is nothing to be transported to [Psa
68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029) (Hupfeld); for [Psa
68:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030) would thereby become stunted.
The words together are the statement of the starting-point of the
oblations belonging to יובילוּ: starting from Thy temple, which soars
aloft over Jerusalem, may kings bring Thee, who sittest enthroned there
in the Holy of holies, tributary gifts (שׁי as in [Psa
76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012); [Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007)). In this connection (of prayer)
it is the expression of the desire that the Temple may become the zenith
or cynosure, and Jerusalem the metropolis, of the world. In this
passage, where it introduces the seat of religious worship, the taking
of מן as expressing the primary cause, "because or on account of Thy
Temple" (Ewald), is not to be entertained.

In [Psa 68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031) follows a summons, which
in this instance is only the form in which the prediction clothes
itself. The "beast of the reed" is not the lion, of which sojourn among
the reeds is not a characteristic (although it makes its home inter
arundineta Mesopotamiae, Ammianus, [Psa
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#007), and in the thickets of the
Jordan, [Jer 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#019); [Jer
50:44](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#044); [Zac
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#003)). The reed is in itself an emblem
of Egypt ([Isa 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#006), cf. [Psa
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006)), and it is therefore either the
crocodile, the usual emblem of Pharaoh and of the power of Egypt ([Eze
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003), cf. [Psa
74:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#013).) that is meant, or even the
hippopotamus (Egyptian p-ehe-môut), which also symbolizes Egypt in [Isa
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#006) (which see), and according to
[Job 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#021) is more appropriately than
the crocodile (התנין אשׁר בּיּם, [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)) called היּת קנה. Egypt appears
here as the greatest and most dreaded worldly power. Elohim is to check
the haughty ones who exalt themselves over Israel and Israel's God.
אבּירים, strong ones, are bulls ([Psa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#013)) as an emblem of the kings; and
עגלי explains itself by the genit. epexeg. עמּים .gexep: together with
(Beth of the accompaniment as in [Psa
68:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#031), [Psa
66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013), and beside the plur. humanus,
[Jer 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#015)) the calves, viz., the
peoples, over whom those bulls rule. With the one emblem of Egypt is
combined the idea of defiant self-confidence, and with the other the
idea of comfortable security (vid., [Jer
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020).). That which is brought
prominently forward as the consequence of the menace is moulded in
keeping with these emblems. מתרפּס, which has been explained by
Flaminius substantially correctly: ut supplex veniat, is intended to be
taken as a part. fut. (according to the Arabic grammar, ḥâl muqaddar,
lit., a predisposed condition). It thus comprehensively in the singular
(like עבר in [Psa 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#009)) with one stroke
depicts thoroughly humbled pride; for רפס (cf. רמס) signifies to stamp,
pound, or trample, to knock down, and the Hithpa. either to behave as a
trampling one, [Pro 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#003), or to trample
upon one's self, i.e., to cast one's self violently upon the ground.
Others explain it as conculcandum se praebere; but such a meaning cannot
be shown to exist in the sphere of the Hebrew Hithpael; moreover this
"suffering one's self to be trampled upon" does not so well suit the
words, which require a more active sense, viz., בּרצּי־כסףcep, in which
is expressed the idea that the riches which the Gentiles have hitherto
employed in the service of God-opposed worldliness, are no offered to
the God of Israel by those who both in outward circumstances and in
heart are vanquished (cf. Isa 60; 9). רץ־כּסף (from רצץ, confringere) is
a piece of uncoined silver, a bar, wedge, or ingot of silver. In בּזּר
there is a wide leap from the call גּער to the language of description.
This rapid change is also to be found in other instances, and more
especially in this dithyrambic Psalm we may readily give up any idea of
a change in the pointing, as בּזּר or בּזּר (lxx διασκόρπισον); בּזּר,
as it stands, cannot be imperative (Hitzig), for the final vowel
essential to the imperat. Piel is wanting. God hath scattered the
peoples delighting in war; war is therefore at an end, and the peace of
the world is realized.

In [Psa 68:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032), the contemplation of
the future again takes a different turn: futures follow as the most
natural expression of that which is future. The form יאתיוּ, more
usually found in pause, here stands pathetically at the beginning, as in
[Job 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#006). השׁמנּים, compared with the
Arabic chšm (whence Arab. chaššm, a nose, a word erroneously denied by
Gesenius), would signify the supercilious, contemptuous (cf. Arab.
âšammun, nasutus, as an appellation of a proud person who will put up
with nothing). On the other hand, compared with Arab. ḥšm, it would mean
the fat ones, inasmuch as this verbal stem (root Arab. ḥšš, cf. השׁרת,
[Sa2 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#012)), starting from the primary
signification "to be pressed together," also signifies "to be
compressed, become compact," i.e., to regain one's plumpness, to make
flesh and fat, applied, according to the usage of the language, to
wasted men and animals. The commonly compared Arab. ḥšı̂m, vir magni
famulitii, is not at all natural, - a usage which is brought about by
the intransitive signification proper to the verb starting from its
radical signification, "to become or be angry, to be zealous about any
one or anything," inasmuch as the nomen verbale Arab. hạšamun signifies
in the concrete sense a person, or collectively persons, for whose
maintenance, safety, and honour one is keenly solicitous, such as the
members of the family, household attendants, servants, neighbours,
clients or protgs, guest-friends; also a thing which one ardently seeks,
and over the preservation of which one keeps zealous watch (Fleischer).
Here there does not appear to be any connecting link whatever in the
Arabic which might furnish some hold for the Hebrew; hence it will be
more advisable, by comparison of השׁמל and חשׁן, to understand by
חשׁמנים, the resplendent, most distinguished ones, perillustres. The
dignitaries of Egypt come to give glory to the God of Israel, and
Aethiopia, disheartened by fear before Jahve (cf. [Hab
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#007)), causes his hands to run to
Elohim, i.e., hastens to stretch them out. Thus it is interpreted by
most expositors. But if it is ידיו, why is it not also יריץ? We reply,
the Hebrew style, even in connection with words that stand close beside
one another, does not seek to avoid either the enallage generis (e.g.,
[Job 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#003), [Job
39:16](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#016)), or the enall. numeri (e.g.,
[Psa 62:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#005)). But "to cause the hands to
run" is a far-fetched and easily misunderstood figure. We may avoid it,
if, with Bttcher and Olshausen, we disregard the accentuation and
interpret thus, "Cush - his hands cause to hasten, i.e., bring on in
haste ([Sa1 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#017); [Ch2
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013)), to Elohim," viz., propitiating
gifts; תּריץ being the predicate to ידיו, according to Ges. 146, 3.

[Psa 68:32-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#032)

The poet stands so completely in the midst of this glory of the end,
that soaring onwards in faith over all the kingdoms of the world, he
calls upon them to render praise to the God of Israel. לרכב attaches
itself to the dominating notion of שׁירוּ in [Psa
68:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#033). The heavens of heavens ([Deu
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014)) are by קדם described as
primeval (perhaps, following the order of their coming into existence,
as extending back beyond the heavens that belong to our globe, of the
second and fourth day of Creation). God is said to ride along in the
primeval heavens of the heavens ([Deu
33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026)), when by means of the cherub
([Psa 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)) He extends His operations
to all parts of these infinite distances and heights. The epithet "who
rideth along in the heavens of heavens of the first beginning" denotes
the exalted majesty of the superterrestrial One, who on account of His
immanency in history is called "He who rideth along through the steppes"
(רכב בּערבות, [Psa 68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)). In יתּן
בּקולו we have a repetition of the thought expressed above in [Psa
68:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#012) by יתּן אמר; what is intended is
God's voice of power, which thunders down everything that contends
against Him. Since in the expression נתן בּקול ([Psa
46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007); [Jer
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008)) the voice, according to Ges.
138, rem. 3, note, is conceived of as the medium of the giving, i.e., of
the giving forth from one's self, of the making one's self heard, we
must take קול עז not as the object (as in the Latin phrase sonitum
dare), but as an apposition:

(Note: The accentuation does not decide; it admits of our taking it in
both ways. Cf. [Psa 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005); [Psa
41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002); [Psa
58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007); [Psa
68:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#028); [Pro
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022); [Pro
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#001).)

behold, He maketh Himself heard with His voice, a powerful voice. Thus
let them then give God עז, i.e., render back to Him in praise that
acknowledges His omnipotence, the omnipotence which He hath, and of
which He gives abundant proof. His glory (גּאוה) rules over Israel, more
particularly as its guard and defence; His power (עז), however, embraces
all created things, not the earth merely, but also the loftiest regions
of the sky. The kingdom of grace reveals the majesty and glory of His
redemptive work (cf. [Eph 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006)), the
kingdom of nature the universal dominion of His omnipotence. To this
call to the kingdoms of the earth they respond in v. 36: "Awful is
Elohim out of thy sanctuaries." The words are addressed to Israel,
consequently מקדּשׁים is not the heavenly and earthly sanctuary
(Hitzig), but the one sanctuary in Jerusalem (Ezek. 21:72) in the
manifold character of its holy places ([Jer
51:51](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#051), cf. [Amo
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#009)). Commanding reverence - such is
the confession of the Gentile world - doth Elohim rule from thy most
holy places, O Israel, the God who hath chosen thee as His mediatorial
people. The second part of the confession runs: the God of Israel giveth
power and abundant strength to the people, viz., whose God He is,
equivalent to לעמּו, [Psa 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#011).
Israel's might in the omnipotence of God it is which the Gentile world
has experienced, and from which it has deduced the universal fact of
experience, v. 36b. All peoples with their gods succumb at last to
Israel and its God. This confession of the Gentile world closes with
בּרוּך אלהים (which is preceded by Mugrash transformed out of Athnach).
That which the psalmist said in the name of Israel in [Psa
68:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#020), "Blessed be the Lord," now
re-echoes from all the world, "Blessed be Elohim." The world is overcome
by the church of Jahve, and that not merely in outward form, but
spiritually. The taking up of all the kingdoms of the world into the
kingdom of God, this the great theme of the Apocalypse, is also after
all the theme of this Psalm. The first half closed with Jahve's
triumphant ascension, the second closes with the results of His victory
and triumph, which embrace the world of peoples.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 69](psa069)

</div>
