<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa122)  [Next](psa124) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 123](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 123:0</span></span>

Upward Glance to the Lord in Times of Contempt

This Psalm is joined to the preceding Psalm by the community of the
divine name Jahve our God. Alsted (died 1638) gives it the brief,
ingenious inscription oculus sperans. It is an upward glance of waiting
faith to Jahve under tyrannical oppression. The fact that this Psalm
appears in a rhyming form, "as scarcely any other piece in the Old
Testament" (Reuss), comes only from those inflexional rhymes which creep
in of themselves in the tephilla style.

[Psalms 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 123:1</span></span>

The destinies of all men, and in particular of the church, are in the
hand of the King who sits enthroned in the unapproachable glory of the
heavens and rules over all things, and of the Judge who decides all
things. Up to Him the poet raises his eyes, and to Him the church,
together with which he may call Him "Jahve our God," just as the eyes of
servants are directed towards the hand of their lord, the eyes of a maid
towards the hand of her mistress; for this hand regulates the whole
house, and they wait upon their winks and signs with most eager
attention. Those of Israel are Jahve's servants, Israel the church is
Jahve's maid. In His hand lies its future. At length He will take
compassion on His own. Therefore its longing gaze goes forth towards
Him, without being wearied, until He shall graciously turn its distress.
With reference to the i of היּשׁבי, vid., on [Psa
113:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001), [Psa
114:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001). אדוניהם is their common lord;
for since in the antitype the sovereign Lord is meant, it will be
conceived of as plur. excellentiae, just as in general it occurs only
rarely ([Gen 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#002), [Gen
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#018); [Jer
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#004)) as an actual plural.

[Psalms 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 123:3</span></span>

The second strophe takes up the "be gracious unto us" as it were in
echo. It begins with a Kyrie eleison, which is confirmed in a crescendo
manner after the form of steps. The church is already abundantly
satiated with ignominy. רב is an abstract "much," and רבּה, [Psa
62:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#003), something great (vid., Bצttcher,
Lehrbuch, ֗624). The subjectivizing, intensive להּ accords with [Psa
120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006) - probably an indication of one
and the same author. בּוּז is strengthened by לעג, like בּז in [Eze
36:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#004). The article of הלּעג is
restrospectively demonstrative: full of such scorn of the haughty (Ew.
֗290, d). הבּוּז is also retrospectively demonstrative; but since a
repetition of the article for the fourth time would have been inelegant,
the poet here says לגאיונים with the Lamed, which serves as a
circumlocution of the genitive. The Masora reckons this word among the
fifteen "words that are written as one and are to be read as two." The
Kerמ runs viz., לגאי יונים, superbis oppressorum (יונים, part. Kal, like
היּונה [Zep 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001), and frequently). But
apart from the consideration that instead of גּאי, from the unknown
גּאה, it might more readily be pointed גּאי, from גּאה (a form of nouns
indicating defects, contracted גּא), this genitival construction appears
to be far-fetched, and, inasmuch as it makes a distinction among the
oppressors, inappropriate. The poet surely meant לגאיונים or לגּאיונים.
This word גּאיון (after the form רעיון, אביון, עליון) is perhaps an
intentional new formation of the poet. Saadia interprets it after the
Talmudic לגיון, legio; but how could one expect to find such a Grecized
Latin word (λεγεών) in the Psalter! dunash ben-Labrat (about 960)
regards גאיונים as a compound word in the signification of הגּאים
היונים. In fact the poet may have chosen the otherwise unused adjectival
form גּאיונים because it reminds one of יונים, although it is not a
compound word like דּביונים. If the Psalm is a Maccabaean Psalm, it is
natural to find in לגאיונים an allusion to the despotic domination of
the יונים.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 124](psa124)

</div>
