<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa138)  [Next](psa140) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 139](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 139:0</span></span>

Adoration of the Omniscient and Omnipresent One

In this Aramaizing Psalm what the preceding Psalm says in [Psa
139:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#006) comes to be carried into effect,
viz.: for Jahve is exalted and He seeth the lowly, and the proud He
knoweth from afar. This Psalm has manifold points of contact with its
predecessor. From a theological point of view it is one of the most
instructive of the Psalms, and both as regards its contents and poetic
character in every way worthy of David. But it is only inscribed לדוד
because it is composed after the Davidic model, and is a counterpart to
such Psalms as [Psa 19:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#001) and to
other Davidic didactic Psalms. For the addition למנצח neither proves its
ancient Davidic origin, nor in a general way its origin in the period
prior to the Exile, as Ps 74 for example shows, which was at any rate
not composed prior to the time of the Chaldaean catastrophe.

The Psalm falls into three parts: [Psa
139:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001), [Psa
139:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#013), [Psa
139:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#019); the strophic arrangement is
not clear. The first part celebrates the Omniscient and Omnipresent One.
The poet knows that he is surrounded on all sides by God's knowledge and
His presence; His Spirit is everywhere and cannot be avoided; and His
countenance is turned in every direction and inevitably, in wrath or in
love. In the second part the poet continues this celebration with
reference to the origin of man; and in the third part he turns in
profound vexation of spirit towards the enemies of such a God, and
supplicates for himself His proving and guidance. In [Psa
139:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001) and [Psa
139:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#004) God is called Jahve, in [Psa
139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017) El, in [Psa
139:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#019) Eloha, in [Psa
139:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#021) again Jahve, and in [Psa
139:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#023) again El. Strongly as this
Psalm is marked by the depth and pristine freshness of its ideas and
feeling, the form of its language is still such as is without precedent
in the Davidic age. To all appearance it is the Aramaeo-Hebrew idiom of
the post-exilic period pressed into the service of poetry. The Psalm
apparently belongs to those Psalms which, in connection with a
thoroughly classical character of form, bear marks of the influence
which the Aramaic language of the Babylonian kingdom exerted over the
exiles. This influence affected the popular dialect in the first
instance, but the written language also did not escape it, as the Books
of Daniel and Ezra show; and even the poetry of the Psalms is not
without traces of this retrograde movement of the language of Israel
towards the language of the patriarchal ancestral house. In the Cod.
Alex. Ζαχαρίου is added to the τῷ Δαυίδ ψαλμός, and by a second hand ἐν
τῇ διασπορᾷ, which Origen also met with "in some copies."

[Psalms 139:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 139:1</span></span>

The Aramaic forms in this strophe are the ἅπαξ λεγομ רע (ground-form
רעי) in [Psa 139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002) and [Psa
139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017), endeavour, desire, thinking,
like רעוּת and רעיון in the post-exilic books, from רעה (רעא), cupere,
cogitare; and the ἅπ. λεγ. רבע in [Psa
139:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#003), equivalent to רבץ, a lying
down, if רבעי be not rather an infinitive like בּלעי in [Job
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#019), since ארחי is undoubtedly not
inflected from ארח, but, as being infinitive, like עברי in [Deu
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#021), from ארח; and the verb ארח also,
with the exception of this passage, only occurs in the speeches of Elihu
([Job 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#008)), which are almost more
strongly Aramaizing than the Book of Job itself. Further, as an
Aramaizing feature we have the objective relation marked by Lamed in the
expression בּנתּה לרעי, Thou understandest my thinking, as in [Psa
116:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#016); [Psa
129:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#003); [Psa
135:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#011); [Psa
136:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#019). The monostichic opening is
after the Davidic style, e.g., [Psa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#001). Among the prophets, Isaiah in
particular is fond of such thematic introductions as we have here in
[Psa 139:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#001). On ותּדע instead of
ותּדעני vid., on [Psa 107:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#020); the
pronominal object stands once beside the first verb, or even beside the
second ([Kg2 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025)), instead of twice
(Hitzig). The "me" is then expanded: sitting down, rising up, walking
and lying, are the sum of human conditions or states. רעי is the
totality or sum of the life of the spirit and soul of man, and דּרכי the
sum of human action. The divine knowledge, as ותּדע says, is the result
of the scrutiny of man. The poet, however, in [Psa
139:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#002) and [Psa
139:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#003) uses the perfect throughout as a
mood of that which is practically existing, because that scrutiny is a
scrutiny that is never unexecuted, and the knowledge is consequently an
ever-present knowledge. מרחוק is meant to say that He sees into not
merely the thought that is fully fashioned and matured, but even that
which is being evolved. זרית from זרה is combined by Luther (with Azulai
and others) with זר, a wreath (from זרר, constringere, cingere),
inasmuch as he renders: whether I walk or lie down, Thou art round about
me (Ich gehe oder lige, so bistu umb mich). זרה ought to have the same
meaning here, if with Wetzstein one were to compare the Arabic, and more
particularly Beduin, drrâ, dherrâ, to protect; the notion of affording
protection does not accord with this train of thought, which has
reference to God's omniscience: what ought therefore to be meant is a
hedging round which secures its object to the knowledge, or even a
protecting that places it in security against any exchanging, which will
not suffer the object to escape it.

(Note: This Verb. tert. Arab. w et y is old, and the derivative dherâ,
protection, is an elegant word; with reference to another derivative,
dherwe, a wall of rock protecting one from the winds, vid., Job, at [Job
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#007), note. The II form (Piel)
signifies to protect in the widest possible sense, e.g., (in Neshwn, ii.
343b), "\[Arab.\] drâ 'l-šâh, he protected the sheep (against being
exchanged) by leaving a lock of wool upon their backs when they were
shorn, by which they might be recognised among other sheep.")

The Arabic ḏrâ, to know, which is far removed in sound, is by no means
to be compared; it is related to Arab. dr', to push, urge forward, and
denotes knowledge that is gained by testing and experimenting. But we
also have no need of that Arab. ḏrâ, to protect, since we can remain
within the range of the guaranteed Hebrew usage, inasmuch as זרה, to
winnow, i.e., to spread out that which has been threshed and expose it
to the current of the wind, in Arabic likewise ḏrrâ, (whence מזרה,
midhrâ, a winnowing-fork, like רחת, racht, a winnowing-shovel), gives an
appropriate metaphor. Here it is equivalent to: to investigate and
search out to the very bottom; lxx, Symmachus, and Theodotion,
ἐξιξηνίασας, after which the Italic renders investigasti, and Jerome
eventilasti. הסכּין with the accusative, as in [Job
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#021) with עם: to enter into
neighbourly, close, familiar relationship, or to stand in such
relationship, with any one; cogn. שׁכן, Arab. skn. God is acquainted
with all our ways not only superficially, but closely and thoroughly, as
that to which He is accustomed.

In [Psa 139:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#004) this omniscience of God
is illustratively corroborated with כּי; [Psa
139:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#004) has the value of a relative
clause, which, however, takes the form of an independent clause. מלּה
(pronounced by Jerome in his letter to Sunnia and Fretela, 82, MALA) is
an Aramaic word that has been already incorporated in the poetry of the
Davidico-Salomonic age. כלּהּ signifies both all of it and every one. In
[Psa 139:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#005) Luther has been misled by
the lxx and Vulgate, which take צוּר in the signification formare
(whence צוּרה, forma); it signifies, as the definition "behind and
before" shows, to surround, encompass. God is acquainted with man, for
He holds him surrounded on all sides, and man can do nothing, if God,
whose confining hand he has lying upon him ([Job
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#023)), does not allow him the
requisite freedom of motion. Instead of דּעתּך (XX ἡ γνῶσίς σου) the
poet purposely says in [Psa 139:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#006)
merely דּעת: a knowledge, so all-penetrating, all-comprehensive as God's
knowledge. The Ker reads פּליאה, but the Chethb פּלאיּה is supported by
the Chethb פּלאי in [Jdg 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#018), the
Ker of which there is not פּליא, but פּלי (the pausal form of an
adjective פּלי, the feminine of which would be פּליּה). With ממּנּי the
transcendence, with נשׂגּבה the unattainableness, and with להּ לא־אוּכל
the incomprehensibleness of the fact of the omniscience of God is
expressed, and with this, to the mind of the poet, coincides God's
omnipresence; for true, not merely phenomenal, knowledge is not possible
without the immanence of the knowing one in the thing known. God,
however, is omnipresent, sustaining the life of all things by His
Spirit, and revealing Himself either in love or in wrath - what the poet
styles His countenance. To flee from this omnipresence (מן, away from),
as the sinner and he who is conscious of his guilt would gladly do, is
impossible. Concerning the first אנּה, which is here accented on the
ultima, vid., on [Psa 116:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#004).

[Psalms 139:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 139:8</span></span>

The future form אסּק, customary in the Aramaic, may be derived just as
well from סלק (סלק), by means of the same mode of assimilation as in
יסּב = יסבּב, as from נסק (נסק), which latter is certainly only
insecurely established by [Dan 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan006.htm#024),
להנסקה (cf. להנזקת, [Ezr 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#022); הנפּק,
[Dan 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#002)), since the Nun, as in
להנעלה, [Dan 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#003), can also be a
compensation for the resolved doubling (vid., Bernstein in the Lexicon
Chrestom. Kirschianae, and Levy s.v. נסק). אם with the simple future is
followed by cohortatives (vid., on [Psa
73:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#016)) with the equivalent אשּׂא among
them: et si stratum facerem (mihi) infernum (accusative of the object as
in [Isa 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)), etc. In other passages
the wings of the sun ([Mal 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002)) and of
the wind ([Psa 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#011)) are mentioned,
here we have the wings of the morning's dawn. Pennae aurorae, Eugubinus
observes (1548), est velocissimus aurorae per omnem mundum decursus. It
is therefore to be rendered: If I should lift wings (נשׂא כנפים as in
[Eze 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#016), and frequently) such as
the dawn of the morning has, i.e., could I fly with the swiftness with
which the dawn of the morning spreads itself over the eastern sky,
towards the extreme west and alight there. Heaven and Hades, as being
that which is superterrestrial and subterrestrial, and the east and west
are set over against one another. אחרית ים is the extreme end of the sea
(of the Mediterranean with the "isles of the Gentiles"). In [Psa
139:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#010) follows the apodosis: nowhere
is the hand of God, which governs everything, to be escaped, for dextera
Dei ubique est. ואמר (not ואמר, [Eze
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#015)), "therefore I spake," also has
the value of a hypothetical protasis: quodsi dixerim. אך and חשׁך
belongs together: merae tenebrae (vid: [Psa
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#006).); but ישׁוּפני is obscure. The
signification secured to it of conterere, contundere, in [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); [Job
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#017), which is followed by the lxx
(Vulgate) καταπατήσει, is inappropriate to darkness. The signification
inhiare, which may be deduced as possible from שׁאף, suits relatively
better, yet not thoroughly well (why should it not have been יבלעני?).
The signification obvelare, however, which one expects to find, and
after which the Targum, Symmachus, Jerome, Saadia, and others render it,
seems only to be guessed at from the connection, since שׁוּף has not
this signification in any other instance, and in favour of it we cannot
appeal either to נשׁף - whence נשׁף, which belongs together with נשׁב,
נשׁם, and נפשׁ - or to עטף, the root of which is עת (עתה), or to צעף,
whence צעיף, which does not signify to cover, veil, but according to
Arab. ḍ‛f, to fold, fold together, to double. We must therefore either
assign to ישׁוּפני the signification operiat me without being able to
prove it, or we must put a verb of this signification in its place,
viz., ישׂוּכני (Ewald) or יעוּפני (Bttcher), which latter is the more
commendable here, where darkness (חשׁך, synon. עיפה, מעוּף) is the
subject: and if I should say, let nothing but darkness cover me, and as
night (the predicate placed first, as in [Amo
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#013)) let the light become about me,
i.e., let the light become night that shall surround and cover me
(בּעדני, poetic for בּעדי, like תּחתּני in 2 Sam. 22) - the darkness
would spread abroad no obscurity ([Psa
105:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#028)) that should extend beyond (מן)
Thy piercing eye and remove me from Thee. In the word יאיר, too, the
Hiphil signification is not lost: the night would give out light from
itself, as if it were the day; for the distinction of day and night has
no conditioning influence upon God, who is above and superior to all
created things (der Uebercreatrliche), who is light in Himself. The two
כ are correlative, as e.g., in [Kg1
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#004). חשׁיכה (with a superfluous Jod)
is an old word, but אורה (cf. Aramaic אורתּא) is a later one.

[Psalms 139:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 139:13</span></span>

The fact that man is manifest to God even to the very bottom of his
nature, and in every place, is now confirmed from the origin of man. The
development of the child in the womb was looked upon by the Israelitish
Chokma as one of the greatest mysteries, [Ecc
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005); and here the poet praises this
coming into being as a marvellous work of the omniscient and omnipresent
omnipotence of God. קנה here signifies condere; and סכך not: to cover,
protect, as in [Psa 140:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#008); [Job
40:22](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#022), prop. to cover with network, to
hedge in, but: to plait, interweave, viz., with bones, sinews, and
veins, like שׂכך in [Job 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#011). The
reins are made specially prominent in order to mark the, the seat of the
tenderest, most secret emotions, as the work of Him who trieth the heart
and the reins. The προσευχή becomes in [Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014) the εὐχαριστία: I give thanks
unto Thee that I have wonderfully come into being under fearful
circumstances, i.e., circumstances exciting a shudder, viz., of
astonishment (נוראות as in [Psa 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#006)).
נפלה (= נפלא) is the passive to הפלה, [Psa
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#004); [Psa
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007). Hitzig regards נפליתה (Thou hast
shown Thyself wonderful), after the lxx, Syriac, Vulgate, and Jerome, as
the only correct reading; but the thought which is thereby gained comes
indeed to be expressed in the following line, [Psa
139:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#014), which sinks down into
tautology in connection with this reading. \`otsem (collectively
equivalent to עצמים, [Ecc 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#005)) is the
bones, the skeleton, and, starting from that idea, more generally the
state of being as a sum-total of elements of being. אשׁר, without being
necessarily a conjunction (Ew. 333, a), attaches itself to the suffix of
עצמי. רקּם, "to be worked in different colours, or also embroidered," of
the system of veins ramifying the body, and of the variegated colouring
of its individual members, more particularly of the inward parts;
perhaps, however, more generally with a retrospective conception of the
colours of the outline following the undeveloped beginning, and of the
forming of the members and of the organism in general.

(Note: In the Talmud the egg of a bird or of a reptile is called מרקּמת,
when the outlines of the developed embryo are visible in it; and
likewise the mole (mola), when traces of human; organization can be
discerned in it.)

The mother's womb is here called not merely סתר (cf. Aeschylus'
Eumenides, 665: ἐν σκοτοισι νηδύος τεθραμμένη, and the designation of
the place where the foetus is formed as "a threefold darkness' in the
Koran, Sur. xxxix. 8), the ē of which is retained here in pause (vid.,
Bttcher, Lehrbuch, 298), but by a bolder appellation תּחתּיּות ארץ, the
lowest parts of the earth, i.e., the interior of the earth (vid., on
[Psa 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#010)) as being the secret
laboratory of the earthly origin, with the same retrospective reference
to the first formation of the human body out of the dust of the earth,
as when Job says, [Job 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#021) : "naked
came I out of my mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither" -
שׁמּה, viz., εἰς τὴν γῆν τὴν μητέρα πάντων, Sir. 40:1. The interior of
Hades is also called בּטן שׁאול in [Jon
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#002), Sir. 51:5. According to the view
of Scripture the mode of Adam's creation is repeated in the formation of
every man, [Job 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#006), cf. [Job
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#004). The earth was the mother's womb
of Adam, and the mother's womb out of which the child of Adam comes
forth is the earth out of which it is taken.

[Psa 139:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#016)

The embryo folded up in the shape of an egg is here called גּלם, from
גּלם, to roll or wrap together (cf. glomus, a ball), in the Talmud said
of any kind of unshapen mass (lxx ἀκατέργαστον, Symmachus ἀμόρφωτον) and
raw material, e.g., of the wood or metal that is to be formed into a
vessel (Chullin 25a, to which Saadia has already referred).

(Note: Epiphanius, Haer, xxx. 31, says the Hebrew γολμη signifies the
peeled grains of spelt or wheat before they are mixed up and backed, the
still raw (only bruised) flour-grains - a signification that can now no
longer be supported by examples.)

As to the rest, compare similar retrospective glances into the embryonic
state in [Job 10:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#008), 2 Macc. 7:22f.
(Psychology, S. 209ff., tr. pp. 247f.). On the words in libro tuo
Bellarmine makes the following correct observation: quia habes apud te
exemplaria sive ideas omnium, quomodo pictor vel sculptor scit ex
informi materia quid futurum sit, quia videt exemplar. The signification
of the future יכּתבוּ is regulated by ראוּ, and becomes, as relating to
the synchronous past, scribebantur. The days יצּרוּ, which were already
formed, are the subject. It is usually rendered: "the days which had
first to be formed." If יצּרוּ could be equivalent to ייצּרוּ, it would
be to be preferred; but this rejection of the praeform. fut. is only
allowed in the fut. Piel of the verbs Pe Jod, and that after a Waw
convertens, e.g., ויּבּשׁ = וייבּשׁ, [Nah
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#004) (cf. Caspari on [Oba
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#011)).

(Note: But outside the Old Testament it also occurs in the Pual, though
as a wrong use of the word; vide my Anekdota (1841), S. 372f.)

Accordingly, assuming the original character of the לא in a negative
signification, it is to be rendered: The days which were (already)
formed, and there was not one among them, i.e., when none among them had
as yet become a reality. The suffix of כּלּם points to the succeeding
ימים, to which יצּרוּ is appended as an attributive clause; ולא אחד בּהם
is subordinated to this יצּרוּ: cum non or nondum ([Job
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#016)) unus inter eos = unus eorum
([Exo 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028)) esset. But the expression
(instead of ועוד לא היה or טרם יהיה) remains doubtful, and it becomes a
question whether the Ker ולו (vid., on [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003)), which stands side by side with
the Chethb ולא (which the lxx, Aquila, Symmachus, Theodotion, the
Targum, Syriac, Jerome, and Saadia follow), is not to be preferred. This
ולו, referred to גלמי, gives the acceptable meaning: and for it (viz.,
its birth) one among them (these days), without our needing to make any
change in the proposed exposition down to יצרו. We decide in favour of
this, because this ולו אחד בהם does not, as ולא אחד בהם, make one feel
to miss any היה, and because the ולי which begins [Psa
139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017) connects itself to it by way of
continuation. The accentuation has failed to discern the reference of
כלם to the following ימים, inasmuch as it places Olewejored against
יכתבו. Hupfeld follows this accentuation, referring כלם back to גלמי as
a coil of days of one's life; and Hitzig does the same, referring it to
the embryos. But the precedence of the relative pronoun occurs in other
instances also,

(Note: The Hebrew poet, says Gesenius (Lehrgebude, S. 739f.), sometimes
uses the pronoun before the thing to which it referred has even been
spoken of. This phenomenon belongs to the Hebrew style generally, vid.,
my Anekdota (1841), S. 382.)

and is devoid of all harshness, especially in connection with כּלּם,
which directly signifies altogether (e.g., [Isa
43:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#014)).

It is the confession of the omniscience that is united with the
omnipotence of God, which the poet here gives utterance to with
reference to himself, just as Jahve says with reference to Jeremiah,
[Jer 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005). Among the days which were
preformed in the idea of God (cf. on יצרו, [Isa
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011); [Isa
37:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#026)) there was also one, says the
poet, for the embryonic beginning of my life. The divine knowledge
embraces the beginning, development, and completion of all things
(Psychology, S. 37ff., tr. pp. 46ff.). The knowledge of the thoughts of
God which are written in the book of creation and revelation is the
poet's cherished possession, and to ponder over them is his favourite
pursuit: they are precious to him, יקרוּ (after [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008)), not: difficult of comprehension
(schwerbegreiflich, Maurer, Olshausen), after [Dan
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#011), which would surely have been
expressed by עמקוּ ([Psa 92:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#006)), more
readily: very weighty (schwergewichtig, Hitzig), but better according to
the prevailing Hebrew usage: highly valued (schwergewerthet), cara.

(Note: It should be noted that the radical idea of the verb, viz., being
heavy (German schwer), is retained in all these renderings. - Tr.)

"Their sums" are powerful, prodigious ([Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006)), and cannot be brought to a
summa summarum. If he desires to count them (fut. hypothet. as in [Psa
91:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#007); [Job
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024)), they prove themselves to be
more than the sand with its grains, that is to say, innumerable. He
falls asleep over the pondering upon them, wearied out; and when he
wakes up, he is still with God, i.e., still ever absorbed in the
contemplation of the Unsearchable One, which even the sleep of fatigue
could not entirely interrupt. Ewald explains it somewhat differently: if
I am lost in the stream of thoughts and images, and recover myself from
this state of reverie, yet I am still ever with Thee, without coming to
an end. But it could only perhaps be interpreted thus if it were העירותי
or התעוררתּי. Hofmann's interpretation is altogether different: I will
count them, the more numerous than the sand, when I awake and am
continually with Thee, viz., in the other world, after the awaking from
the sleep of death. This is at once impossible, because הקיצתי cannot
here, according to its position, be a perf. hypotheticum. Also in
connection with this interpretation עוד would be an inappropriate
expression for "continually," since the word only has the sense of the
continual duration of an action or a state already existing; here of one
that has not even been closed and broken off by sleep. He has not done;
waking and dreaming and waking up, he is carried away by that endless,
and yet also endlessly attractive, pursuit, the most fitting occupation
of one who is awake, and the sweetest (cf. [Jer
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#026)) of one who is asleep and
dreaming.

[Psalms 139:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 139:19</span></span>

And this God is by many not only not believed in and loved, but even
hated and blasphemed! The poet now turns towards these enemies of God in
profound vexation of spirit. The אם, which is conditional in [Psa
139:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#008), here is an optative o si, as in
[Psa 81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009); [Psa
95:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#007). The expression תּקטל אלוהּ
reminds one of the Book of Job, for, with the exception of our Psalm,
this is the only book that uses the verb קטל, which is more Aramaic than
Hebrew, and the divine name Eloah occurs more frequently in it than
anywhere else. The transition from the optative to the imperative סוּרוּ
is difficult; it would have been less so if the Waw copul. had been left
out: cf. the easier expression in [Psa
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#009); [Psa
119:115](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#115). But we may not on this
account seek to read יסוּרוּ, as Olshausen does. Everything here is
remarkable; the whole Psalm has a characteristic form in respect to the
language. מנּי is the ground-form of the overloaded ממּנּי, and is also
like the Book of Job, [Job 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#016), cf.
מנהוּ [Job 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012), [Psa
68:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#024). The mode of writing ימרוּך
(instead of which, however, the Babylonian texts had יאמרוּך) is the
same as in [Sa2 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#015), cf. in [Sa2
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#009) the same melting away of the
Aleph into the preceding vowel in connection with אחז, in [Sa2
22:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#040) in connection with אזּר, and in
[Isa 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020) with אהל. Construed with
the accusative of the person, אמר here signifies to declare any one,
profiteri, a meaning which, we confess, does not occur elsewhere. But
למזמּה (cf. למרמה, [Psa 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#004); the
Targum: who swear by Thy name for wantonness) and the parallel member of
the verse, which as it runs is moulded after [Exo
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007), show that it has not to be read
ימרוּך (Quinta: παρεπικρανάν σε). The form נשׁוּא, with Aleph otians, is
also remarkable; it ought at least to have been written נשׂאוּ (cf.
נרפּוּא, [Eze 47:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#008)) instead of the
customary נשׂאוּ; yet the same mode of writing is found in the Niphal in
[Jer 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#005), ינשׁוּא, it assumes a
ground-form נשׂה ([Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001)) = נשׂא,
and is to be judged of according to אבוּא in [Isa
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#012) \[Ges. 23, 3, rem. 3\]. Also one
feels the absence of the object to נשׁוּא לשּׁוא. It is meant to be
supplied according to the decalogue, [Exo
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#007), which certainly makes the
alteration שׁמך (Bttcher, Olsh.) or זכרך (Hitzig on [Isa
26:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#013)), instead of עריך, natural. But
the text as we now have it is also intelligible: the object to נשׂוא is
derived from ימרוך, and the following עריך is an explanation of the
subject intended in נשׂוא that is introduced subsequently. [Psa
89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052) proves the possibility of this
structure of a clause. It is correctly rendered by Aquila ἀντίζηλοί σου,
and Symmachus οἱ ἐναντίοι σου. ער, an enemy, prop. one who is zealous, a
zealot (from עוּר, or rather עיר, = Arab. gâr, med. Je, ζηλοῦν, whence
עיר, Arab. gayrat = קנאה), is a word that is guaranteed by [Sa1
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#016); [Dan
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#016), and as being an Aramaism is
appropriate to this Psalm. The form תּקומם for מתּקומם has cast away the
preformative Mem (cf. שׁפתּים and משׁפּתים, מקּרה in [Deu
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#011) for ממּקּרה); the suffix is to
be understood according to [Psa 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007).
Pasek stands between יהוה and אשׂנה in order that the two words may not
be read together (cf. [Job 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#013), and
above [Psa 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#003)). התקוטט as in the
recent [Psa 119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158). The emphasis in
[Psa 139:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#022) lies on לי; the poet
regards the adversaries of God as enemies of his own. תּכלית takes the
place of the adjective: extremo (odio) odi eos. Such is the relation of
the poet to the enemies of God, but without indulging any self-glorying.

[Psalms 139:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 139:23</span></span>

He sees in them the danger which threatens himself, and prays God not to
give him over to the judgment of self-delusion, but to lay bare the true
state of his soul. The fact "Thou hast searched me," which the beginning
of the Psalm confesses, is here turned into a petitioning "search me."
Instead of רעים in [Psa 139:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#017), the
poet here says שׂרעפּים, which signifies branches ([Eze
31:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze031.htm#005)) and branchings of the act of
thinking (thoughts and cares, [Psa
94:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#019)). The Resh is epenthetic, for
the first form is שׂעפּים, [Job 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013);
[Job 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#002). The poet thus sets the very
ground and life of his heart, with all its outward manifestations, in
the light of the divine omniscience. And in [Psa
139:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#024) he prays that God would see
whether any דּרך־עצב cleaves to him (בּי as in [Sa1
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#024)), by which is not meant "a way
of idols" (Rosenm׬ller, Gesenius, and Maurer), after [Isa
48:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#005), since an inclination towards, or
even apostasy to, heathenism cannot be an unknown sin; nor to a man like
the writer of this Psalm is heathenism any power of temptation. דוך בּצע
(Grהtz) might more readily be admissible, but דוך עצב is a more
comprehensive notion, and one more in accordance with this closing
petition. The poet gives this name to the way that leads to the pain,
torture, viz., of the inward and outward punishments of sin; and, on the
other hand, the way along which he wishes to be guided he calls דּרך
עולם, the way of endless continuance (lxx, Vulgate, Luther), not the way
of the former times, after [Jer 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016)
(Maurer, Olshausen), which thus by itself is ambiguous (as becomes
evident from [Job 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#015); [Jer
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015)), and also does not furnish any
direct antithesis. The "everlasting way" is the way of God ([Psa
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#011)), the way of the righteous,
which stands fast for ever and shall not "perish" ([Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 140](psa140)

</div>
