<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa132)  [Next](psa134) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 133](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

[Psalms 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 133:1</span></span>

In this Psalm, says Hengstenberg, "David brings to the consciousness of
the church the glory of the fellowship of the saints, that had so long
been wanting, the restoration of which had begun with the setting up of
the Ark in Zion." The Psalm, in fact, does not speak of the termination
of the dispersion, but of the uniting of the people of all parts of the
land for the purpose of divine worship in the one place of the
sanctuary; and, as in the case of [Psa
122:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001), its counterpart, occasions
can be found in the history of David adapted to the לדוד of the
inscription. But the language witnesses against David; for the
construction of שׁ with the participle, as שׁיּרד, qui descendit (cf.
[Psa 135:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#002), שׁעמדים, qui stant), is
unknown in the usage of the language prior to the Exile. Moreover the
inscription לדוד is wanting in the lxx Cod. Vat. and the Targum; and the
Psalm may only have been so inscribed because it entirely breathes
David's spirit, and is as though it had sprung out of his love for
Jonathan.

With גּם the assertion passes on from the community of nature and
sentiment which the word "brethren" expresses to the outward active
manifestation and realization that correspond to it: good and delightful
([Psa 135:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#003)) it is when brethren
united by blood and heart also (corresponding to this their brotherly
nature) dwell together - a blessed joy which Israel has enjoyed during
the three great Feasts, although only for a brief period (vid., [Psa
122:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#001)). Because the high priest, in
whom the priestly mediatorial office culminates, is the chief personage
in the celebration of the feast, the nature and value of that local
reunion is first of all expressed by a metaphor taken from him. שׁמן
הטּוב is the oil for anointing described in [Exo
30:22-33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#022), which consisted of a mixture
of oil and aromatic spices strictly forbidden to be used in common life.
The sons of Aaron were only sprinkled with this anointing oil; but Aaron
was expressly anointed with it, inasmuch as Moses poured it upon his
head; hence he is called par excellence "the anointed priest" (הכּהן
המּשׁיה), whilst the other priests are only "anointed" (משׁחים, [Num
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#003)) in so far as their garments, like
Aaron's, were also sprinkled with the oil (together with the blood of
the ram of consecration), [Lev 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012),
[Lev 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#030). In the time of the second
Temple, to which the holy oil of anointing was wanting, the installation
into the office of high priest took place by his being invested in the
pontifical robes. The poet, however, when he calls the high priest as
such Aaron, has the high-priesthood in all the fulness of its divine
consecration ([Lev 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#010)) before his
eyes. Two drops of the holy oil of anointing, says a Haggada, remained
for ever hanging on the beard of Aaron like two pearls, as an emblem of
atonement and of peace. In the act of the anointing itself the precious
oil freely poured out ran gently down upon his beard, which in
accordance with [Lev 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#005) was
unshortened.

In that part of the Tra which describes the robe of the high priest,
שׁוּלי is its hems, פּי ראשׁו, or even absolutely פּה, the opening for
the head, or the collar, by means of which the sleeveless garment was
put on, and שׂפה the binding, the embroidery, the border of this collar
(vid., [Exo 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#032); [Exo
39:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo039.htm#023); cf. [Job
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018), פּי כתנתּי, the collar of my
shirt). פּי must apparently be understood according to these passages of
the Tra, as also the appellation מדּות (only here for מדּים, מּדּים),
beginning with [Lev 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003), denotes the
whole vestment of the high priest, yet without more exact distinction.
But the Targum translates פּי with אמרא (ora = fimbria) - a word which
is related to אמּרא, agnus, like ᾤα to ὄΐς. This ᾤα is used both of the
upper and lower edge of a garment. Accordingly Appolinaris and the Latin
versions understand the ἐπὶ τὴν ὤαν of the lxx of the hem (in oram
vestimenti); Theodoret, on the other hand, understands it to mean the
upper edging: ὤαν ἐκάλεσεν ὃ καλοῦμεν περιτραχήλιον, τοῦτο δὲ καὶ ὁ
Ἀκύλας στόμα ἐνδυμάτων εἴρηκε. So also De Sacy: sur le bord de son
vtement, c'est--dire, sur le haut de ses habits pontificaux. The
decision of the question depends upon the aim of this and the following
figure in [Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003). If we compare
the two figures, we find that the point of the comparison is the uniting
power of brotherly feeling, as that which unites in heart and soul those
who are most distant from one another locally, and also brings them
together in outward circumstance. If this is the point of the
comparison, then Aaron's beard and the hem of his garments stand just as
diametrically opposed to one another as the dew of Hermon and the
mountains of Zion. פּי is not the collar above, which gives no advance,
much less the antithesis of two extremes, but the hem at the bottom (cf.
שׂפה, [Exo 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#004), of the edge of a
curtain). It is also clear that שׁיּרד cannot now refer to the beard of
Aaron, either as flowing down over the upper border of his robe, or as
flowing down upon its hem; it must refer to the oil, for peaceable love
that brings the most widely separated together is likened to the oil.
This reference is also more appropriate to the style of the onward
movement of the gradual Psalms, and is confirmed by [Psa
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003), where it refers to the dew,
which takes the place of the oil in the other metaphor. When brethren
united in harmonious love also meet together in one place, as is the
case in Israel at the great Feasts, it is as when the holy, precious
chrism, breathing forth the blended odour of many spices, upon the head
of Aaron trickles down upon his beard, and from thence to the extreme
end of his vestment. It becomes thoroughly perceptible, and also
outwardly visible, that Israel, far and near, is pervaded by one spirit
and bound together in unity of spirit.

This uniting spirit of brotherly love is now symbolised also by the dew
of Hermon, which descends in drops upon the mountains of Zion. "What we
read in the 133rd Psalm of the dew of Hermon descending upon the
mountains of Zion," says Van de Velde in his Travels (Bd. i. S. 97), "is
now become quite clear to me. Here, as I sat at the foot of Hermon, I
understood how the water-drops which rose from its forest-mantled
heights, and out of the highest ravines, which are filled the whole year
round with snow, after the sun's rays have attenuated them and moistened
the atmosphere with them, descend at evening-time as a heavy dew upon
the lower mountains which lie round about as its spurs. One ought to
have seen Hermon with its white-golden crown glistening aloft in the
blue sky, in order to be able rightly to understand the figure. Nowhere
in the whole country is so heavy a dew perceptible as in the districts
near to Hermon." To this dew the poet likens brotherly love. This is as
the dew of Hermon: of such pristine freshness and thus refreshing,
possessing such pristine power and thus quickening, thus born from above
([Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)), and in fact like the dew
of Hermon which comes down upon the mountains of Zion - a feature in the
picture which is taken from the natural reality; for an abundant dew,
when warm days have preceded, might very well be diverted to Jerusalem
by the operation of the cold current of air sweeping down from the north
over Hermon. We know, indeed, from our own experience how far off a cold
air coming from the Alps is perceptible and produces its effects. The
figure of the poet is therefore as true to nature as it is beautiful.
When brethren bound together in love also meet together in one place,
and in fact when brethren out of the north unite with brethren in the
south in Jerusalem, the city which is the mother of all, at the great
Feasts, it is as when the dew of Mount Hermon, which is covered with
deep, almost eternal snow,

(Note: A Haraunitish poem in Wetzstein's Lieder-Sammlungen begins: Arab.
- - 'l-bâriḥat habbat ‛lynâ šarârt mn ‛âliya 'l-ṯlj, "Yesterday there
blew across to me a spark

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

from the lofty snow-mountain (the Hermon)," on which the commentator
dictated to him the remark, that Arab. šarârt, the glowing spark, is
either the snow-capped summit of the mountain glowing in the morning sun
or a burning cold breath of air, for one says in everyday life Arab.
'l-ṣaqa‛ yaḥriq, the frost burns \[vid. note to [Psa
121:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006)\].)

descends upon the bare, unfruitful - and therefore longing for such
quickening - mountains round about Zion. In Jerusalem must love and all
that is good meet. For there (שׁם as in [Psa
132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017)) hath Jahve commanded (צוּה as
in [Lev 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#021), cf. [Psa
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#009); [Psa
68:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#029)) the blessing, i.e., there
allotted to the blessing its rendezvous and its place of issue.
את־הבּרכה is appositionally explained by חיּים: life is the substance
and goal of the blessing, the possession of all possessions, the
blessing of all blessings. The closing words עד־העולם (cf. [Psa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009)) belong to צוּה: such is God's
inviolable, ever-enduring order.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 134](psa134)

</div>

</div>
