<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1023)  [Next](sa1025.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 24:1</span></span>

Whilst Saul had gone against the Philistines, David left this dangerous
place, and went to the mountain heights of Engedi, i.e., the present
Ain-jidy (goat-fountain), in the middle of the western coats of the Dead
Sea (see at [Jos 15:62](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#062).md), which he
could reach from Maon in six or seven hours. The soil of the
neighbourhood consists entirely of limestone; but the rocks contain a
considerable admixture of chalk and flint. Round about there rise bare
conical mountains, and even ridges of from two to four hundred feet in
height, which mostly run down to the sea. The steep mountains are
intersected by wadys running down in deep ravines to the sea. "On all
sides the country is full of caverns, which might then serve as
lurking-places for David and his men, as they do for outlaws at the
present day" (Rob. Pal. p. 203)

[Sa1 24:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#001.md)

When Saul had returned from his march against the Philistines, and was
informed of this, he set out thither with three thousand picked men to
search for David and his men in the wild-goat rocks. The expression
"rocks of the wild goats" is probably not a proper name for some
particular rocks, but a general term applied to the rocks of that
locality on account of the number of wild goats and chamois that were to
be found in all that region, as mountain goats are still (Rob. Pal. ii.
p. 204).

[Sa1 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#003.md)

When Saul came to the sheep-folds by the way, where there was a cave, he
entered it to cover his feet, whilst David and his men sat behind in the
cave. V. de Velde (R. ii. p. 74) supposes the place, where the
sheep-folds by the roadside were, to have been the Wady Chareitun, on
the south-west of the Frank mountain, and to the north-east of Tekoah, a
very desolate and inaccessible valley. "Rocky, precipitous walls, which
rise up one above another for many hundred feet, form the sides of this
defile. Stone upon stone, and cliff above cliff, without any sign of
being habitable, or of being capable of affording even a halting-place
to anything but wild goats." Near the ruins of the village of Chareitun,
hardly five minutes' walk to the east, there is a large cave or chamber
in the rock, with a very narrow entrance entirely concealed by stones,
and with many side vaults in which the deepest darkness reigns, at least
to any one who has just entered the limestone vaults from the dazzling
light of day. It may be argued in favour of the conjecture that this is
the cave which Saul entered, and at the back of which David and his men
were concealed, that this cave is on the road from Bethlehem to
Ain-jidy, and one of the largest caves in that district, if not the
largest of all, and that, according to Pococke (Beschr. des Morgenl. ii.
p. 61), the Franks call it a labyrinth, the Arabs Elmaama, i.e.,
hiding-place, whilst the latter relate how at one time thirty thousand
people hid themselves in it "to escape an evil wind," in all probability
the simoom. The only difficulty connected with this supposition is the
distance from Ain-jidy, namely about four or five German miles (fifteen
or twenty English), and the nearness of Tekoah, according to which it
belongs to the desert of Tekoah rather than to that of Engedi. "To cover
his feet" is a euphemism according to most of the ancient versions, as
in [Jdg 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#024.md), for performing the
necessities of nature, as it is a custom in the East to cover the feet.
It does not mean "to sleep," as it is rendered in this passage in the
Peschito, and also by Michaelis and others; for although what follows
may seem to favour this, there is apparently no reason why any such
euphemistic expression should have been chosen for sleep. "The sides of
the cave:" i.e., the outermost or farthest sides.

[Sa1 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004.md)

Then David's men said to him, "See, this is the day of which Jehovah
hath said to thee, Behold, I give thine enemy into thy hand, and do to
him what seemeth good to thee." Although these words might refer to some
divine oracle which David had received through a prophet, Gad for
example, what follows clearly shows that David had received no such
oracle; and the meaning of his men was simply this, "Behold, to-day is
the day when God is saying to thee:" that is to say, the speakers
regarded the leadings of providence by which Saul had been brought into
David's power as a divine intimation to David himself to take this
opportunity of slaying his deadly enemy, and called this intimation a
word of Jehovah. David then rose, up, and cut off the edge of Saul's
cloak privily. Saul had probably laid the meil on one side, which
rendered it possible for David to cut off a piece of it unobserved.

[Sa1 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#005.md)

But his heart smote him after he had done it; i.e., his conscience
reproached him, because he regarded this as an injury done to the king
himself.

[Sa1 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#006.md)

With all the greater firmness, therefore, did he repel the suggestions
of his men: "Far be it to me from Jehovah (on Jehovah's account: see at
[Jos 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#029).md), that (אם, a particle
denoting an oath) I should do such a thing to my lord, the anointed of
Jehovah, to stretch out my hand against him." These words of David show
clearly enough that no word of Jehovah had come to him to do as he liked
with Saul.

[Sa1 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007.md)

Thus he kept back his people with words (שׁסּע, verbis dilacere), and
did not allow them to rise up against Saul, sc., to slay him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 24:8</span></span>

But when Saul had gone out of the cave, David went out, and called, "My
lord king," that when the king looked round he might expostulate with
him, with the deepest reverence, but yet with earnest words, that should
sharpen his conscience as to the unfounded nature of his suspicion and
the injustice of his persecution. "Why dost thou hearken to words of
men, who say, Behold, David seeketh thy hurt? Behold, this day thine
eyes have been that Jehovah hath given thee to-day into my hand in the
cave, and they said (אמר, thought) to kill thee, and I spared thee:"
lit. it (mine eye) spared thee (cf. [Gen
45:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen045.htm#020.md); [Deu
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#016.md), etc., which show that עיני is to
be supplied).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 24:11</span></span>

To confirm what he said, he then showed him the lappet of his coat which
he had cut off, and said, "My father, see." In these words there is an
expression of the childlike reverence and affection which David
cherished towards the anointed of the Lord. "For that I cut off the
lappet and did not kill thee, learn and see (from this) that (there is)
not evil in my hand (i.e., that I do not go about for the purpose of
injury and crime), and that I have not sinned against thee, as thou
nevertheless layest wait for my soul to destroy it."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 24:12</span></span>

After he had proved to the king in this conclusive manner that he had no
reason whatever for seeking his life, he invoked the Lord as judge
between him and his adversary: "Jehovah will avenge me upon thee, but my
hand will not be against thee. As the proverb of the ancients (הקּדמוני
is used collectively) says, Evil proceedeth from the evil, but my hand
shall not be upon thee." The meaning is this: Only a wicked man could
wish to avenge himself; I do not.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 24:14</span></span>

And even if he should wish to attack the king, he did not possess the
power. This thought introduces [Sa1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014.md) : "After whom is the king of
Israel gone out? After whom dost thou pursue? A dead dog, a single
flea." By these similes David meant to describe himself as a perfectly
harmless and insignificant man, of whom Saul had no occasion to be
afraid, and whom the king of Israel ought to think it beneath his
dignity to pursue. A dead dog cannot bite or hurt, and is an object
about which a king ought not to trouble himself (cf. [Sa2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008.md) and [Sa2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009.md), where the idea of something
contemptible is included). The point of comparison with a flea is the
insignificance of such an animal (cf. [Sa1
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#020).md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 24:15</span></span>

As Saul had therefore no good ground for persecuting David, the latter
could very calmly commit his cause to the Lord God, that He might decide
it as judge, and deliver him out of the hand of Saul: "Let Him look at
it, and conduct my cause," etc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 24:16</span></span>

These words made an impression upon Saul. David's conduct went to his
heart, so that he wept aloud, and confessed to him: "Thou art more
righteous than I, for thou hast shown me good, and I (have shown) thee
evil; and thou hast given me a proof of this to-day."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 24:19</span></span>

"If a man meet with his enemy, will he send him (let him go) in peace?"
This sentence is to be regarded as a question, which requires a negative
reply, and expresses the thought: When a man meets with an enemy, he
does not generally let him escape without injury. But thou hast acted
very differently towards me. This thought is easily supplied from the
context, and what follows attaches itself to this: "The Lord repay thee
good for what thou hast done to me this day."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 24:20</span></span>

This wish was expressed in perfect sincerity. David's behaviour towards
him had conquered for the moment the evil demon of his heart, and
completely altered his feelings. In this better state of mind he felt
impelled even to give utterance to these words, "I know that thou wilt
be king, and the sovereignty will have perpetuity in thy hand." Saul
could not prevent this conviction from forcing itself upon him, after
his own rejection and the failure of all that he attempted against
David; and it was this which drove him to persecute David whenever the
evil spirit had the upper hand in his soul. But now that better feelings
had arisen in his mind, he uttered it without envy, and merely asked
David to promise on oath that he would not cut off his descendants after
his death, and seek to exterminate his name from his father's house. A
name is exterminated when the whole of the descendants are destroyed, -
a thing of frequent occurrence in the East in connection with a change
of dynasties, and one which occurred again and again even in the kingdom
of the ten tribes (vid., [Kg1 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#028.md).,
[Sa1 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011).; 2 Kings 10.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 24:22</span></span>

When David had sworn this, Saul returned home. But David remained upon
the mountain heights, because he did not regard the passing change in
Saul's feelings as likely to continue. המּצוּדה (translated "the hold")
is used here to denote the mountainous part of the desert of Judah. It
is different in [Sa1 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#005.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 25](sa1025.md)

</div>
