<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1011)  [Next](sa1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 12:0</span></span>

Samuel's Address at the Renewal of the Monarchy - 1 Samuel 12

Samuel closed this solemn confirmation of Saul as king with an address
to all Israel, in which he handed over the office of judge, which he had
hitherto filled, to the king, who had been appointed by God and joyfully
recognised by the people. The good, however, which Israel expected from
the king depended entirely upon both the people and their king
maintaining that proper attitude towards the Lord with which the
prosperity of Israel was ever connected. This truth the prophet felt
impelled to impress most earnestly upon the hearts of all the people on
this occasion. To this end he reminded them, that neither he himself, in
the administration of his office, nor the Lord in His guidance of Israel
thus far, had given the people any reason for asking a king when the
Ammonites invaded the land ([Sa1
12:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)). Nevertheless the Lord had
given them a king, and would not withdraw His hand from them, if they
would only fear Him and confess their sin ([Sa1
12:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#013)). This address was then
confirmed by the Lord at Samuel's desire, through a miraculous sign
([Sa1 12:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016)); whereupon Samuel gave
to the people, who were terrified by the miracle and acknowledged their
sin, the comforting promise that the Lord would not forsake His people
for His great name's sake, and then closed his address with the
assurance of his continued intercession, and a renewed appeal to them to
serve the Lord with faithfulness ([Sa1
12:19-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#019)). With this address Samuel
laid down his office as judge, but without therefore ceasing as prophet
to represent the people before God, and to maintain the rights of God in
relation to the king. In this capacity he continued to support the king
with his advice, until he was compelled to announce his rejection on
account of his repeated rebellion against the commands of the Lord, and
to anoint David as his successor.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 12:1</span></span>

The time and place of the following address are not given. But it is
evident from the connection with the preceding chapter implied in the
expression ויּאמר, and still more from the introduction ([Sa1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001), [Sa1
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#002)) and the entire contents of the
address, that it was delivered on the renewal of the monarchy at Gilgal.

[Sa1 12:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#001)

Samuel starts with the fact, that he had given the people a king in
accordance with their own desire, who would now walk before them. הנּה
with the participle expresses what is happening, and will happen still.
לפני התהלּך must not be restricted to going at the head in war, but
signifies the general direction and government of the nation, which had
been in the hands of Samuel as judge before the election of Saul as
king. "And I have grown old and grey (שׂבתּי from שׂיב); and my sons,
behold, they are with you." With this allusion to his sons, Samuel
simply intended to confirm what he had said about his own age. By the
further remark, "and I have walked before you from my childhood unto
this day," he prepares the way for the following appeal to the people to
bear witness concerning his conduct in office.

[Sa1 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003)

"Bear witness against me before the Lord," i.e., looking up to the Lord,
the omnipotent and righteous God-king, "and before His anointed," the
visible administrator of His divine government, whether I have committed
any injustice in my office of judge, by appropriating another's
property, or by oppression and violence (רצץ, to pound or crush in
pieces, when used to denote an act of violence, is stronger than אשׁק,
with which it is connected here and in many other passages, e.g., [Deu
28:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#033); [Amo
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#001)), or by taking atonement money
(כּפר, redemption or atonement money, is used, as in [Exo
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#030) and [Num
35:31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#031), to denote a payment made by a
man to redeem himself from capital punishment), "so that I had covered
my eyes with it," viz., to exempt from punishment a man who was worthy
of death. The בּו, which is construed with העלים, is the בּ instrumenti,
and refers to כּפר; consequently it is not to be confounded with מן, "to
hide from," which would be quite unsuitable here. The thought is not
that the judge covers his eyes from the copher, that he may not see the
bribe, but that he covers his eyes with the money offered him as a
bribe, so as not to see and not to punish the crime committed.

[Sa1 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#004)

The people answered Samuel, that he had not done them any kind of
injustice.

[Sa1 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#005)

To confirm this declaration on the part of the people, he then called
Jehovah and His anointed as witnesses against the people, and they
accepted these witnesses. כּל־ישׂראל is the subject to ויּאמר; and the
Keri ויּאמרוּ, though more simple, is by no means necessary. Samuel
said, "Jehovah be witness against you," because with the declaration
which the people had made concerning Samuel's judicial labours they had
condemned themselves, inasmuch as they had thereby acknowledged on oath
that there was no ground for their dissatisfaction with Samuel's
administration, and consequently no well-founded reason for their
request for a king.

[Sa1 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#006)

But in order to bring the people to a still more thorough acknowledgment
of their sin, Samuel strengthened still more their assent to his solemn
appeal to God, as expressed in the words "He is witness," by saying,
"Jehovah (i.e., yea, the witness is Jehovah), who made Moses and Aaron,
and brought your fathers out of the land of Egypt." The context itself
is sufficient to show that the expression "is witness" is understood;
and there is no reason, therefore, to assume that the word has dropped
out of the text through a copyist's error. עשׂה, to make, in a moral and
historical sense, i.e., to make a person what he is to be; it has no
connection, therefore, with his physical birth, but simply relates to
his introduction upon the stage of history, like ποιεῖν, [Heb
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#002). But if Jehovah, who redeemed
Israel out of Egypt by the hands of Moses and Aaron, and exalted it into
His own nation, was witness of the unselfishness and impartiality of
Samuel's conduct in his office of judge, then Israel had grievously
sinned by demanding a king. In the person of Samuel they had rejected
Jehovah their God, who had given them their rulers (see [Sa1
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007)). Samuel proves this still further
to the people from the following history.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 12:7</span></span>

"And now come hither, and I will reason with you before the Lord with
regard to all the righteous acts which He has shown to you and your
fathers." צדקות, righteous acts, is the expression used to denote the
benefits which Jehovah had conferred upon His people, as being the
results of His covenant fidelity, or as acts which attested the
righteousness of the Lord in the fulfilment of the covenant grace which
He had promised to His people.

[Sa1 12:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#008)

The first proof of this was furnished by the deliverance of the children
of Israel out of Egypt, and their safe guidance into Canaan ("this
place" is the land of Canaan). The second was to be found in the
deliverance of the people out of the power of their foes, to whom the
Lord had been obliged to give them up on account of their apostasy from
Him, through the judges whom He had raised up for them, as often as they
turned to Him with penitence and cried to Him for help. Of the hostile
oppressions which overtook the Israelites during this period of the
judges, the following are singled out in [Sa1
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#009) : (1) that by Sisera, the
commander-in-chief of Hazor, i.e., that of the Canaanitish king Jabin of
Hazor ([Jdg 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#002).); (2) that of the
Philistines, by which we are to understand not so much the hostilities
of that nation described in [Jdg 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#031),
as the forty years' oppression mentioned in [Jdg
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#002) and [Jdg
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#001); and (3) the Moabitish oppression
under Eglon ([Jdg 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#012).). The first
half of [Jdg 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#010) agrees almost word
for word with [Jdg 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#010), except that,
according to [Jdg 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#006), the Ashtaroth
are added to the Baalim (see at [Sa1
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004) and [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013)). Of the judges whom God sent to
the people as deliverers, the following are named, viz., Jerubbaal (see
at [Jdg 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#032)), i.e., Gideon (Judg 6),
and Bedan, and Jephthah (see Judg 11), and Samuel. There is no judge
named Bedan mentioned either in the book of Judges or anywhere else. The
name Bedan only occurs again in [Ch1
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1007.htm#017), among the descendants of Machir
the Manassite: consequently some of the commentators suppose Jair of
Gilead to be the judge intended. But such a supposition is perfectly
arbitrary, as it is not rendered probable by any identity in the two
names, and Jair is not described as having delivered Israel from any
hostile oppression. Moreover, it is extremely improbable that Samuel
should have mentioned a judge here, who had been passed over in the book
of Judges on account of his comparative insignificance. There is also
just as little ground for rendering Bedan as an appellative, e.g., the
Danite (ben-Dan), as Kimchi suggests, or corpulentus as Bttcher
maintains, and so connecting the name with Samson. There is no other
course left, therefore, than to regard Bedan as an old copyist's error
for Barak (Judg 4), as the lxx, Syriac, and Arabic have done, - a
conclusion which is favoured by the circumstance that Barak was one of
the most celebrated of the judges, and is placed by the side of Gideon
and Jephthah in [Heb 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#032). The
Syriac, Arabic, and one Greek MS (see Kennicott in the Addenda to his
Dissert. Gener.), have the name of Samson instead of Samuel. But as the
lxx, Chald., and Vulg. all agree with the Hebrew text, there is no
critical ground for rejecting Samuel, the more especially as the
objection raised to it, viz., that Samuel would not have mentioned
himself, is far too trivial to overthrow the reading supported by the
most ancient versions; and the assertion made by Thenius, that Samuel
does not come down to his own times until the following verse, is
altogether unfounded. Samuel could very well class himself with the
deliverers of Israel, for the simple reason that it was by him that the
people were delivered from the forty years' tyranny of the Philistines,
whilst Samson merely commenced their deliverance and did not bring it to
completion. Samuel appears to have deliberately mentioned his own name
along with those of the other judges who were sent by God, that he might
show the people in the most striking manner ([Sa1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012)) that they had no reason
whatever for saying to him, "Nay, but a king shall reign over us," as
soon as the Ammonites invaded Gilead. "As Jehovah your God is your
king," i.e., has ever proved himself to be your King by sending judges
to deliver you.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 12:13</span></span>

After the prophet had thus held up before the people their sin against
the Lord, he bade them still further consider, that the king would only
procure for them the anticipated deliverance if they would fear the
Lord, and give up their rebellion against God.

[Sa1 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#013)

"But now behold the king whom ye have chosen, whom ye have asked for!
behold, Jehovah hath set a king over you." By the second והנּה, the
thought is brought out still more strongly, that Jehovah had fulfilled
the desire of the people. Although the request of the people had been an
act of hostility to God, yet Jehovah had fulfilled it. The word בּהרתּם,
relating to the choice by lot ([Sa1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017).), is placed before שׁאלתּם
אשׁר, to show that the demand was the strongest act that the people
could perform. They had not only chosen the king with the consent or by
the direction of Samuel; they had even demanded a king of their own
self-will.

[Sa1 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#014)

Still, since the Lord had given them a king, the further welfare of the
nation would depend upon whether they would follow the Lord from that
time forward, or whether they would rebel against Him again. "If ye will
only fear the Lord, and serve Him, ... and ye as well as the king who
rules over you will be after Jehovah your God." אם, in the sense of
modo, if only, does not require any apodosis, as it is virtually
equivalent to the wish, "O that ye would only!" for which אם with the
imperfect is commonly used (vid., [Kg2
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#019); [Pro
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011), etc.; and Ewald, 329, b.).
There is also nothing to be supplied to יהוה אחר ... והיתם, since אחר
היה, to be after or behind a person, is good Hebrew, and is frequently
met with, particularly in the sense of attaching one's self to the king,
or holding to him (vid., [Sa2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#010);
[Kg1 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#020); [Kg1
16:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#021)). This meaning is also at the
foundation of the present passage, as Jehovah was the God-king of
Israel.

[Sa1 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#015)

"But if ye do not hearken to the voice of Jehovah, and strive against
His commandment, the hand of Jehovah will be heavy upon you, as upon
your fathers." ו in the sense of as, i.e., used in a comparative sense,
is most frequently placed before whole sentences (see Ewald, 340, b.);
and the use of it here may be explained, on the ground that בּאבתיכם
contains the force of an entire sentence: "as it was upon your fathers."
The allusion to the fathers is very suitable here, because the people
were looking to the king for the removal of all the calamities, which
had fallen upon them from time immemorial. The paraphrase of this word,
which is adopted in the Septuagint, ἐπὶ τὸν βασιλέα ὑμῶν, is a very
unhappy conjecture, although Thenius proposes to alter the text to suit
it.

[Sa1 12:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#016)

In order to give still greater emphasis to his words, and to secure
their lasting, salutary effect upon the people, Samuel added still
further: Even now ye may see that ye have acted very wickedly in the
sight of Jehovah, in demanding a king. This chain of thought is very
clearly indicated by the words גּם־עתּה, "yea, even now." "Even now come
hither, and see this great thing which Jehovah does before your eyes."
The words גּם־עתּה, which are placed first, belong, so far as the sense
is concerned, to את־הד ראוּ; and התיצּבוּ ("place yourselves," i.e.,
make yourselves ready) is merely inserted between, to fix the attention
of the people more closely upon the following miracle, as an event of
great importance, and one which they ought to lay to heart. "Is it not
now wheat harvest? I will call to Jehovah, that He may give thunder
(קלוה, as in [Exo 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023), etc.) and
rain. Then perceive and see, that the evil is great which ye have done
in the eyes of Jehovah, to demand a king." The wheat harvest occurs in
Palestine between the middle of May and the middle of June (see by Bibl.
Arch. i. 118). And during this time it scarcely ever rains. Thus Jerome
affirms (ad Am. c. 4): "Nunquam in fine mensis Junii aut in Julio in his
provinciis maximeque in Judaea pluvias vidimus." And Robinson also says
in his Palestine (ii. p. 98): "In ordinary seasons, from the cessation
of the showers in spring until their commencement in October and
November, rain never falls, and the sky is usually serene" (see my Arch.
i. 10). So that when God sent thunder and rain on that day in answer to
Samuel's appeal to him, this was a miracle of divine omnipotence,
intended to show to the people that the judgments of God might fall upon
the sinners at any time. Thunderings, as "the voice of God" ([Exo
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#028)), are harbingers of judgment.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 12:18</span></span>

This miracle therefore inspired the people with a salutary terror. "All
the people greatly feared the Lord and Samuel," and entreated the
prophet, "Pray for thy servants to the Lord thy God, that we die not,
because we have added to all our sins the evil thing, to ask us a king."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 12:20</span></span>

Samuel thereupon announced to them first of all, that the Lord would not
forsake His people for His great name's sake, if they would only serve
Him with uprightness. In order, however, to give no encouragement to any
false trust in the covenant faithfulness of the Lord, after the
comforting words, "Fear not," he told them again very decidedly that
they had done wrong, but that now they were not to turn away from the
Lord, but to serve Him with all their heart, and not go after vain
idols. To strengthen this admonition, he repeats the תּסוּרוּ לא in [Sa1
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#021), with the explanation, that in
turning from the Lord they would fall away to idols, which could not
bring them either help or deliverance. To the כּי after תּסוּרוּ the
same verb must be supplied from the context: "Do not turn aside (from
the Lord), for (ye turn aside) after that which is vain." התּהוּ, the
vain, worthless thing, signifies the false gods. This will explain the
construction with a plural: "which do not profit and do not save,
because they are emptiness" (tohu), i.e., worthless beings (elilim, [Lev
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#004); cf. [Isa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009) and [Jer
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#019)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 12:22</span></span>

"For (כּי gives the reason for the main thought of the previous verse,
'Fear not, but serve the Lord,' etc.) the Lord will not forsake His
people for His great name's sake; for it hath pleased the Lord (for
הואיל, see at [Deu 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#005)) to make you
His people." The emphasis lies upon His. This the Israelites could only
be, when they proved themselves to be the people of God, by serving
Jehovah with all their heart. "For His great name's sake," i.e., for the
great name which He had acquired in the sight of all the nations, by the
marvellous guidance of Israel thus far, to preserve it against
misapprehension and blasphemy (see at [Jos
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#009)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 12:23</span></span>

Samuel then promised the people his constant intercession: "Far be it
from me to sin against the Lord, that I should cease to pray for you,
and to instruct you in the good and right way," i.e., to work as prophet
for your good. "In this he sets a glorious example to all rulers,
showing them that they should not be led astray by the ingratitude of
their subordinates or subjects, and give up on that account all interest
in their welfare, but should rather persevere all the more in their
anxiety for them" (Berleb. Bible).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 12:24</span></span>

Lastly, he repeats once more his admonition, that they would continue
stedfast in the fear of God, threatening at the same time the
destruction of both king and people if they should do wrong (on [Sa1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#024), see [Sa1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003) and [Jos
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014), where the form יראוּ is also
found). "For see what great things He has done for you" (shown to you),
not by causing it to thunder and rain at Samuel's prayer, but by giving
them a king. עם הגדּיל, as in [Gen
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#019).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa1013)

</div>
