<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1022)  [Next](sa1024) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 23:0</span></span>

David Delivers Keilah. He Is Betrayed by the Ziphites, and Marvellously
Saved from Saul in the Desert of Maon - 1 Samuel 23

The following events show how, on the one hand, the Lord gave pledges to
His servant David that he would eventually become king, but yet on the
other hand plunged him into deeper and deeper trouble, that He might
refine him and train him to be a king after His own heart. Saul's rage
against the priests at Nob not only drove the high priest into David's
camp, but procured for David the help of the "light and right" of the
high priest in all his undertakings. Moreover, after the prophet Gad had
called David back to Judah, an attack of the Philistines upon Keilah
furnished him with the opportunity to show himself to the people as
their deliverer. And although this enterprise of his exposed him to
fresh persecutions on the part of Saul, who was thirsting for revenge,
he experienced in connection therewith not only the renewal of
Jonathan's friendship on this occasion, but a marvellous interposition
on the part of the faithful covenant God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 23:1</span></span>

[Sa1 23:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001)

Rescue of Keilah. - After his return to the mountains of Judah, David
received intelligence that Philistines, i.e., a marauding company of
these enemies of Israel, were fighting against Keilah, and plundering
the threshing-floors, upon which the corn that had been reaped was lying
ready for threshing. Keilah belonged to the towns of the lowlands of
Judah ([Jos 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044)); and although it
has not yet been discovered, was certainly very close to the Philistian
frontier.

[Sa1 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#002)

After receiving this information, David inquired of the Lord (through
the Urim and Thummim of the high priest) whether he should go and smite
these Philistines, and received an affirmative answer.

[Sa1 23:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#003)

But his men said to him, "Behold, here in Judah we are in fear (i.e.,
are not safe from Saul's pursuit); how shall we go to Keilah against the
ranks of the Philistines?" In order, therefore, to infuse courage into
them, he inquired of the Lord again, and received the assurance from
God, "I will give the Philistines into thy hand." He then proceeded with
his men, fought against the Philistines, drove off their cattle,
inflicted a severe defeat upon them, and thus delivered the inhabitants
of Keilah. In [Sa1 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006) a
supplementary remark is added in explanation of the expression "inquired
of the Lord," to the effect that, when Abiathar fled to David to Keilah,
the ephod had come to him. The words "to David to Keilah" are not to be
understood as signifying that Abiathar did not come to David till he was
in Keilah, but that when he fled after David ([Sa1
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020)), he met with him as he was
already preparing for the march of Keilah, and immediately proceeded
with him thither. For whilst it is not stated in [Sa1
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020) that Abiathar came to David in
the wood of Hareth, but the place of meeting is left indefinite, the
fact that David had already inquired of Jehovah (i.e., through the
oracle of the high priest) with reference to the march to Keilah,
compels us to assume that Abiathar had come to him before he left the
mountains for Keilah. So that the brief expression "to David to Keilah,"
which is left indefinite because of its brevity, must be interpreted in
accordance with this fact.

[Sa1 23:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#007)

As soon as Saul received intelligence of David's march to Keilah, he
said, "God has rejected him (and delivered him) into my hand." נכּר does
not mean simply to look at, but also to find strange, and treat as
strange, and then absolutely to reject ([Jer
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#004), as in the Arabic in the fourth
conjugation). This is the meaning here, where the construction with
בּידי is to be understood as a pregnant expression: "rejection and
delivered into my hand" (vid., Ges. Lex. s. v.). The early translators
have rendered it quite correctly according to the sense מכר, πέπρακεν,
tradidit, without there being any reason to suppose that they read מכר
instead of נכּר. "For he hath shut himself in, to come (= coming, or by
coming) into a city with gates and bolts."

[Sa1 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#008)

He therefore called all the people (i.e., men of war) together to war,
to go down to Keilah, and to besiege David and his men.

[Sa1 23:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009)

But David heard that Saul was preparing mischief against him (lit.
forging, החרישׁ, from הרשׁ; [Pro 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#029);
[Pro 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#014), etc.), and he inquired
through the oracle of the high priest whether the inhabitants of Keilah
would deliver him up to Saul, and whether Saul would come down; and as
both questions were answered in the affirmative, he departed from the
city with his six hundred men, before Saul carried out his plan. It is
evident from [Sa1 23:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009), that when
the will of God was sought through the Urim and Thummim, the person
making the inquiry placed the matter before God in prayer, and received
an answer; but always to one particular question. For when David had
asked the two questions given in [Sa1
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#011), he received the answer to the
second question only, and had to ask the first again ([Sa1
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#012)).

[Sa1 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#013)

"They went whithersoever they could go" (lit. "they wandered about where
they wandered about"), i.e., wherever they could go without danger.

[Sa1 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014)

David retreated into the desert (of Judah), to the mountain heights
(that were to be found there), and remained on the mountains in the
desert of Ziph. The "desert of Judah" is the desert tract between the
mountains of Judah and the Dead Sea, in its whole extent, from the
northern boundary of the tribe of Judah to the Wady Fikreh in the south
(see at [Jos 15:61](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#061)). Certain portions
of this desert, however, received different names of their own,
according to the names of different towns on the border of the mountains
and desert. The desert of Ziph was that portion of the desert of Judah
which was near to and surrounded the town of Ziph, the name of which has
been retained in the ruins of Tell Zif, an hour and three-quarters to
the south-east of Hebron (see at [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055)).

[Sa1 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014). "And Saul sought him all
the days, but God delivered him not into his hand." This is a general
remark, intended to introduce the accounts which follow, of the various
attempts made by Saul to get David into his power. "All the days," i.e.,
as long as Saul lived.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 23:15</span></span>

David in the Deserts of Ziph and Maon. - The history of David's
persecution by Saul is introduced in [Sa1
23:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#015), with the account of an
attempt made by the noble-minded prince Jonathan, in a private interview
with his friend David, to renew his bond of friendship with him, and
strengthen David by his friendly words for the sufferings that yet
awaited him. [Sa1 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#015), [Sa1
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#016) are to be connected together so
as to form one period: "When David saw that Saul was come out ... and
David was in the desert of Ziph, Jonathan rose up and went to David into
the wood." חרשׁה, from חרשׁ, with ה paragogic, signifies a wood or
thicket; here, however, it is probably a proper name for a district in
the desert of Ziph that was overgrown with wood or bushes, and where
David was stopping at that time. "There is no trace of this wood now.
The land lost its ornament of trees centuries ago through the desolating
hand of man" (v. de Velde). "And strengthened his hand in God," i.e.,
strengthened his heart, not by supplies, or by money, or any subsidy of
that kind, but by consolation drawn from his innocence, and the promises
of God (vid., [Jdg 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#024); [Jer
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#014)). "Fear not," said Jonathan to
him, "for the hand of Saul my father will not reach thee; and thou wilt
become king over Israel, and I will be the second to thee; and Saul my
father also knows that it is so." Even though Jonathan had heard nothing
from David about his anointing, he could learn from David's course thus
far, and from his own father's conduct, that David would not be
overcome, but would possess the sovereignty after the death of Saul.
Jonathan expresses here, as his firm conviction, what he has intimated
once before, in [Sa1 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#013).; and with
the most loving self-denial entreats David, when he shall be king, to
let him occupy the second place in the kingdom. It by no means follows
from the last words ("Saul my father knoweth"), that Saul had received
distinct information concerning the anointing of David, and his divine
calling to be king. The words merely contain the thought, he also sees
that it will come. The assurance of this must have forced itself
involuntarily upon the mind of Saul, both from his own rejection, as
foretold by Samuel, and also from the marvellous success of David in all
his undertakings.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 23:18</span></span>

After these encouraging words, they two made a covenant before Jehovah:
i.e., they renewed the covenant which they had already made by another
solemn oath; after which Jonathan returned home, but David remained in
the wood.

The treachery of the Ziphites forms a striking contrast to Jonathan's
treatment of David. They went up to Gibeah to betray to Saul the fact
that David was concealed in the wood upon their mountain heights, and
indeed "upon the hill Hachilah, which lies to the south of the waste."
The hill of Ziph is a flattened hill standing by itself, of about a
hundred feet in height. "There is no spot from which you can obtain a
better view of David's wanderings backwards and forwards in the desert
than from the hill of Ziph, which affords a true panorama. The Ziphites
could see David and his men moving to and fro in the mountains of the
desert of Ziph, and could also perceive how he showed himself in the
distance upon the hill Hachilah on the south side of Ziph (which lies to
the right by the desert); whereupon they sent as quickly as possible to
Saul, and betrayed to him the hiding-place of his enemy" (v. de Velde,
ii. pp. 104-5). Jeshimon does not refer here to the waste land on the
north-eastern coast of the Dead Sea, as in [Num
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#020); [Num
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#028), but to the western side of that
sea, which is also desert.

[Sa1 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#020) reads literally thus: "And
now, according to all the desire of thy soul, O king, to come down (from
Gibeah, which stood upon higher ground), come down, and it is in us to
deliver him (David) into the hand of the king."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 23:21</span></span>

For this treachery Saul blessed them: "Be blessed of the Lord, that ye
have compassion upon me." In his evil conscience he suspected David of
seeking to become his murderer, and therefore thanked God in his
delusion that the Ziphites had had compassion upon him, and shown him
David's hiding-place.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 23:22</span></span>

In his anxiety, however, lest David should escape him after all, he
charged them, "Go, and give still further heed (הכין without לב, as in
[Jdg 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#006)), and reconnoitre and look
at his place where his foot cometh (this simply serves as a more precise
definition of the nominal suffix in מקומו, his place), who hath seen him
there (sc., let them inquire into this, that they may not be deceived by
uncertain or false reports): for it is told me that he dealeth very
subtilly."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 23:23</span></span>

They were to search him out in every corner (the object to דּעוּ must be
supplied from the context). "And come ye again to me with the certainty
(i.e., when you have got some certain intelligence concerning his
hiding-place), that I may go with you; and if he is in the land, I will
search him out among all the thousands (i.e., families) of Judah."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 23:24</span></span>

With this answer the Ziphites arose and "went to Ziph before Saul" (who
would speedily follow with his warriors); but David had gone farther in
the meantime, and was with his men "in the desert of Maon, in the steppe
to the south of the wilderness." Maon, now Man, is about three hours and
three-quarters S.S.E. of Hebron (see at [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055)), and therefore only two hours
from Ziph, from which it is visible. "The table-land appears to
terminate here; nevertheless the principal ridge of the southern
mountains runs for a considerable distance towards the south-west,
whereas towards the south-east the land falls off more and more into a
lower table-land." This is the Arabah or steppe on the right of the
wilderness (v. de Velde, ii. pp. 107-8).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 23:25</span></span>

Having been informed of the arrival of Saul and his men (warriors),
David went down the rock, and remained in the desert of Maon. "The rock"
is probably the conical mountain of Main (Maon), the top of which is now
surrounded with ruins, probably remains of a tower (Robinson, Pal. ii.
p. 194), as the rock from which David came down can only have been the
mountain ([Sa1 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026)), along one side
of which David went with his men whilst Saul and his warriors went on
the other, namely when Saul pursued him into the desert of Maon.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 23:26</span></span>

"And David was anxiously concerned to escape from Saul, and Saul and his
men were encircling David and his men to seize them; but a messenger
came to Saul ... . Then Saul turned from pursuing David." The two
clauses, "for Saul and his men" ([Sa1
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026)), and "there came a messenger"
([Sa1 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#027)), are the circumstantial
clauses by which the situation is more clearly defined: the apodosis to
דּוד ויהי does not follow till ויּשׁב in [Sa1
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#028). The apodosis cannot begin with
וּמלאך because the verb does not stand at the head. David had thus
almost inextricably fallen into the hands of Saul; but God saved him by
the fact that at that very moment a messenger arrived with the
intelligence, "Hasten and go (come), for Philistines have fallen into
the land," and thus called Saul away from any further pursuit of David.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa1 23:28</span></span>

From this occurrence the place received the name of Sela-hammahlekoth,
"rock of smoothnesses," i.e., of slipping away or escaping, from חלק, in
the sense of being smooth. This explanation is at any rate better
supported than "rock of divisions, i.e., the rock at which Saul and
David were separated" (Clericus), since חלק does not mean to separate.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 24](sa1024)

</div>
