<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1009)  [Next](sa1011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 10:1</span></span>

Samuel then took the oil-flask, poured it upon his (Saul's) head, kissed
him, and said, "Hath not Jehovah (equivalent to 'Jehovah assuredly
hath') anointed thee to be captain over His inheritance?" הלוא, as an
expression of lively assurance, receives the force of an independent
clause through the following כּי, "is it not so?" i.e., "yea, it is so,
that," etc., just as it does before אם in [Gen
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#007). נחלתו, (His (Jehovah's)
possession, was the nation of Israel, which Jehovah had acquired as the
people of His own possession through their deliverance out of Egypt
([Deu 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020); [Deu
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#026), etc.). Anointing with oil as a
symbol of endowment with the Spirit of God; as the oil itself, by virtue
of the strength which it gives to the vital spirits, was a symbol of the
Spirit of God as the principle of divine and spiritual power (see at
[Lev 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012)). Hitherto there had been no
other anointing among the people of God than that of the priests and
sanctuary ([Exo 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023).; [Lev
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010).). When Saul, therefore, was
consecrated as king by anointing, the monarchy was inaugurated as a
divine institution, standing on a par with the priesthood; through which
henceforth the Lord would also bestow upon His people the gifts of His
Spirit for the building up of His kingdom. As the priests were
consecrated by anointing to be the media of the ethical blessings of
divine grace for Israel, so the king was consecrated by anointing to be
the vehicle and medium of all the blessings of grace which the Lord, as
the God-king, would confer upon His people through the institution of a
civil government. Through this anointing, which was performed by Samuel
under the direction of God, the king was set apart from the rest of the
nation as "anointed of the Lord" (cf. [Sa1
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#003), [Sa1
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#005), etc.), and sanctified as the
נגיד, i.e., its captain, its leader and commander. Kissing was probably
not a sign of homage or reverence towards the anointed of the Lord, so
much as "a kiss of affection, with which the grace of God itself was
sealed" (Seb. Schmidt).

(Note: The lxx and Vulgate have expanded the second half of this verse
by a considerable addition, which reads as follows in the lxx: οὐχὶ
κέχρικέ σε κύριος εἰς ἄρχοντα ἐπὶ τὸν λαὸν αὐτοῦ ἐπὶ Ἰσραήλ καὶ σὺ
ἄρξεις ἐν λαῷ κυρίου, καὶ σὺ σώσεις αὐτὸν ἐκ χειρὸς ἐχθρῶν αὐτοῦ
κυκλόθεν, καὶ τοῦτό σοι τὸ σημεῖον ὅτι ἔχρισέ σε κύριος ἐπὶ κληρονομίαν
αὐτοῦ εἰς ἄρχοντα. And in the Vulgate: Ecce, unxit te Dominus super
haereditatem suam in principem, et liberabis populum suum de manibus
inimicorum ejus, qui in circuitu ejus sunt. Et hoc tibi signum, quia
unxit te Deus in principem. A comparison of these two texts will show
that the lxx interpolated their addition between הלוא and כּי, as the
last clause, ὅτι ἔχρισέ σε κύριος ἐπὶ κληρονομίαν αυτοῦ εἰς ἄρχοντα, is
a verbal translation of יהוה משׁחך כּי לנגיד על־נחלתו. In the Vulgate,
on the other hand, the first clause, ecce unxit - in principem,
corresponds word for word with the Hebrew text, from which we may see
that Jerome translated our present Hebrew text; and the addition, et
liberabis, etc., was interpolated into the Vulgate from the Itala. The
text of the Septuagint is nothing more than a gloss formed from [Sa1
9:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016), which the translator thought
necessary, partly because he could not clearly see the force of כּי
הלוא, but more especially because he could not explain the fact that
Samuel speaks to Saul of signs, without having announced them to him as
such. But the author of the gloss has overlooked the fact that Samuel
does not give Saul a σημεῖον, but three σημεῖα, and describes the object
of them in [Sa1 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007) as being the
following, namely, that Saul would learn when they took place what he
had to do, for Jehovah was with him, and not that they would prove that
the Lord had anointed him to be captain.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 10:2</span></span>

To confirm the consecration of Saul as king over Israel, which had been
effected through the anointing, Samuel gave him three more signs which
would occur on his journey home, and would be a pledge to him that
Jehovah would accompany his undertakings with His divine help, and
practically accredit him as His anointed. These signs, therefore, stand
in the closest relation to the calling conveyed to Saul through his
anointing.

[Sa1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002)

The first sign: "When thou goest away from me to-day (i.e., now), thou
wilst meet two men at Rachel's sepulchre, on the border of Benjamin at
Zelzah; and they will say unto thee, The asses of thy father, which thou
wentest to seek, are found. Behold, they father hath given up העתנות
את־דּברי, the words (i.e., talking) about the asses, and troubleth
himself about you, saying, What shall I do about my son?" According to
[Gen 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#016)., Rachel's sepulchre was on
the way from Bethel to Bethlehem, only a short distance from the latter
place, and therefore undoubtedly on the spot which tradition has
assigned to it since the time of Jerome, viz., on the site of the Kubbet
Rahil, half an hour to the north-west of Bethlehem, on the left of the
road to Jerusalem, about an hour and a half from the city (see at [Gen
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#020)). This suits the passage before
us very well, if we give up the groundless assumption that Saul came to
Samuel at Ramah and was anointed by him there, and assume that the place
of meeting, which is not more fully defined in 1 Samuel 9, was situated
to the south-west of Bethlehem.

(Note: As the account of Saul's meeting with Samuel, in 1 Samuel 9, when
properly understood, is not at variance with the tradition concerning
the situation of Rachel's tomb, and the passage before us neither
requires us on the one had to understand the Ephratah of [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019) and [Gen
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#007) as a different place from
Bethlehem, and erase "that is Bethlehem" from both passages as a gloss
that has crept into the text, and then invent an Ephratah in the
neighbourhood of Bethel between Benjamin and Ephraim, as Thenius does,
nor warrants us on the other hand in transferring Rachel's tomb to the
neighbourhood of Bethel, in opposition to the ordinary tradition, as
Kurtz proposes; so the words of [Jer
31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015), "A voice was heard in Ramah,
lamentation and bitter weeping, Rachel weeping for her children," etc.,
furnish no evident that Rachel's tomb was at Ramah (i.e., er Rm). "For
here (in the cycle of prophecy concerning the restoration of all Israel,
Jer 30-33) Rachel's weeping is occasioned by the fact of the exiles of
Benjamin having assembled together in Ramah ([Jer
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#001)), without there being any reason
why Rachel's tomb should be sought for in the neighbourhood of this
Ramah" (Delitzsch on [Gen 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#020)).)

The expression "in the border of Benjamin" is not at variance with this.
It is true that Kubbet Rahil is about an hour and a quarter from the
southern boundary of Benjamin, which ran past the Rogel spring, through
the valley of Ben-hinnom ([Jos 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016));
but the expression קבוּרה עם must not be so pressed as to be restricted
to the actual site of the grave, since otherwise the further definition
"at Zelzah" would be superfluous, as Rachel's tomb was unquestionably a
well-known locality at that time. If we suppose the place called Zelzah,
the situation of which has not yet been discovered,

(Note: Ewald (Gesch. iii. p. 29) supposes Zelzah to be unsuitable to the
context, if taken as the name of a place, and therefore follows the
ἁλλομένους μεγάλα of the lxx, and renders the word "in great haste;" but
he has neither given any reason why the name of a place is unsuitable
here, nor considered that the Septuagint rendering is merely
conjectural, and has nothing further to support it than the fact that
the translators rendered צלח ἐφήλατο, "he sprang upon him," in [Sa1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006) and [Sa1
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#006), and took צלצח to be an emphatic
form of צלח.)

to have been about mid-way between Rachel's tomb and the Rogel spring,
Samuel could very well describe the spot where Saul would meet the two
men in the way that he has done. This sign, by confirming the
information which Samuel had given to Saul with reference to the asses,
was to furnish him with a practical proof that what Samuel had said to
him with regard to the monarchy would quite as certainly come to pass,
and therefore not only to deliver him from all anxiety as to the lost
animals of his father, but also to direct his thoughts to the higher
destiny to which God had called him through Samuel's anointing.

[Sa1 10:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#003)

The second sign ([Sa1 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#003), [Sa1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#004)): "Then thou shalt go on forward
from thence, and thou shalt come to the terebinth of Tabor; and there
shall meet thee there three men going up to God to Bethel, carrying one
three kinds, one three loaves of bread, and one a bottle of wine. They
will ask thee after thy welfare, and give thee two loaves; receive them
at their hands." The terebinth of Tabor is not mentioned anywhere else,
and nothing further can be determined concerning it, than that it stood
by the road leading from Rachel's tomb to Gibeah.

(Note: The opinion expressed by Ewald and Thenius, that Deborah's
mourning oak ([Gen 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#008)) is intended,
and that Tabor is either a different form of Deborah, or that Tabor
should be altered into Deborah, has no foundation to rest upon; for the
fact that the oak referred to stood below (i.e., to the south of)
Bethel, and the three men whom Saul was to meet at the terebinth of
Tabor were going to Bethel, by no means establishes the identity of the
two, as their going up to Bethel does not prove that they were already
in the neighbourhood of Bethel. Moreover, the Deborah oak was on the
north of Gibeah, whereas Saul met the three men between Rachel's tomb
and Gibeah, i.e., to the south of Gibeah.)

The fact that the three men were going up to God at Bethel, shows that
there was still a place of sacrifice consecrated to the Lord at Bethel,
where Abraham and Jacob had erected altars to the Lord who had appeared
to them there ([Gen 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008); [Gen
13:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#003); [Gen
28:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#018); [Gen
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#007)); for the kids and loaves and
wine were sacrificial gifts which they were about to offer. לשׁלום שׁאל,
to ask after one's welfare, i.e., to greet in a friendly manner (cf.
[Jdg 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#015); [Gen
43:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#027)). The meaning of this double
sign consisted in the fact that these men gave Saul two loaves from
their sacrificial offerings. In this he was to discern a homage paid to
the anointed of the Lord; and he was therefore to accept the gift in
this sense at their hand.

[Sa1 10:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005)

The third sign ([Sa1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005), [Sa1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006)) Saul was to receive at Gibeah of
God, where posts of the Philistines were stationed. Gibeath ha-Elohim is
not an appellative, signifying a high place of God, i.e., a high place
dedicated to God, but a proper name referring to Gibeah of Benjamin, the
native place of Saul, which was called Gibeah of Saul from the time when
Saul resided there as king ([Sa1 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#016)
: cf. [Sa1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004); [Sa1
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#034); [Sa2
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#006); [Isa
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#029)). This is very apparent from the
fact that, according to [Sa1 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010).,
all the people of Gibeah had known Saul of old, and therefore could not
comprehend how he had all at once come to be among the prophets. The
name Gibeah of God is here given to the town on account of a bamah or
sacrificial height which rose within or near the town ([Sa1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#013)), and which may possibly have
been renowned above other such heights, as the seat of a society of
prophets. פלשׁתּים נצבי are not bailiffs of the Philistines, still less
columns erected as signs of their supremacy (Thenius), but military
posts of the Philistines, as [Sa1
13:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003), and [Sa2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006), [Sa2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014), clearly show. The allusion here
to the posts of the Philistines at Gibeah is connected with what was
about to happen to Saul there. At the place where the Philistines, those
severe oppressors of Israel, had set up military posts, the Spirit of
God was to come upon Saul, and endow him with the divine power that was
required for his regal office. "And it shall come to pass, when thou
comest to the town there, thou wilt light upon a company of prophets
coming down from the high place (bamah, the sacrificial height), before
them lyre and tambourin, and flute, and harp, and they prophesying." חבל
signifies a rope or cord, then a band or company of men. It does not
follow that because this band of prophets was coming down from the high
place, the high place at Gibeah must have been the seat of a school of
the prophets. They might have been upon a pilgrimage to Gibeah. The fact
that they were preceded by musicians playing, seems to indicate a festal
procession. Nebel and Kinnor are stringed instruments which were used
after David's time in connection with the psalmody of divine worship
([Ch1 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#008); [Ch1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#020); [Psa
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002); [Psa
43:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#004), etc.). The nebel was an
instrument resembling a lyre, the kinnor was more like a guitar than a
harp. Toph: the tambourin, which was played by Miriam at the Red Sea
([Exo 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020)). Chalil: the flute; see
my Bibl. Archaeology, ii. 137. By the prophesying of these prophets we
are to understand an ecstatic utterance of religious feelings to the
praise of God, as in the case of the seventy elders in the time of Moses
([Num 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#025)). Whether it took the form
of a song or of an enthusiastic discourse, cannot be determined; in any
case it was connected with a very energetic action indicative of the
highest state of mental excitement. (For further remarks on these
societies of prophets, see at [Sa1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#018).)

[Sa1 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006)

"And the Spirit of Jehovah will come upon thee, and thou wilt prophesy
with them, and be changed into another man." "Ecstatic states," says
Tholuck (die Propheten, p. 53), "have something infectious about them.
The excitement spreads involuntarily, as in the American revivals and
the preaching mania in Sweden, even to persons in whose state of mind
there is no affinity with anything of the kind." But in the instance
before us there was something more than psychical infection. The Spirit
of Jehovah, which manifested itself in the prophesying of the prophets,
was to pass over to Saul, so that he would prophesy along with them
(התנבּית formed like a verb הל for התנבאת; so again in [Sa1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#013)), and was entirely to transform
him. This transformation is not to be regarded indeed as regeneration in
the Christian sense, but as a change resembling regeneration, which
affected the entire disposition of mind, and by which Saul was lifted
out of his former modes of thought and feeling, which were confined
within a narrow earthly sphere, into the far higher sphere of his new
royal calling, was filled with kingly thoughts in relation to the
service of God, and received "another heart" ([Sa1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009)). Heart is used in the ordinary
scriptural sense, as the centre of the whole mental and psychical life
of will, desire, thought, perception, and feeling (see Delitzsch, Bibl.
Psychol. pp. 248ff., ed. 2). Through this sign his anointing as king was
to be inwardly sealed.

[Sa1 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007)

"When these signs are come unto thee (the Kethibh תבאינה is to be read
תּבאינה, as in [Psa 45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016) and [Est
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#004); and the Keri תּבאנה is a needless
emendation), do to thee what thy hand findeth, i.e., act according to
the circumstances (for this formula, see [Jdg
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#033)); for God will be with thee." The
occurrence of the signs mentioned was to assure him of the certainty
that God would assist him in all that he undertook as king. The first
opportunity for action was afforded him by the Ammonite Nahash, who
besieged Jabesh-gilead ([Sa1 11:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 10:8</span></span>

In conclusion, Samuel gave him an important hint with regard to his
future attitude: "And goest thou before me down to Gilgal; and, behold,
I am coming down to thee, to offer burnt-offerings, and to sacrifice
peace-offerings: thou shalt wait seven days, till I come to thee, that I
may show thee what thou art to do." The infinitive clause וגו להעלות is
undoubtedly dependent upon the main clause וירדתּ, and not upon the
circumstantial clause which is introduced as a parenthesis. The thought
therefore is the following: If Saul went down to Gilgal to offer
sacrifice there, he was to wait till Samuel arrived. The construction of
the main clause itself, however, is doubtful, since, grammatically
considered, ירדתּ can either be a continuation of the imperative עשׂה
([Sa1 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007)), or can be regarded as
independent, and in fact conditional. The latter view, according to
which ירדתּ supposes his going down as a possible thing that may take
place at a future time, is the one required by the circumstantial clause
which follows, and which is introduced by והנּה; for if וירדתּ were
intended to be a continuation of the imperative which precedes it, so
that Samuel commanded Saul to go down to Gilgal before him, he would
have simply announced his coming, that is to say, he would either have
said וירדתּי or ארד ואני. The circumstantial clause "and behold I am
coming down to thee" evidently presupposes Saul's going down as a
possible occurrence, in the event of which Samuel prescribes the course
he is to pursue. But the conditional interpretation of וירדתּ is still
more decidedly required by the context. For instance, when Samuel said
to Saul that after the occurrence of the three signs he was to do what
came to his hand, he could hardly command him immediately afterwards to
go to Gilgal, since the performance of what came to his hand might
prevent him from going to Gilgal. If, however, Samuel meant that after
Saul had finished what came to his hand he was to go down to Gilgal, he
would have said, "And after thou hast done this, go down to Gilgal,"
etc. But as he does not express himself in this manner, he can only have
referred to Saul's going to Gilgal as an occurrence which, as he
foresaw, would take place at some time or other. And to Saul himself
this must not only have presented itself as a possible occurrence, but
under the existing circumstances as one that was sure to take place; so
that the whole thing was not so obscure to him as it is to us, who are
only able to form our conclusions from the brief account which lies
before us. If we suppose that in the conversation which Samuel had with
Saul upon the roof ([Sa1 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#025)), he
also spoke about the manner in which the Philistines, who had pushed
their outposts as far as Gibeah, could be successfully attacked, he
might also have mentioned that Gilgal was the most suitable place for
gathering an army together, and for making the necessary preparations
for a successful engagement with their foes. If we just glance at the
events narrated in the following chapters, for the purpose of getting a
clear idea of the thing which Samuel had in view; we find that the three
signs announced by Samuel took place on Saul's return to Gibeah ([Sa1
10:9-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009)). Samuel then summoned the
people to Mizpeh, where Saul was elected king by lot ([Sa1
10:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017)); but Saul returned to Gibeah
to his own house even after this solemn election, and was engaged in
ploughing the field, when messengers came from Jabesh with the account
of the siege of that town by the Ammonites. On receiving this
intelligence the Spirit of Jehovah came upon him, so that he summoned
the whole nation with energy and without delay to come to battle, and
proceeded to Jabesh with the assembled army, and smote the Ammonites
([Sa1 11:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#001)). Thereupon Samuel
summoned the people to come to Gilgal and renew the monarchy there ([Sa1
11:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#012)); and at the same time he
renewed his office of supreme judge (1 Samuel 12), so that now for the
first time Saul actually commenced his reign, and began the war against
the Philistines ([Sa1 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001)), in which,
as soon as the latter advanced to Michmash with a powerful army after
Jonathan's victorious engagement, he summoned the people to Gilgal to
battle, and after waiting there seven days for Samuel in vain, had the
sacrifices offered, on which account as soon as Samuel arrived he
announced to him that his rule would not last ([Sa1
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#013).).

Now, it cannot have been the first of these two gatherings at Gilgal
that Samuel had in his mind, but must have been the second. The first is
precluded by the simple fact that Samuel summoned the people to go to
Gilgal for the purpose of renewing the monarchy; and therefore, as the
words "come and let us go to Gilgal" ([Sa1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#014)) unquestionably imply, he must
have gone thither himself along with the people and the king, so that
Saul was never in a position to have to wait for Samuel's arrival. The
second occurrence at Gilgal, on the other hand, is clearly indicated in
the words of [Sa1 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#008), "Saul tarried
seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had appointed," in
which there is almost an express allusion to the instructions given to
Saul in the verse before us. But whilst we cannot but regard this as the
only true explanation, we cannot agree with Seb. Schmidt, who looks upon
the instructions given to Saul in this verse as "a rule to be observed
throughout the whole of Samuel's life," that is to say, who interprets
ירדתּ in the sense of "as often as thou goest down to Gilgal." For this
view cannot be grammatically sustained, although it is founded upon the
correct idea, that Samuel's instructions cannot have been intended as a
solitary and arbitrary command, by which Saul was to be kept in a
condition of dependence. According to our explanation, however, this is
not the case; but there was an inward necessity for them, so far as the
government of Saul was concerned. Placed as he was by Jehovah as king
over His people, for the purpose of rescuing them out of the power of
those who were at that time its most dangerous foes, Saul was not at
liberty to enter upon the war against these foes simply by his own will,
but was directed to wait till Samuel, the accredited prophet of Jehovah,
had completed the consecration through the offering of a solemn
sacrifice, and had communicated to him the requisite instructions from
God, even though he should have to wait for seven days.

(Note: The difficulty in question has been solved on the whole quite
correctly by Brentius. "It is not to be supposed," he says, "that Samuel
was directing Saul to go at once to Gilgal as soon as he should go away
from him, and wait there for seven days; but that he was to do this
after he had been chosen king by public lot, and having conquered the
Ammonites and been confirmed in the kingdom, was about to prepare to
make war upon the Philistines, on whose account chiefly it was that he
had been called to the kingdom. For the Lord had already spoken thus to
Samuel concerning Saul: 'He will save my people from the hands of the
Philistines, because I have looked upon my people.' This is the meaning
therefore of Samuel's command: Thou hast been called to the kingdom
chiefly for this purpose, that thou mayest deliver Israel from the
tyranny of the Philistines. When therefore thou shalt enter upon this
work, go down into Gilgal and wait there seven days, until I shall come
to thee: for thou shalt then offer a holocaust, though not before I come
to thee, and I will show thee what must be done in order that our
enemies the Philistines may be conquered. The account of this is given
below in 1 Samuel 13, where we learn that Saul violated this command.")

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 10:9</span></span>

When Saul went away from Samuel, to return to Gibeah, "God changed to
him another heart," - a pregnant expression for "God changed him, and
gave him another heart" (see at [Sa1
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006)); and all these signs (the signs
mentioned by Samuel) happened on that very day. As he left Samuel early
in the morning, Saul could easily reach Gibeah in one day, even if the
town where he had met with Samuel was situated to the south-west of
Rachel's tomb, as the distance from that tomb to Gibeah was not more
than three and a half or four hours.

[Sa1 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010)

The third sign is the only one which is minutely described, because this
caused a great sensation at Gibeah, Saul's home. "And they (Saul and his
attendant) came thither to Gibeah." "Thither" points back to "thither to
the city" in [Sa1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005), and is defined
by the further expression "to Gibeah" (Eng. version, "to the hill:"
Tr.). The rendering ἔκειθεν (lxx) does not warrant us in changing שׁם
into משּׁם; for the latter would be quite superfluous, as it was
self-evident that they came to Gibeah from the place where they had been
in the company of Samuel.

[Sa1 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#011)

When those who had known Saul of old saw that he prophesied with the
prophets, the people said one to another, "What has happened to the son
of Kish? Is Saul also among the prophets?" This expression presupposes
that Saul's previous life was altogether different from that of the
disciples of the prophets.

[Sa1 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#012)

And one from thence (i.e., from Gibeah, or from the crowd that was
gathered round the prophets) answered, "And who is their father?" i.e.,
not "who is their president?" which would be a very gratuitous question;
but, "is their father a prophet then?" i.e., according to the
explanation given by Oehler (Herzog's Real. Enc. xii. p. 216), "have
they the prophetic spirit by virtue of their birth?" Understood in this
way, the retort forms a very appropriate "answer" to the expression of
surprise and the inquiry, how it came to pass that Saul was among the
prophets. If those prophets had not obtained the gift of prophecy by
inheritance, but as a free gift of the Lord, it was equally possible for
the Lord to communicate the same gift to Saul. On the other hand, the
alteration of the text from אביהם (their father) into אביהוּ (his
father), according to the lxx, Vulg., Syr., and Arab., which is favoured
by Ewald, Thenius, and others, must be rejected, for the simple reason
that the question, Who is his father? in the mouth of one of the
inhabitants of Gibeah, to whom Saul's father was so well known that they
called Saul the son of Kish at once, would have no sense whatever. From
this the proverb arose, "Is Saul also among the prophets?" - a proverb
which was used to express astonishment at the appearance of any man in a
sphere of life which had hitherto been altogether strange to him.

[Sa1 10:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#013)

When Saul had left off prophesying, and came to Bamah, his uncle asked
him and his attendant where they had been; and Saul told him, that as
they had not found the asses anywhere, they had gone to Samuel, and had
learned from him that the asses were found. But he did not relate the
words which had been spoken by Samuel concerning the monarchy, from
unambitious humility (cf. [Sa1 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#022),
[Sa1 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#023)) and not because he was
afraid of unbelief and envy, as Thenius follows Josephus in supposing.
From the expression "he came to Bamah" (Eng. ver. "to the high place"),
we must conclude, that not only Saul's uncle, but his father also, lived
in Bamah, as we find Saul immediately afterwards in his own family
circle (see [Sa1 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#014).).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 10:17</span></span>

Saul's Election by Lot. - After Samuel had secretly anointed Saul king
by the command of God, it was his duty to make provision for a
recognition of the man whom God had chosen on the part of the people
also. To this end he summoned the people to Mizpeh, and there instructed
the tribes to choose a king by lot. As the result of the lot was
regarded as a divine decision, not only was Saul to be accredited by
this act in the sight of the whole nation as the king appointed by the
Lord, but he himself was also to be more fully assured of the certainty
of his own election on the part of God. -

(Note: Thenius follows De Wette, and adduces the incompatibility of 1
Samuel 8 and [Sa1 10:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017) with [Sa1
9:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001), [Sa1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016), as a proof that in [Sa1
10:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017) we have a different account
of the manner in which Saul became king from that given in [Sa1
9:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001), [Sa1
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016), and one which continues the
account in [Sa1 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#022). "It is
thoroughly inconceivable," he says, "that Samuel should have first of
all anointed Saul king by the instigation of God, and then have caused
the lot to be cast, as it were, for the sake of further confirmation;
for in that case either the prophet would have tempted God, or he would
have made Him chargeable before the nation with an unworthy act of
jugglery." Such an argument as this could only be used by critics who
deny not only the inspiration of the prophets, but all influence on the
part of the living God upon the free action of men, and cannot therefore
render the truth of the biblical history at all doubtful. Even Ewald
sees no discrepancy here, and observes in his history (Gesch. iii. p.
32): "If we bear in mind the ordinary use made of the sacred lot at that
time, we shall find that there is nothing but the simple truth in the
whole course of the narrative. The secret meeting of the seer with Saul
was not sufficient to secure a complete and satisfactory recognition of
him as king; it was also necessary that the Spirit of Jehovah should
single him out publicly in a solemn assembly of the nation, and point
him out as the man of Jehovah.")

[Sa1 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017)

העם is the nation in its heads and representatives. Samuel selected
Mizpeh for this purpose, because it was there that he had once before
obtained for the people, by prayer, a great victory over the Philistines
([Sa1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005).).

[Sa1 10:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#018)

"But before proceeding to the election itself, Samuel once more charged
the people with their sin in rejecting God, who had brought them out of
Egypt, and delivered them out of the hand of all their oppressors, by
their demand for a king, that he might show them how dangerous was the
way which they were taking now, and how bitterly they would perhaps
repent of what they had now desired" (O. v. Gerlach; see the commentary
on 1 Samuel 8). The masculine הלּחצים is construed ad sensum with
המּמלכות. In לו ותּאמרוּ the early translators have taken לו for לא,
which is the actual reading in some of the Codices. But although this
reading is decidedly favoured by the parallel passages, [Sa1
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#019); [Sa1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#012), it is not necessary; since כּי
is used to introduce a direct statement, even in a declaration of the
opposite, in the sense of our "no but" (e.g., in [Rut
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#010), where להּ precedes). There is,
therefore, no reason for exchanging לו for לא.

[Sa1 10:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#020)

After this warning, Samuel directed the assembled Israelites to come
before Jehovah (i.e., before the altar of Jehovah which stood at Mizpeh,
according to [Sa1 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009)) according to
their tribes and families (alaphim: see at [Num
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016)); "and there was taken (by lot)
the tribe of Benjamin." הלּכד, lit. to be snatched out by Jehovah,
namely, through the lot (see [Jos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014), [Jos
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#016)). He then directed the tribe of
Benjamin to draw near according to its families, i.e., he directed the
heads of the families of this tribe to come before the altar of the Lord
and draw lots; and the family of Matri was taken. Lastly, when the heads
of the households in this family came, and after that the different
individuals in the household which had been taken, the lot fell upon
Saul the son of Kish. In the words, "Saul the son of Kish was taken,"
the historian proceeds at once to the final result of the casting of the
lots, without describing the intermediate steps any further.

(Note: It is true the Septuagint introduces the words καὶ προσάγουσι τὴν
φυλὴν Ματταρὶ εἰς ἄνδρας before ויּלּכד, and this clause is also found
in a very recent Hebrew MS (viz., 451 in Kennicott's dissert. gener. p.
491). But it is very evident that these words did not form an integral
part of the original text, as Thenius supposes, but were nothing more
than an interpolation of the Sept. translators, from the simple fact
that they do not fill up the supposed gap at all completely, but only in
a very partial and in fact a very mistaken manner; for the family of
Matri could not come to the lot εἰς ἄνδρας (man by man), but only κατ ̓
οἴκους (by households: [Jos 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#014)).
Before the household (beth-aboth, father's house) of Saul could be
taken, it was necessary that the גּברים (ἄνδρες), i.e., the different
heads of households, should be brought; and it was not till then that
Kish, or his son Saul, could be singled out as the appointed of the
Lord. Neither the author of the gloss in the lxx, nor the modern
defender of the gloss, has thought of this.)

When the lot fell upon Saul, they sought him, and he could not be found.

[Sa1 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#022)

Then they inquired of Jehovah, "Is any one else come hither?" and
Jehovah replied, "Behold, he (whom ye are seeking) is hidden among the
things." The inquiry was made through the high priest, by means of the
Urim and Thummim, for which בּיהוה שׁאל was the technical expression,
according to [Num 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#021) (see [Jdg
20:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#027); [Jdg
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001), etc.). There can be no doubt,
that in a gathering of the people for so important a purpose as the
election of a king, the high priest would also be present, even though
this is not expressly stated. Samuel presided over the meeting as the
prophet of the Lord. The answer given by God, "Behold, he is hidden,"
etc., appears to have no relation to the question, "Is any one else
come?" The Sept. and Vulg. have therefore altered the question into ει ̓
ἔτι ἔρχεται ὁ ἀνήρ, utrumnam venturus esset; and Thenius would adopt
this as an emendation. But he is wrong in doing so; for there was no
necessity to ask whether Saul would still come: they might at once have
sent to fetch him. What they asked was rather, whether any one else had
come besides those who were present, as Saul was not to be found among
them, that they might know where they were to look for Saul, whether at
home or anywhere else. And to this question God gave the answer, "He is
present, only hidden among the things." By כּלים (the things or vessels,
Eng. ver. the stuff) we are to understand the travelling baggage of the
people who had assembled at Mizpeh. Saul could neither have wished to
avoid accepting the monarchy, nor have imagined that the lot would not
fall upon him if he hid himself. For he knew that God had chosen him;
and Samuel had anointed him already. He did it therefore simply from
humility and modesty. "In order that he might not appear to have either
the hope or desire for anything of the kind, he preferred to be absent
when the lots were cast" (Seb. Schmidt).

[Sa1 10:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#023)

He was speedily fetched, and brought into the midst of the (assembled)
people; and when he came, he was a head taller than all the people (see
[Sa1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#002)). And Samuel said to all the
people, "Behold ye whom the Lord hath chosen! for there is none like him
in all the nation." Then all the people shouted aloud, and cried, "Let
the king live!" Saul's bodily stature won the favour of the people (see
the remarks on [Sa1 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#002)).

Samuel then communicated to the people the right of the monarchy, and
laid it down before Jehovah. "The right of the monarchy" (meluchah) is
not to be identified with the right of the king (melech), which is
described in [Sa1 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011) and sets forth
the right or prerogative which a despotic king would assume over the
people; but it is the right which regulated the attitude of the earthly
monarchy in the theocracy, and determined the duties and rights of the
human king in relation to Jehovah the divine King on the one hand, and
to the nation on the other. This right could only be laid down by a
prophet like Samuel, to raise a wholesome barrier at the very outset
against all excesses on the part of the king. Samuel therefore wrote it
in a document which was laid down before Jehovah, i.e., in the sanctuary
of Jehovah; though certainly not in the sanctuary at Bamah in Gibeah, as
Thenius supposes, for nothing is known respecting any such sanctuary. It
was no doubt placed in the tabernacle, where the law of Moses was also
deposited, by the side of the fundamental law of the divine state in
Israel. When the business was all completed, Samuel sent the people away
to their own home.

[Sa1 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026)

Saul also returned to his house at Gibeah, and there went with him the
crowd of the men whose hearts God had touched, sc., to give him a royal
escort, and show their readiness to serve him. החיל is not to be altered
into החיל בּני, according to the free rendering of the lxx, but is used
as in [Exo 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028); with this
difference, however, that here it does not signify a large military
force, but a crowd of brave men, who formed Saul's escort of honour.

[Sa1 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#027)

But as it generally happens that, where a person is suddenly lifted up
to exalted honours or office, there are sure to be envious people found,
so was it here: there were בליּעל בּני, worthless people, even among the
assembled Israelites, who spoke disparagingly of Saul, saying, "How will
this man help us?" and who brought him no present. Minchah: the present
which from time immemorial every one has been expected to bring when
entering the presence of the king; so that the refusal to bring a
present was almost equivalent to rebellion. But Saul was "as being
deaf," i.e., he acted as if he had not heard. The objection which
Thenius brings against this view, viz., that in that case it would read
כם היה והוּא, exhibits a want of acquaintance with the Hebrew
construction of a sentence. There is no more reason for touching ויהי
than ויּלכוּ in [Sa1 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026). In both
cases the apodosis is attached to the protasis, which precedes it in the
form of a circumstantial clause, by the imperfect, with vav consec.
According to the genius of our language, these protases would be
expressed by the conjunction when, viz.: "when Saul also went home, ...
there went with him," etc.; and "when loose (or idle) people said, etc.,
he was as deaf."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](sa1011)

</div>
