<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1026)  [Next](sa1028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 27:0</span></span>

David at Ziklag in the Land of the Philistines - [Sa1
27:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001)

In his despair of being able permanently to escape the plots of Saul in
the land of Israel, David betook himself, with his attendants, to the
neighbouring land of the Philistines, to king Achish of Gath, and
received from him the town of Ziklag, which was assigned him at his own
request as a dwelling-place ([Sa1
27:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001)). From this point he made
attacks upon certain tribes on the southern frontier of Canaan which
were hostile to Israel, but described them to Achish as attacks upon
Judah and its dependencies, that he might still retain the protection of
the Philistian chief ([Sa1 27:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008)).
David had fled to Achish at Gath once before; but on that occasion he
had been obliged to feign insanity in order to preserve his life,
because he was recognised as the conqueror of Goliath. This act of David
was not forgotten by the Philistines even now. But as David had been
pursued by Saul for many years, Achish did not hesitate to give a place
of refuge in his land to the fugitive who had been outlawed by the king
of Israel, the arch-enemy of the Philistines, possibly with the hope
that if a fresh war with Saul should break out, he should be able to
reap some advantage from David's friendship.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 27:1</span></span>

The result of the last affair with Saul, after his life had again been
spared, could not fail to confirm David in his conviction that Saul
would not desist from pursuing him, and that if he stayed any longer in
the land, he would fall eventually into the hands of his enemy. With
this conviction, he formed the following resolution: "Now shall I be
consumed one day by the hand of Saul: there is no good to me (i.e., it
will not be well with me if I remain in the land), but (כּי after a
negative) I will flee into the land of the Philistines; so will Saul
desist from me to seek me further (i.e., give up seeking me) in the
whole of the territory of Israel, and I shall escape his hand."

[Sa1 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002)

Accordingly he went over with the 600 men who were with him to Achish,
the king of Gath. Achish, the son of Maoch, is in all probability the
same person not only as the king Achish mentioned in [Sa1
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#011), but also as Achish the son of
Maachah ([Kg1 2:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#039)), since Maoch and
Maachah are certainly only different forms of the same name; and a fifty
years' reign, which we should have in that case to ascribe to Achish, it
not impossible.

[Sa1 27:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#003)

Achish allotted dwelling-places in his capital, Gath, for David and his
wives, and for all his retinue; and Saul desisted from any further
pursuit of David when he was informed of his flight to Gath. The
Chethibh יוסף is apparently only a copyist's error for יסף.

[Sa1 27:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#005)

In the capital of the kingdom, however, David felt cramped, and
therefore entreated Achish to assign him one of the land (or provincial)
towns to dwell in; whereupon he gave him Ziklag for that purpose. This
town was given to the Simeonites in the time of Joshua ([Jos
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#005)), but was afterwards taken by the
Philistines, probably not long before the time of David, and appears to
have been left without inhabitants in consequence of this conquest. The
exact situation, in the western part of the Negeb, has not been clearly
ascertained (see at [Jos 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#031)).
Achish appears to have given it to David. This is implied in the remark,
"Therefore Ziklag came to the kings of Judah (i.e., became their
property) unto this day."

[Sa1 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#007)

The statement that David remained a year and four months in the land of
the Philistines, is a proof of the historical character of the whole
narrative. The ימים before the "four months" signifies a year; strictly
speaking, a term of days which amounted to a full year (as in [Lev
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#029) : see also [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003), [Sa1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020); [Sa1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#019)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 27:8</span></span>

From Ziklag David made an attack upon the Geshurites, Gerzites, and
Amalekites, smote them without leaving a man alive, and returned with
much booty. The occasion of this attack is not mentioned, as being a
matter of indifference in relation to the chief object of the history;
but it is no doubt to be sought for in plundering incursions made by
these tribes into the land of Israel. For David would hardly have
entered upon such a war in the situation in which he was placed at that
time without some such occasion, seeing that it would be almost sure to
bring him into suspicion with Achish, and endanger his safety. ויּעל,
"he advanced," the verb being used, as it frequently is, to denote the
advance of an army against a people or town (see at [Jos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001)). At the same time, the tribes
which he attacked may have had their seat upon the mountain plateau in
the northern portion of the desert of Paran, so that David was obliged
to march up to reach them. פּשׁט, to invade for the purpose of
devastation and plunder. Geshuri is a tribe mentioned in [Jos
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#002) as living in the south of the
territory of the Philistines, and is a different tribe from the
Geshurites in the north-east of Gilead ([Jos
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#005); [Jos
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#011), [Jos
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#013); [Deu
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)). These are the only passages in
which they are mentioned. The Gerzites, or Gizrites according to the
Keri, are entirely unknown. Bonfrere and Clericus suppose them to be the
Gerreni spoken of in 2 Macc. 13:24, who inhabited the town of Gerra,
between Rhinocolura and Pelusium (Strabo, xvi. 760), or Gerron (Ptol.
iv. 5). This conjecture is a possible one, but is very uncertain
nevertheless, as the Gerzites certainly dwelt somewhere in the desert of
Arabia. At any rate Grotius and Ewald cannot be correct in their opinion
that they were the inhabitants of Gezer ([Jos
10:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#033)). The Amalekites were the
remnant of this old hereditary foe of the Israelites, who had taken to
flight on Saul's war of extermination, and had now assembled again (see
at [Sa1 15:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#008)). "For they inhabit the
land, where you go from of old to Shur, even to the land of Egypt." The
עשׁר before מעולם may be explained from the fact that בּואך is not
adverbial here, but is construed according to its form as an infinitive:
literally, "where from of old thy coming is to Shur." עשׁר cannot have
crept into the text through a copyist's mistake, as such a mistake would
not have found its way into all the MSS. The fact that the early
translators did not render the word proves nothing against its
genuineness, but merely shows that the translators regarded it as
superfluous. Moreover, the Alexandrian text is decidedly faulty here,
and עולם is confounded with עלם, ἀπὸ Γελάμ. Shur is the desert of Jifar,
which is situated in front of Egypt (as in [Sa1
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#007)). These tribes were nomads, and
had large flocks, which David took with him as booty when he had smitten
the tribes themselves. After his return, David betook himself to Achish,
to report to the Philistian king concerning his enterprise, and deceive
him as to its true character.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 27:10</span></span>

Achish said, "Ye have not made an invasion to-day, have ye?" אל, like
μὴ, is an interrogative sense; the ה has dropped out: vid., Ewald, 324,
b. David replied, "Against the south of Judah, and the south of the
Jerahmeelites, and into the south of the Kenites," sc., we have made an
incursion. This reply shows that the Geshurites, Gerzites, and
Amalekites dwelt close to the southern boundary of Judah, so that David
was able to represent the march against these tribes to Achish as a
march against the south of Judah, to make him believe that he had been
making an attack upon the southern territory of Judah and its
dependencies. The Negeb of Judah is the land between the mountains of
Judah and the desert of Arabia (see at [Jos
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021)). The Jerahmeelites are the
descendants of Jerahmeel, the first-born of Hezron ([Ch1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#009), [Ch1
2:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#025)), and therefore one of the
three large families of Judah who sprang from Hezron. They probably
dwelt on the southern frontier of the tribe of Judah (vid., [Sa1
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#029)). The Kenites were protgs of
Judah (see at [Sa1 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006), and [Jdg
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016)). In [Sa1
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#011) the writer introduces the
remark, that in his raid David left neither man nor woman of his enemies
alive, to take them to Gath, because he thought "they might report
against us, and say, Thus hath David done." There ought to be a major
point under דּוד עשׂה, as the following clause does not contain the
words of the slaughtered enemies, but is a clause appended by the
historian himself, to the effect that David continued to act in that
manner as long as he dwelt in the land of the Philistines. משׁפּט, the
mode of procedure; lit. the right which he exercised (see [Sa1
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#009)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 27:12</span></span>

[Sa1 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#012) is connected with [Sa1
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#010); Achish believed David's words,
and said (to himself), "He hath made himself stinking (i.e., hated)
among his own people, among Israel, and will be my servant (i.e.,
subject to me) for ever."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 28](sa1028)

</div>
