<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1002)  [Next](sa1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 3:1</span></span>

At the time when Samuel served the Lord before Eli, both as a boy and as
a young man ([Sa1 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#011), [Sa1
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#021), [Sa1
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#026)), the word of the Lord had become
dear, i.e., rare, in Israel, and "Prophecy was not spread." נפרץ, from
פּרץ, to spread out strongly, to break through copiously (cf. [Pro
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#010)). The "word of the Lord" is the
word of God announced by prophets: the "vision," "visio prophetica." It
is true that Jehovah had promised His people, that He would send
prophets, who should make known His will and purpose at all times ([Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015).; cf. [Num
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#023)); but as a revelation from God
presupposed susceptibility on the part of men, the unbelief and
disobedience of the people might restrain the fulfilment of this and all
similar promises, and God might even withdraw His word to punish the
idolatrous nation. Such a time as this, when revelations from God were
universally rare, and had now arisen under Eli, in whose days, as the
conduct of his sons sufficiently proves, the priesthood had fallen into
very deep corruption.

[Sa1 3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#002)

The word of the Lord was then issued for the first time to Samuel. [Sa1
3:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#002) form one period. The clause, "it
came to pass at that time" ([Sa1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#002)),
is continued in [Sa1 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#004), "that the
Lord called," etc. The intervening clauses from ועלי to אלהים ארון are
circumstantial clauses, intended to throw light upon the situation. The
clause, "Eli was laid down in his place," etc., may be connected
logically with "at that time" by the insertion of "when" (as in the
English version: Tr.). The dimness of Eli's eyes is mentioned, to
explain Samuel's behaviour, as afterwards described. Under these
circumstances, for example, when Samuel heard his own name called out in
sleep, he might easily suppose that Eli was calling him to render some
assistance. The "lamp of God" is the light of the candlestick in the
tabernacle, the seven lamps of which were put up and lighted every
evening, and burned through the night till all the oil was consumed (see
[Exo 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008); [Lev
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#002); [Ch2
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#011), and the explanation given at
[Exo 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#021)). The statement that this
light was not yet extinguished, is equivalent to "before the morning
dawn." "And Samuel was lying (sleeping) in the temple of Jehovah, where
the ark of God was." היכל does not mean the holy place, as distinguished
from the "most holy," as in [Kg1 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005);
[Kg1 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#050),

(Note: The Masoretes have taken היכל in this sense, and therefore have
placed the Athnach under שׁכב rednu, to separate שׁכב וּשׁמוּאל from יי
בּהיכל, and thus to guard against the conclusion, which might be drawn
from this view of היכל that Samuel slept in the holy place.)

but the whole tabernacle, the tent with its court, as the palace of the
God-king, as in [Sa1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009); [Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004). Samuel neither slept in the holy
place by the side of the candlestick and table of shew-bread, nor in the
most holy place in front of the ark of the covenant, but in the court,
where cells were built for the priests and Levites to live in when
serving at the sanctuary (see at [Sa1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#015)). "The ark of God, i.e., the ark
of the covenant, is mentioned as the throne of the divine presence, from
which the call to Samuel proceeded.

[Sa1 3:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#005)

As soon as Samuel heard his name called out, he hastened to Eli to
receive his commands. But Eli bade him lie down again, as he had not
called him. At first, no doubt, he thought the call which Samuel had
heard was nothing more than a false impression of the youth, who had
been fast asleep. But the same thing was repeated a second and a third
time; for, as the historian explains in [Sa1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#006), "Samuel had not yet known
Jehovah, and (for) the word of Jehovah was not yet revealed to him."
(The perfect ידע after טרם, though very rare, is fully supported by [Psa
90:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#002) and [Pro
8:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#025), and therefore is not to be
altered into ידע, as Dietrich and Bttcher propose.) He therefore
imagined again that Eli had called him. But when he came to Eli after
the third call, Eli perceived that the Lord was calling, and directed
Samuel, if the call were repeated, to answer, "Speak, Lord; for Thy
servant heareth."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 3:10</span></span>

When Samuel had lain down again, "Jehovah came and stood," sc., before
Samuel. These words show that the revelation of God was an objectively
real affair, and not a mere dream of Samuel's. "And he called to him as
at other times" (see [Num 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#001); [Jdg
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#020)), etc.). When Samuel replied in
accordance with Eli's instructions, the Lord announced to him that He
would carry out the judgment that had been threatened against the house
of Eli ([Sa1 3:11-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#011)). "Behold, I do a
thing in Israel, at which both the ears of every one that heareth it
shall tingle," sc., with horror (see [Kg2
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#012); [Jer
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#003); [Hab
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 3:12</span></span>

On that day I will perform against Eli all that I have spoken concerning
his house (see [Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030).), beginning
and finishing it," i.e., completely. דּבּר את־אשׁר הקים, to set up the
word spoken, i.e., to carry it out, or accomplish it. In [Sa1
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#013) this word is communicated to
Samuel, so far as its essential contents are concerned. God would judge
"the house of Eli for ever because of the iniquity, that he knew his
sons were preparing a curse for themselves and did not prevent them." To
judge on account of a crime, is the same as to punish it. עד־עולם, i.e.,
without the punishment being ever stopped or removed. להם מקללים,
cursing themselves, i.e., bringing a curse upon themselves. "Therefore I
have sworn to the house of Eli, that the iniquity of the house of Eli
shall not (אם, a particle used in an oath, equivalent to assuredly not)
be expiated by slain-offerings and meat-offerings (through any kind of
sacrifice) for ever." The oath makes the sentence irrevocable. (On the
facts themselves, see the commentary on [Sa1
2:27-36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027).)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 3:15</span></span>

Samuel then slept till the morning; and when he opened the doors of the
house of Jehovah, he was afraid to tell Eli of the revelation which he
had received. Opening the doors of the house of God appears to have been
part of Samuel's duty. We have not to think of doors opening into the
holy place, however, but of doors leading into the court. Originally,
when the tabernacle was simply a tent, travelling with the people from
place to place, it had only curtains at the entrance to the holy place
and court. But when Israel had become possessed of fixed houses in the
land of Canaan, and the dwelling-place of God was permanently erected at
Shiloh, instead of the tents that were pitched for the priests and
Levites, who encamped round about during the journey through the desert,
there were erected fixed houses, which were built against or inside the
court, and not only served as dwelling-places for the priests and
Levites who were officiating, but were also used for the reception and
custody of the gifts that were brought as offerings to the sanctuary.
These buildings in all probability supplanted entirely the original
tent-like enclosure around the court; so that instead of the curtains at
the entrance, there were folding doors, which were shut in the evening
and opened again in the morning. It is true that nothing is said about
the erection of these buildings in our historical books, but the fact
itself is not to be denied on that account. In the case of Solomon's
temple, notwithstanding the elaborate description that has been given of
it, there is nothing said about the arrangement or erection of the
buildings in the court; and yet here and there, principally in Jeremiah,
the existence of such buildings is evidently assumed. מראה, visio, a
sign or vision. This expression is applied to the word of God which came
to Samuel, because it was revealed to him through the medium of an
inward sight or intuition.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 3:16</span></span>

When Samuel was called by Eli and asked concerning the divine revelation
that he had received, he told him all the words, without concealing
anything; whereupon Eli bowed in quiet resignation to the purpose of
God: "It is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him good." Samuel's
communication, however, simply confirmed to the aged Eli what God had
already made known to him through a prophet, But his reply proves that,
with all his weakness and criminal indulgence towards his wicked sons,
Eli was thoroughly devoted to the Lord in his heart. And Samuel, on the
other hand, through his unreserved and candid communication of the
terribly solemn word of God with regard to the man, whom he certainly
venerated with filial affection, not only as high priest, but also as
his own parental guardian, proved himself to be a man possessing the
courage and the power to proclaim the word of the Lord without fear to
the people of Israel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 3:19</span></span>

Thus Samuel grew, and Jehovah was with him, and let none of his words
fall to the ground, i.e., left no word unfulfilled which He spoke
through Samuel. (On הפּיל, see [Jos
21:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#045); [Jos
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#014); [Kg1
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#056).) By this all Israel from Dan to
Beersheba (see at [Jdg 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)) perceived
that Samuel was found trustworthy, or approved (see [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007)) as a prophet of Jehovah. And the
Lord continued to appear at Shiloh; for He revealed himself there to
Samuel "in the word of Jehovah," i.e., through a prophetic announcement
of His word. These three verses form the transition from the call of
Samuel to the following account of his prophetic labours in Israel. At
the close of [Sa1 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#021), the lxx have
appended a general remark concerning Eli and his sons, which, regarded
as a deduction from the context, answers no doubt to the paraphrastic
treatment of our book in that version, but in a critical aspect is
utterly worthless.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa1004)

</div>
