<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1021)  [Next](sa1023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 22:1</span></span>

Having been driven away by Achish, the Philistian king at Gath, David
took refuge in the cave Adullam, where his family joined him. The cave
Adullam is not to be sought for in the neighbourhood of Bethlehem, as
some have inferred from [Sa2 23:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013),
but near the town Adullam, which is classed in [Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035) among the towns in the lowlands
of Judah, and at the foot of the mountains; though it has not yet been
traced with any certainty, as the caves of Deir Dubban, of which Van de
Velde speaks, are not the only large caves on the western slope of the
mountains of Judah. When his brethren and his father's house, i.e., the
rest of his family, heard of his being there, they came down to him,
evidently because they no longer felt themselves safe in Bethlehem from
Saul's revenge. The cave Adullam cannot have been more than three hours
from Bethlehem, as Socoh and Jarmuth, which were near to Adullam, were
only three hours and a half from Jerusalem (see at [Jos
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#015)).

[Sa1 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002)

There a large number of malcontents gathered together round David, viz.,
all who were in distress, and all who had creditors, and all who were
embittered in spirit (bitter of soul), i.e., people who were
dissatisfied with the general state of affairs or with the government of
Saul, - about four hundred men, whose leader he became. David must in
all probability have stayed there a considerable time. The number of
those who went over to him soon amounted to six hundred men ([Sa1
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#013)), who were for the most part
brave and reckless, and who ripened into heroic men under the command of
David during his long flight. A list of the bravest of them is given in
1 Chron 12, with which compare [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013). and [Ch1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#015).

[Sa1 22:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#003)

David proceeded thence to Mizpeh in Moab, and placed his parents in
safety with the king of the Moabites. His ancestress Ruth was a
Moabitess. Mizpeh: literally a watch-tower or mountain height commanding
a very extensive prospect. Here it is probably a proper name, belonging
to a mountain fastness on the high land, which bounded the Arboth Moab
on the eastern side of the Dead Sea, most likely on the mountains of
Abarim or Pisgah ([Deu 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#001)), and
which could easily be reached from the country round Bethlehem, by
crossing the Jordan near the point where it entered the Dead Sea. As
David came to the king of Moab, the Moabites had probably taken
possession of the most southerly portion of the eastern lands of the
Israelites; we may also infer this from the fact that, according to [Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), Saul had also made war upon
Moab, for Mizpeh Moab is hardly to be sought for in the actual land of
the Moabites, on the south side of the Arnon (Mojeb). אתּכם ... יצא־נא,
"May my father and my mother go out with you." The construction of יצא
with את is a pregnant one: to go out of their home and stay with you
(Moabites). "Till I know what God will do to me." Being well assured of
the justice of his cause, as contrasted with the insane persecutions of
Saul, David confidently hoped that God would bring his flight to an end.
His parents remained with the king of Moab as long as David was
בּמּצוּדה, i.e., upon the mount height, or citadel. This can only refer
to the place of refuge which David had found at Mizpeh Moab. For it is
perfectly clear from [Sa1 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#005), where
the prophet Gad calls upon David not to remain any longer בּמּצוּדה, but
to return to the land of Judah, that the expression cannot refer either
to the cave Adullam, or to any other place of refuge in the
neighbourhood of Bethlehem. The prophet Gad had probably come to David
from Samuel's school of prophets; but whether he remained with David
from that time forward to assist him with his counsel in his several
undertakings, cannot be determined, on account of our want of
information. In [Ch1 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#009) he is called
David's seer. In the last year of David's reign he announced to him the
punishment which would fall upon him from God on account of his sin in
numbering the people ([Sa2 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#011).);
and according to [Ch1 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#029) he also
wrote the acts of David. In consequence of this admonition, David
returned to Judah, and went into the wood Hareth, a woody region on the
mountains of Judah, which is never mentioned again, and the situation of
which is unknown. According to the counsels of God, David was not to
seek for refuge outside the land; not only that he might not be
estranged from his fatherland and the people of Israel, which would have
been opposed to his calling to be the king of Israel, but also that he
might learn to trust entirely in the Lord as his only refuge and
fortress.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 22:6</span></span>

Murder of the Priests by Saul. - [Sa1
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#006). When Saul heard that David and
the men with him were known, i.e., that information had been received as
to their abode or hiding-place, he said to his servants when they were
gathered round him, "Hear," etc. The words, "and Saul was sitting at
Gibeah under the tamarisk upon the height," etc., show that what follows
took place in a solemn conclave of all the servants of Saul, who were
gathered round their king to deliberate upon the more important affairs
of the kingdom. This sitting took place at Gibeah, the residence of
Saul, and in the open air "under the tamarisk." בּרמה, upon the height,
not "under a grove at Ramah" (Luther); for Ramah is an appellative, and
בּרמה, which belongs to האשׁל תּחת, is a more minute definition of the
locality, which is indicated by the definite article (the tamarisk upon
the height) as the well-known place where Saul's deliberative assemblies
were held. From the king's address ("hear, ye Benjaminites; will the son
of Jesse also give you all fields and vineyards?") we perceive that Saul
had chosen his immediate attendants form the members of his own tribe,
and had rewarded their services right royally. גּם־לכלּכם is placed
first for the sake of emphasis, "You Benjaminites also," and not rather
to Judahites, the members of his own tribe. The second לכלּכם (before
ישׂים) is not a dative; but ל tub merely serves to give greater
prominence to the object which is placed at the head of the clause: As
for all of you, will he make (you: see Ewald, 310, a.).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 22:8</span></span>

"That you have all of you conspired against me, and no one informs me of
it, since my son makes a covenant with the son of Jesse." בּכרת, lit. at
the making of a covenant. Saul may possibly have heard something of the
facts related in [Sa1 20:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#012); at the
same time, his words may merely refer to Jonathan's friendship with
David, which was well known to him. ואין־חלה, "and no one of you is
grieved on my account ... that my son has set my servant (David) as a
lier in wait against me," i.e., to plot against my life, and wrest the
throne to himself. We may see from this, that Saul was carried by his
suspicions very far beyond the actual facts. "As at this day:" cf. [Deu
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#018), etc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 22:9</span></span>

The Edomite Doeg could not refrain from yielding to this appeal, and
telling Saul what he had seen when staying at Nob; namely, that
Ahimelech had inquired of God for David, and given him food as well as
Goliath's sword. For the fact itself, see [Sa1
21:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#001), where there is no reference
indeed to his inquiring of God; though it certainly took place, as
Ahimelech ([Sa1 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#015)) does not
disclaim it. Doeg is here designated נצּב, "the superintendent of Saul's
servants," so that apparently he had been invested with the office of
marshal of the court.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 22:11</span></span>

On receiving this information, Saul immediately summoned the priest
Ahimelech and "all his father's house," i.e., the whole priesthood, to
Nob, to answer for what they had done. To Saul's appeal, "Why have ye
conspired against me, thou and the son of Jesse, by giving him bread?"
Ahimelech, who was not conscious of any such crime, since David had come
to him with a false pretext, and the priest had probably but very little
knowledge of what took place at court, replied both calmly and worthily
([Sa1 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#014)): "And who of all thy
servants is so faithful (proved, attested, as in [Num
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#007)) as David, and son-in-law of the
king, and having access to thy private audience, and honoured in thy
house?" The true explanation of אל־משׁמעתּך סר may be gathered from a
comparison of [Sa2 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023) and [Ch1
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#025), where משׁמעת occurs again, as
the context clearly shows, in the sense of a privy councillor of the
king, who hears his personal revelations and converses with him about
them, so that it corresponds to our "audience." סוּר, lit. to turn aside
from the way, to go in to any one, or to look after anything ([Exo
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#003); [Rut
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001), etc.); hence in the passage
before us "to have access," to be attached to a person. This is the
explanation given by Gesenius and most of the modern expositors, whereas
the early translators entirely misunderstood the passage, though they
have given the meaning correctly enough at [Sa2
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#023). But if this was the relation in
which David stood to Saul, - and he had really done so for a long time,
- there was nothing wrong in what the high priest had done for him; but
he had acted according to the best of his knowledge, and quite
conscientiously as a faithful subject of the king. Ahimelech then added
still further ([Sa1 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#015)): "Did I
then begin to inquire of God for him this day?" i.e., was it the first
time that I had obtained the decision of God for David concerning
important enterprises, which he had to carry out in the service of the
king? "Far be from me," sc., any conspiracy against the king, like that
of which I am accused. "Let not the king lay it as a burden upon thy
servant, my whole father's house (the omission of the cop. ו before
בּכל־כּית may be accounted for from the excitement of the speaker); for
thy servant knows not the least of all this." בּכל־זאת, of all that Saul
had charged him with.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 22:16</span></span>

Notwithstanding this truthful assertion of his innocence, Saul
pronounced sentence of death, not only upon the high priest, but upon
all the priests at Nob, and commanded his רצים, "runner," i.e.,
halberdiers, to put the priests to death, because, as he declared in his
wrath, "their hand is with David (i.e., because they side with David),
and because they knew that he fled and did not tell me." Instead of the
Chethibh אזנו, it is probably more correct to read אזני, according to
the Keri, although the Chethibh may be accounted for if necessary from a
sudden transition from a direct to an indirect form of address: "and (as
he said) had not told him." This sentence was so cruel, and so nearly
bordering upon madness, that the halberdiers would not carry it out, but
refused to lay hands upon "the priests of Jehovah."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 22:18</span></span>

Saul then commanded Doeg to cut down the priests, and he at once
performed the bloody deed. On the expression "wearing the linen ephod,"
compare the remarks at [Sa1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#018). The
allusion to the priestly clothing, like the repetition of the expression
"priests of Jehovah," serves to bring out into its true light the crime
of the bloodthirsty Saul and his executioner Doeg. The very dress which
the priests wore, as the consecrated servants of Jehovah, ought to have
made them shrink from the commission of such a murder.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 22:19</span></span>

But not content with even this revenge, Saul had the whole city of Nob
destroyed, like a city that was laid under the ban (vid., [Deu
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#013).). So completely did Saul
identify his private revenge with the cause of Jehovah, that he avenged
a supposed conspiracy against his own person as treason against Jehovah
the God-king.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 22:20</span></span>

The only one of the whole body of priests who escaped this bloody death
was a son of Ahimelech, named Abiathar, who "fled after David," i.e., to
David the fugitive, and informed him of the barbarous vengeance which
Saul had taken upon the priests of the Lord. Then David recognised and
confessed his guilt. "I knew that day that the Edomite Doeg was there,
that he (i.e., that as the Edomite Doeg was there, he) would tell Saul:
I am the cause of all the souls of thy father's house," i.e., of their
death. סבב is used here in the sense of being the cause of a thing,
which is one of the meanings of the verb in the Arabic and Talmudic
(vid., Ges. Lex. s. v.). "Stay with me, fear not; for he who seeks my
life seeks thy life: for thou art safe with me." The abstract
mishmereth, protection, keeping ([Exo
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006); [Exo
16:33-34](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#033)), is used for the concrete,
in the sense of protected, well kept. The thought is the following: As
no other is seeking thy life than Saul, who also wants to kill me, thou
mayest stay with me without fear, as I am sure of divine protection.
David spoke thus in the firm belief that the Lord would deliver him from
his foe, and give him the kingdom. The action of Saul, which had just
been reported to him, could only strengthen him in this belief, as it
was a sign of the growing hardness of Saul, which must accelerate his
destruction.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 23](sa1023)

</div>
