<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1007)  [Next](sa1009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 8:0</span></span>

II\. The Monarchy of Saul from His Election Till His Ultimate Rejection
- 1 Samuel 8-15

The earthly monarchy in Israel was established in the time of Samuel,
and through his mediation. At the pressing desire of the people, Samuel
installed the Benjaminite Saul as king, according to the command of God.
The reign of Saul may be divided into two essentially different periods:
viz., (1) the establishment and vigorous development of his regal
supremacy (1 Samuel 8-15); (2) the decline and gradual overthrow of his
monarchy (1 Samuel 16-31). The establishment of the monarchy is
introduced by the negotiations of the elders of Israel with Samuel
concerning the appointment of a king (1 Samuel 8). This is followed by
(1) the account of the anointing of Saul as king (1 Samuel 9:1-10:16),
of his election by lot, and of his victory over the Ammonites and the
confirmation of his monarchy at Gilgal (1 Samuel 10:17-11:15), together
with Samuel's final address to the nation (1 Samuel 12); (2) the history
of Saul's reign, of which only his earliest victories over the
Philistines are given at all elaborately (1 Samuel 13:1-14:46), his
other wars and family history being disposed of very summarily ([Sa1
14:47-52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047)); (3.md) the account of his
disobedience to the command of God in the war against the Amalekites,
and the rejection on the part of God with which Samuel threatened him in
consequence (1 Samuel 15). The brevity with which the history of his
actual reign is treated, in contrast with the elaborate account of his
election and confirmation as king, may be accounted for from the
significance and importance of Saul's monarchy in relation to the
kingdom of God in Israel.

The people of Israel traced the cause of the oppression and distress,
from which they had suffered more and more in the time of the judges, to
the defects of their own political constitution. They wished to have a
king, like all the heathen nations, to conduct their wars and conquer
their enemies. Now, although the desire to be ruled by a king, which had
existed in the nation even from the time of Gideon, was not in itself at
variance with the appointment of Israel as a kingdom of God, yet the
motive which led the people to desire it was both wrong and hostile to
God, since the source of all the evils and misfortunes from which Israel
suffered was to be found in the apostasy of the nation from its God, and
its coquetting with the gods of the heathen. Consequently their
self-willed obstinacy in demanding a king, notwithstanding the warnings
of Samuel, was an actual rejection of the sovereignty of Jehovah, since
He had always manifested himself to His people as their king by
delivering them out of the power of their foes, as soon as they returned
to Him with simple penitence of heart. Samuel pointed this out to the
elders of Israel, when they laid their petition before him that he would
choose them a king. But Jehovah fulfilled their desires. He directed
Samuel to appoint them a king, who possessed all the qualifications that
were necessary to secure for the nation what it looked for from a king,
and who therefore might have established the monarchy in Israel as
foreseen and foretold by Jehovah, if he had not presumed upon his own
power, but had submitted humbly to the will of God as made known to him
by the prophet. Saul, who was chosen from Benjamin, the smallest but yet
the most warlike of all the tribes, a man in the full vigour of youth,
and surpassing all the rest of the people in beauty of form as well as
bodily strength, not only possessed "warlike bravery and talent,
unbroken courage that could overcome opposition of every kind, a
stedfast desire for the well-being of the nation in the face of its many
and mighty foes, and zeal and pertinacity in the execution of his plans"
(Ewald), but also a pious heart, and an earnest zeal for the maintenance
of the provisions of the law, and the promotion of the religious life of
the nation. He would not commence the conflict with the Philistines
until sacrifice had been offered ([Sa1
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#009)..md); in the midst of the hot
pursuit of the foe he opposed the sin committed by the people in eating
flesh with the blood ([Sa1 14:32-33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032).md);
he banished the wizards and necromancers out of the land ([Sa1
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003.md), [Sa1
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#009).md); and in general he appears to
have kept a strict watch over the observance of the Mosaic law in his
kingdom. But the consciousness of his own power, coupled with the energy
of his character, led his astray into an incautious disregard of the
commands of God; his zeal in the prosecution of his plans hurried him on
to reckless and violent measures; and success in his undertakings
heightened his ambition into a haughty rebellion against the Lord, the
God-king of Israel. These errors come out very conspicuously in the
three great events of his reign which are the most circumstantially
described. When Saul was preparing for war against the Philistines, and
Samuel did not appear at once on the day appointed, he presumptuously
disregarded the prohibition of the prophet, and offered the sacrifice
himself without waiting for Samuel to arrive ([Sa1
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#007)..md). In the engagement with the
Philistines, he attempted to force on the annihilation of the foe by
pronouncing the ban upon any one in his army who should eat bread before
the evening, or till he had avenged himself upon his foes. Consequently,
he not only diminished the strength of the people, so that the overthrow
of the enemy was not great, but he also prepared humiliation for
himself, inasmuch as he was not able to carry out his vow ([Sa1
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#024)..md). But he sinned still more
grievously in the war with the Amalekites, when he violated the express
command of the Lord by only executing the ban upon that nation as far as
he himself thought well, and thus by such utterly unpardonable conduct
altogether renounced the obedience which he owed to the Lord his God (1
Samuel 15). All these acts of transgression manifest an attempt to
secure the unconditional gratification of his own self-will, and a
growing disregard of the government of Jehovah in Israel; and the
consequence of the whole was simply this, that Saul not only failed to
accomplish that deliverance of the nation out of the power of its foes
which the Israelites had anticipated from their king, and was unable to
inflict any lasting humiliation upon the Philistines, but that he
undermined the stability of his monarchy, and brought about his own
rejection on the part of God.

From all this we may see very clearly, that the reason why the
occurrences connected with the election of Saul as king as fully
described on the one hand, and on the other only such incidents
connected with his enterprises after he began to reign as served to
bring out the faults and crimes of his monarchy, was, that Israel might
learn from this, that royalty itself could never secure the salvation it
expected, unless the occupant of the throne submitted altogether to the
will of the Lord. Of the other acts of Saul, the wars with the different
nations round about are only briefly mentioned, but with this remark,
that he displayed his strength and gained the victory in whatever
direction he turned ([Sa1 14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047).md),
simply because this statement was sufficient to bring out the brighter
side of his reign, inasmuch as this clearly showed that it might have
been a source of blessing to the people of God, if the king had only
studied how to govern his people in the power and according to the will
of Jehovah. If we examine the history of Saul's reign from this point of
view, all the different points connected with it exhibit the greatest
harmony. Modern critics, however, have discovered irreconcilable
contradictions in the history, simply because, instead of studying it
for the purpose of fathoming the plan and purpose which lie at the
foundation, they have entered upon the inquiry with a twofold
assumption: viz., (1) that the government of Jehovah over Israel was
only a subjective idea of the Israelitish nation, without any objective
reality; and (2) that the human monarchy was irreconcilably opposed to
the government of God. Governed by these axioms, which are derived not
from the Scriptures, but from the philosophical views of modern times,
the critics have found it impossible to explain the different accounts
in any other way than by the purely external hypothesis, that the
history contained in this book has been compiled from two different
sources, in one of which the establishment of the earthly monarchy was
treated as a violation of the supremacy of God, whilst the other took a
more favourable view. From the first source, 1 Samuel 8, [Sa1
10:17-27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017.md), [Sa1
10:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#011.md), and [Sa1
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#015.md) are said to have been derived;
and 1 Samuel 9-10:17, [Sa1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#013.md), and
[Sa1 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#014.md) from the second.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 8:1</span></span>

[Sa1 8:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#001.md)

The reason assigned for the appointment of Samuel's sons as judges is
his own advanced age. The inference which we might draw from this alone,
namely, that they were simply to support their father in the
administration of justice, and that Samuel had no intention of laying
down his office, and still less of making the supreme office of judge
hereditary in his family, is still more apparent from the fact that they
were stationed as judges of the nation in Beersheba, which was on the
southern border of Canaan ([Jdg 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md),
etc.; see at [Gen 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#031).md). The sons are
also mentioned again in [Ch1 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#013.md),
though the name of the elder has either been dropped out of the
Masoretic text or has become corrupt.

[Sa1 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#003.md)

The sons, however, did not walk in the ways of their father, but set
their hearts upon gain, took bribes, and perverted justice, in
opposition to the command of God (see [Exo
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#006.md), [Exo
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008.md); [Deu
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019).md).

[Sa1 8:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#004.md)

These circumstances (viz., Samuel's age and the degeneracy of his sons)
furnished the elders of Israel with the opportunity to apply to Samuel
with this request: "Appoint us a king to judge us, as all the nations"
(the heathen), sc., have kings. This request resembles so completely the
law of the king in [Deu 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#014.md)
(observe, for example, the expression כּכל־הגּוים), that the distinct
allusion to it is unmistakeable. The custom of expressly quoting the
book of the law is met with for the first time in the writings of the
period of the captivity. The elders simply desired what Jehovah had
foretold through His servant Moses, as a thing that would take place in
the future and for which He had even made provision.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 8:6</span></span>

Nevertheless "the thing displeased Samuel when they said," etc. This
serves to explain הדּבר, and precludes the supposition that Samuel's
displeasure had reference to what they had said concerning his own age
and the conduct of his sons. At the same time, the reason why the
petition for a king displeased the prophet, was not that he regarded the
earthly monarchy as irreconcilable with the sovereignty of God, or even
as untimely; for in both these cases he would not have entered into the
question at all, but would simply have refused the request as ungodly or
unseasonable. But "Samuel prayed to the Lord," i.e., he laid the matter
before the Lord in prayer, and the Lord said ([Sa1
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007).md): "Hearken unto the voice of the
people in all that they say unto thee." This clearly implies, that not
only in Samuel's opinion, but also according to the counsel of God, the
time had really come for the establishment of the earthly sovereignty in
Israel. In this respect the request of the elders for a king to reign
over them was perfectly justifiable; and there is no reason to say, with
Calvin, "they ought to have had regard to the times and conditions
prescribed by God, and it would no doubt have come to pass that the
regal power would have grown up in the nation. Although, therefore, it
had not yet been established, they ought to have waited patiently for
the time appointed by God, and not to have given way to their own
reasons and counsels apart from the will of God." For God had not only
appointed no particular time for the establishment of the monarchy; but
in the introduction to the law for the king, "When thou shalt say, I
will set a king over me," He had ceded the right to the representatives
of the nation to deliberate upon the matter. Nor did they err in this
respect, that while Samuel was still living, it was not the proper time
to make use of the permission that they had received; for they assigned
as the reason for their application, that Samuel had grown old:
consequently they did not petition for a king instead of the prophet who
had been appointed and so gloriously accredited by God, but simply that
Samuel himself would give them a king in consideration of his own age,
in order that when he should become feeble or die, they might have a
judge and leader of the nation. Nevertheless the Lord declared, "They
have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should not
reign over them. As they have always done from the day that I brought
them up out of Egypt unto this day, that they have forsaken me and
served other gods, so do they also unto thee." This verdict on the part
of God refers not so much to the desire expressed, as to the feelings
from which it had sprung. Externally regarded, the elders of Israel had
a perfect right to present the request; the wrong was in their hearts.

(Note: Calvin has correctly pointed out how much would have been
warrantable under the circumstances: "They might, indeed, have reminded
Samuel of his old age, which rendered him less able to attend to the
duties of his office, and also of the avarice of his sons and the
corruptness of the judges; or they might have complained that his sons
did not walk in his footsteps, and have asked that God would choose
suitable men to govern them, and thus have left the whole thing to His
will. And if they had done this, there can be no doubt that they would
have received a gracious and suitable answer. But they did not think of
calling upon God; they demanded that a king should be given them, and
brought forward the customs and institutions of other nations.")

They not only declared to the prophet their confidence in his
administration of his office, but they implicitly declared him incapable
of any further superintendence of their civil and political affairs.
This mistrust was founded upon mistrust in the Lord and His guidance. In
the person of Samuel they rejected the Lord and His rule. They wanted a
king, because they imagined that Jehovah their God-king was not able to
secure their constant prosperity. Instead of seeking for the cause of
the misfortunes which had hitherto befallen them in their own sin and
want of fidelity towards Jehovah, they searched for it in the faulty
constitution of the nation itself. In such a state of mind as this,
their desire for a king was a contempt and rejection of the kingly
government of Jehovah, and was nothing more than forsaking Jehovah to
serve other gods. (See [Sa1 10:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#018.md),
and [Sa1 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1012.htm#007.md)., where Samuel points
out to the people still more fully the wrong that they have committed.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 8:9</span></span>

In order to show them wherein they were wrong, Samuel was instructed to
bear witness against them, by proclaiming the right of the king who
would rule over them. בּהם תּעיד העד neither means "warn them earnestly"
(De Wette), nor "explain and solemnly expound to them" (Thenius). בּ
העיד means to bear witness, or give testimony against a person, i.e., to
point out to him his wrong. The following words, והגּדתּוגו, are to be
understood as explanatory, in the sense of "by proclaiming to them."
"The manner (mishpat) of the king" is the right or prerogative which the
king would claim, namely, such a king as was possessed by all the other
nations, and such an one as Israel desired in the place of its own
God-king, i.e., a king who would rule over his people with arbitrary and
absolute power.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 8:10</span></span>

In accordance with the instructions of God, Samuel told the people all
the words of Jehovah, i.e., all that God had said to him, as related in
[Sa1 8:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#007.md), and then proclaimed to
them the right of the king.

[Sa1 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011.md)

"He will take your sons, and set them for himself upon his chariots, and
upon his saddle-horses, and they will run before his chariot;" i.e., he
will make the sons of the people his retainers at court, his
charioteers, riders, and runners. The singular suffix attached to
בּמרכּבתּו is not to be altered, as Thenius suggests, into the plural
form, according to the lxx, Chald., and Syr., since the word refers, not
to war-chariots, but to the king's state-carriage; and פּרשׁ does not
mean a rider, but a saddle-horse, as in [Sa2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#006.md); [Kg1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006.md), etc.

[Sa1 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#012.md)

"And to make himself chiefs over thousands and over fifties;" - the
greatest and smallest military officers are mentioned, instead of all
the soldiers and officers (comp. [Num
31:14](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#014.md); [Kg2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#009.md)., with [Exo
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021.md), [Exo
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#025).md). ולשׂוּם is also dependent upon
יקּח ([Sa1 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011).md), - "and to plough his
field (חרישׁ, lit. the ploughed), and reap his harvest, and make his
instruments of war and instruments of his chariots."

[Sa1 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#013.md)

"Your daughters he will take as preparers of ointments, cooks, and
bakers," sc., for his court.

[Sa1 8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#014.md)

All their possessions he would also take to himself: the good (i.e., the
best) fields, vineyards, and olive-gardens, he would take away, and give
to his servants; he would tithe the sowings and vineyards (i.e., the
produce which they yielded), and give them to his courtiers and
servants. סריס, lit. the eunuch; here it is used in a wider sense for
the royal chamberlains. Even their slaves (men-servants and
maid-servants) and their beasts of draught and burden he would take and
use for his own work, and raise the tithe of the flock. The word
בּחוּריכם, between the slaves (men-servants and maid-servants) and the
asses, is very striking and altogether unsuitable; and in all
probability it is only an ancient copyist's error for בּקריכם, your
oxen, as we may see from the lxx rendering, τὰ βουκόλια. The servants
and maids, oxen and asses, answer in that case to one another; whilst
the young men are included among the sons in [Sa1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011.md), [Sa1
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#012.md). In this way the king would make
all the people into his servants or slaves. This is the meaning of the
second clause of [Sa1 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#017.md); for the
whole are evidently summed up in conclusion in the expression, "and ye
shall be his servants."

[Sa1 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#018.md)

Israel would then cry out to God because of its king, but the Lord would
not hear it then. This description, which contains a fearful picture of
the tyranny of the king, is drawn from the despotic conduct of the
heathen kings, and does not presuppose, as many have maintained, the
times of the later kings, which were so full of painful experiences.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 8:19</span></span>

With such a description of the "right of the king" as this, Samuel had
pointed out to the elders the dangers connected with a monarchy in so
alarming a manner, that they ought to have been brought to reflection,
and to have desisted from their demand. "But the people refused to
hearken to the voice of Samuel." They repeated their demand, "We will
have a king over us, that we also may be like all the nations, and that
our king may judge us, and go out before us, and conduct our battles."

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 8:21</span></span>

These words of the people were laid by Samuel before the Lord, and the
Lord commanded him to give the people a king. With this answer Samuel
sent the men of Israel, i.e., the elders, away. This is implied in the
words, "Go ye every man unto his city," since we may easily supply from
the context, "till I shall call you again, to appoint you the king you
desire."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 9](sa1009.md)

</div>
