<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa1031)  [Next](sa2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 0:0</span></span>

The Book of 2 Samuel

Introduction to 2 Samuel

(For more see the Introduction to 1 Samuel.)

This book contains the history of David's reign, arranged according to
its leading features: viz., (1) the commencement of his reign as king of
Judah at Hebron, whereas the other tribes of Israel adhered to the house
of Saul (2 Samuel 1-4); (2) his promotion to be king over all Israel,
and the victorious extension of his sway (2 Samuel 5-9); (3) the decline
of his power in consequence of his adultery (2 Samuel 10-20); (4) the
close of his reign (2 Samuel 21-24). Parallels and supplements to this
history, in which the reign of David is described chiefly in its
connection with the development of the kingdom of God under the Old
Testament, are given in 1 Chron 11-28, where we have an elaborate
description of the things done by David, both for the elevation and
organization of the public worship of God, and also for the
consolidation and establishment of the whole kingdom, and the general
administration of government.

I. David King Over Judah; and Ishbosheth King Over Israel

When David received the tidings at Ziklag of the defeat of Israel and
the death of Saul, he mourned deeply and sincerely for the fallen king
and his noble son Jonathan (2 Samuel 1). He then returned by the
permission of God into the land of Judah, namely to Hebron, and was
anointed king of Judah by the elders of that tribe; whereas Abner, the
cousin and chief general of Saul, took Ishbosheth, the only remaining
son of the fallen monarch, and made him king over the other tribes of
Israel at Mahanaim ([Sa2 2:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#001).md). This
occasioned a civil war. Abner marched to Gibeon against David with the
forces of Ishbosheth, but was defeated by Joab, David's
commander-in-chief, and pursued to Mahanaim, in which pursuit Abner slew
Asahel the brother of Joab, who was eagerly following him (2 Samuel
2:12-32). Nevertheless, the conflict between the house of David and the
house of Saul continued for some time longer, but with the former
steadily advancing and the latter declining, until at length Abner
quarrelled with Ishbosheth, and persuaded the tribes that had hitherto
adhered to him to acknowledge David as king over all Israel. After the
negotiations with David for effecting this, he was assassinated by Joab
on his return from Hebron-an act at which David not only expressed his
abhorrence by a solemn mourning for Abner, but declared it still more
openly by cursing Joab's crime (2 Samuel 3). Shortly afterwards,
Ishbosheth was assassinated in his own house by two Benjaminites; but
this murder was also avenged by David, who ordered the murderers to be
put to death, and the head of Ishbosheth, that had been delivered up to
him, to be buried in Abner's tomb ([Sa2
4:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2004.htm#001).md). Thus the civil war and the
threatened split in the kingdom were brought to an end, though without
any complicity on the part of David, but rather against his will, viz.,
through the death of Abner, the author of the split, and of Ishbosheth,
whom he had placed upon the throne, both of whom fell by treacherous
hands, and received the reward of their rebellion against the ordinance
of God. David himself, in his long school of affliction under Saul, had
learned to put all his hope in the Lord his God; and therefore, when
Saul was dead, he took no steps to grasp by force the kingdom which God
had promised him, or to remove his rival out of the way by crime.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 1](sa2001.md)

</div>
