<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2011)  [Next](sa2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 12:0</span></span>

Nathan's Reproof and David's Repentance. Conquest of Rabbah - 2 Samuel
12

The Lord left David almost a whole year in his sin, before sending a
prophet to charge the haughty sinner with his misdeeds, and to announce
the punishment that would follow. He did this at length through Nathan,
but not till after the birth of Bathsheba's child, that had been
begotten in adultery (compare [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014), [Sa2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015) with [Sa2
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#027)). Not only was the fruit of the
sin to be first of all brought to light, and the hardened sinner to be
deprived of the possibility of either denying or concealing his crimes,
but God would first of all break his unbroken heart by the torture of
his own conscience, and prepare it to feel the reproaches of His
prophet. The reason for this delay on the part of God in the threatening
of judgment is set forth very clearly in [Psa
32:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001), where David describes most
vividly the state of his heart during this period, and the sufferings
that he endured as long as he was trying to conceal his crime. And
whilst in this Psalm he extols the blessedness of a pardoned sinner, and
admonishes all who fear God, on the ground of his own inmost experience
after his soul had tasted once more the joy and confidence arising from
the full forgiveness of his iniquities; in the fifty-first Psalm, which
was composed after Nathan had been to him, he shows clearly enough that
the promise of divine forgiveness, which the prophet had given him in
consequence of his confession of his guilt, did not take immediate
possession of his soul, but simply kept him from despair at first, and
gave him strength to attain to a thorough knowledge of the depth of his
guilt through prayer and supplication, and to pray for its entire
removal, that his heart might be renewed and fortified through the Holy
Ghost. But Nathan's reproof could not possibly have borne this saving
fruit, if David had still been living in utter blindness as to the
character of his sin at the time when the prophet went to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 12:1</span></span>

[Sa2 12:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

Nathan's Reproof. - [Sa2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001). To
ensure the success of his mission, viz., to charge the king with his
crimes, Nathan resorted to a parable by which he led on the king to
pronounce sentence of death upon himself. The parable is a very simple
one, and drawn from life. Two men were living in a certain city: the one
was rich, and had many sheep and oxen; the other was poor, and possessed
nothing at all but one small lamb which he had bought and nourished
(יחיּה, lit. kept alive), so that it grew up in his house along with his
son, and was treated most tenderly and loved like a daughter. The custom
of keeping pet-sheep in the house, as we keep lap-dogs, is still met
with among the Arabs (vid., Bochart, Hieroz. i. p. 594). There came a
traveller (הלך, a journey, for a traveller) to the rich man (לאישׁ
without an article, the express definition being introduced afterwards
in connection with the adjective העשׁיר; vid., Ewald, 293a, p. 741), and
he grudged to take of his own sheep and oxen to prepare (sc., a meal)
for the traveller who had come to his house; "and he took the poor man's
lamb, and dressed it for the man that had come to him."

[Sa2 12:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#005)

David was so enraged at this act of violence on the part of the rich
man, that in the heat of his anger he pronounced this sentence at once:
"As the Lord liveth, the man who did this deserves to die; and the lamb
he shall restore fourfold." The fourfold restoration corresponds to the
law in [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001). The culprit himself
was also to be put to death, because the forcible robbery of a poor
man's pet-lamb was almost as bad as man-stealing.

[Sa2 12:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007)

The parable was so selected that David could not suspect that it had
reference to him and to his son. With all the greater shock therefore
did the words of the prophet, "Thou art the man," come upon the king.
Just as in the parable the sin is traced to its root - namely,
insatiable covetousness - so now, in the words of Jehovah which follow,
and in which the prophet charges the king directly with his crime, he
brings out again in the most unsparing manner this hidden background of
all sins, for the purpose of bringing thoroughly home to his heart the
greatness of his iniquity, and the condemnation it deserved. "Jehovah
the God of Israel hath said, I anointed thee king over Israel, and I
delivered thee out of the hand of Saul, and I gave thee thy master's
house and thy master's wives into thy bosom." These words refer to the
fact that, according to the general custom in the East, when a king
died, his successor upon the throne also succeeded to his harem, so that
David was at liberty to take his predecessor's wives; though we cannot
infer from this that he actually did so: in fact this is by no means
probable, since, according to [Sa1
14:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#050), Saul had but one wife, and
according to [Sa2 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007) only one
concubine, whom Abner appropriated to himself. "And gave thee the house
of Israel and Judah;" i.e., I handed over the whole nation to thee as
king, so that thou couldst have chosen young virgins as wives from all
the daughters of Judah and Israel. מעט ואם, "and if (all this was) too
little, I would have added to thee this and that."

[Sa2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#009)

"Why hast thou despised the word of Jehovah, to do evil in His eyes?
Thou hast slain Uriah the Hethite with the sword, and taken his wife to
be thy wife, and slain him with the sword of the Ammonites." The last
clause does not contain any tautology, but serves to strengthen the
thought by defining more sharply the manner in which David destroyed
Uriah. הרג, to murder, is stronger than הכּה; and the fact that it was
by the sword of the Ammonites, the enemies of the people of God, that
the deed was done, added to the wickedness.

[Sa2 12:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010)

The punishment answers to the sin. There is first of all ([Sa2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010)) the punishment for the murder
of Uriah: "The sword shall not depart from thy house for ever, because
thou hast despised me, and hast taken the wife," etc. "For ever" must
not be toned down to the indefinite idea of a long period, but must be
held firmly in its literal signification. the expression "thy house,"
however, does not refer to the house of David as continued in his
descendants, but simply as existing under David himself until it was
broken up by his death. The fulfilment of this threat commenced with the
murder of Amnon by Absalom ([Sa2
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#029)); it was continued in the death
of Absalom the rebel ([Sa2 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#014)), and
was consummated in the execution of Adonijah ([Kg1
2:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#024)).

[Sa2 12:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011)

But David had also sinned in committing adultery. It was therefore
announced to him by Jehovah, "Behold, I raise up mischief over thee out
of thine own house, and will take thy wives before thine eyes, and give
them to thy neighbour, that he may lie with thy wives before the eyes of
this sun (for the fulfilment of this by Absalom, see [Sa2
16:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021)). "For thou hast done it in
secret; but I will do this thing before all Israel, and before (in the
face of) the sun." David's twofold sin was to be followed by a twofold
punishment. For his murder he would have to witness the commission of
murder in his own family, and for his adultery the violation of his
wives, and both of them in an intensified form. As his sin began with
adultery, and was consummated in murder, so the law of just retribution
was also carried out in the punishment, in the fact that the judgments
which fell upon his house commenced with Amnon's incest, whilst
Absalom's rebellion culminated in the open violation of his father's
concubines, and even Adonijah lost his life, simply because he asked for
Abishag the Shunammite, who had lain in David's bosom to warm and
cherish him in his old age ([Kg1
2:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#023)).

[Sa2 12:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)

These words went to David's heart, and removed the ban of hardening
which pressed upon it. He confessed to the prophet, "I have sinned
against the Lord." "The words are very few, just as in the case of the
publican in the Gospel of Luke ([Luk
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013)). But that is a good sign of a
thoroughly broken spirit ... There is no excuse, no cloaking, no
palliation of the sin. There is no searching for a loophole, ... no
pretext put forward, no human weakness pleaded. He acknowledges his
guilt openly, candidly, and without prevarication" (Berleb. Bible). In
response to this candid confession of his sin, Nathan announced to him,
"The Lord also hath let thy sin pass by (i.e., forgiven it). Thou wilt
not die. Only because by this deed thou hast given the enemies of the
Lord occasion to blaspheme, the son that is born unto thee shall die."
נאץ, inf. abs. Piel, with chirek, because of its similarity in sound to
the following perfect (see Ewald, 240, c.). גּם, with which the apodosis
commences, belongs to the הבּן which follows, and serves to give
emphasis to the expression: "Nevertheless the son" (vid., Ges. 155, 2,
a.). David himself had deserved to die as an adulterer and murderer. The
Lord remitted the punishment of death, not so much because of his
heartfelt repentance, as from His own fatherly grace and compassion, and
because of the promise that He had given to David ([Sa2
7:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#011)), - a promise which rested
upon the assumption that David would not altogether fall away from a
state of grace, or commit a mortal sin, but that even in the worst cases
he would turn to the Lord again and seek forgiveness. The Lord therefore
punished him for this sin with the judgments announced in [Sa2
12:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010), as about to break upon him
and his house. But as his sin had given occasion to the enemies of the
Lord - i.e., not only to the heathen, but also to the unbelieving among
the Israelites themselves - to blaspheme or ridicule his religion and
that of all other believers also, the child that was begotten in
adultery and had just been born should die; in order, on the one hand,
that the father should atone for his adultery in the death of the son,
and, on the other hand, that the visible occasion for any further
blasphemy should be taken away: so that David was not only to feel the
pain of punishment in the death of his son, but was also to discern in
it a distinct token of the grace of God.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 12:15</span></span>

David's Penitential Grief, and the Birth of Solomon. - [Sa2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015). The last-mentioned punishment
was inflicted without delay. When Nathan had gone home, the Lord smote
the child, so that it became very ill.

[Sa2 12:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#016)

Then David sought God (in prayer) for the boy, and fasted, and went and
lay all night upon the earth. וּבא, "he came," not into the sanctuary of
the Lord ([Sa2 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#020) is proof to the
contrary), but into his house, or into his chamber, to pour out his
heart before God, and bend beneath His chastising hand, and refused the
appeal of his most confidential servants, who tried to raise him up, and
strengthen him with food. "The elders of his house," judging from [Gen
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#002), were the oldest and most
confidential servants, "the most highly honoured of his servants, and
those who had the greatest influence with him" (Clericus).

[Sa2 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#018)

On the seventh day, when the child died, the servants of David were
afraid to tell him of its death; for they said (to one another),
"Behold, while the child was still living, we spoke to him, and he did
not hearken to our voice; how should we say to him, now the child is
dead, that he should do harm?" (i.e., do himself an injury in the depth
of his anguish.)

[Sa2 12:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#019)

David saw at once what had happened from their whispering conversation,
and asked whether the child was dead. When they answered in the
affirmative, he rose up from the ground, washed and anointed himself,
and changed his clothes; that is to say, he laid aside all the signs of
penitential grief and mourning, went into the house of the Lord (the
holy tent upon Mount Zion) and worshipped, and then returned to his
house, and had food set before him.

[Sa2 12:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#021)

When his servants expressed their astonishment at all this, David
replied, "As long as the boy lived, I fasted and wept: for I thought
(said), Perhaps (who knows) the Lord may be gracious to me, that the
child may remain alive. But now he is dead, why should I fast? can I
bring him back again? I shall go to him, but he will not return to me."
On this O. v. Gerlach has the following admirable remarks: "In the case
of a man whose penitence was so earnest and so deep, the prayer for the
preservation of his child must have sprung from some other source than
excessive love of any created object. His great desire was to avert the
stroke, as a sign of the wrath of God, in the hope that he might be able
to discern, in the preservation of the child, a proof of divine favour
consequent upon the restoration of his fellowship with God. But when the
child was dead, he humbled himself under the mighty hand of God, and
rested satisfied with His grace, without giving himself up to fruitless
pain." This state of mind is fully explained in Ps 51, though his
servants could not comprehend it. The form יחנּני is the imperfect Kal,
יחנּני according to the Chethibh, though the Masoretes have substituted
as the Keri וחנּני, the perfect with vav consec.

[Sa2 12:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023)

[Sa2 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023) is paraphrased very
correctly by Clericus: "I shall go to the dead, the dead will not come
to me." - [Sa2 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024). David then
comforted his wife Bathsheba, and lived with her again; and she bare a
son, whom he called Solomon, the man of peace (cf. [Ch1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009)). David gave the child this name,
because he regarded his birth as a pledge that he should now become a
partaker again of peace with God, and not from any reference to the fact
that the war with the Ammonites was over, and peace prevailed when he
was born; although in all probability Solomon was not born till after
the capture of Rabbah and the termination of the Ammonitish war. His
birth is mentioned here simply because of its connection with what
immediately precedes. The writer adds (in [Sa2
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024), [Sa2
12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)), "And Jehovah loved him, and
sent by the hand (through the medium) of Nathan the prophet; and he
called his son Jedidiah (i.e., beloved of Jehovah), for Jehovah's sake."
The subject to ויּשׁלח (he sent) cannot be David, because this would not
yield any appropriate sense, but must be Jehovah, the subject of the
clause immediately preceding. "To send by the hand," i.e., to make a
mission by a person (vid., [Exo 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#013),
etc.), is equivalent to having a commission performed by a person, or
entrusting a person with a commission to another. We learn from what
follows, in what the commission with which Jehovah entrusted Nathan
consisted: "And he (Nathan, not Jehovah) called his (the boy's) name
Jedidiah." And if Nathan is the subject to "called," there is nothing to
astonish in the expression "because of the Lord." The idea is this:
Nathan came to David according to Jehovah's instructions, and gave
Solomon the name Jedidiah for Jehovah's sake, i.e., because Jehovah
loved him. The giving of such a name was a practical declaration on the
part of Jehovah that He loved Solomon, from which David could and was
intended to discern that the Lord had blessed his marriage with
Bathsheba. Jedidiah, therefore, was not actually adopted as Solomon's
name.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 12:26</span></span>

Conquest of Rabbah, and Punishment of the Ammonites (comp. [Ch1
20:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#001)). - "Joab fought against Rabbah
of the children of Ammon, and took the king's city." המּלוּכה עיר, the
capital of the kingdom, is the city with the exception of the acropolis,
as [Sa2 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#027) clearly shows, where the
captured city is called "the water-city." Rabbah was situated, as the
ruins of Ammn show, on both banks of the river (Moiet) Ammn (the upper
Jabbok), in a valley which is shut in upon the north and south by two
bare ranges of hills of moderate height, and is not more than 200 paces
in breadth. "The northern height is crowned by the castle, the ancient
acropolis, which stands on the north-western side of the city, and
commands the whole city" (see Burckhardt, Syria ii. pp. 612ff., and
Ritter, Erdkunde xv. pp. 1145ff.). After taking the water-city, Joab
sent messengers to David, to inform him of the result of the siege, and
say to him, "Gather the rest of the people together, and besiege the
city (i.e., the acropolis, which may have been peculiarly strong), and
take it, that I may not take the city (also), and my name be named upon
it," i.e., the glory of the conquest be ascribed to me. Luther adopts
this explanation in his free rendering, "and I have a name from it."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 12:29</span></span>

Accordingly David "gathered together all the people," - i.e., all the
men of war who had remained behind in the land; from which we may see
that Joab's besieging army had been considerably weakened during the
long siege, and at the capture of the water-city, - "and fought against
the acropolis, and took it."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 12:30</span></span>

He then took their king's crown ("their king," viz., the king of the
Ammonites) from off his (the king's) head; so that he had either been
taken prisoner or slain at the capture of the city. The weight of the
crown was "a talent of gold, and precious stones" (sc., were upon it):
as the writer of the Chronicles has correctly explained it by supplying
בּהּ. The Hebrew talent (equal to 3000 shekels) was 83 1/2 Dresden
pounds. But the strongest man could hardly have borne a crown of this
weight upon his head for however short a time; and David could scarcely
have placed it upon his own head. We must therefore assume that the
account of the weight is not founded upon actual weighing, but simply
upon an approximative estimate, which is somewhat too high. David also
took a great quantity of booty out of the city.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 12:31</span></span>

He also had the inhabitants executed, and that with cruel tortures. "He
sawed them in pieces with the saw and with iron harrows." בּמּגרה
ויּשׂם, "he put them into the saw," does not give any appropriate sense;
and there can be no doubt, that instead of וישׂם we should read ויּשׂר
(from שׂוּר): "he cut (sawed) them in pieces." הבּרזל וּבמגזרות, "and
with iron cutting tools." The meaning of the ἁπ. λεγ. מגזרות cannot be
more precisely determined. The current rendering, "axes or hatchets," is
simply founded upon the circumstance that גּזר, to cut, is applied in
[Kg2 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#004) to the felling of trees. The
reading in the Chronicles, וּבמּגרות, is evidently a copyist's error, as
we have already had בּמּגרה, "with the saw." The meaning of the next
clause is a disputed point, as the reading itself varies, and the
Masoretes read בּמּלבּן instead of the Chethibh במלכן, "he made them go
through brick-kilns," i.e., burnt them in brick-kilns, as the lxx and
Vulgate render it. On the other hand, Thenius takes the Chethibh under
his protection, and adopts Kimchi's explanation: "he led them through
Malchan, i.e., through the place where the Ammonites burned their
children in honour of their idol." Thenius would therefore alter בּמלכּם
into בּמלכּם or בּמּלכּם: "he offered them as sacrifices in their image
of Moloch. " But this explanation cannot be even grammatically
sustained, to say nothing of the arbitrary character of the alteration
proposed; for the technical expression למּלך בּאשׁ חעביר, "to cause to
go through the fire for Moloch" ([Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021)), is essentially different from
בּמּלך חעביר, to cause to pass through Moloch, an expression that we
never meet with. Moreover, it is impossible to see how burning the
Ammonites in the image of Moloch could possibly be "an obvious mode of
punishing idolatry," since the idolatry itself consisted in the fact
that the Ammonites burned their children to Moloch. So far as the
circumstances themselves are concerned, the cruelties inflicted upon the
prisoners are not to be softened down, as Daaz and others propose, by an
arbitrary perversion of the words into a mere sentence to hard labour,
such as sawing wood, burning bricks, etc. At the same time, the words of
the text do not affirm that all the inhabitants of Rabbah were put to
death in this cruel manner. בּהּ אשׁר העם (without כּל) refers no doubt
simply to the fighting men that were taken prisoners, or at the most to
the male population of the acropolis of Rabbah, who probably consisted
of fighting men only. In doing this, David merely retaliated upon the
Ammonites the cruelties with which they had treated their foes; since
according to [Amo 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013) they ripped up
women who were with child, and according to [Sa1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#002) their king Nahash would only make
peace with the inhabitants of Jabesh upon the condition that the right
eye of every one of them should be put out. It is sufficiently evident
from this, that the Ammonites had aimed at the most shameful
extermination of the Israelites. "Thus did he unto all the cities of the
Ammonites," i.e., to all the fortified cities that resisted the
Israelites. After the close of this war, David returned to Jerusalem
with all the men of war. The war with the Syrians and Ammonites,
including as it did the Edomitish war as well, was the fiercest in which
David was ever engaged, and was also the last great war of his life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa2013)

</div>
