<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2016)  [Next](sa2018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 17:1</span></span>

Ahithophel's advice frustrated by Hushai. - [Sa2
17:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#001). Ahithophel said still further
to Absalom, "I will choose out twelve thousand men, and arise, and
pursue after David this night; and fall upon him when he is exhausted
and weak, and fill him with alarm: so shall all the people that are with
him flee; and I will smite the king alone (when he is alone), and will
bring back all the people to thee." הלּילה, the night, is the night
following the day of David's flight and Absalom's entrance into
Jerusalem, as we may see very clearly from [Sa2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016). This advice was sagaciously
conceived; for if David had been attacked that night by a powerful army,
he might possibly have been defeated. אשׁיבה, to bring back, may be
explained on the supposition that Ahithophel regarded Absalom as king,
and those who had fled with David as rebels, who were to be brought back
under Absalom's sceptre. The following words, וגו הכּל כּשׁוּב, "as the
return of the whole (the whole nation) is the man," i.e., the return of
all is dependent upon David, for whom thou liest in wait, are somewhat
difficult, though the meaning of Ahithophel is evident enough from what
precedes: viz., if he is beaten, they will all come over to thee; "the
whole nation will be at peace" (שׁלוּם is used adverbially).

(Note: Consequently no conjectures are needed as to the rendering of the
words in the lxx, viz., καθὼς (al. ὅν τρόπον) ἐπιστρέρει ἡ νύμφη πρὸς
τὸν ἄνδρα αὐτῆς· πλὴν ψυχὴν ἀνδρὸς ἑνὸς σὺ ζητεῖς, such as Ewald,
Thenius, and Bttcher have attempted. For it is very obvious that ἡ νύμφη
πρὸς τὸν ἄνδρα αὐτῆς owes its origin simply to a false reading of האישׁ
הכּל as אישׁ הכּלּה, and that πλὴν ψυχὴν ἀνδρὸς ἑνός has been
interpolated by way of explanation from nothing but conjecture. No other
of the ancient versions contains the slightest trace of a different
reading from that given in the text.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 17:4</span></span>

Although this advice pleased Absalom and all the elders of Israel
(present), Absalom sent for Hushai the Archite to hear his opinion.
גּם־הוּא serves to strengthen the suffix in בּפיו (cf. Ewald, 311, a.).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 17:6</span></span>

In answer to Absalom's inquiry, "Shall we do his word (i.e., follow
Ahithophel's advice) or not?" Hushai said, "The advice is not good that
Ahithophel hath given this time;" and then still further explained ([Sa2
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#008)): "Thou knowest thy father and
his men, that they are heroes, and of a ferocious disposition (like [Jdg
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#025)), like a bear in the field
robbed of her young; and thy father is a man of war, and will not pass
the night with the people," sc., so that it would be possible to come
upon him unawares and slay him (לין with את, as in [Job
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#004)). The idea that ילין is to be
taken as a Hiphil, in the sense of "and does not let the people lodge
for the night" (Bttcher), is quite untenable, since it does not tally
with [Sa2 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#009), "Behold, he is hid now
in one of the pits, or one of the places (פּחתים are hiding-places that
are strong by nature, מקומת are places rendered strong by art); and it
comes to pass that he falls upon them at the first: so will men hear it,
and say a defeat has taken place among the people that follow Absalom."
נפל with בּ, as in [Jos 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#007), to fall
upon a person. The subject to נפל is David, but it is not mentioned as
being evident enough from the context; so that there is no necessity for
the emendation נפלו, which Thenius proposes. The suffix בּהם relates to
those making the attack, the hosts of Absalom. Thenius has given the
meaning correctly: "The report that David has made an attack will be
sufficient to give rise to the belief that our men have sustained a
severe defeat."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 17:10</span></span>

"And even if he (the hearer, [Sa2
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#009)) be a brave man, who has a lion's
heart (lion-like courage), he will be thrown into despair; for all
Israel knows that thy father is a hero, and brave men (are those) who
are with him."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 17:11</span></span>

"Yea (כּי, profecto), I advise: let all Israel be gathered round thee
from Dan to Beersheba (see at [Jdg
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001)), numerous as the sand by the
sea; and thou thyself go into the war." פניך, thy person, i.e., thou
thyself be marching. The plural הלכים is used because of פניך. For בּ
הלך, to enter into anything, see [Kg1
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004); [Isa
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#016); [Isa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002). קרב, war, the early translators
have confounded with קרב.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 17:12</span></span>

"And come we to him (if we come upon him) in one of the places where he
is found, we let ourselves down upon him, as the dew falls upon the
earth; and of him and all the men with him there will not be one left."
נחנוּ might be a contraction of אנחנוּ, as in [Gen
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#011); [Exo
16:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007), etc.: "so we upon him,"
equivalent to "so shall we come upon him." But if this were the meaning,
we should expect עליו והינוּ. It is more correct, therefore, to take
נחנוּ ekat ot as the first pers. perf. of נוּח, as the early translators
have done: so do we let ourselves down upon him. (For נוּח as applied to
an army encamping, see [Isa 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002), [Isa
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#019); and as denoting the swarming of
flies and grasshoppers, [Isa 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#019) and
[Exo 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#014).) In Ahithophel's opinion,
it would be possible with a very small army to crush David and his
little band, however brave his followers might be, and in fact to
annihilate them altogether.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 17:13</span></span>

"And if he draw back into a city, all Israel lays ropes to that city,
and we drag it to the brook, till there is not even a little stone found
there." עד־הנּחל: inasmuch as fortified cities were generally built upon
mountains. צרור signifies a little stone, according to the ancient
versions. Hushai speaks in hyperboles of the irresistible power which
the whole nation would put forth when summoned together for battle, in
order to make his advice appear the more plausible.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 17:14</span></span>

And he secured his end. Absalom and all Israel thought his advice better
than that of Ahithophel; for it was intended to commend itself to
Absalom and his supporters. "The counsel appeared safe; at the same time
it was full of a certain kind of boasting, which pleased the younger
men" (Clericus). All that Hushai had said about the bravery and heroism
of David and his followers, was well founded. The deception lay in the
assumption that all the people from Dan to Beersheba would crowd around
Absalom as one man; whereas it might easily be foreseen, that after the
first excitement of the revolution was over, and great calmness ensued,
a large part of the nation and army would gather round David. But such a
possibility as this never entered the minds of Absalom and his
supporters. It was in this that the divine sentence referred to in [Sa2
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#014) was seen: "The Lord had
commanded (appointed) it, to defeat the good counsel of Ahithophel, that
he might bring the evil (intended) upon Absalom."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 17:15</span></span>

David is informed of what has occurred. - [Sa2
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015), [Sa2
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#016). Hushai communicated without
delay to the priests Zadok and Abiathar the advice which had been given
to Absalom both by Ahithophel and himself, and requested them to make it
known to David as quickly as possible. "Stay not the night," he said,
"by the ferries (עברות, as in [Sa2
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#028)) of the desert; but rather go
over, lest the king and all the people with him be destroyed." וגם, "and
indeed," or after a negative clause, "but rather." למּלך יבלּע is either
"there will be a devouring," i.e., destruction, to the king, it will
fall upon him; of if we supply the subject from the previous clause
תּעבור עבור as Bttcher proposes, "that it (the crossing over) may not be
swallowed up or cut off from the king." There is nothing to justify
Ewald's explanation, "it (misfortune) is swallowed by him." Hushai
recommended of course an immediate crossing of the Jordan; because he
did not know whether Absalom would really act upon his advice, although
he had expressed his approval of it, or whether he might not change his
mind and follow Ahithophel's counsel.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 17:17</span></span>

"Jonathan and Ahimaaz (the sons of the priests: [Sa2
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#027)) stood at the Rogel spring (the
present well of Job or Nehemiah, at the south-east corner of Jerusalem:
see at [Job 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#007)), and the
maid-servant (of one of the high priests) went and told them (Hushai's
message), and they went and told it to king David; for they durst not
let themselves be seen to come into the city." They had therefore been
staying at the Rogel spring outside the city. After what had taken place
publicly, according to [Sa2 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#024).,
Absalom could not be in any doubt as to the views of the high priests.
Consequently their sons could not come into the city, with the intention
of leaving it again directly, to inform David of the occurrences that
had taken place there as he had requested ([Sa2
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#028)). The clause "and they went and
told David" anticipates the course of the affair, according to the
general plan adopted by Hebrew historians, of communicating the result
at the very outset wherever they possibly could.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 17:18</span></span>

"And a lad (servant) saw them, and told Absalom." Absalom had most
likely set spies to watch the priests and their sons. But the two sons
who had noticed the spy hurried into the house of a man at Bahurim, who
had a well (or cistern that was dry at the time) in his court, and went
down into the well.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 17:19</span></span>

And the man's wife spread a covering (המּסך, the covering which she had
close at hand) over the well (over the opening into the cistern), and
scattered groats (ריפות, peeled barley: [Pro
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#022)) upon it, so that nothing was
noticed. The Vulgate explanation is a very good one: "quasi siccans
ptisanas" (as if drying peeled barley).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 17:20</span></span>

When Absalom's servants came and asked for the priest's sons, the woman
said, They have gone over the little water-brook (המּים מיכל, ἁπ. λεγ.),
and thus led them wrong, so that they did not find them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 17:21</span></span>

When they had gone away, the priest's sons came up out of the well and
brought David the news, saying, "Go quickly over the water, for thus
hath Ahithophel counselled against you;" whereupon David and all the
people with him went hastily over the Jordan. "Till the morning dawn not
one was missed who had not gone over." אחד עד, lit. even to one there
was not any one missed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 17:23</span></span>

It is still further stated in conclusion, that when Ahithophel saw that
his advice was not carried out, he saddled his ass and returned to his
home, and there set his house in order and hanged himself, because he
could foresee that Absalom would lose his cause through not taking his
advice, and it would then be all over with himself. Thus was David's
prayer ([Sa2 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#031)) fulfilled.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 17:24</span></span>

The account of the civil war, which terminated with Absalom's defeat and
death, is introduced in [Sa2 17:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#024)
with a description of the relative position of the two hostile parties.
David had come to Mahanaim, a city probably a fortified one, on the east
of the Jordan, not far from the ford of the Jabbok (see at [Sa2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#008)). Absalom had also gone over the
Jordan, "he and all the men with him," i.e., all the fighting men that
he had gathered together according to Hushai's advice, and encamped in
the land of Gilead.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 17:25</span></span>

Absalom had made Amasa captain over his army instead of Joab, who had
remained true to David, and had gone with his king to Mahanaim. Amasa
was the son of a man named Jithra, היּשׂראלי, who had gone in to (i.e.,
had seduced) Abigail, the daughter of Nahash and sister of Zeruiah,
Joab's mother. He was therefore an illegitimate cousin of Joab. The
description given of Jithra as ישׂראלי is very striking, since there was
no reason whatever why it should be stated that Amasa's father was an
Israelite. The Seventy have therefore given ὁ Ἰεζραηλίτης, i.e., sprung
from Jezreel, where David's wife Ahinoam came from ([Sa1
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#003)); but they have done so
apparently from mere conjecture. The true reading is evidently
היּשׁמעאלי, an Ishmaelite, according to [Ch1
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#017), where the name is written
Jether, a contracted form of Jithra. From the description given of
Abigail as a daughter of Nahash and sister of Zeruiah, not of David,
some of the earlier commentators have very justly concluded that Abigail
and Zeruiah were only step-sisters of David, i.e., daughters of his
mother by Nahash and not by Jesse.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 17:27</span></span>

When David came to Mahanaim, some of the wealthier citizens of the land
to the east of the Jordan supplied the men who were with him with
provisions. This is mentioned as the first sign that the people had not
all fallen away from David, but that some of the more distinguished men
were still firm in their adherence. Shobi, the son of Nahash or Rabbah,
the capital of the Ammonites (see [Sa2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001)), was possibly a son of Nahash
the deceased king of the Ammonites, and brother of Hanun, who was
defeated by David ([Sa2 10:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#001)), and
one of those to whom David had shown favour and kindness when Rabbah was
taken. At the same time, it is also quite possible that Shobi may have
been an Israelite, who was merely living in the capital of the
Ammonites, which had been incorporated into the kingdom of David, as it
is evident from [Sa2 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025) that Nahash
was not an uncommon name among the Israelites. Machir the son of Ammiel
of Lodebar (see at [Sa2 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#004)), and
Barsillai of Roglim the Gileadite. Roglim was a town in Gilead, which is
only mentioned once again, viz., in [Sa2
19:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#032), and of which nothing further is
known. They brought "bedding, basins, earthenware, and wheat, barley,
meal, and parched grains, beans, lentils and parched." The position of
the verb, which is not placed between the subject and the object of the
sentence, but only at the close of the whole series of objects, is
certainly unusual; but this does not warrant any alteration of the text.
For if we were to supply a verb before משׁכּב, as having fallen out of
the text, it would be necessary, since הגּישׁוּ follows without a
copula, to divide the things enumerated into two classes, so as to
connect one portion of the objects with הגּישׁוּ, which is obviously
unnatural. The early translators who interpolate a verb before the
objects have therefore also supplied the copula w before הגּישׁוּ. There
is still less ground for supplying the number 10, as having dropped out
before משׁכּב and ספּות, as the lxx have done, since none of the
translators of the other ancient versions had any such reading. משׁכּב,
couch or bed, is used here for bedding. ספּות, basins, probably
field-kettles. The repetition of וקלי is very striking; nevertheless the
second must not be struck out without further ground as a supposed
copyist's error. As they not only ate parched ears or grains of wheat
(see at [Lev 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#014)), but were also in
the habit of drying pulse, pease, and lentils before eating them (vid.,
Harmar, Beobachtungen, i. pp. 255-6), the second קלי may be understood
as referring to parched pulse. The ἁπ. λεγ. בּקר שׁפות signifies,
according to the Chaldee and the Rabbins, cheese of oxen (i.e., of
cows), and according to the conjecture of Roediger (Ges. Thes. p. 1462),
a peculiar kind of cheese, such as the Aeneze in the province of Nedjid
still make,

(Note: According to Burckhardt's account (Die Beduinen, p. 48), "after
they have taken the butter from the butter-milk, they beat the latter
again till it coagulates, and then dry it till it is quite hard. It is
then rubbed to pieces, and in the spring every family stores up two or
three lasts of it, which they eat mixed with butter.")

and for which the term σαφὼθ βοῶν retained by the lxx was probably the
technical name. Theodotus, on the other hand, has γαλαθηνὰ μοσχάρια,
milch-calves; and the Vulgate pingues vitulos, - both of them renderings
which can certainly be sustained from the Arabic usage of speech, and
would be more in accordance with the situation of the words, viz., after
צאן. אמרוּ כּי, "for they said (or thought) the people have become
hungry and faint and thirty in the desert," i.e., in their flight to
Mahanaim.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 18](sa2018)

</div>
