<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2007)  [Next](sa2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 8:0</span></span>

David's Wars, Victories, and Ministers of State - 2 Samuel 8

To the promise of the establishment of this throne there is appended a
general enumeration of the wars by which David secured the supremacy of
Israel over all his enemies round about. In this survey all the nations
are included with which war had ever been waged by David, and which he
had conquered and rendered tributary: the Philistines and Moabites, the
Syrians of Zobah and Damascus, Toi of Hamath, the Ammonites, Amalekites,
and Edomites. It is very evident from this, that the chapter before us
not only treats of the wars which David carried on after receiving the
divine promise mentioned in 2 Samuel 7, but of all the wars of his
entire reign. The only one of which we have afterwards a fuller account
is the war with the Ammonites and their allies the Syrians (2 Samuel 10
and 11), and this is given on account of its connection with David's
adultery. In the survey before us, the war with the Ammonites is only
mentioned quite cursorily in [Sa2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012), in the account of the booty
taken from the different nations, which David dedicated to the Lord.
With regard to the other wars, so far as the principal purpose was
concerned-namely, to record the history of the kingdom of God-it was
quite sufficient to give a general statement of the fact that these
nations were smitten by David and subjected to his sceptre. But if this
chapter contains a survey of all the wars of David with the nations that
were hostile to Israel, there can be no doubt that the arrangement of
the several events is not strictly regulated by their chronological
order, but that homogeneous events are grouped together according to a
material point of view. There is a parallel to this chapter in 1 Chron
18.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 8:1</span></span>

Subjugation of the Philistines. - In the introductory formula, "And it
came to pass afterwards," the expression "afterwards" cannot refer
specially to the contents of 2 Samuel 7, for reasons also given, but
simply serves as a general formula of transition to attach what follows
to the account just completed, as a thing that happened afterwards. This
is incontestably evident from a comparison of [Sa2
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#001), where the war with the Ammonites
and Syrians, the termination and result of which are given in the
present chapter, is attached to what precedes by the same formula, "It
came to pass afterwards" (cf. [Sa2
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001)). "David smote the Philistines
and subdued them, and took the bridle of the mother out of the hand of
the Philistines," i.e., wrested the government from them and made them
tributary. The figurative expression Metheg-ammah, "bridle of the
mother," i.e., the capital, has been explained by Alb. Schultens (on
[Job 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011)) from an Arabic idiom, in
which giving up one's bridle to another is equivalent to submitting to
him. Gesenius also gives several proofs of this (Thes. p. 113). Others,
for example Ewald, render it arm-bridle; but there is not a single
passage to support the rendering "arm" for ammah. The word is a feminine
form of אם, mother, and only used in a tropical sense. "Mother" is a
term applied to the chief city or capital, both in Arabic and Phoenician
(vid., Ges. Thes. p. 112). The same figure is also adopted in Hebrew,
where the towns dependent upon the capital are called its daughters
(vid., [Jos 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#045), [Jos
15:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#047)). In [Ch1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#001) the figurative expression is
dropped for the more literal one: "David took Gath and its daughters out
of the hand of the Philistines," i.e., he wrested Gath and the other
towns from the Philistines. The Philistines had really five cities,
every one with a prince of its own ([Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003)). This was the case even in the
time of Samuel ([Sa1 6:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#016)). But in
the closing years of Samuel, Gath had a king who stood at the head of
all the princes of the Philistines ([Sa1
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#002)., cf. [Sa1
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002)). Thus Gath became the capital of
the land of the Philistines, which held the bridle (or reins) of
Philistia in its own hand. The author of the Chronicles has therefore
given the correct explanation of the figure. The one suggested by Ewald,
Bertheau, and others, cannot be correct, - namely, that David wrested
from the Philistines the power which they had hitherto exercised over
the Israelites. The simple meaning of the passage is, that David wrested
from the Philistines the power which the capital had possessed over the
towns dependent upon it, i.e., over the whole of the land of Philistia;
in other words, he brought the capital (Gath) and the other towns of
Philistia into his own power. The reference afterwards made to a king of
Gath in the time of Solomon in [Kg1
2:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#039) is by no means at variance with
this; for the king alluded to was one of the tributary sovereigns, as we
may infer from the fact that Solomon ruled over all the kings on this
side of the Euphrates as far as to Gaza ([Kg1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001), [Kg1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 8:2</span></span>

Subjugation of Moab. - "He smote Moab (i.e., the Moabites), and measured
them with the line, making them lie down upon the ground, and measured
two lines (i.e., two parts) to put to death, and one line full to keep
alive." Nothing further is known about either the occasion or the
history of this war, with the exception of the cursory notice in [Ch1
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#022), that Benaiah, one of David's
heroes, smote two sons of the king of Moab, which no doubt took place in
the same war. In the earliest period of his flight from Saul, David had
met with a hospitable reception from the king of Moab, and had even
taken his parents to him for safety ([Sa1
22:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#003)). But the Moabites must have
very grievously oppressed the Israelites afterwards, that David should
have inflicted a severer punishment upon them after their defeat, than
upon any other of the nations that he conquered, with the exception of
the Ammonites ([Sa2 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031)), upon whom
he took vengeance for having most shamefully insulted his ambassadors
([Sa2 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#002).). The punishment
inflicted, however, was of course restricted to the fighting men who had
been taken prisoners by the Israelites. They were ordered to lie down in
a row upon the earth; and then the row was measured for the purpose of
putting two-thirds to death, and leaving one-third alive. The Moabites
were then made "servants" to David (i.e., they became his subjects),
"bringing gifts" (i.e., paying tribute).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 8:3</span></span>

Conquest and Subjugation of the King of Zobah, and of the Damascene
Syrians. - [Sa2 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003). The situation of
Zobah cannot be determined. The view held by the Syrian church
historians, and defended by Michaelis, viz., that Zobah was the ancient
Nisibis in northern Mesopotamia, has no more foundation to rest upon
than that of certain Jewish writers who suppose it to have been Aleppo,
the present Haleb. Aleppo is too far north for Zobah, and Nisibis is
quite out of the range of the towns and tribes in connection with which
the name of Zobah occurs. In [Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047), compared with [Sa2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012) of this chapter, Zobah, or Aram
Zobah as it is called in [Sa2 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006) and
[Psa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002), is mentioned along with
Ammon, Moab, and Edom, as a neighbouring tribe and kingdom to the
Israelites; and, according to [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), [Sa2
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#005), and [Sa2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#009) of the present chapter, it is to
be sought for in the vicinity of Damascus and Hamath towards the
Euphrates. These data point to a situation to the north-east of Damascus
and south of Hamath, between the Orontes and Euphrates, and in fact
extending as far as the latter according to [Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003), whilst, according to [Sa2
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#016), it even reached beyond it with
its vassal-chiefs into Mesopotamia itself. Ewald (Gesch. iii. p. 195)
has therefore combined Zobah, which was no doubt the capital, and gave
its name to the kingdom, with the Sabe mentioned in Ptol. v. 19, - a
town in the same latitude as Damascus, and farther east towards the
Euphrates. The king of Zobah at the time referred to is called Hadadezer
in the text (i.e., whose help is Hadad); but in [Sa2
10:16-19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#016) and throughout the Chronicles
he is called Hadarezer. The first is the original form; for Hadad, the
name of the sun-god of the Syrians, is met with in several other
instances in Syrian names (vid., Movers, Phnizier). David smote this
king "as he was going to restore his strength at the river (Euphrates)."
ידו השׁיב does not mean to turn his hand, but signifies to return his
hand, to stretch it out again over or against any one, in all the
passage in which the expression occurs. It is therefore to be taken in a
derivative sense in the passage before us, and signifying to restore or
re-establish his sway. The expression used in the Chronicles ([Sa2
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003)), ידו הצּיב, has just the same
meaning, since establishing or making fast presupposes a previous
weakening or dissolution. Hence the subject of the sentence "as he
went," etc., must be Hadadezer and not David; for David could not have
extended his power to the Euphrates before the defeat of Hadadezer. The
Masoretes have interpolated P'rath (Euphrates) after "the river," as in
the text of the Chronicles. This is correct enough so far as the sense
is concerned, but it is by no means necessary, as the nahar (the river
κ. ἐξ.) is quite sufficient of itself to indicate the Euphrates.

There is also a war between David and Hadadezer and other kings of Syria
mentioned in 2 Samuel 10; and the commentators all admit that that war,
in which David defeated these kings when they came to the help of the
Ammonites, is connected with the war mentioned in the present chapter.
But the connection is generally supposed to be this, that the first of
David's Aramaean wars is given in 2 Samuel 8, the second in 2 Samuel 10;
for no other reason, however, than because 2 Samuel 10 stands after 2
Samuel 8. This view is decidedly an erroneous one. According to the
chapter before us, the war mentioned there terminated in the complete
subjugation of the Aramaean kings and kingdoms. Aram became subject to
David, paying tribute ([Sa2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006)). Now,
though the revolt of subjugated nations from their conquerors is by no
means a rare thing in history, and therefore it is perfectly conceivable
in itself that the Aramaeans should have fallen away from David when he
was involved in the war with the Ammonites, and should have gone to the
help of the Ammonites, such an assumption is precluded by the fact that
there is nothing in 2 Samuel 10 about any falling away or revolt of the
Aramaeans from David; but, on the contrary, these tribes appear to be
still entirely independent of David, and to be hired by the Ammonites to
fight against him. But what is absolutely decisive against this
assumption, is the fact that the number of Aramaeans killed in the two
wars is precisely the same (compare [Sa2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004) with [Sa2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018)): so that it may safely be
inferred, not only that the war mentioned in 2 Samuel 10, in which the
Aramaeans who had come to the help of the Ammonites were smitten by
David, was the very same as the Aramaean war mentioned in 2 Samuel 8,
but of which the result only is given; but also that all the wars which
David waged with the Aramaeans, like his war with Edom ([Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013).), arose out of the Ammonitish
war (2 Samuel 10), and the fact that the Ammonites enlisted the help of
the kings of Aram against David ([Sa2
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006)). We also obtain from 2 Samuel 10
an explanation of the expression "as he went to restore his power (Eng.
Ver. 'recover his border') at the river," since it is stated there that
Hadadezer was defeated by Joab the first time, and that, after
sustaining this defeat, he called the Aramaeans on the other side of the
Euphrates to his assistance, that he might continue the war against
Israel with renewed vigour ([Sa2
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#013), [Sa2
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#015).). The power of Hadadezer had no
doubt been crippled by his first defeat; and in order to restore it, he
procured auxiliary troops from Mesopotamia with which to attack David,
but he was defeated a second time, and obliged to submit to him ([Sa2
10:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#017)). In this second engagement
"David took from him (i.e., captured) seventeen hundred horse-soldiers
and twenty thousand foot" ([Sa2 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004),
compare [Sa2 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018)). This decisive
battle took place, according to [Ch1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#003), in the neighbourhood of Hamath,
i.e., Epiphania on the Orontes (see at [Num
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#021), and [Gen
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#018)), or, according to [Sa2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018) of this book, at Helam, - a
difference which may easily be reconciled by the simple assumption that
the unknown Helam was somewhere near to Hamath. Instead of 1700
horse-soldiers, we find in the Chronicles ([Ch1
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#004)) 1000 chariots and 7000 horsemen.
Consequently the word receb has no doubt dropped out after אלף in the
text before us, and the numeral denoting a thousand has been confounded
with the one used to denote a hundred; for in the plains of Syria seven
thousand horsemen would be a much juster proportion to twenty thousand
foot than seventeen hundred. (For further remarks, see at [Sa2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018).) "And David lamed all the
cavalry," i.e., he made the war-chariots and cavalry perfectly useless
by laming the horses (see at [Jos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006), [Jos
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#009)), - "and only left a hundred
horses." The word receb in these clauses signifies the war-horses
generally, - not merely the carriage-horses, but the riding-horses as
well, - as the meaning cavalry is placed beyond all doubt by [Isa
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007), and it can hardly be imagined
that David would have spared the riding-horses.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 8:5</span></span>

After destroying the main force of Hadadezer, David turned against his
ally, against Aram-Damascus, i.e., the Aramaeans, whose capital was
Damascus. Dammesek (for which we have Darmesek in the Chronicles
according to its Aramaean form), Damascus, a very ancient and still a
very important city of Syria, standing upon the Chrysorrhoas (Pharpar),
which flows through the centre of it. It is situated in the midst of
paradisaical scenery, on the eastern side of the Antilibanus, on the
road which unites Western Asia with the interior. David smote 22,000
Syrians of Damascus, placed garrisons in the kingdom, and made it
subject and tributary. נציבים are not governors of officers, but
military posts, garrisons, as in [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005); [Sa1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 8:7</span></span>

Of the booty taken in these wars, David carried the golden shields which
he took from the servants, i.e., the governors and vassal princes, of
Hadadezer, to Jerusalem.

(Note: The lxx has this additional clause: "And Shishak the king of
Egypt took them away, when he went up against Jerusalem in the days of
Rehoboam the son of Solomon," which is neither to be found in the
Chronicles nor in any other ancient version, and is merely an inference
drawn by the Greek translator, or by some copyists of the lxx, from [Kg1
14:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#025), taken in connection with the
fact that the application of the brass is given in [Ch1
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#008). But, in the first place, the
author of this gloss has overlooked the fact that the golden shields of
Rehoboam which Shishak carried away, were not those captured by David,
but those which Solomon had had made, according to [Kg1
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#016), for the retainers of his
palace; and in the second place, he has not observed that, according to
[Sa2 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#011) of this chapter, and also of
the Chronicles, David dedicated to the Lord all the gold and silver that
he had taken, i.e., put it in the treasury of the sanctuary to be
reserved for the future temple, and that at the end of his reign he
handed over to his son and successor Solomon all the gold, silver, iron,
and brass that he had collected for the purpose, to be applied to the
building of the temple ([Ch1 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#014).,
[Ch1 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#002).). Consequently the clause
in question, which Thenius would adopt from the lxx into our own text,
is nothing more than the production of a presumptuous Alexandrian, whose
error lies upon the very surface, so that the question of its
genuineness cannot for a moment be entertained.)

Shelet signifies "a shield," according to the Targums and Rabbins, and
this meaning is applicable to all the passages in which the word occurs;
whilst the meaning "equivalent" cannot be sustained either by the
rendering πανοπλία adopted by Aquila and Symmachus in [Kg2
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#010), or by the renderings of the
Vulgate, viz., arma in loc. and armatura in [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004), or by an appeal to the etymology
(vid., Gesenius' Thes. and Dietrich's Lexicon).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 8:8</span></span>

And from the cities of Betach and Berothai David took very much brass,
with which, according to [Ch1 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#008),
Solomon made the brazen sea, and the brazen columns and vessels of the
temple. The lxx have also interpolated this notice into the text. The
name Betach is given as Tibhath in the Chronicles; and for Berothai we
have Chun. As the towns themselves are unknown, it cannot be decided
with certainty which of the forms and names are the correct and original
ones. מבּטח appears to have been written by mistake for מטּבח. This
supposition is favoured by the rendering of the lxx, ἐκ τῆς Μετεβάκ; and
by that of the Syriac also (viz., Tebach). On the other hand, the
occurrence of the name Tebah among the sons of Nahor the Aramaean in
[Gen 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#024) proves little or nothing,
as it is not known that he founded a family which perpetuated his name;
nor can anything be inferred from the fact that, according to the more
modern maps, there is a town of Tayibeh to the north of Damascus in 35
north lat., as there is very little in common between the names Tayibeh
and Tebah. Ewald connects Berothai with the Barathena of Ptol. v. 19 in
the neighbourhood of Saba. The connection is a possible one, but it is
not sufficiently certain to warrant us in founding any conclusions upon
it with regard to the name Chun which occurs in the Chronicles; so that
there is no ground whatever for the opinion that it is a corruption of
Berothai.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 8:9</span></span>

After the defeat of the king of Zobah and his allies, Toi king of Hamath
sought for David's friendship, sending his son to salute him, and
conveying to him at the same time a considerable present of vessels of
silver, gold, and brass. The name Toi is written Tou in the Chronicles,
according to a different mode of interpretation; and the name of the son
is given as Hadoram in the Chronicles, instead of Joram as in the text
before us. The former is evidently the true reading, and Joram an error
of the pen, as the Israelitish name Joram is not one that we should
expect to find among Aramaeans; whilst Hadoram occurs in [Ch1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#021) in the midst of Arabic names, and
it cannot be shown that the Hadoram or Adoram mentioned in [Ch2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2010.htm#018) and [Kg1
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#018) was a man of Israelitish
descent. The primary object of the mission was to salute David ("to ask
him of peace;" cf. [Gen 43:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#027), etc.),
and to congratulate him upon his victory ("to bless him because he had
fought," etc.); for Toi had had wars with Hadadezer. "A man of wars"
signifies a man who wages wars (cf. [Ch1
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#003); [Isa
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#013)). According to [Ch1
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#003), the territory of the king of
Hamath bordered upon that of Hadadezer, and the latter had probably
tried to make king Toi submit to him. The secret object of the
salutation, however, was no doubt to secure the friendship of this new
and powerful neighbour.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 8:11</span></span>

David also sanctified Toi's presents to the Lord (handed them over to
the treasury of the sanctuary), together with the silver and gold which
he had sanctified from all the conquered nations, from Aram, Moab, etc.
Instead of הקדּישׁ אשׁר the text of the Chronicles has נשׂא אשׁר, which
he took, i.e., took as booty. Both are equally correct; there is simply
a somewhat different turn given to the thought.

(Note: Bertheau erroneously maintains that נשׂא אשׁר, which he took, is
at variance with [Sa2 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#007), as,
according to this passage, the golden shields of Hadadezer did not
become the property of the Lord. But there is not a word to that effect
in [Sa2 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#007). On the contrary, his
taking the shields to Jerusalem implies, rather than precludes, the
intention to devote them to the purposes of the sanctuary.)

In the enumeration of the conquered nations in [Sa2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012), the text of the Chronicles
differs from that of the book before us. In the first place, we find
"from Edom" instead of "from Aram;" and secondly, the clause "and of the
spoil of Hadadezer, son of Rehob king of Zobah," is altogether wanting
there. The text of the Chronicles is certainly faulty here, as the name
of Aram (Syria) could not possibly be omitted. Edom could much better be
left out, not "because the conquest of Edom belonged to a later period,"
as Movers maintains, but because the conquest of Edom is mentioned for
the first time in the subsequent verses. But if we bear in mind that in
[Sa2 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012) of both texts not only are
those tribes enumerated the conquest of which had been already noticed,
but all the tribes that David ever defeated and subjugated, even the
Ammonites and Amalekites, to the war with whom no allusion whatever is
made in the present chapter, we shall see that Edom could not be
omitted. Consequently "from Syria" must have dropped out of the text of
the Chronicles, and "from Edom" out of the one before us; so that the
text in both instances ran originally thus, "from Syria, and from Edom,
and from Moab." For even in the text before us, "from Aram" (Syria)
could not well be omitted, notwithstanding the fact that the booty of
Hadadezer is specially mentioned at the close of the verse, for the
simple reason that David not only made war upon Syria-Zobah (the kingdom
of Hadadezer) and subdued it, but also upon Syria-Damascus, which was
quite independent of Zobah.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 8:13</span></span>

"And David made (himself) a name, when he returned from smiting (i.e.,
from the defeat of) Aram, (and smote Edom) in the valley of Salt,
eighteen thousand men." The words enclosed in brackets are wanting in
the Masoretic text as it has come down to us, and must have fallen out
from a mistake of the copyist, whose eye strayed from את־ארם to את־אדום;
for though the text is not "utterly unintelligible" without these words,
since the passage might be rendered "after he had smitten Aram in the
valley of Salt eighteen thousand men," yet this would be decidedly
incorrect, as the Aramaeans were not smitten in the valley of Salt, but
partly at Medeba ([Ch1 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#007)) and Helam
([Sa2 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#017)), and partly in their own
land, which was very far away from the Salt valley. Moreover, the
difficulty presented by the text cannot be removed, as Movers supposes,
by changing את־ארם (Syria) into את־אדום (Edom), as the expression בּשׁבו
("when he returned") would still be unexplained. The facts were probably
these: Whilst David, or rather Israel, was entangled in the war with the
Ammonites and Aramaeans, the Edomites seized upon the opportunity, which
appeared to them a very favourable one, to invade the land of Israel,
and advanced as far as the southern extremity of the Dead Sea. As soon,
therefore, as the Aramaeans were defeated and subjugated, and the
Israelitish army had returned from this war, David ordered it to march
against the Edomites, and defeated them in the valley of Salt. This
valley cannot have been any other than the Ghor adjoining the Salt
mountain on the south of the Dead Sea, which really separates the
ancient territories of Judah and Edom (Robinson, Pal. ii. 483). There
Amaziah also smote the Edomites at a later period ([Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007)). We gather more concerning this
war of David from the text of the Chronicles ([Sa2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#012)) taken in connection with [Kg1
11:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015), and [Psa
60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002). According to the Chronicles, it
was Abishai the son of Zeruiah who smote the Edomites. This agrees very
well not only with the account in [Sa2
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#010)., to the effect that Abishai
commanded a company in the war with the Syrians and Ammonites under the
generalship of his brother Joab, but also with the heading to [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), in which it is stated that
Joab returned after the defeat of Aram, and smote the Edomites in the
valley of Salt, twelve thousand men; and with [Kg1
11:15-16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015), in which we read that when
David was in Edom, Joab, the captain of the host, came up to bury the
slain, and smote every male in Edom, and remained six months in Edom
with all Israel, till he had cut off every male in Edom. From this
casual but yet elaborate notice, we learn that the war with the Edomites
was a very obstinate one, and was not terminated all at once. The
difference as to the number slain, which is stated to have been 18,000
in the text before us and in the Chronicles, and 12,000 in the heading
to [Psa 60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), may be explained in a
very simple manner, on the supposition that the reckonings made were
only approximative, and yielded different results;

(Note: Michaelis adduces a case in point from the Seven Years' War.
After the battle of Lissa, eight or twelve thousand men were reported to
have been taken prisoners; but when they were all counted, including
those who fell into the hands of the conquerors on the second, third,
and fourth days of the flight, the number amounted to 22,000.)

and the fact that David is named as the victor in the verse before us,
Joab in [Psa 60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001), and Abishai in
the Chronicles, admits of a very easy explanation after what has just
been observed. The Chronicles contain the most literal account. Abishai
smote the Edomites as commander of the men engaged, Joab as
commander-in-chief of the whole army, and David as king and supreme
governor, of whom the writer of the Chronicles affirms, "The Lord helped
David in all his undertakings." After the defeat of the Edomites, David
placed garrisons in the land, and made all Edom subject to himself. [Sa2
8:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#015). David's Ministers. - To the
account of David's wars and victories there is appended a list of his
official attendants, which is introduced with a general remark as to the
spirit of his government. As king over all Israel, David continued to
execute right and justice.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 8:16</span></span>

The chief ministers were the following: - Joab (see at [Sa2
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#018)) was "over the army," i.e.,
commander-in-chief. Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud, of whom nothing
further is known, was mazcir, chancellor; not merely the national
annalist, according to the Septuagint and Vulgate (ἐπὶ τῶν ὑπομνημάτην,
ὑπομνηματόγραφος; a commentariis), i.e., the recorder of the most
important incidents and affairs of the nation, but an officer resembling
the magister memoriae of the later Romans, or the waka nuvis of the
Persian court, who keeps a record of everything that takes place around
the king, furnishes him with an account of all that occurs in the
kingdom, places his vis upon all the king's commands, and keeps a
special protocol of all these things (vid., Chardin, Voyages v. p. 258,
and Paulsen, Regierung der Morgenlnder, pp. 279-80).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 8:17</span></span>

Zadok the son of Ahitub, of the line of Eleazar ([Ch1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#008); [Ch1
6:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#011)), and Ahimelech the son of
Abiathar, were cohanim, i.e., officiating high priests; the former at
the tabernacle at Gibeon ([Ch1 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#039)),
the latter probably at the ark of the covenant upon Mount Zion. Instead
of Ahimelech, the Chronicles have Abimelech, evidently through a
copyist's error, as the name is written Ahimelech in [Ch1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003), [Ch1
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006). But the expression "Ahimelech
the son of Abiathar" is apparently a very strange one, as Abiathar was a
son of Ahimelech according to [Sa1
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#020), and in other passages Zadok and
Abiathar are mentioned as the two high priests in the time of David
([Sa2 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#024), [Sa2
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#035); [Sa2
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#015); [Sa2
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#012); [Sa2
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#025)). This difference cannot be set
aside, as Movers, Thenius, Ewald, and other suppose, by transposing the
names, so as to read Abiathar the son of Ahimelech; for such a solution
is precluded by the fact that, in [Ch1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003), [Ch1
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006), [Ch1
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#031), Ahimelech is mentioned along
with Zadok as head of the priests of the line of Ithamar, and according
to [Ch1 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006) he was the son of
Abiathar. It would therefore be necessary to change the name Ahimelech
into Abiathar in this instance also, both in [Ch1
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#003) and [Ch1
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#006), and in the latter to transpose
the two names. But there is not the slightest probability in the
supposition that the names have been changed in so many passaGes. We are
therefore disposed to adopt the view held by Bertheau and Oehler, viz.,
that Abiathar the high priest, the son of Ahimelech, had also a son
named Ahimelech, as it is by no means a rare occurrence for grandfather
and grandson to have the same names (vid., [Ch1
6:4-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#004)), and also that this (the
younger) Ahimelech performed the duties of high priest in connection
with his father, who was still living at the commencement of Solomon's
reign ([Kg1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#027)), and is mentioned in
this capacity, along with Zadok, both here and in the book of
Chronicles, possibly because Abiathar was ill, or for some other reason
that we cannot discover. As Abiathar was thirty or thirty-five years old
at the time when his father was put to death by Saul, according to what
has already been observed at [Sa1
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#003), and forty years old at the death
of Saul, he was at least forty-eight years old at the time when David
removed his residence to Mount Zion, and might have had a son of
twenty-five years of age, namely the Ahimelech mentioned here, who could
have taken his father's place in the performance of the functions of
high priest when he was prevented by illness or other causes. The
appearance of a son of Abiathar named Jonathan in [Sa2
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#027); [Sa2
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#017), [Sa2
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#020), is no valid argument against
this solution of the apparent discrepancy; for, according to these
passages, he was still very young, and may therefore have been a younger
brother of Ahimelech. The omission of any allusion to Ahimelech in
connection with Abiathar's conspiracy with Adonijah against Solomon
([Kg1 1:42-43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#042)), and the reference to
his son Jonathan alone, might be explained on the supposition that
Ahimelech had already died. But as there is no reference to Jonathan at
the time when his father was deposed, no stress is to be laid upon the
omission of any reference to Ahimelech. Moreover, when Abiathar was
deposed after Solomon had ascended the throne, he must have been about
eighty years of age. Seraiah was a scribe. Instead of Seraiah, we have
Shavsha in the corresponding text of the Chronicles, and Sheva in the
parallel passage [Sa2 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#025). Whether
the last name is merely a mistake for Shavsha, occasioned by the
dropping of שׁ, or an abbreviated form of Shisha and Shavsha, cannot be
decided. Shavsha is not a copyist's error, for in [Kg1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#003) the same man is unquestionably
mentioned again under the name of Shisha, who is called Shavsha in the
Chronicles, Sheva (שׁיא) in the text of [Sa2
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#025), and here Seraiah. Seraiah also
is hardly a copyist's error, but another form for Shavsha or Shisha. The
scribe was a secretary of state; not a military officer, whose duty it
was to raise and muster the troops, for the technical expression for
mustering the people was not ספר, but פּקד (cf. [Sa2
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#002), [Sa2
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#004),[Sa2
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#009); [Ch1
21:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#005), etc.).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 8:18</span></span>

Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, a very brave hero of Kabzeel (see at [Sa2
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#020).), was over the Crethi and
Plethi. Instead of והכּרתי, which gives no sense, and must be connected
in some way with [Kg1 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#038), [Kg1
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#044), we must read הכּרתי על according
to the parallel passage [Sa2 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023),
and the corresponding text of the Chronicles. The Crethi and Plethi were
the king's body-guard, σωματοφύλακες (Josephus, Ant. vii. 5, 4). The
words are adjectives in form, but with a substantive meaning, and were
used to indicate a certain rank, lit. the executioners and runners, like
השּׁלישׁי ([Sa2 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#008)). כּרתי, from
כּרת, to cut down or exterminate, signifies confessor, because among the
Israelites (see at [Kg1 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#025)), as in
fact throughout the East generally, the royal halberdiers had to execute
the sentence of death upon criminals. פּלתי, from פלת (to fly, or be
swift), is related to פּלט, and signifies runners. It is equivalent to
רץ, a courier, as one portion of the halberdiers, like the ἄγγαροι of
the Persians, had to convey the king's orders to distant places (vid.,
[Ch2 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#006)). This explanation is
confirmed by the fact that the epithet והרצים הכּדי was afterwards
applied to the king's body-guard ([Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004), [Kg2
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#019)), and that הכּרי for הכּרתי
occurs as early as [Sa2 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023).

כּרי, from כוּר, fodit, perfodit, is used in the same sense.

(Note: Gesenius (Thes. s. vv.) and Thenius (on [Kg1
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#038)) both adopt this explanation; but
the majority of the modern theologians decide in favour of Lakemacher's
opinion, to which Ewald has given currency, viz., that the Crethi or
Cari are Cretes or Carians, and the Pelethi Philistines (vid., Ewald,
Krit. Gramm. p. 297, and Gesch. des Volkes Israel, pp. 330ff.; Bertheau,
zur Geschichte Israel, p. 197; Movers, Phnizier i. p. 19). This view is
chiefly founded upon the fact that the Philistines are called C'rethi in
[Sa1 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014), and C'rethim in [Zep
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005) and [Eze
25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016). But in both the passages from
the prophets the name is used with special reference to the meaning of
the word הכרית, viz., to exterminate, cut off, as Jerome has shown in
the case of Ezekiel by adopting the rendering interficiam interfectores
(I will slay the slayers) for את־כּרתים הכרתּי. The same play upon the
words takes place in Zephaniah, upon which Strauss has correctly
observed: "Zephaniah shows that this violence of theirs had not been
forgotten, calling the Philistines Crethim for that very reason, ut sit
nomen et omen." Besides, in both these passages the true name
Philistines stands by the side as well, so that the prophets might have
used the name Crethim (slayers, exterminators) without thinking at all
of [Sa1 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#014). In this passage it is
true the name Crethi is applied to a branch of the Philistine people
that had settled on the south-west of Philistia, and not to the
Philistines generally. The idea that the name of a portion of the royal
body-guard was derived from the Cretans is precluded, first of all, by
the fact of its combination with הפּלתי (the Pelethites); for it is a
totally groundless assumption that this name signifies the Philistines,
and is a corruption of פלשׁתּים. There are no such contractions as these
to be found in the Semitic languages, as Gesenius observes in his
Thesaurus (l.c.), "quis hujusmodi contractionem in linguis Semiticis
ferat?" Secondly, it is also precluded by the strangeness of such a
combination of two synonymous names to denote the royal body-guard. "Who
could believe it possible that two synonymous epithets should be joined
together in this manner, which would be equivalent to saying Englishmen
and Britons?" (Ges. Thes. p. 1107). Thirdly, it is opposed to the title
afterwards given to the body-guard, והרצים הכּרי ([Kg2
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#004), [Kg2
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#019)), in which the Cari correspond
to the Crethi, as in [Sa2 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#023), and
ha-razim to the Pelethi; so that the term pelethi can no more signify a
particular tribe than the term razim can. Moreover, there are other
grave objections to this interpretation. In the first place, the
hypothesis that the Philistines were emigrants from Crete is merely
founded upon the very indefinite statements of Tacitus (Hist. v. 3, 2),
"Judaeos Creta insula profugos novissima Libyae insedisse memorant," and
that of Steph. Byz. (s. v. Γαζά), to the effect that the city of Gaza
was once called Minoa, from Minos a king of Crete, - statements which,
according to the correct estimate of Strauss (l.c.), "have all so
evidently the marks of fables that they hardly merit discussion," at all
events when opposed to the historical testimony of the Old Testament
([Deu 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023); [Amo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007)), to the effect that the
Philistines sprang from Caphtor. And secondly, "it is a priori
altogether improbable, that a man with so patriotic a heart, and so
devoted to the worship of the one God, should have surrounded himself
with a foreign and heathen body-guard" (Thenius). This argument cannot
be invalidated by the remark "that it is well known that at all times
kings and princes have preferred to commit the protection of their
persons to foreign mercenaries, having, as they thought, all the surer
pledge of their devotedness in the fact that they did not spring from
the nation, and were dependent upon the ruler alone" (Hitzig). For, in
the first place, the expression "at all times" is one that must be very
greatly modified; and secondly, this was only done by kings who did not
feel safe in the presence of their own people, which was not the case
with David. And the Philistines, those arch-foes of Israel, would have
been the last nation that David would have gone to for the purpose of
selecting his own body-guard. It is true that he himself had met with a
hospitable reception in the land of the Philistines; but it must be
borne in mind that it was not as king of Israel that he found refuge
there, but as an outlaw flying from Saul the king of Israel, and even
then the chiefs of the Philistines would not trust him ([Sa1
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#003).). And when Hitzig appeals still
further to the fact, that according to [Sa2
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#002), David handed over the command of
a third of his army to a foreigner who had recently entered his service,
having emigrated from Gath with a company of his fellow-countrymen ([Sa2
15:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#019), [Sa2
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#022)), and who had displayed the
greatest attachment to the person of David ([Sa2
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#021)), it is hardly necessary to
observe that the fact of David's welcoming a brave soldier into his
army, when he had come over to Israel, and placing him over a division
of the army, after he had proved his fidelity so decidedly as Ittai had
at the time of Absalom's rebellion, is no proof that he chose his
body-guard from the Philistines. Nor can [Sa2
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#018) be adduced in support of this,
as the notion that, according to that passage, David had 600 Gathites in
his service as body-guard, is simply founded upon a misinterpretation of
the passage mentioned.)

And David's sons were כּהנים ("confidants"); not priests, domestic
priests, court chaplains, or spiritual advisers, as Gesenius, De Wette,
and others maintain, but, as the title is explained in the corresponding
text of the Chronicles, when the title had become obsolete, "the first
at the hand (or side) of the king." The correctness of this explanation
is placed beyond the reach of doubt by [Kg1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#005), where the cohen is called, by way
of explanation, "the king's friend." The title cohen may be explained
from the primary signification of the verb כּהן, as shown in the
corresponding verb and noun in Arabic ("res alicujus gerere," and
"administrator alieni negotii"). These cohanim, therefore, were the
king's confidential advisers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 9](sa2009)

</div>
