<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2012)  [Next](sa2014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 13:0</span></span>

Amnon's Incest, and Absalom's Fratricide - 2 Samuel 13

The judgments threatened to king David in consequence of his sin with
Bathsheba soon began to fall upon him and upon his house, and were
brought about by sins and crimes on the part of his own sons, for which
David was himself to blame, partly because of his own indulgence and
want of discipline, and partly because of the bad example that he had
set them. Having grown up without strict paternal discipline, simply
under the care of their different mothers, who were jealous of one
another, his sons fancied that they might gratify their own fleshly
lusts, and carry out their own ambitious plans; and from this there
arose a series of crimes, which nearly cost the king his life and
throne. Amnon, David's eldest son, led the way with his forcible
violation of his step-sister Tamar (vv. 1-22). The crime was avenged by
her own brother Absalom, who treacherously assassinated Amnon, in
consequence of which he was obliged to flee to Geshur and take refuge
with his father-in-law (vv. 23-39).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 13:1</span></span>

Amnon's Incest. - [Sa2 13:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001). The
following occurrences are assigned in a general manner to the times
succeeding the Ammonitish war, by the words "And it came to pass after
this;" and as David did not marry Maacah the mother of Absalom and Tamar
till after he had been made king at Hebron (see [Sa2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)), they cannot well have taken
place before the twentieth year of his reign. Amnon, the eldest son of
David by Ahinoam the Jezreelite ([Sa2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002)), loved Tamar, the beautiful
sister of his step-brother Absalom, so passionately that he became ill
in consequence, because he could not get near to her as she was a
virgin. [Sa2 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001) and [Sa2
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#002) form one period. ויּצר is a
continuation of אהרי־כן ויהי; and the words from וּאבשׁלום to בּן־דּוד
are a circumstantial clause. ויּצר: literally "it became narrow
(anxious) to Amnon, even to making himself ill," i.e., he quite pined
away, not "he pretended to be ill" (Luther), for it was not till
afterwards that he did this according to Jonadab's advice ([Sa2
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#005)). התהלּות: to make one's self
ill, here to become ill, in [Sa2 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#005)
to pretend to be ill. The clause היא בתוּלה כּי is to be joined to the
one which follows: "because she was a virgin, and it seemed impossible
to him to do anything to her." The maidenly modesty of Tamar evidently
raised an insuperable barrier to the gratification of his lusts.

[Sa2 13:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#003)

Amnon's miserable appearance was observed by his cousin Jonadab, a very
crafty man, who asked him what was the reason, and then gave him advice
as to the way in which he might succeed in gratifying his desires.
Shimeah is called Shammah in [Sa1
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#009).

[Sa2 13:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#004)

"Why art thou so wasting away (דּל, thin, spare, here equivalent to
wasting away, looking miserable), king's son, from morning to morning?"
i.e., day by day. "The morning" is mentioned because sick persons look
worst in the morning. The advice given in [Sa2
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#005), - viz., "Lay thee down upon thy
bed, and pretend to be ill; and when thy father comes to visit thee, say
to him, May my sister Tamar come to me, and give me to eat?" etc., - was
very craftily devised, as Amnon's wretched appearance would favour his
pretence that he was ill, and it might be hoped that an affectionate
father would gratify him, since even if the wish seemed a strange one,
it might easily be accounted for from the marvellous desires of persons
who are ill, particularly with regard to food-desires which it is often
very difficulty to gratify.

[Sa2 13:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#006)

Amnon acted upon the advice, and begged his father, when he came to ask
him how he was, to allow his sister Tamar to come and bake two
heart-cakes for him before his eyes, which she very speedily did. לבּב
is a denom. from לבבות, to make or bake heart-cakes. לבבות is a
heart-strengthening kind of pastry, a kind of pancake, which could be
very quickly made. It is evident from these verses that the king's
children lived in different houses. Probably each of the king's wives
lived with her children in one particular compartment of the palace.

[Sa2 13:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#009)

"And she took the pan and shook out (what she had prepared) before him.
The ἁπ. λεγ. משׂרת signifies a frying-pan or sauce-pan, according to the
ancient versions. The etymology is uncertain. But Amnon refused to eat,
and, like a whimsical patient, he then ordered all the men that were
with him to go out; and when this had been done, he told Tamar to bring
the food into the chamber, that he might eat it from her hand; and when
she handed him the food, he laid hold of her, and said, "Come, lie with
me, my sister!"

[Sa2 13:12-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#012)

Tamar attempted to escape by pointing to the wickedness of such a
desire: "Pray, do not, my brother, do not humble me; for they do not
such things in Israel: do not this folly." The words recall [Gen
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#007), where the expression "folly"
(nebalah) is first used to denote a want of chastity. Such a sin was
altogether out of keeping with the calling and holiness of Israel (vid.,
[Lev 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#008).). "And I, whither should I
carry my shame?" i.e., shame and contempt would meet me everywhere. "And
thou wouldst be as one of the fools in Israel." We should both of us
reap nothing but shame from it. What Tamar still further said, "Now
therefore, I pray thee, speak to the king, for he will not refuse me to
thee," is no doubt at variance with the law which prohibits marriage
between step-brothers and sisters ([Lev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009), [Lev
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#011); [Lev
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#017)); but it by no means proves that
the laws of Leviticus were not in existence at the time, nor does it
even presuppose that Tamar was ignorant of any such law. She simply said
this, as Clericus observes, "that she might escape from his hands by any
means in her power, and to avoid inflaming him still more and driving
him to sin by precluding all hope of marriage."

(Note: Josephus adopts this explanation: "This she said, as desirous to
avoid her brother's violent passion at present" (Ant. viii. 8, 1).)

We cannot therefore even infer from these words of hers, that she really
thought the king could grant a dispensation from the existing hindrances
to their marriage.

[Sa2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#014)

Amnon would not listen to her, however, but overpowered her, forced her,
and lay with her.

[Sa2 13:15-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#015)

Amnon had no sooner gratified his animal passion, than his love to the
humbled sister turned into hatred, which was even greater than his
(previous) love, so that he commanded her to get up and go. This sudden
change, which may be fully explained from a psychological point of view,
and is frequently exemplified still in actual life, furnishes a striking
proof that lust is not love, but simply the gratification of the animal
passions.

[Sa2 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#016)

Tamar replied, "Do not become the cause of this great evil, (which is)
greater than another that thou hast done to me, to thrust me away,"
i.e., do not add to the great wrong which thou hast done me the still
greater one of thrusting me away. This is apparently the only admissible
explanation of the difficult expression אל־אדות, as nothing more is
needed than to supply תּהי. Tamar calls his sending her away a greater
evil than the one already done to her, because it would inevitably be
supposed that she had been guilty of some shameful conduct herself, that
the seduction had come from her; whereas she was perfectly innocent, and
had done nothing but what affection towards a sick brother dictated,
whilst it was impossible for her to call for help (as prescribed in [Deu
22:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#027)), because Amnon had sent the
servants away, and Tamar could not in any case expect assistance from
them.

[Sa2 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#017)

Amnon then called the boy who waited upon him, and ordered him to put
out this person (the sister he had humbled), and to bolt the door behind
her, so that it had the appearance of her having made a shameful
proposal to him.

[Sa2 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#018)

Before stating that this command was obeyed, the writer inserts this
remark: "She (Tamar) wore a long dress with sleeves (see [Gen
37:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#003)); for in this manner did the
virgin daughters of the king dress themselves with mantles." מעילים is
an accusative belonging to תּלבּשׁנה, and the meaning is that the king's
daughters, who were virgins, wore long dresses with sleeves as cloaks.
The cetoneth passim was not an ordinary under-garment, but was worn over
the plain cetoneth or tunic, and took the place of the ordinary mel
without sleeves. Notwithstanding this dress, by which a king's daughter
could at once be recognised, Amnon's servant treated Tamar like a common
woman, and turned her out of the house.

[Sa2 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#019)

And Tamar took ashes upon her head, rent her sleeve-dress (as a sign of
grief and pain at the disgrace inflicted upon her), laid her hand upon
her head (as a sign that a grievous trouble had come upon her, that the
hand of God was resting as it were upon her: vid., [Jer
2:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#037)), and "went going and cried,"
i.e., crying aloud as she went along.

[Sa2 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#020)

Then Absalom said to her, namely when she came home mourning in this
manner, "Has Amnon thy brother been with thee?" This was a euphemism for
what had taken place (cf. [Gen 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#010)),
as Absalom immediately conjectures. "And now, my sister, be silent; it
is thy brother, do not take this thing to heart." Absalom quieted the
sister, because he was determined to take revenge, but wished to conceal
his plan of vengeance for the time. So Tamar remained in her brother's
house, "and indeed desolate," i.e., as one laid waste, with the joy of
her life hopelessly destroyed. It cannot be proved that שׁמם ever means
single or solitary.

[Sa2 13:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#021)

When David heard "all these things," he became very wrathful; but
Absalom did not speak to Amnon "from good to evil" (i.e., either good or
evil, not a single word: [Gen 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#050)),
because he hated him for having humbled his sister. The lxx add to the
words "he (David) was very wroth," the following clause: "He did not
trouble the spirit of Amnon his son, because he loved him, for he was
his first-born." This probably gives the true reason why David let such
a crime as Amnon's go unpunished, when the law enjoined that incest
should be punished with death ([Lev
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#017)); at the same time it is nothing
but a subjective conjecture of the translators, and does not warrant us
in altering the text. The fact that David was contented to be simply
angry is probably to be accounted for partly from his own consciousness
of guilt, since he himself had been guilty of adultery; but it arose
chiefly from his indulgent affection towards his sons, and his
consequent want of discipline. This weakness in his character bore very
bitter fruit.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 13:23</span></span>

Absalom's Revenge and Flight. - [Sa2
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#023), [Sa2
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#024). Absalom postponed his revenge
for two full years. He then "kept sheep-shearing," which was celebrated
as a joyous festival (see [Sa1 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002),
[Sa1 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#008)), "at Baal-hazor, near
Ephraim," where he must therefore have had some property. The situation
of Baal-hazor cannot be precisely determined. The clause "which (was)
beside Ephraim" points to a situation on the border of the
tribe-territory of Ephraim (juxta Ephraim, according to the Onom. s.v.
Baalasor); for the Old Testament never mentions any city of that name.
This definition does not exactly tally with v. Raumer's conjecture (Pal.
p. 149), that Baal-Hazor may have been preserved in Tell Asr ((Rob. Pal.
ii. p. 151, iii. p. 79); for this Tell is about five Roman miles to the
north-east of Bethel, i.e., within the limits of the tribe of Ephraim.
There is greater probability in the suggestion made by Ewald and others,
that Baal-hazor is connected with the Hazor of Benjamin ([Neh
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#033)), though the situation of Hazor
has not yet been thoroughly decided; and it is merely a conjecture of
Robinson's that it is to be found in Tell Asr. The following statement,
that "Absalom invited all the king's sons" (sc., to the feast), somewhat
anticipates the course of events: for, according to [Sa2
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#024), Absalom invited the king
himself, together with his courtiers; and it was not till the king
declined the invitation for himself, that Absalom restricted his
invitation to the royal princes.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 13:25</span></span>

The king declined the invitation that he might not be burdensome to
Absalom. Absalom pressed him indeed, but he would not go, and blessed
him, i.e., wished him a pleasant and successful feast (see [Sa1
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#014)).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 13:26</span></span>

Then Absalom said, "And not (i.e., if thou doest not go), may my brother
Amnon go with me?" The king would not give his consent to this; whether
from suspicion cannot be determined with certainty, as he eventually
yielded to Absalom's entreaties and let Amnon and all the other king's
sons go. From the length of time that had elapsed since Amnon's crime
was committed, without Absalom showing any wish for revenge, David might
have felt quite sure that he had nothing more to fear. But this long
postponement of revenge, for the purpose of carrying it out with all the
more certainty, is quite in the spirit of the East.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa2 13:28</span></span>

Absalom then commanded his servants to put Amnon to death without fear,
as he had commanded, as soon as his heart should become merry with wine
and he (Absalom) should tell them to smite him. The arrangement of the
meal is passed over as being quite subdrdinate to the main purpose of
the narrative; and the clause added by the lxx at the close of [Sa2
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#027), καὶ ἐποίησεν ἈβεσσαλὼϚ πότον
κατὰ τὸν τοῦ βασιλέως, is nothing more than an explanatory gloss, formed
according to [Sa1 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#036). The words
"Have not I commanded you?" implied that Absalom would take the
responsibility upon himself.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 13:29</span></span>

The servants did as he commanded, whereupon the other king's sons all
fled upon their mules. - [Sa2 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#030).
But whilst they were on the road, the report of what Absalom had done
reached the ears of the king, and, as generally happens in such cases,
with very great exaggeration: "Absalom hath slain all the king's sons,
and there is not one of them left."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 13:31</span></span>

The king rent his clothes with horror at such a deed, and sat down upon
the ground, and all his servants (courtiers) stood motionless by, with
their clothes rent as well. This is the rendering adopted by Bttcher, as
נצּב has frequently the idea of standing perfectly motionless (e.g.,
[Num 22:23-24](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#023); [Exo
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#020), etc.).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 13:32</span></span>

Then Jonadab, the same person who had helped Amnon to commit his crime,
said, "Let not my lord say (or think) that they have slain all the young
men the king's sons, but Amnon alone is dead; for it was laid upon the
mouth of Absalom from the day that he forced his sister Tamar." The
meaning is either "they might see it (the murder of Amnon) by his
mouth," or "they might gather it from what he said." שׂימה היתה: it was
a thing laid down, i.e., determined (vid., [Exo
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#013)). The subject, viz., the thing
itself, or the intended murder of Amnon, may easily be supplied from the
context. אם כּי is undoubtedly used in the sense of "no but." The
negation is implied in the thought: Let the king not lay it to heart,
that they say all the king's sons are dead; it is not so, but only Amnon
is dead. Jonadab does not seem to speak from mere conjecture; he is much
too sure of what he says. He might possibly have heard expressions from
Absalom's lips which made him certain as to how the matter stood.

[Sa2 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#034)

"And Absalom fled." This statement follows upon [Sa2
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#029). When the king's sons fled upon
their mules, Absalom also took to flight.

[Sa2 13:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#030) are a parenthesis, in
which the writer describes at once the impression made upon the king and
his court by the report of what Absalom had done. The apparently
unsuitable position in which this statement is placed may be fully
explained from the fact, that the flight of Absalom preceded the arrival
of the rest of the sons at the king's palace. The alteration which
Bttcher proposes to make in the text, so as to remove this statement
altogether on account of its unsuitable position, is proved to be
inadmissible by the fact that the account of Absalom's flight cannot
possibly be left out, as reference is made to it again afterwards ([Sa2
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037), [Sa2
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#038), "Absalom had fled"). The other
alterations proposed by Thenius in the text of [Sa2
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#034), [Sa2
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037), [Sa2
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#038), are just as arbitrary and out
of place, and simply show that this critic was ignorant of the plan
adopted by the historian. His plan is the following: To the account of
the murder of Amnon, and the consequent flight of the rest of the king's
sons whom Absalom had invited to the feast ([Sa2
13:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#029)), there is first of all appended
a notice of the report which preceded the fugitives and reached the
king's ears in an exaggerated form, together with the impression which
it made upon the king, and the rectification of that report by Jonadab
([Sa2 13:30-33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#030)). Then follows the
statement that Absalom fled, also the account of the arrival of the
king's sons ([Sa2 13:34-36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#034)). After
this we have a statement as to the direction in which Absalom fled, the
king's continued mourning, and the length of time that Absalom's
banishment lasted ([Sa2 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037), [Sa2
13:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#038)), and finally a remark as to
David's feelings towards Absalom ([Sa2
13:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#039)).

Jonadab's assertion, that Amnon only had been slain, was very speedily
confirmed ([Sa2 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#034)). The young man,
the spy, i.e., the young man who was looking out for the return of those
who had been invited to the feast, "lifted up his eyes and saw," i.e.,
saw as he looked out into the distance, "much people (a crowd of men)
coming from the way behind him along the side of the mountain." אחריו
מדּרך, ἐν τῇ ὁδῷ ὄπισθεν αὐτοῦ (lxx), per iter devium (Vulg.), is
obscure; and אהר, "behind," is probably to be understood as meaning "to
the west:" from the way at the back of the spy, i.e., to the west of his
station. The following words, ההר מצּד, also remain obscure, as the
position of the spy is not given, so that the allusion may be to a
mountain in the north-west of Jerusalem quite as well as to one on the
west.

(Note: The lxx have very comprehensive additions here: first of all,
after ἐκ πλευρᾶς τοῦ ὄρους, they have the more precise definition ἐν τῇ
καταβάσει, and then the further clause, "and the spy came and announced
to the king," Ἄνδρας ὲώρακα ἐκ τῆς ὁδοῦ τῆς ὠρωνῆν (?) ἐκ μέρους τοῦ
ὅρους, partly to indicate more particularly the way by which the king's
sons came, and partly to fill up a supposed gap in the account. But they
did not consider that the statement in [Sa2
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#035), "and Jonadab said to the king,
Behold, the king's sons are coming," does not square with these
additions; for if the spy had already informed the king that his sons
were coming, there was no necessity for Jonadab to do it again. This
alone is sufficient to show that the additions made by the lxx are
nothing but worthless glosses, introduced according to subjective
conjectures and giving no foundation for alterations of the text.)

When the spy observed the crowd of men approaching, Jonadab said to the
king ([Sa2 13:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#035)), "Behold, the king's
sons are coming: as thy servant said, so has it come to pass."

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa2 13:36</span></span>

Jonadab had hardly said this when the king's sons arrived and wept
aloud, sc., as they related what had occurred; whereupon the king and
all his retainers broke out in loud weeping.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa2 13:37</span></span>

"Only Absalom had fled and gone to Talmai the son of Ammihud, the king
of Geshur." These words form a circumstantial clause, which the writer
has inserted as a parenthesis, to define the expression "the king's
sons" more particularly. If we take these words as a parenthesis, there
will be no difficulty in explaining the following word "mourned," as the
subject (David) may very easily be supplied from the preceding words
"the king," etc. ([Sa2 13:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#036)). To the
remark that David mourned all his life for his son (Amnon), there is
attached, just as simply and quite in accordance with the facts, the
more precise information concerning Absalom's flight, that he remained
in Geshur three years. The repetition of the words "Absalom had fled and
gone to Geshur" may be accounted for from the general diffuseness of the
Hebrew style. Talmai the king of Geshur was the father of Maacah,
Absalom's mother ([Sa2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)). The lxx
thought it necessary expressly to indicate this by inserting εἰς γῆν
Χαμαχάαδ (al. γῆν Μαχάδ).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 13:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa2 13:39</span></span>

"And it (this) held king David back from going out to Absalom, for he
comforted himself concerning Amnon, because he was dead." In adopting
this translation of the difficult clause with which the verse commences,
we take ותּכל in the sense of כּלא, as the verbs כלה and כלא frequently
exchange their forms; we also take the third pers. fem. as the neuter
impersonal, so that the subject is left indefinite, and is to be
gathered from the context. Absalom's flight to Geshur, and his stay
there, were what chiefly prevented David from going out to Absalom.
Moreover, David's grief on account of Amnon's death gradually diminished
as time rolled on. אל־אבש צאת is used in a hostile sense, as in [Deu
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#007), to go out and punish him for his
wickedness. The כּי before נחם might also be rendered "but," as after a
negative clause, as the principal sentence implies a negation: "He did
not go out against Absalom, but comforted himself." There is not only no
grammatical difficulty in the way of this explanation of the verse, but
it also suits the context, both before and after. All the other
explanations proposed are either at variance with the rules of the
language, or contain an unsuitable thought. The old Jewish
interpretation (adopted in the Chaldee version, and also by the
Rabbins), viz., David longed (his soul pined) to go out to Absalom
(i.e., to see or visit him), is opposed, as Gusset has shown (in his
Lex. pp. 731-2), to the conduct of David towards Absalom as described in
2 Samuel 14, - namely, that after Joab had succeeded by craft in
bringing him back to Jerusalem, David would not allow him to come into
his presence for two whole years ([Sa2
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#024), [Sa2
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#028)). Luther's rendering, "and king
David left off going out against Absalom," is not only precluded by the
feminine תּכל, but also by the fact that nothing has been said about any
pursuit of Absalom on the part of David. Other attempts at emendations
there is no need whatever to refute.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 14](sa2014)

</div>
