<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol006)  [Next](sol008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 7:1</span></span>

1a How beautiful are thy steps in the shoes,

O prince's daughter!

The noun נדיב, which signifies noble in disposition, and then noble by
birth and rank (cf. the reverse relation of the meanings in generosus),
is in the latter sense synon. and parallel to מלך and שׂר; Shulamith is
here called a prince's daughter because she was raised to the rank of
which Hannah, [Sa1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#008), cf. [Psa
113:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008), speaks, and to which she
herself, 6:12 points. Her beauty, from the first associated with
unaffected dignity, now appears in native princely grace and majesty.
פּעם (from פּעם, pulsare, as in nunc pede libero pulsanda tellus)
signifies step and foot, - in the latter sense the poet. Heb. and the
vulgar Phoen. word for רגל; here the meanings pes and passus (Fr. pas,
dance-step) flow into each other. The praise of the spectators now turns
from the feet of the dancer to her thighs:

1b The vibration of thy thighs like ornamental chains,

The work of an artist's hands.

The double-sided thighs, viewed from the spine and the lower part of the
back, are called מתנים; from the upper part of the legs upwards, and the
breast downwards (the lumbar region), thus seen on the front and
sidewise, חלצים or ירכים. Here the manifold twistings and windings of
the upper part of the body by means of the thigh-joint are meant; such
movements of a circular kind are called חמּוּקים, from חמק, [Sol
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#006). חלאים is the plur. of חלי =
(Arab.) ḥaly, as חבאים (gazelles) of צבי = zaby. The sing. חלי (or חליה
= Arab. hulyah) signifies a female ornament, consisting of gold, silver,
or precious stones, and that (according to the connection, [Pro
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#002); [Hos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015)) for the neck or the breast as a
whole; the plur. חל, occurring only here, is therefore chosen because
the bendings of the loins, full of life and beauty, are compared to the
free swingings to and fro of such an ornament, and thus to a connected
ornament of chains; for חם are not the beauty-curves of the thighs at
rest, - the connection here requires movement. In accordance with the
united idea of חל, the appos. is not מעשׂי, but (according to the
Palestin.) מעשׂה (lxx, Targ., Syr., Venet.). The artist is called אמּן
(ommân) (the forms אמן and אמן are also found), Syr. avmon, Jewish-Aram.
אוּמן; he has, as the master of stability, a name like ימין, the right
hand: the hand, and especially the right hand, is the artifex among the
members.

(Note: Vid., Ryssel's Die Syn. d. Wahren u. Guten in d. Sem. Spr.
(1873), p. 12.)

The eulogists pass from the loins to the middle part of the body. In
dancing, especially in the Oriental style of dancing, which is the mimic
representation of animated feeling, the breast and the body are raised,
and the forms of the body appear through the clothing.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 7:2</span></span>

2 Thy navel is a well-rounded basin -

Let not mixed wine be wanting to it

Thy body is a heap of wheat,

Set round with lilies.

In interpreting these words, Hitzig proceeds as if a "voluptuary" were
here speaking. He therefore changes שׁררך into שׁררך, "thy pudenda." But
(1) it is no voluptuary who speaks here, and particularly not a man, but
women who speak; certainly, above all, it is the poet, who would not,
however, be so inconsiderate as to put into the mouths of women immodest
words which he could use if he wished to represent the king as speaking.
Moreover (2) שׁר = (Arab.) surr, secret (that which is secret; in Arab.
especially referred to the pudenda, both of man and woman), is a word
that is

(Note: Vid., Tebrzi, in my work entitled Jud.-Arab. Poesien, u.s.w.
(1874), p. 24.)

foreign to the Heb. language, which has for "Geheimnis" secret the
corresponding word סוד (vid., under [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002); [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014)), after the root-signification
of its verbal stem (viz., to be firm, pressed together); and (3) the
reference - preferred by Dpke, Magnus, Hahn, and others, also without
any change of punctuation - of שׁר to the interfeminium mulieris, is
here excluded by the circumstance that the attractions of a woman
dancing, as they unfold themselves, are here described. Like the Arab.
surr, שׁר (= shurr), from שׁרר, to bind fast, denotes properly the
umbilical cord, [Eze 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004), and then
the umbilical scar. Thus, [Pro 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#008),
where most recent critics prefer, for לשׁרּך, to read, but without any
proper reason, לשׁרך = לשׁארך, "to thy flesh," the navel comes there
into view as the centre of the body, - which it always is with new-born
infants, and is almost so with grown-up persons in respect of the length
of the body, - and as, indeed, the centre. whence the pleasurable
feeling of health diffuses its rays of heat. This middle and prominent
point of the abdomen shows itself in one lightly clad and dancing when
she breathes deeply, even through the clothing; and because the navel
commonly forms a little funnel-like hollow (Bttch.: in the form almost
of a whirling hollow in the water, as one may see in nude antique
statues), therefore the daughters of Jerusalem compare Shulamith's navel
to a "basin of roundness," i.e., which has this general property, and
thus belongs to the class of things that are round. אגּן does not mean a
Becher (a cup), but a Bechen (basin), pelvis; properly a washing basin,
ijjanah (from אגן = ajan, to full, to wash = כּבּס); then a sprinkling
basin, [Exo 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#006); and generally a
basin, [Isa 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#024); here, a mixing
basin, in which wine was mingled with a proportion of water to render it
palatable (κρατήρ, from κεραννύναι, temperare), - according to the Talm.
with two-thirds of water. In this sense this passage is interpreted
allegorically, Sanhedrin 14b, 37a, and elsewhere (vid., Aruch under
מזג). מזג .)מז is not spiced wine, which is otherwise designated ([Sol
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#002)), but, as Hitzig rightly explains,
mixed wine, i.e., mixed with water or snow (vid., under [Isa
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022)). מזג is not borrowed from the
Greek μίσγειν (Grtz), but is a word native to all the three chief
Semitic dialects, - the weaker form of מסך, which may have the meaning
of "to pour in;" but not merely "to pour in," but, at that same time,
"to mix" (vid., under [Isa 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#022); [Pro
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#002)). סהר, with אגּן, represents the
circular form (from סהר = סחר), corresponding to the navel ring; Kimchi
thinks that the moon must be understood (cf. שׂהרון, lunula): a
moon-like round basin; according to which the Venet., also in Gr.,
choosing an excellent name for the moon, translates: ῥἀντιστρον τῆς
ἑκάτης. But "moon-basin" would be an insufficient expression for it;
Ewald supposes that it is the name of a flower, without, however,
establishing this opinion. The "basin of roundness" is the centre of the
body a little depressed; and that which the clause, "may not mixed wine
be lacking," expresses, as their wish for her, is soundness of health,
for which no more appropriate and delicate figure can be given than hot
wine tempered with fresh water.

The comparison in 3b is the same as that of R. Johanan's of beauty, Meza
84a: "He who would gain an idea of beauty should take a silver cup, fill
it with pomegranate flowers, and encircle its rim with a garland of
roses."

(Note: See my Gesch. d. Jd. Poesie, p. 30 f. Hoch (the German Solomon)
reminds us of the Jewish marriage custom of throwing over the
newly-married pair the contents of a vessel wreathed with flowers, and
filled with wheat or corn (with money underneath), accompanied with the
cry, פּרוּ וּרבוּ be fruitful and multiply.)

To the present day, winnowed and sifted corn is piled up in great heaps
of symmetrical half-spherical form, which are then frequently stuck over
with things that move in the wind, for the purpose of protecting them
against birds. "The appearance of such heaps of wheat," says Wetstein
(Isa. p. 710), "which one may see in long parallel rows on the
thrashing-floors of a village, is very pleasing to a peasant; and the
comparison of the Song; [Sol 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#003),
every Arabian will regard as beautiful." Such a corn-heap is to the
present day called ṣubbah, while ‛aramah is a heap of thrashed corn that
has not yet been winnowed; here, with ערמה, is to be connected the idea
of a ṣubbah, i.e., of a heap of wheat not only thrashed and winnowed,
but also sifted (riddled). סוּג, enclosed, fenced about (whence the
post-bibl. סיג, a fence), is a part. pass. such as פּוּץ, scattered
(vid., under [Psa 92:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#012)). The
comparison refers to the beautiful appearance of the roundness, but, at
the same time, also the flesh-colour shining through the dress; for
fancy sees more than the eyes, and concludes regarding that which is
veiled from that which is visible. A wheat-colour was, according to the
Moslem Sunna, the tint of the first created man. Wheat-yellow and
lily-white is a subdued white, and denotes at once purity and health; by
πυρός wheat one thinks of πῦρ - heaped up wheat developes a remarkable
heat, a fact for which Biesenthal refers to Plutarch's Quaest. In
accordance with the progress of the description, the breasts are now
spoken of:

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 7:3</span></span>

3 Thy two breasts are like two fawns,

Twins of a gazelle.

[Sol 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005) is repeated, but with the
omission of the attribute, "feeding among lilies," since lilies have
already been applied to another figure. Instead of תּאומי there, we have
here מּאמי (taǒme), the former after the ground-form ti'âm, the latter
after the ground-form to'm (cf. נּאלי, [Neh
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#002), from גּאל = גּאל).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 7:4</span></span>

4a Thy neck like an ivory tower.

The article in חשּׁן may be that designating species (vid., under [Sol
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#011)); but, as at [Sol
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005) and [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004), it appears to be also here a
definite tower which the comparison has in view: one covered externally
with ivory tablets, a tower well known to all in and around Jerusalem,
and visible far and wide, especially when the sun shone on it; had it
been otherwise, as in the case of the comparison following, the locality
would have been more definitely mentioned. So slender, so dazzlingly
white, is imposing, and so captivating to the eye did Shulamith's neck
appear. These and the following figures would be open to the objection
of being without any occasion, and monstrous, if they referred to an
ordinary beauty; but they refer to Solomon's spouse, they apply to a
queen, and therefore are derived from that which is most splendid in the
kingdom over which, along with him, she rules; and in this they have the
justification of their grandeur.

4ba Thine eyes pools in Heshbon,

At the gate of the populous (city).

Hesbhon, formerly belonging to the Amorites, but at this time to the
kingdom of Solomon, lay about 5 1/2 hours to the east of the northern
point of the Dead Sea, on an extensive, undulating, fruitful, high
table-land, with a far-reaching prospect. Below the town, now existing
only in heaps of ruins, a brook, which here takes it rise, flows
westward, and streams toward the Ghτr as the Nahr Hesbαn. It joins the
Jordan not far above its entrance into the Dead Sea. The situation of
the town was richly watered. There still exists a huge reservoir of
excellent masonry in the valley, about half a mile from the foot of the
hill on which the town stood. The comparison here supposes two such
pools, but which are not necessarily together, though both are before
the gate, i.e., near by, outside the town. Since שׁער, except at [Isa
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#031), is fem., רבּים־בּים, in the
sense of עם רבּתי, [Lam 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001) (cf. for
the non-determin. of the adj., [Eze
21:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#025)), is to be referred to the town,
not to the gate (Hitz.); Blau's

(Note: In Merx' Archiv. III 355.)

conjectural reading, bath-'akrabbim, does not recommend itself, because
the craggy heights of the "ascent of Akrabbim" ([Num
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#004); [Jos
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003)), which obliquely cross

(Note: Vid., Robinson's Phys. Geogr. p. 51.)

the Ghr to the south of the Dead Sea, and from remote times formed the
southern boundary of the kingdom of the Amorites ([Jdg
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#036)), were too far off, and too
seldom visited, to give its name to a gate of Heshbon. But generally the
crowds of men at the gate and the topography of the gate are here
nothing to the purpose; the splendour of the town, however, is for the
figure of the famed cisterns like a golden border. בּרכה (from בּרך, to
spread out, vid., Genesis, p. 98; Fleischer in Levy, I 420b) denotes a
skilfully built round or square pool. The comparison of the eyes to a
pool means, as Wetstein

(Note: Zeitschr. fr allgem. Erdkunde, 1859, p. 157 f.)

remarks, "either thus glistening like a water-mirror, or thus lovely in
appearance, for the Arabian knows no greater pleasure than to look upon
clear, gently rippling water." Both are perhaps to be taken together;
the mirroring glance of the moist eyes (cf. Ovid, De Arte Am. ii. 722):

"Adspicies obulos tremulo fulgore micantes,

Ut sol a liquida saepe refulget aqua"

and the spell of the charm holding fast the gaze of the beholder.

4bb Thy nose like the tower of Lebanon,

Which looks towards Damascus.

This comparison also places us in the midst of the architectural and
artistic splendours of the Solomonic reign. A definite town is here
meant; the art. determines it, and the part. following appositionally
without the art., with the expression "towards Damascus" defining it
more nearly (vid., under [Sol 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006)),
describes it. הלּמנון designates here "the whole Alpine range of
mountains in the north of the land of Israel" (Furrer); for a tower
which looks in the direction of Damascus (פּני, accus., as את־פּני, [Sa1
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#004)) is to be thought of as standing
on one of the eastern spurs of Hermon, or on the top of Amana ([Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008)), whence the Amana (Barada) takes
its rise, whether as a watch-tower ([Sa2
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006)), or only as a look-out from which
might be enjoyed the paradisaical prospect. The nose gives to the face
especially its physiognomical expression, and conditions its beauty. Its
comparison to a tower on a lofty height is occasioned by the fact that
Shulamith's nose, without being blunt or flat, formed a straight line
from the brow downward, without bending to the right or left (Hitzig), a
mark of symmetrical beauty combined with awe-inspiring dignity. After
the praise of the nose it was natural to think of Carmel; Carmel is a
promontory, and as such is called anf el-jebel ("nose of the
mountain-range").

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 7:5</span></span>

5aa Thy head upon thee as Carmel.

We say that the head is "on the man" ([Kg2
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#031); Judith 14:18), for we think of a
man ideally as the central unity of the members forming the external
appearance of his body. Shulamith's head ruled her form, surpassing all
in beauty and majesty, as Carmel with its noble and pleasing appearance
ruled the land and sea at its feet. From the summit of Carmel, clothed
with trees) [Amo 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#003); [Kg1
18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042)), a transition is made to the
hair on the head, which the Moslem poets are fond of comparing to long
leaves, as vine leaves and palm branches; as, on the other hand, the
thick leafy wood is called (vid., under [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020)) comata silva (cf. Oudendorp's
Apuleii Metam. p. 744). Grδtz, proceeding on the supposition of the
existence of Persian words in the Song, regards כרמל as the name of a
colour; but (1) crimson is designated in the Heb.-Pers. not כרמל, but
כרמיל, instead of תולעת שׁני (vid., under [Isa
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#018); [Pro
31:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#021)); (2) if the hair of the head
(if ראשׁך might be directly understood of this) may indeed be compared
to the glistening of purple, not, however, to the listening of carmese
or scarlet, then red and not black hair must be meant. But it is not the
locks of hair, but the hair in locks that is meant. From this the
eulogium finally passes to the hair of the head itself.

5ab The flowing hair of thy head like purple -

A king fettered by locks.

Hitzig supposes that כרמל reminded the poet of כּרמיל (carmese), and
that thus he hit upon ארגּמן (purple); but one would rather think that
Carmel itself would immediately lead him to purple, for near this
promontory is the principal place where purple shell-fish are found
(Seetzen's Reisen, IV 277 f.). דּלּה (from דּלל, to dangle, to hang
loose, [Job 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#004), Arab. tadladal) is
res pendula, and particularly coma pendula. Hengst. remarks that the
"purple" has caused much trouble to those who understand by דלה the hair
of the head. He himself, with Gussetius, understand by it the temples,
tempus capitis; but the word רקּה is used ([Sol
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003)) for "temples," and "purple-like"
hair hanging down could occasion trouble only to those who know not how
to distinguish purple from carmese. Red purple, ארגּמן (Assyr.
argamannu, Aram., Arab., Pers., with departure from the primary meaning
of the word, ארגּון ,drow eht), which derives this name from רגם = רקם,
material of variegated colour, is dark-red, and almost glistening black,
as Pliny says (Hist. Nat. ix. 135): Laus ei (the Tyrian purple) summa in
colore sanguinis concreti, nigricans adspectu idemque suspectu (seen
from the side) refulgens, unde et Homero purpureus dicitur sanguis. The
purple hair of Nisus does not play a part in myth alone, but beautiful
shining dark black hair is elsewhere also called purple, e.g., πυρφύρεος
πλόκαμος in Lucian, πορφυραῖ χαῖται in Anacreon. With the words "like
purple," the description closes; and to this the last characteristic
distinguishing Shulamith there is added the exclamation: "A king
fettered by locks!" For רהטים, from רהט, to run, flow, is also a name of
flowing locks, not the ear-locks (Hitz.), i.e., long ringlets flowing
down in front; the same word ([Sol
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#017)) signifies in its North Palest.
form רחיט (Chethı̂b), a water-trough, canalis. The locks of one beloved
are frequently called in erotic poetry "the fetters" by which the lover
is held fast, for "love wove her net in alluring ringlets" (Deshmi in
Joseph and Zuleika).

(Note: Compare from the same poet: "Alas! thy braided hair, a heart is
in every curl, and a dilemma in every ring" (Deut. Morg. Zeit. xxiv.
581).)

Goethe in his Westst. Divan presents as a bold yet moderate example:
"There are more than fifty hooks in each lock of thy hair;" and, on the
other hand, one offensively extravagant, when it is said of a Sultan:
"In the bonds of thy locks lies fastened the neck of the enemy." אסוּר
signifies also in Arab. frequently one enslaved by love: asîruha is
equivalent to her lov.

(Note: Samaschshari, Mufaṣṣal, p. 8.)

The mention of the king now leads from the imagery of a dance to the
scene which follows, where we again hear the king's voice. The scene and
situation are now manifestly changed. We are transferred from the garden
to the palace, where the two, without the presence of any spectators,
carry on the following dialogue.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 7:6</span></span>

6 How beautiful art thou, and how charming,

O love, among delights!

It is a truth of all-embracing application which is here expressed.
There is nothing more admirable than love, i.e., the uniting or mingling
together of two lives, the one of which gives itself to the other, and
so finds the complement of itself; nor than this self-devotion, which is
at the same time self-enrichment. All this is true of earthly love, of
which Walther v. d. Vogelweide says: "minne ist sweier herzen wnne" love
is the joy of two hearts, and it is true also of heavenly love; the
former surpasses all earthly delights (also such as are purely sensuous,
[Ecc 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#008)), and the latter is, as the
apostle expresses himself in his spiritual "Song of Songs," [Co1
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#013), in relation to faith and hope,
"greater than these," greater than both of them, for it is their sacred,
eternal aim. In יפית it is indicated that the idea, and in נעמתּ that
the eudaemonistic feature of the human soul attains its satisfaction in
love. The lxx, obliterating this so true and beautiful a promotion of
love above all other joys, translate ἐν ταῖς τρυφαῖς σου (in the
enjoyment which thou impartest). The Syr., Jerome, and others also rob
the Song of this its point of light and of elevation, by reading אהמה O
beloved! instead of אהבה. The words then declare (yet contrary to the
spirit of the Hebrew language, which knows neither אהוּמה nor אהוּמתי as
vocat.) what we already read at [Sol
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010); while, according to the
traditional form of the text, they are the prelude of the love-song, to
love as such, which is continued in [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 7:7</span></span>

When Solomon now looks on the wife of his youth, she stands before him
like a palm tree with its splendid leaf-branches, which the Arabians
call ucht insn (the sisters of men); and like a vine which climbs up on
the wall of the house, and therefore is an emblem of the housewife, [Psa
128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003).

7 Thy stature is like the palm tree;

And thy breasts clusters.

8 I thought: I will climb the palm,

Grasp its branches;

And thy breasts shall be to me

As clusters of the vine,

And the breath of thy nose like apples,

Shulamith stands before him. As he surveys her from head to foot, he
finds her stature like the stature of a slender, tall date-palm, and her
breasts like the clusters of sweet fruit, into which, in due season its
blossoms are ripened. That קומתך (thy stature) is not thought of as
height apart from the person, but as along with the person (cf. [Eze
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#018)), scarcely needs to be remarked.
The palm derives its name, tāmār, from its slender stem rising upwards
(vid., under [Isa 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#009); [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006)). This name is specially given to
the Phoenix dactylifera, which is indigenous from Egypt to India, and
which is principally cultivated (vid., under [Gen
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#007)), the female flowers of which,
set in panicles, develope into large clusters of juicy sweet fruit.
These dark-brown or golden-yellow clusters, which crown the summit of
the stem and impart a wonderful beauty to the appearance of the palm,
especially when seen in the evening twilight, are here called אשׁוכלות
(connecting form at [Deu 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#032)), as by
the Arabians 'ithkal, plur. 'ithakyl (botri dactylorum). The perf. דּמתה
signifies aequata est = aequa est; for דּמה, R. דם, means, to make or to
become plain, smooth, even. The perf. אמרתּי, on the other hand, will be
meant retrospectively. As an expression of that which he just now
purposed to do, it would be useless; and thus to notify with emphasis
anything beforehand is unnatural and contrary to good taste and custom.
But looking back, he can say that in view of this august attractive
beauty the one thought filled him, to secure possession of her and of
the enjoyment which she promised; as one climbs (עלה with בּ, as [Psa
24:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#003)) a palm tree and seizes (אחז,
fut. אחז, and אאחז with בּ, as at [Job
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#011)) its branches (סנסנּים, so
called, as it appears,

(Note: Also that סנסן is perhaps equivalent to סלסל (זלזל, תלתל), to
wave hither and thither, comes here to view.)

after the feather-like pointed leaves proceeding from the mid-rib on
both sides), in order to break off the fulness of the sweet fruit under
its leaves. As the cypress (sarwat), so also the palm is with the Moslem
poets the figure of a loved one, and with the mystics, of God;

(Note: Vid., Hfiz, ed. Brockhaus, II p. 46.)

and accordingly the idea of possession is here particularly intended.
ויהיוּ־נא denotes what he then thought and aimed at. Instead of בּתּמר,
[Sol 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#009), the punctuation בּתּמר is
undoubtedly to be preferred. The figure of the palm tree terminates with
the words, "will grasp its branches." It was adequate in relation to
stature, but less so in relation to the breasts; for dates are of a long
oval form, and have a stony kernel. Therefore the figure departs from
the date clusters to that of grape clusters, which are more appropriate,
as they swell and become round and elastic the more they ripen. The
breath of the nose, which is called אף, from breathing hard, is that of
the air breathed, going in and out through it; for, as a rule, a man
breathes through his nostrils with closed mouth. Apples present
themselves the more naturally for comparison, that the apple has the
name תּפּוּח (from נפח, after the form תּמכוּף), from the fragrance
which it exhales.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 7:9</span></span>

9aa And thy palate like the best wine.

יין הטּוב is wine of the good kind, i.e., the best, as רע אושׁת, [Pro
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024), a woman of a bad kind, i.e., a
bad woman; the neut. thought of as adject. is both times the gen. of the
attribute, as at [Pro 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#025) it is the
gen. of the substratum. The punctuation כּיּין הטּוב (Hitz.) is also
possible; it gives, however, the common instead of the delicate poetical
expression. By the comparison one may think of the expressions, jungere
salivas oris (Lucret.) and oscula per longas jungere pressa moras
(Ovid). But if we have rightly understood [Sol
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011); [Sol
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016), the palate is mentioned much
rather with reference to the words of love which she whispers in his
ears when embracing her. Only thus is the further continuance of the
comparison to be explained, and that it is Shulamith herself who
continues it.

9ab Which goes down for my beloved smoothly,

Which makes the lips of sleepers move.

The dramatic structure of the Song becomes here more strongly manifest
than elsewhere before. Shulamith interrupts the king, and continues his
words as if echoing them, but again breaks off. The lxx had here לדודי
in the text. It might notwithstanding be a spurious reading. Hitzig
suggests that it is erroneously repeated, as if from [Sol
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011). Ewald also (Hohesl. p. 137) did
that before, - Heiligstedt, as usual, following him. But, as Ewald
afterwards objected, the line would then be "too short, and not
corresponding to that which follows." But how shall לדודי now connect
itself with Solomon's words? Ginsburg explains: "Her voice is not merely
compared to wine, because it is sweet to everybody, but to such wine as
would be sweet to a friend, and on that account is more valuable and
pleasant." But that furnishes a thought digressing εἰς ἄλλο γένος; and
besides, Ewald rightly remarks that Shulamith always uses the word דודי
of her beloved, and that the king never uses it in a similar sense. He
contends, however, against the idea that Shulamith here interrupts
Solomon; for he replies to me (Jahrb. IV 75): "Such interruptions we
certainly very frequently find in our ill-formed and dislocated plays;
in the Song, however, not a solitary example of this is found, and one
ought to hesitate in imagining such a thing." He prefers the reading
לדּודים beloved ones, although possibly לדודי, with , abbreviated after
the popular style of speech from m, may be the same word. But is this
ledodim not a useless addition? Is excellent wine good to the taste of
friends merely; and does it linger longer in the palate of those not
beloved than of those loving? And is the circumstance that Shulamith
interrupts the king, and carried forward his words, not that which
frequently also occurs in the Greek drama, as e.g., Eurip. Phoenissae,
v. 608? The text as it stands before us requires an interchange of the
speakers, and nothing prevents the supposition of such an interchange.
In this idea Hengstenberg for once agrees with us. The Lamed in ledodi
is meant in the same sense as when the bride drinks to the bridegroom,
using the expression ledodi. The Lamed in למישׁרים is that of the
defining norm, as the Beth in במי, [Pro
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#031), is that of the accompanying
circumstance: that which tastes badly sticks in the palate, but that
which tastes pleasantly glides down directly and smoothly. But what does
the phrase וגו דּובב שׂף mean? The lxx translate by ἱκανούμενος χείλεσί
μου καὶ ὀδοῦσιν, "accommodating itself (Sym. προστιθέμενος) to my lips
and teeth." Similarly Jerome (omitting at least the false μου),
labiisque et dentibus illius ad ruminandum, in which דּבּה, rumor, for
דובב, seems to have led him to ruminare. Equally contrary to the text
with Luther's translation: "which to my friend goes smoothly goes, and
speaks of the previous year;" a rendering which supposes ישׁנים (as also
the Venet.) instead of ישׁנים (good wine which, as it were, tells of
former years), and, besides, disregards שׁפתי. The translation: "which
comes at unawares upon the lips of the sleepers," accords with the
language (Heiligst., Hitz.). But that gives no meaning, as if one
understood by ישׁנים, as Gesen. and Ewald do, una in eodem toro
cubantes; but in this case the word ought to have been שׁכבים. Since,
besides, such a thing is known as sleeping through drink or speaking in
sleep, but not of drinking in sleep, our earlier translation approves
itself: which causes the lips of sleepers to speak. This interpretation
is also supported by a proverb in the Talm. Jebamoth 97a, Jer. Moeed
Katan, iii. 7, etc., which, with reference to the passage under review,
says that if any one in this world adduces the saying of a righteous man
in his name (רוחשׁות or מרחשׁות), שׂפתותיו דובבות בקבר. But it is an
error inherited from Buxtorf, that דובבות means there loquuntur, and,
accordingly, that דובב of this passage before us means loqui faciens. It
rather means (vid., Aruch), bullire, stillare, manare (cogn. זב, טף,
Syn. רחשׁ), since, as that proverb signifies, the deceased experiences
an after-taste of his saying, and this experience expresses itself in
the smack of the lips; and דּובב, whether it be part. Kal or Po. =
מדובב, thus: brought into the condition of the overflowing, the
after-experience of drink that has been partaken of, and which returns
again, as it were, ruminando. The meaning "to speak" is, in spite of
Parchon and Kimchi (whom the Venet., with its φθεγγόμενος, follows),
foreign to the verb; for דּבּה also means, not discourse, but sneaking,
and particularly sneaking calumny, and, generally, fama repens. The
calumniator is called in Arab. dabûb, as in Heb. רכיל.

We now leave it undecided whether in דובב, of this passage before us,
that special idea connected with it in the Gemara is contained; but the
roots דב and זב are certainly cogn., they have the fundamental idea of a
soft, noiseless movement generally, and modify this according as they
are referred to that which is solid or fluid. Consequently דּבב, as it
means in lente incedere (whence the bear has the name דּב), is also
capable of being interpreted leniter se movere, and trans. leniter
movere, according to which the Syr. here translates, quod commovet labia
mea et dentes meos (this absurd bringing in of the teeth is from the lxx
and Aq.), and the Targ. allegorizes, and whatever also in general is the
meaning of the Gemara as far as it exchanges דובבות for רוחשות (vid.,
Levy under רחשׁ). Besides, the translations qui commovet and qui loqui
facit fall together according to the sense. For when it is said of
generous wine, that it makes the lips of sleepers move, a movement is
meant expressing itself in the sleeper speaking. But generous wine is a
figure of the love-responses of the beloved, sipped in, as it were, with
pleasing satisfaction, which hover still around the sleepers in
delightful dreams, and fill them with hallucinations.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 7:10</span></span>

10 I am my beloved's

And to me goeth forth his desire.

After the words "I am my beloved's," we miss the "and my beloved is
mine" of [Sol 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#003), cf. [Sol
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016), which perhaps had dropped out.
The second line here refers back to [Gen
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016), for here, as there, תּשׁוּקה,
from שׁוּק, to impel, move, is the impulse of love as a natural power.
When a wife is the object of such passion, it is possible that, on the
one side, she feels herself very fortunate therein; and, on the other
side, if the love, in its high commendations, becomes excessive,
oppressed, and when she perceive that in her love-relation she is the
observed of many eyes, troubled. It is these mingled feelings which move
Shulamith when she continues the praise so richly lavished on her in
words which denote what she might be to the king, but immediately breaks
off in order that, as the following verse now shows, she might use this
superabundance of his love for the purpose of setting forth her request,
and thus of leading into another path; her simple, child-like
disposition longs for the quietness and plainness of rural life, away
from the bustle and display of city and court life.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 7:11</span></span>

11 Up, my lover, we will go into the country,

Lodge in the villages.

Hitzig here begins a new scene, to which he gives the superscription:
"Shulamith making haste to return home with her lov." The advocate of
the shepherd-hypothesis thinks that the faithful Shulamith, after
hearing Solomon's panegyric, shakes her head and says: "I am my
beloved's." To him she calls, "Come, my beloved;" for, as Ewald seeks to
make this conceivable: the golden confidence of her near triumph lifts
her in spirit forthwith above all that is present and all that is
actual; only to him may she speak; and as if she were half here and half
already there, in the midst of her rural home along with him, she says,
"Let us go out into the fields," etc. In fact, there is nothing more
incredible than this Shulamitess, whose dialogue with Solomon consists
of Solomon's addresses, and of answers which are directed, not to
Solomon, but in a monologue to her shepherd; and nothing more cowardly
and more shadowy than this lover, who goes about in the moonlight
seeking his beloved shepherdess whom he has lost, glancing here and
there through the lattices of the windows and again disappearing. How
much more justifiable is the drama of the Song by the French Jesuit C.
F. Menestrier (born in Sion 1631, died 1705), who, in his two little
works on the opera and the ballet, speaks of Solomon as the creator of
the opera, and regards the Song as a shepherd-play, in which his
love-relation to the daughter of the king of Egypt is set forth under
the allegorical figures of the love of a shepherd and a shepherdess!

(Note: Vid., Eugne Despris in the Revue politique et litteraire 1873.
The idea was not new. This also was the sentiment of Fray Luis de Leon;
vid., his Biographie by Wilkens (1866), p. 209.)

For Shulamith is thought of as a רעה shepherdess, [Sol
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008), and she thinks of Solomon as a
רעה shepherd. She remains so in her inclination even after her elevation
to the rank of a queen. The solitude and glory of external nature are
dearer to her than the bustle and splendour of the city and the court.
Hence her pressing out of the city to the country. השׂדה is local,
without external designation, like rus (to the country). כּפרים (here
and at [Ch1 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#025)) is plur. of the
unused form כּפר (constr. כּפר, [Jos
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024)) or כּפר, Arab. kafar (cf. the
Syr. dimin. kafrûno, a little town), instead of which it is once pointed
כּפר, [Sa1 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#018), of that name of a
district of level country with which a multitude of later Palest. names
of places, such as כּפר נחוּם, are connected. Ewald, indeed, understands
kephārim as at [Sol 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013) : we will
lodge among the fragrant Al-henna bushes. But yet בּכּף cannot be
equivalent to תּחת הכפרים; and since לין (probably changed from ליל) and
השׁכים, [Sol 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#013), stand together, we
must suppose that they wished to find a bed in the henna bushes; which,
if it were conceivable, would be too gipsy-like, even for a pair of
lovers of the rank of shepherds (vid., [Job
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007)). No. Shulamith's words express a
wish for a journey into the country: they will there be in freedom, and
at night find shelter (בכף, as [Ch1
27:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#025) and [Neh
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#002), where also the plur. is similarly
used), now in this and now in that country place. Spoken to the supposed
shepherd, that would be comical, for a shepherd does not wander from
village to village; and that, returning to their home, they wished to
turn aside into villages and spend the night there, cannot at all be the
meaning. But spoken of a shepherdess, or rather a vine-dresser, who has
been raised to the rank of queen, it accords with her relation to
Solomon, - they are married, - as well as with the inexpressible impulse
of her heart after her earlier homely country-life. The former
vine-dresser, the child of the Galilean hills, the lily of the valley,
speaks in the verses following.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 7:12</span></span>

12 In the morning we will start for the vineyards,

See whether the vine is in bloom,

Whether the vine-blossoms have opened,

The pomegranates budded -

There will I give thee my love.

13 The mandrakes breathe a pleasant odour,

And over our doors are all kinds of excellent fruits,

New, also old,

Which, my beloved, I have kept for thee.

As the rising up early follows the tarrying over night, the description
of that which is longed for moves forward. As השׁכּים is denom. of שׁכם,
and properly signifies only to shoulder, i.e., to rise, make oneself
ready, when early going forth needs to be designated it has generally
בּבּקר (cf. [Jos 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#015)) along with it;
yet this word may also be wanting, [Sa1
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#026); [Sa1
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#016). נשׁךּ לכּר = נשׁב ונלך לבר, an
abbreviation of the expression which is also found in hist. prose, [Gen
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#027); cf. [Kg2
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#009). They wished in the morning, when
the life of nature can best be observed, and its growth and progress and
striving upwards best contemplated, to see whether the vine had opened,
i.e., unfolded (thus, [Sol 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)),
whether the vine-blossom (vid., at [Sol
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013)) had expanded (lxx ἤνθησεν ὁ
κυπρισμός), whether the pomegranate had its flowers or flower-buds
(הנצוּ, as at [Sol 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011)); פּתּח is
here, as at [Isa 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#008); [Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011), used as internally transitive:
to accomplish or to undergo the opening, as also (Arab.) fattaḥ

(Note: Vid., Fleischer, Makkari, 1868, p. 271.)

is used of the blooming of flowers, for (Arab.) tafttaḥ (to unfold). The
vineyards, inasmuch as she does not say כּרמינוּ, are not alone those of
her family, but generally those of her home, but of her home; for these
are the object of her desire, which in this pleasant journey with her
beloved she at once in imagination reaches, flying, as it were, over the
intermediate space. There, in undisturbed quietness, and in a lovely
region consecrating love, will she give herself to him in the entire
fulness of her love. By דּדי she means the evidences of her love (vid.,
under [Sol 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010); [Sol
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002)), which she will there grant to
him as thankful responses to his own. Thus she speaks in the
spring-time, in the month Ijjar, corresponding to our Wonnemond
(pleasure-month, May), and seeks to give emphasis to her promise by
this, that she directs him to the fragrant "mandragoras," and to the
precious fruits of all kinds which she has kept for him on the shelf in
her native home.

דּוּדי (after the form לוּלי), love's flower, is the mandragora
officinalis, L., with whitish green flowers and yellow apples of the
size of nutmegs, belonging to the Solanaceae; its fruits and roots are
used as an aphrodisiac, therefore this plant was called by the Arabs abd
al-sal'm, the servant of love, postillon d'amour; the son of Leah found
such mandrakes (lxx [Gen 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#014), μῆλα
μανδραγορῶν) at the time of the vintage, which falls in the month of
Ijjar; they have a strong but pleasant odour. In Jerusalem mandrakes are
rare; but so much the more abundantly are they found growing wild in
Galilee, whither Shulamith is transported in spirit. Regarding the מגדים
(from מגד, occurring in the sing. exclusively in the blessing of Moses,
Deut 33), which in the Old Testament is peculiar to the Song, vid., [Sol
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013), [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016). From "over our doors," down to
"I have kept for thee," is, according to the lxx, Syr., Jerome, and
others, one sentence, which in itself is not inadmissible; for the
object can precede its verb, [Sol 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003),
and can stand as the subject between the place mentioned and the verb,
[Isa 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013), also as the object, [Ch2
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#006), which, as in the passage before
us, may be interpunctuated with Athnach for the sake of emphasis; in the
bibl. Chald. this inverted sequence of the words is natural, e.g., [Dan
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#017). But such a long-winded sentence
is at least not in the style of the Song, and one does not rightly see
why just "over our doors" has the first place in it. I therefore
formerly translated it as did Luther, dividing it into parts: "and over
our doors are all kinds of precious fruits; I have," etc. But with this
departure from the traditional division of the verse nothing is gained;
for the "keeping" (laying up) refers naturally to the fruits of the
preceding year, and in the first instance can by no means refer to
fruits of this year, especially as Shulamith, according to the structure
of the poem, has not visited her parental home since her home-bringing
in marriage, and now for the first time, in the early summer, between
the barley harvest and the wheat harvest, is carried away thither in her
longing. Therefore the expression, "my beloved, I have kept for thee,"
is to be taken by itself, but not as an independent sentence (Bttch.),
but is to be rendered, with Ewald, as a relative clause; and this, with
Hitz., is to be referred to ישׁנים (old). Col refers to the many sorts
of precious fruits which, after the time of their ingathering, are
divided into "new and old" ([Mat
13:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#052)). The plur. "our doors," which
as amplif. poet. would not be appropriate here, supposes several
entrances into her parents' home; and since "I have kept" refers to a
particular preserving of choice fruits, al does not (Hitzig) refer to a
floor, such as the floor above the family dwelling or above the barn,
but to the shelf above the inner doors, a board placed over them, on
which certain things are wont to be laid past for some particular
object. She speaks to the king like a child; for although highly
elevated, she yet remains, without self-elation, a child.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 8](sol008)

</div>
