<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol)  
  [Previous](sol002)  [Next](sol004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 3:1</span></span>

1 On my bed in the nights

I sought him whom my soul loveth:

I sought him, and found him not.

She does not mean to say that she sought him beside herself on her
couch; for how could that be of the modest one, whose home-bringing is
first described in the next act - she could and might miss him there
neither waking nor sleeping. The commencement is like [Job
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#015). She was at night on her couch,
when a painful longing seized her: the beloved of her soul appeared to
have forsaken her, to have withdrawn from her; she had lost the feeling
of his nearness, and was not able to recover it. לילות is neither here
nor at [Sol 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#008) necessarily the categ.
plur. The meaning may also be, that this pain, arising from a sense of
being forgotten, always returned upon her for several nights through:
she became distrustful of his fidelity; but the more she apprehended
that she was no longer loved, the more ardent became her longing, and
she arose to seek for him who had disappeared.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 3:2</span></span>

2 So I will arise, then, and go about the city,

The markets, and the streets;

I will seek him whom my soul loveth! -

I sought him, and found him not.

How could this night-search, with all the strength of love, be
consistent with the modesty of a maiden? It is thus a dream which she
relates. And if the beloved of her soul were a shepherd, would she seek
him in the city, and not rather without, in the field or in some
village? No; the beloved of her soul is Solomon; and in the dream,
Jerusalem, his city is transported close to the mountains of her native
home. The resolution expressed by "I will arise, then," is not
introduced by "then I said," or any similar phrase: the scene consists
of a monologue which dramatically represents that which is experienced.
Regarding the second Chatef-Pathach of ואס, vid., Baer's Genesis, p. 7.
שׁוקים is the plur of שׁוּק (= shavḳ), as שׁורים of שׁוּר (= shavr); the
root-word שוק (Arab. shaḳ) signifies to press on, to follow after
continuously; (Arab.) suwaḳ designates perhaps, originally, the place to
which one drives cattle for sale, as in the desert; (Arab.) sawaḳ
designates the place to which one drives cattle for drink (Wetzst.). The
form אבקשׁה is without the Daghesh, as are all the forms of this verb
except the imper.; the semi-guttural nature of the Koph has something
opposing the simple Sheva.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 3:3</span></span>

Shulamith now relates what she further experienced when, impelled by
love-sorrow, she wandered through the city:

3 The watchmen who go about in the city found me:

"Have ye seen him whom my soul loveth?"

Here also (as in [Sol 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#002)) there is
wanting before the question such a phrase as, "and I asked them,
saying:" the monologue relates dramatically. If she described an outward
experience, then the question would be a foolish one; for how could she
suppose that the watchmen, who make their rounds in the city (Epstein,
against Grtz, points for the antiquity of the order to [Psa
127:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#001); [Isa
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006); cf. [Isa
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011)), could have any knowledge of
her beloved! But if she relates a dream, it is to be remembered that
feeling and imagination rise higher than reflection. It is in the very
nature of a dream, also, that things thus quickly follow one another
without fixed lineaments. This also, that having gone out by night, she
found in the streets him whom she sought, is a happy combination of
circumstances formed in the dreaming soul; an occurrence without
probable external reality, although not without deep inner truth:

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 3:4</span></span>

4 Scarcely had I passed from them,

When I found him whom my soul loveth.

I seized him, and did not let him go

Until I brought him into the house of my mother,

And into the chamber of her that gave me birth.

כּמעט = paululum, here standing for a sentence: it was as a little that
I passed, etc. Without שׁ, it would be paululum transii; with it,
paululum fuit quod transii, without any other distinction than that in
the latter case the paululum is more emphatic. Since Shulamith relates
something experienced earlier, אחזתּי is not fitly rendered by teneo,
but by tenui; and ארפּנּוּ dna ;iune לאו, not by et non dimittam eum,
but, as the neg. of וארפנו, et dimisi eum, - not merely et non
dimittebam eum, but et non dimisi eum. In [Gen
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#027) \[26\], we read the cogn. שׁלּח,
which signifies, to let go ("let me go"), as הרפּה, to let loose, to let
free. It is all the same whether we translate, with the subjective
colouring, donec introduxerim, or, with the objective, donec introduxi;
in either case the meaning is that she held him fast till she brought
him, by gentle violence, into her mother's house. With בּית there is the
more definite parallel חדר lellar, which properly signifies (vid., under
[Sol 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)), recessus, penetrale; with
אמּי, the seldom occurring (only, besides, at [Hos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007)) הורה, part.f. Kal of הרה fo la,
to conceive, be pregnant, which poetically, with the accus., may mean
parturire or parere. In Jacob's blessing, [Gen
49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026), as the text lies before us, his
parents are called הורי; just as in Arab. ummâni, properly "my two
mothers," may be used for "my parents;" in the Lat. also, parentes means
father and mother zeugmatically taken together.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 3:5</span></span>

The closing words of the monologue are addressed to the daughters of
Jerusalem.

5 I adjure you, O ye daughters of Jerusalem,

By the gazelles or the hinds of the field,

That ye awake not and disturb not love

Till she pleases.

We are thus obliged apparently to think of the daughters of Jerusalem as
being present during the relation of the dream. But since Shulamith in
the following Act is for the first time represented as brought from her
home to Jerusalem, it is more probable that she represented her
experience to herself in secret, without any auditors, and feasting on
the visions of the dream, which brought her beloved so near, that she
had him by herself alone and exclusively, that she fell into such a
love-ecstasy as [Sol 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007); and pointing
to the distant Jerusalem, deprecates all disturbance of this ecstasy,
which in itself is like a slumber pervaded by pleasant dreams. In two
monologues dramatically constructed, the poet has presented to us a view
of the thoughts and feelings by which the inner life of the maiden was
moved in the near prospect of becoming a bride and being married.
Whoever reads the Song in the sense in which it is incorporated with the
canon, and that, too, in the historical sense fulfilled in the N.T.,
will not be able to read the two scenes from Shulamith's experience
without finding therein a mirror of the intercourse of the soul with God
in Christ, and cherishing thoughts such, e.g., as are expressed in the
ancient hymn:

Quando tandem venies, meus amor?

Propera de Libano, dulcis amor!

Clamat, amat sponsula: Veni, Jesu,

Dulcis veni Jesu!

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 3:6</span></span>

6 Who is this coming up from the wilderness

Like pillars of smoke,

Perfumed with myrrh and frankincense,

With all aromatics of the merchants?

It is possible that זאת and עלה may be connected; but עני זה, [Psa
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#007) (this poor man, properly, this, a
poor man), is not analogous, it ought to be העלה זאת. Thus zoth will
either be closely connected with מי, and make the question sharper and
more animated, as is that in [Gen
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#018), or it will be the subject which
then, as in [Isa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001); [Job
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#002), cf. below [Sol
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#005), [Jon
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#011), [Amo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012), is more closely written with
indeterminate participles, according to which it is rightly accented.
But we do not translate with Heiligst. quid est hoc quod adscendit, for
mī asks after a person, mā after a thing, and only per attract. does mī
stand for mā in [Gen 33:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#008); [Jdg
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#017); [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005); also not quis est hoc (Vaih.),
for zoth after mi has a personal sense, thus: quis (quaenam) haec est.
That it is a woman that is being brought forward those who ask know,
even if she is yet too far off to be seen by them, because they
recognise in the festal gorgeous procession a marriage party. That the
company comes up from the wilderness, it may be through the wilderness
which separates Jerusalem from Jericho, is in accordance with the fact
that a maiden from Galilee is being brought up, and that the procession
has taken the way through the Jordan valley (Ghr); but the scene has
also a typical colouring; for the wilderness is, since the time of the
Mosaic deliverance out of Egypt, an emblem of the transition from a
state of bondage to freedom, from humiliation to glory (vid., under [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003); [Hos
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011); [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005)). The pomp is like that of a
procession before which the censer of frankincense is swung. Columns of
smoke from the burning incense mark the line of the procession before
and after. תּימרות (תּים) here and at Job 3 (vid., Norzi) is formed, as
it appears, from ימר, to strive upwards, a kindred form to אמר; cf. [Isa
61:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#006) with [Isa
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006), [Psa
94:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#004); the verb תּמר, whence the
date-palm receives the name תּמר, is a secondary formation, like תּאב to
אבה. Certainly this form תּימרה (cf. on the contrary, תּולדה) is not
elsewhere to be supported; Schlottm. sees in it תמּרות, from תּמרה; but
such an expansion of the word for Dag. dirimens is scarcely to be
supposed. This naming of the pillars of smoke is poet., as [Jon
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003); cf. "a pillar of smoke," [Jdg
20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040). She who approaches comes from
the wilderness, brought up to Jerusalem, placed on an elevation, "like
pillars of smoke," i.e., not herself likened thereto, as Schlottm.
supposes it must be interpreted (with the tertium comp. of the slender,
precious, and lovely), but encompassed and perfumed by such. For her
whom the procession brings this lavishing of spices is meant; it is she
who is incensed or perfumed with myrrh and frankincense. Schlottm.
maintains that מקטּרת cannot mean anything else than "perfumed," and
therefore he reads מקּטרת (as Aq. ἀπὸ θυμιάματος, and Jerome). But the
word mekuttěrěth does not certainly stand alone, but with the genit.
foll.; and thus as "rent in their clothes," [Sa2
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#031), signifies not such as are
themselves rent, but those whose clothes are rent (Ewald, 288b, compare
also de Sacy, II 321), so וגו מקט can also mean those for whom (for
whose honour) this incense is expended, and who are thus fumigated with
it. מר .t, myrrh, (Arab.) murr (vid., above under [Sol
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#013)), stands also in [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023) and [Psa
45:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#009) at the head of the perfumes; it
came from Arabia, as did also frankincense levōnā, Arab. lubân (later
referred to benzoin); both of the names are Semitic, and the
circumstance that the Tra required myrrh as a component part of the holy
oil, [Exo 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023), and frankincense as a
component part of the holy incense, [Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034), points to Arabia as the source
whence they were obtained. To these two principal spices there is added
ממּל (cf. [Gen 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#020); [Gen
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#002)) as an et cetera. רוכל denotes the
travelling spice merchants (traders in aromatics), and traders
generally. אבקה, which is related to אבק as powder to dust (cf. abacus,
a reckoning-table, so named from the sand by means of which arithmetical
numbers were reckoned), is the name designating single drugs (i.e., dry
wares; cf. the Arab. elixir = ξηρόν).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 3:7</span></span>

The description of the palanquin now following, one easily attributes to
another voice from the midst of the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

7 Lo! Solomon's palanquin,

Threescore heroes are around it,

Of the heroes of Israel,

8 All of them armed with the sword, expert in war.

Each with his sword on his thigh,

Against fear in the nights.

Since אפּריון, 9a, is not by itself a word clearly intelligible, so as
to lead us fully to determine what is here meant by מטּה as
distinguished from it, we must let the connection determine. We have
before us a figure of that which is called in the post-bibl. Heb. כּלה
הכנסת (the bringing-home of the bride). The bridegroom either betook
himself to her parents' house and fetched his bride thence, which
appears to be the idea lying at the foundation of Ps 45, if, as we
believe, the ivory-palaces are those of the king of Israel's house; or
she was brought to him in festal procession, and he went forth to meet
her, 1 Macc. 9:39 - the prevailing custom, on which the parable of the
ten virgins (Matt 25) is founded.

(Note: Weigand explains the German word Braut (bride) after the Sanscr.
prauḍha, "she who is brought in a carriage;" but this particip.
signifies nothing more than (aetate) provetca.)

Here the bride comes from a great distance; and the difference in rank
between the Galilean maid and the king brings this result, that he does
not himself go and fetch her, but that she is brought to him. She comes,
not as in old times Rebecca did, riding on a camel, but is carried in a
mittā, which is surrounded by an escort for protection and as a mark of
honour. Her way certainly led through the wilderness, where it was
necessary, by a safe convoy, to provide against the possibility (min in
mippahad, cf. [Isa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#006); [Isa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004)) of being attacked by robbers;
whereas it would be more difficult to understand why the marriage-bed in
the palace of the king of peace ([Ch1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009)) should be surrounded by such an
armed band for protection. That Solomon took care to have his chosen one
brought to him with royal honours, is seen in the lavish expenditure of
spices, the smoke and fragrance of which signalized from afar the
approach of the procession, - the mittā, which is now described, can be
no other than that in which, sitting or reclining, or half sitting, half
reclining, she is placed, who is brought to him in such a cloud of
incense. Thus mittā (from nāthā, to stretch oneself out), which
elsewhere is also used of a bier, [Sa2
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#021) (like the Talm. ערס = ערשׂ), will
here signify a portable bed, a sitting cushion hung round with curtains
after the manner of the Indian palanquin, and such as is found on the
Turkish caiques or the Venetian gondolas. The appositional nearer
definition שׁלּשׁ, "which belonged to Solomon" (vid., under 6b), shows
that it was a royal palanquin, not one belonging to one of the nobles of
the people. The bearers are unnamed persons, regarding whom nothing is
said; the sixty heroes form only the guard for safety and for honour
(sauvegarde), or the escorte or convoie. The sixty are the tenth part
(the lite) of the royal body-guard, [Sa1
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#002); [Sa1
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1030.htm#009), etc. (Schlottm.). If it be
asked, Why just 60? we may perhaps not unsuitably reply: The number 60
is here, as at [Sol 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008), the number of
Israel multiplied by 5, the fraction of 10; so that thus 60
distinguished warriors form the half to the escort of a king of Israel.
חרב אחזי properly means, held fast by the sword so that it goes not let
them free, which, according to the sense = holding fast = practised in
the use of the sword; the Syr. translation of the Apoc. renders
παντοκράτωρ by 'he who is held by all," i.e., holding it (cf. Ewald,
149b).

(Note: This deponent use of the part. pass. is common in the Mishna;
vid., Geiger's Lehrbuch zur Sprache der Mishna, 16. 5.)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 3:9</span></span>

Another voice now describes the splendour of the bed of state which
Solomon prepared in honour of Shulamith:

9 A bed of state hath King Solomon made for himself

Of the wood of Lebanon.

10 Its pillars hath he made of silver,

Its support of gold, its cushion of purple;

Its interior is adorned from love

By the daughters of Jerusalem.

The sound of the word, the connection and the description, led the Greek
translators (the lxx, Venet., and perhaps also others) to render
אפּריון, by φορεῖον, litter palanquin (Vulg. ferculum). The appiryon
here described has a silver pedestal and a purple cushion - as we read
in Athenaeus v. 13 (II p. 317, ed. Schweigh.) that the philosopher and
tyrant Athenion showed himself "on a silver-legged φορεῖον, with purple
coverlet;" and the same author, v. 5 (II p. 253), also says, that on the
occasion of a festal procession by Antiochus Epiphanes, behind 200 women
who sprinkled ointments from golden urns came 80 women, sitting in pomp
on golden-legged, and 500 on silver-legged, φορεῖα - this is the proper
name for the costly women's-litter (Suidas: φορεῖον γυναικεῖον), which,
according to the number of bearers (Mart. VI 77: six Cappadocians and,
ix. 2, eight Syrians), was called ἑξάφορον (hexaphorum, Mart. II 81) or
ὀκτώφορον (octophorum, Cicero's Verr. v. 10). The Mishna, Sota ix. 14,
uses appiryon in the sense of φορεῖον: "in the last war (that of
Hadrian) it was decreed that a bride should not pass through the town in
an appiryon on account of the danger, but our Rabbis sanctioned it later
for modesty's sake;" as here, "to be carried in an appiryon," so in
Greek, προιέναι (καταστείχειν) ἐν φορείω. In the Midrash also, Bamidbar
rabba c. 12, and elsewhere, appiryon of this passage before us is taken
in all sorts of allegorical significations in most of which the identity
of the word with φορεῖον is supposed, which is also there written
פּוּרון (after Aruch), cf. [Isa 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022),
Targ., and is once interchanged with פאפליון, papilio (parillon),
pleasure-tent. But a Greek word in the Song is in itself so improbable,
that Ewald describes this derivation of the word as a frivolous jest; so
much the more improbable, as φορεῖον as the name of a litter (lectica)
occurs first in such authors (of the κοινή) as Plutarch, Polybuis,
Herodian, and the like, and therefore, with greater right, it may be
supposed that it is originally a Semitic word, which the Greek language
adopted at the time when the Oriental and Graeco-Roman customs began to
be amalgamated. Hence, if mittā [Sol
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#007), means a portable bed, - is
evident from this, that it appears as the means of transport with an
escort, - then appiryon cannot also mean a litter; the description,
moreover, does not accord with a litter. We do not read of rings and
carrying-poles, but, on the contrary, of pillars (as those of a
tent-bed) instead, and, as might be expected, of feet. Schlottm.,
however, takes mittā and appiryon as different names for a portable bed;
but the words, "an appiryon has King Solomon made," etc., certainly
indicate that he who thus speaks has not the appiryon before him, and
also that this was something different from the mittā. While Schlottm.
is inclined to take appiryon, in the sense of a litter, as a word
borrowed from the Greek (but in the time of the first king?), Gesen. in
his Thes. seeks to derive it, thus understood, from פּרה, cito ferri,
currere; but this signification of the verb is imaginary.

We expect here, in accordance with the progress of the scene, the name
of the bridal couch; and on the supposition that appiryon, Sota 12a, as
in the Mishna, means the litter (Aruch) of the bride, Arab. maziffat,
and not torus nuptialis (Buxt.), then there is a possibility that
appiryon is a more dignified word for 'ěrěs, [Sol
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#017), yet sufficient thereby to show
that פּוּריא is the usual Talm. name of the marriage-bed (e.g., Mezia
23b, where it stand, per meton., for concubitus), which is wittily
explained by שׁפרין ורבין עליה (Kethuboth 10b, and elsewhere). The Targ.
has for it the form פּוּרין (vid., Levy). It thus designates a bed with
a canopy (a tent-bed), [Deu 32:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#050),
Jerus; so that the ideas of the bed of state and the palanquin (cf.
כילה, canopy, and כילת חתנים, bridal-bed, Succa 11a) touch one another.
In general, פוריא (פורין, as is also the case with appiryon, must have
been originally a common designation of certain household furniture with
a common characteristic; for the Syr. aprautha, plur. parjevatha
(Wiseman's Horae, p. 255), or also parha (Castell.), signifies a cradle.
It is then to be inquired, whether this word is referable to a root-word
which gives a common characteristic with manifold applications. But the
Heb. פּרה, from the R. pr, signifies to split,

(Note: Vid., Friedr. Delitzsch's Indogerman.-semit. Studien, p. 72.)

to tear asunder, to break forth, to bring fruit, to be fruitful, and
nothing further. Paaraa has nowhere the signification to run, as already
remarked; only in the Palest.-Aram. פּרא is found in this meaning (vid.,
Buxt.). The Arab. farr does not signify to run, but to flee; properly
(like our "ausreissen" = be tear out, to break out), to break open by
flight the rank in which one stands (as otherwise turned by
horse-dealers: to open wide the horse's mouth). But, moreover, we do not
thus reach the common characteristic which we are in search of; for if
we may say of the litter that it runs, yet we cannot say that of a bed
or a cradle, etc. The Arab. farfâr, species vehiculi muliebris, also
does not help us; for the verb farfar, to vacillate, to shake, is its
appropriate root-word.

(Note: The Turkish Kâmûs says of farfâr: "it is the name of a vehicle
(merkeb), like the camel-litter (haudej), destined merely for women."
This also derives its name from rocking to and fro. So farfâr, for
farfara is to the present day the usual word for agiter, scouer les
ailes; farfarah, for lgret; furfûr, for butterfly (cf. Ital. farfalla);
generally, the ideas of that which is light and of no value - e.g., a
babbler-connect themselves with the root far in several derivatives.)

With better results shall we compare the Arab. fary, which, in Kal and
Hiph., signifies to break open, to cut out (couper, tailler une toffe),
and also, figuratively, to bring forth something strange, something not
yet existing (yafry alfaryya, according to the Arab. Lex. = yaty
bal'ajab fy 'amalh, he accomplishes something wonderful); the primary
meaning in Conj. viii. is evidently: yftarra kidban, to cut out lies, to
meditate and to express that which is calumnious (a similar metaphor to
khar'a, findere, viii. fingere, to cut out something in the imagination;
French, inventer, imaginer). With this fary, however, we do not
immediately reach פּוּריא, אפּריון; for fary, as well as fara (farw),
are used only of cutting to pieces, cutting out, sewing together of
leather and other materials (cf. Arab. farwat, fur; farrā, furrier), but
not of cutting and preparing wood.

But why should not the Semitic language have used פּרה, פּרא, also, in
the sense of the verb בּרא, which signifies

(Note: Vid., Friedr. Delitzsch's Indogerm.-sem. Stud. p. 50. We are now
taught by the Assyr. that as בן goes back to בנה, so בר (Assyr. nibru)
to ברה = ברא, to bring forth.)

to cut and hew, in the sense of forming (cf. Pih. כּרא, sculpere, [Eze
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#024)), as in the Arab. bara and bary,
according to Lane, mean, "be formed or fashioned by cutting (a
writing-reed, stick, bow), shaped out, or pared," - in other words: Why
should פרה, used in the Arab. of the cutting of leather, not be used, in
the Heb. and Aram., of the preparing of wood, and thus of the fashioning
of a bed or carriage? As חשּׁבון signifies a machine, and that the work
of an engineer, so פּריון signifies timber-work, carpenter-work, and,
lengthened especially by Aleph prosthet., a product of the carpenter's
art, a bed of state. The Aleph prosth. would indeed favour the
supposition that appiryon is a foreign word; for the Semitic language
frequently forms words after this manner, - e.g., אמגּוּשׁא, a magician;
אסמּרא, a stater.

(Note: Vid., Merx's Gramm. Syr. p. 115.)

But apart from such words as אגרטל, oddly sounding in accord with
κάρταλλος as appiryon with φορεῖον, אבטּיח and אבעבּעה are examples of
genuine Heb. words with such a prosthesis, i.e., an Aleph, as in אכזב
and the like. אפּדן, palace, [Dan
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045), is, for its closer amalgamation
by means of Dag., at least an analogous example; for thus it stands
related to the Syr. opadna, as, e.g., (Syr.), oparsons, net, Ewald,
163c, to the Jewish-Aram. אפרסנא, or אפּרסנא; cf. also אפּתם, "finally,"
in relation to the Pehlv. אפדוּם (Spiegel's Literatur der Parsen, p.
356).

(Note: אּפוּריא, quoted by Gesen. in his Thes., Sanhedrin 109b, is not
applicable here, it is contracted from אד־פוריא (on the bed).)

We think we have thus proved that אפּריון is a Heb. word, which, coming
from the verb פּרה, to cut right, to make, frame, signifies

(Note: This derivation explains how it comes that appiryon can mean, in
the Karaite Heb., a bird-cage or aviary, vid., Gottlober's ס בקרת, p.
208. We have left out of view the phrase אפריון נמטיי ליה, which, in
common use, means: we present to him homage (of approbation or thanks).
It occurs first, as uttered by the Sassanidean king, Shabur I, Mezia
119a, extr.; and already Rapoport, in his Erech Milln, 1852, p. 183, has
recognised this word appiryon as Pers. It is the Old Pers. âfrîna or
âfrivana (from frî, to love), which signifies blessing or benediction
(vid., Justi's Handb. d. Zendsprache, p. 51). Rashi is right in glossing
it by חן שׁלנו (the testimony of our favour).)

a bed, and that, as Ewald also renders, a bed of state.

רפידה (from רפד, R. רף, to lift from beneath, sublevare, then sternere)
is the head of the head of the bed; lxx ἀνάκλιτον; Jerome,
reclinatorium, which, according to Isidore, is the Lat. vulgar name for
the fulchra, the reclining (of the head and foot) of the bedstead.
Schlottmann here involuntarily bears testimony that appiryon may at
least be understood of a bed of state as well as of a litter of state;
for he remarks: "The four sides of the bed were generally adorned with
carved work, ivory, metal, or also, as in the case of most of the
Oriental divans, with drapery." "Nec mihi tunc," says Porpertius, ii.
10, 11, "fulcro lectus sternatur eburno." Here the fulcrum is not of
ivory, but of gold.

מרכּב (from רכב, to lie upon anything; Arab. II componere; Aethiop.
adipisci) is that which one takes possession of, sitting or lying upon
it, the cushion, e.g., of a saddle ([Lev
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#009)); here, the divan (vid., Lane,
Mod. Egypt, I 10) arranged on an elevated frame, serving both as a seat
and as a couch. Red purple is called ארגּמן, probably from רגם = רקם, as
material of variegated colour. By the interior תּוך of the bed, is
probably meant a covering which lay above this cushion. רצף, to arrange
together, to combine (whence רצפה, pavement; Arab. ruṣafat, a paved
way), is here meant like στορέννυμι, στόρνυμι, στρώννυμι, whence στρῶμα.
And רצוּף אה is not equivalent to רצוּף אה (after the construction [Kg1
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#010); [Eze
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002)), inlaid with love, but is the
adv. accus of the manner; "love" (cf. hhesed, [Psa
141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005)) denotes the motive: laid out or
made up as a bed from love on the part of the daughters of Jerusalem,
i.e., the ladies of the palace - these from love to the king have
procured a costly tapestry or tapestries, which they have spread over
the purple cuchion. Thus rightly Vaihinger in his Comm., and Merx,
Archiv. Bd. II 111-114. Schlottmann finds this interpretation of מן
"stiff and hard;" but although מן in the pass. is not used like the
Greek ὑπό, yet it can be used like ἀπό (Ewald, sec. 295b); and if there
be no actual example of this, yet we point to Ps 45 in illustration of
the custom of presenting gifts to a newly-married pair. He himself
understands אהבה personally, as do also Ewald, Heiligst., Bttcher; "the
voice of the people," says Ewald, "knows that the finest ornament with
which the invisible interior of the couch is adorned, is a love from
among the daughters of Jerusalem, - i.e., some one of the court ladies
who was raised, from the king's peculiar love to her, to the rank of a
queen-consort. The speaker thus ingeniously names this newest favourite
'a love,' and at the same time designates her as the only thing with
which this elegant structure, all adorned on the outside is adorned
within." Relatively better Bttcher: with a love (beloved one), prae
filiis Hierus. But even though אהבה, like amor and amores, might be used
of the beloved one herself, yet רצוף does not harmonize with this,
seeing we cannot speak of being paved or tapestried with persons.
Schlottm. in vain refers for the personal signification of אהבה to [Sol
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007), where it means love and nothing
else, and seeks to bring it into accord with רצוף; for he remarks, "as
the stone in mosaic work fills the place destined for it, so the bride
the interior of the litter, which is intended for just one person
filling it." But is this not more comical, without intending to be so,
than Juvenal's (i. 1. 32 s.):

Causidici nova cum veniat lectica Mathonis

Plena ipso ... .

But Schlottm. agrees with us in this, that the marriage which is here
being prepared for was the consummation of the happiness of Solomon and
Shulamith, not of another woman, and not the consummation of Solomon's
assault on the fidelity of Shulamith, who hates him to whom she now must
belong, loving only one, the shepherd for whom she is said to sigh ([Sol
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#004)), that he would come and take her
away. "This triumphal procession," says Rocke,

(Note: Das Hohelied, Erstlingsdrama, u.s.w. The Song, a Primitive Drama
from the East; or, Family Sins and Love's Devotion. A Moral Mirror for
the Betrothed and Married, 1851.)

"was for her a mourning procession, the royal litter a bier; her heart
died within her with longing for her beloved shepherd." Touching, if it
were only true! Nowhere do we see her up to this point resisting; much
rather she is happy in her love. The shepherd-hypothesis cannot
comprehend this marriage procession without introducing incongruous and
imaginary things; it is a poem of the time of Gellert. Solomon the
seducer, and Shulamith the heroine of virtue, are figures as from
Gellert's Swedish Countess; they are moral commonplaces personified, but
not real human beings. In the litter sits Shulamith, and the appiryon
waits for her. Solomon rejoices that now the reciprocal love-bond is to
find its conclusion; and what Shulamith, who is brought from a lowly to
so lofty a station, experiences, we shall hear her describe in the
sequel.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 3:11</span></span>

At the close of the scene, the call now goes forth to the daughters of
Zion, i.e., the women of Jerusalem collectively, to behold the king, who
now shows himself to the object of his love and to the jubilant crowd,
as the festal procession approaches.

11 Come out, yet daughters of Zion, and see

King Solomon with the crown

With which his mother crowned him

On the day of his espousal,

And on the day of the gladness of his heart.

The women of the court, as distinguished from the Galilean maiden, are
called "daughters of Jerusalem;" here, generally, the women of Zion or
Jerusalem ([Lam 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#011)) are called
"daughters of Zion." Instead of צאנה (since the verb Lamed Aleph is
treated after the manner of verbs Lamed He, cf. [Jer
50:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#020); [Eze
23:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#049)), צאינה, and that defect. צאנה,

(Note: Without the Jod after Aleph in the older ed. Thus also in J and H
with the note לית וחסר \[= nonnisi h. l. et defective\] agreeing with
the MS Masora Parna. Thus also Kimchi, Michlol 108b.)

is used for the sake of assonance with וּראינה;

(Note: The Resh has in H Chatef-Pathach, with Metheg preceding. This,
according to Ben-Asher's rule, is correct (cf. [Psa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009). וּר). In the punctuation of the
Aleph with Tsere or Segol the Codd. vary, according to the different
views of the punctuation. J has Segol; D H, Tsere, which latter also
Kimchi, Michlol 109a.)

elsewhere also, as we have shown at [Isa
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013), an unusual form is used for the
sake of the sound. It is seen from the Sota (ix. 14) that the old custom
for the bridegroom to wear a "crown" was abolished in consequence of the
awful war with Vespasian. Rightly Epstein, against Grtz, shows from [Job
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#036); [Isa
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#001); [Psa
103:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#004), that men also crowned
themselves. בּעטרה (with the crown) is, according to the best
authorities, without the art., and does not require it, since it is
determined by the relat. clause following. חתנה is the marriage (the
word also used in the post-bibl. Heb., and interchanging with חפּה,
properly νυμφών, [Mat 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015)), from the
verb חתן, which, proceeding from the root-idea of cutting into (Arab.
khatn, to circumcise; R. חת .R ;, whence חתך, חתם, חתר), denotes the
pressing into, or going into, another family; חתן is he who enters into
such a relation of affinity, and חטן the father of her who is taken
away, who also on his part is related to the husband.

(Note: L. Geiger (Ursprung der Sprache, 1869, p. 88) erroneously finds
in R. חת (חתם, etc.) the meaning of binding. The (Arab.) noun Khatan
means first a married man, and then any relation on the side of the wife
(Lane); the fundamental idea must be the same as that of Khatn,
circumcidere (cf. [Exo 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#025)), viz.,
that of penetrating, which חתת, percellere, and נחת, descendere (cf.
e.g., ferrum descendit haud alte in corpus, in Livy, and [Pro
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#001)), also exhibit.)

Here also the seduction fable is shattered. The marriage with Shulamith
takes place with the joyful consent of the queen-mother. In order to set
aside this fatal circumstance, the "crown" is referred back to the time
when Solomon was married to Pharaoh's daughter. Cogitandus est Salomo,
says Heiligst., qui cum Sulamitha pompa sollemni Hierosolyma redit,
eadem corona nuptiali ornatus, qua quum filiam regis Aegyptiorum uxorem
duxeret ornatus erat. But was he then so poor or niggardly as to require
to bring forth this old crown? and so basely regardless of his
legitimate wife, of equal rank with himself, as to wound her by placing
this crown on his head in honour of a rival? No; at the time when this
youthful love-history occurred, Pharaoh's daughter was not yet married.
The mention of his mother points us to the commencement of his reign.
His head is not adorned with a crown which had already been worn, but
with a fresh garland which his mother wreathed around the head of her
youthful son. The men have already welcomed the procession from afar;
but the king in his wedding attire has special attractions for the women
- they are here called upon to observe the moment when the happy pair
welcome one another.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](sol004)

</div>
