<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac009)  [Next](zac011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 10:0</span></span>

Complete Redemption of the People of God. - This chapter contains no new
promise, but simply a further expansion of the previous section, the
condition on which salvation is to be obtained being mentioned in the
introduction ([Zac 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) and [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002)); whilst subsequently, more
especially from [Zac 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006) onwards, the
participation of Ephraim in the salvation in prospect is more
elaborately treated of. The question in dispute among the commentators,
viz., whether [Zac 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) and [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002) are to be connected with the
previous chapter, so as to form the conclusion, or whether they form the
commencement of a new address, or new turn in the address, is to be
answered thus: The prayer for rain ([Zac
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001)) is indeed occasioned by the
concluding thought in [Zac 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017), but
it is not to be connected with the preceding chapter as though it were
an integral part of it, inasmuch as the second hemistich of [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002) can only be separated with
violence from [Zac 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003). The close
connection between [Zac 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002) and [Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003) shows that [Zac
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001) commences a new train of thought,
for which preparation is made, however, by [Zac
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017).

[Zechariah 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 10:1</span></span>

"Ask ye of Jehovah rain in the time of the latter rain; Jehovah createth
lightnings, and showers of rain will He give them, to every one
vegetation in the field. [Zac 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002).
For the teraphim have spoken vanity, and the soothsayers have seen a
lie, and speak dreams of deceit; they comfort in vain: for this they
have wandered like a flock, they are oppressed because there is no
shepherd." The summons to prayer is not a mere turn of the address
expressing the readiness of God to give (Hengstenberg), but is seriously
meant, as the reason assigned in [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002) clearly shows. The church of the
Lord is to ask of God the blessings which it needs for its prosperity,
and not to put its trust in idols, as rebellious Israel has done ([Hos
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#007)). The prayer for rain, on which
the successful cultivation of the fruits of the ground depends, simply
serves to individualize the prayer for the bestowal of the blessings of
God, in order to sustain both temporal and spiritual life; just as in
[Zac 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#017) the fruitfulness of the land
and the flourishing of the nation are simply a concrete expression, for
the whole complex of the salvation which the Lord will grant to His
people (Kliefoth). This view, which answers to the rhetorical character
of the exhortation, is very different from allegory. The time of the
latter rain is mentioned, because this was indispensable to the ripening
of the corn, whereas elsewhere the early and latter rain are connected
together (e.g., [Joe 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023); [Deu
11:13-15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#013)). The lightnings are
introduced as the harbingers of rain (cf. [Jer
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#013); [Psa
135:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#007)). Metar geshem, rain of the
rain-pouring, i.e., copious rain (compare [Job
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#006), where the words are transposed).
With lâkem (to them) the address passes into the third person: to them,
i.e., to every one who asks. עשׂב is not to be restricted to grass or
herb as the food of cattle, as in [Deu
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#015), where it is mentioned in
connection with the corn and the fruits of the field; but it includes
these, as in [Gen 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#029) and [Psa
104:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#014), where it is distinguished from
châtsı̄r. The exhortation to pray to Jehovah for the blessing needed to
ensure prosperity, is supported in [Zac
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#002) by an allusion to the
worthlessness of the trust in idols, and to the misery which idolatry
with its consequences, viz., soothsaying and false prophecy, have
brought upon the nation. The terâphı̄m were house-deities and oracular
deities, which were worshipped as the givers and protectors of the
blessings of earthly prosperity (see at [Gen
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#019)). Along with these קוסמים are
mentioned, i.e., the soothsayers, who plunged the nation into misery
through their vain and deceitful prophesyings. חלמות is not the subject
of the sentence, for in that case it would have the article like
הקּוסמים; but it is the object, and הקּוסמים is also the subject to
ידבּרוּ and ינחמוּן. "Therefore," i.e., because Israel had trusted in
teraphim and soothsayers, it would have to wander into exile. נסע, to
break up, applied to the pulling up of the pegs, to take down the tent,
involves the idea of wandering, and in this connection, of wandering
into exile. Hence the perfect נסעוּ, to which the imperfect יענוּ is
suitably appended, because their being oppressed, i.e., the oppression
which Israel suffered from the heathen, still continued. The words apply
of course to all Israel (Ephraim and Judah); compare [Zac
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013) with [Zac
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004), [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006). Israel is bowed down because it
has no shepherd, i.e., no king, who guards and provides for his people
(cf. [Num 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/num027.htm#017); [Jer
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#004)), having lost the Davidic
monarchy when the kingdom was overthrown.

[Zechariah 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 10:3</span></span>

To this there is appended in [Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003). the promise that Jehovah will
take possession of His flock, and redeem it out of the oppression of the
evil shepherds. [Zac 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003). "My wrath
is kindled upon the shepherds, and the goats shall I punish; for Jehovah
of hosts visits His flock, the house of Judah, and makes it like His
state-horse in the war. [Zac 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004).
From Him will be corner-stone, from Him the nail, from Him the war-bow;
from Him will every ruler go forth at once." When Israel lost its own
shepherds, it came under the tyranny of bad shepherds. These were the
heathen governors and tyrants. Against these the wrath of Jehovah is
kindled, and He will punish them. There is no material difference
between רעים, shepherds, and עתּוּדים, leading goats. ‛Attūdı̄m also
signifies rulers, as in [Isa 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#009). The
reason assigned why the evil shepherds are to be punished, is that
Jehovah visits His flock. The perfect pâqad is used prophetically of
what God has resolved to do, and will actually carry out; and pâqad c.
acc. pers. means to visit, i.e., to assume the care of, as distinguished
from pâqad with 'al pers., to visit in the sense of to punish (see at
[Zep 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#007)). The house of Judah only is
mentioned in [Zac 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003), not in
distinction from Ephraim, however (cf. [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006)), but as the stem and kernel of
the covenant nation, with which Ephraim is to be united once more. The
care of God for Judah will not be limited to its liberation from the
oppression of the bad shepherds; but Jehovah will also make Judah into a
victorious people. This is the meaning of the figure "like a
state-horse," i.e., a splendid and richly ornamented war-horse, such as
a king is accustomed to ride. This figure is not more striking than the
description of Judah and Ephraim as a bow and arrow ([Zac
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#013)). This equipment of Judah as a
warlike power overcoming its foes is described in [Zac
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#004), namely in 4a, in figures taken
from the firmness and furnishing of a house with everything requisite,
and in 4b, etc., in literal words. The verb יצא of the fourth clause
cannot be taken as the verb belonging to the ממּנּוּ in the first three
clauses, because יצא is neither applicable to pinnâh nor to yâthēd. We
have therefore to supply יהיה. From (out of) Him will be pinnâh, corner,
here corner-stone, as in [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016),
upon which the whole building stands firmly, and will be built securely,
- a suitable figure for the firm, stately foundation which Judah is to
receive. To this is added yâthēd, the plug. This figure is to be
explained from the arrangement of eastern houses, in which the inner
walls are provided with a row of large nails or plugs for hanging the
house utensils upon. The plug, therefore, is a suitable figure for the
supports or upholders of the whole political constitution, and even in
[Isa 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#023) was transferred to persons.
The war-bow stands synecdochically for weapons of war and the military
power. It is a disputed point, however, whether the suffix in mimmennū
(out of him) refers to Judah or Jehovah. But the opinion of Hitzig and
others, that it refers to Jehovah, is overthrown by the expression יצא
ממּנּוּ in the last clause. For even if we could say, Judah will receive
its firm foundation, its internal fortification, and its military
strength from Jehovah, the expression, "Every military commander will go
out or come forth out of Jehovah," is unheard-of and unscriptural. It is
not affirmed in the Old Testament even of the Messiah that He goes forth
out of God, although His "goings forth" are from eternity ([Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001)), and He Himself is called El
gibbōr ([Isa 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005)). Still less can this
be affirmed of every ruler (kol-mōgēs) of Judah. In this clause,
therefore, mimmennū must refer to Judah, and consequently it must be
taken in the same way in the first three clauses. On יצא מן, see [Mic
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#001). Nōgēs, an oppressor or
taskmaster, is not applied to a leader or ruler in a good sense even
here, any more than in [Isa 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012) and
[Isa 60:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#017) (see the comm. on these
passages). The fact that negus in Ethiopic is the name given to the king
(Koehler), proves nothing in relation to Hebrew usage. The word has the
subordinate idea of oppressor, or despotic ruler, in this instance also;
but the idea of harshness refers not to the covenant nation, but to its
enemies (Hengstenberg), and the words are used in antithesis to [Zac
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#008). Whereas there the promise is
given to the nation of Israel that it will not fall under the power of
the nōgēs any more, it is here assured that it is to attain to the
position of a nōgēs in relation to its foes (Kliefoth). כּל־נוגשׂ is
strengthened by יחדּו: every oppressor together, which Judah will
require in opposition to its foes.

[Zechariah 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 10:5</span></span>

Thus equipped for battle, Judah will annihilate its foes. [Zac
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005). "And they will be like heroes,
treading street-mire in the battle: and will fight, for Jehovah is with
them, and the riders upon horses are put to shame. [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006). And I shall strengthen the house
of Judah, and grant salvation to the house of Joseph, and shall make
them dwell; for I have had compassion upon them: and they will be as if
I had not rejected them: for I am Jehovah their God, and will hear them.
[Zac 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007). And Ephraim will be like a
hero, and their heart will rejoice as if with wine: and their children
will see it, and rejoice; their heart shall rejoice in Jehovah." In [Zac
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005), bōsı̄m is a more precise
definition of kegibbōrı̄m, and the house of Judah ([Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003)) is the subject of the sentence.
They will be like heroes, namely, treading upon mire. Bōsı̄m is the kal
participle used in an intransitive sense, since the form with o only
occurs in verbs with an intransitive meaning, like bōsh, lōt, qōm; and
būs in kal is construed in every other case with the accusative of the
object: treading upon mire = treading or treading down mire.
Consequently the object which they tread down or trample in pieces is
expressed by בּטיט חוּצות; and thus the arbitrary completion of the
sentence by "everything that opposes them" (C. B. Mich. and Koehler) is
set aside as untenable. Now, as "treading upon mire" cannot possibly
express merely the firm tread of a courageous man (Hitzig), we must take
the dirt of the streets as a figurative expression for the enemy, and
the phrase "treading upon street-mire" as a bold figure denoting the
trampling down of the enemy in the mire of the streets ([Mic
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#010); [Sa2
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#043)), analogous to their "treading
down sling-stones," [Zac 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#015). For
such heroic conflict will they be fitted by the help of Jehovah, that
the enemy will be put to shame before them. The riders of the horses are
mentioned for the purpose of individualizing the enemy, because the
principal strength of the Asiatic rulers consisted in cavalry (see [Dan
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#040)). הובישׁ intransitive, as in
[Zac 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#005). This strength for a
victorious conflict will not be confined to Judah, but Ephraim will also
share it. The words, "and the house of Ephraim will I endow with
salvation," have been taken by Koehler as signifying "that Jehovah will
deliver the house of Ephraim by granting the victory to the house of
Judah in conflict with its own foes and those of Ephraim also;" but
there is no ground for this. We may see from [Zac
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007), according to which Ephraim will
also fight as a hero, as Judah will according to [Zac
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#005), that הושׁיע does not mean merely
to help or deliver, but to grant salvation, as in [Zac
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016). The circumstance, however, "that
in the course of the chapter, at any rate from [Zac
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007) onwards, it is only Ephraim whose
deliverance and restoration are spoken of," proves nothing more than
that Ephraim will receive the same salvation as Judah, but not that it
will be delivered by the house of Judah. The abnormal form הושׁבותים is
regarded by many, who follow Kimchi and Aben Ezra, as a forma composita
from הושׁבתּים and השׁיבותי: "I make them dwell, and bring them back."
But this is precluded by the fact that the bringing back would
necessarily precede the making to dwell, to say nothing of the
circumstance that there is no analogy whatever for such a composition
(cf. [Jer 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#037)). The form is rather
to be explained from a confusion of the verbs עו and פי, and is the
hiphil of ישׁב for הושׁבתּים (lxx, Maurer, Hengstenberg; comp.
Olshausen, Grammat. p. 559), and not a hiphil of שׁוּב, in which a
transition has taken place into the hiphil form of the verbs פו (Ewald,
196, b, Not. 1; Targ., Vulg., Hitzig, and Koehler). For "bringing back"
affirms too little here. הושׁבתּים, "I make them dwell," corresponds
rather to "they shall be as if they had not been cast off," without
needing any further definition, since not only do we meet with ישׁב
without anything else, in the sense of peaceful, happy dwelling (e.g.,
[Mic 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#003)), but here also the manner of
dwelling is indicated in the appended clause כּאשׁר לא־זנחתּים, "as
before they were cast off" (cf. [Eze
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#011)). אענם is also not to be taken
as referring to the answering of the prayers, which Ephraim addressed to
Jehovah out of its distress, out of its imprisonment (Koehler), but is
to be taken in a much more general sense, as in [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009); [Isa
58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009), and [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023). Ephraim, like Judah, will also
become a hero, and rejoice as if with wine, i.e., fight joyfully like a
hero strengthened with wine (cf. [Psa
78:65-66](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#065)). This rejoicing in conflict
the sons will see, and exult in consequence; so that it will be a
lasting joy.

[Zechariah 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 10:8</span></span>

In order to remove all doubt as to the realization of this promise, the
deliverance of Ephraim is described still more minutely in [Zac
10:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008). [Zac
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008). "I will hiss to them, and gather
them; for I have redeemed them: and they will multiply as they have
multiplied. [Zac 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#009). And I will sow
them among the nations: and in the far-off lands will they remember me;
and will live with their sons, and return. [Zac
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010). And I will bring them back out
of the land of Egypt, and gather them out of Asshur, and bring them into
the land of Gilead and of Lebanon; and room will not be found for them."
That these verses do not treat of a fresh (second) dispersion of
Ephraim, or represent the carrying away as still in the future (Hitzig),
is evident from the words themselves, when correctly interpreted. Not
only are the enticing and gathering together ([Zac
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008)) mentioned before the sowing or
dispersing ([Zac 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#009)), but they are
both expressed by similar verbal forms (אשׁרקה and אזרעם); and the
misinterpretation is thereby precluded, that events occurring at
different times are referred to. We must also observe the voluntative
form אשׁרקה, "I will (not I shall) hiss to them, i.e., entice them"
(shâraq being used for alluring, as in [Isa
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#026) and [Isa
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)), as well as the absence of a
copula. They both show that the intention here is simply to explain with
greater clearness what is announced in [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006), [Zac
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#007). The perfect פּדיתים is
prophetic, like רחמתּים in [Zac 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006).
The further promise, "they will multiply," etc., cannot be taken as
referring either merely to the multiplication of Israel in exile
(Hengst., Koehler, etc.), or merely to the future multiplication after
the gathering together. According to the position in which the words
stand between אקבּצם and אזרעם, they must embrace both the
multiplication during the dispersion, and the multiplication after the
gathering together. The perfect כּמו רבוּ points to the increase which
Israel experienced in the olden time under the oppression of Egypt ([Exo
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007), [Exo
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#012)). This increase, which is also
promised in [Eze 36:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#010), is effected
by God's sowing them broadcast among the nations. זרע does not mean to
scatter, but to sow, to sow broadcast (see at [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023)). Consequently the reference
cannot be to a dispersion of Israel inflicted as a punishment. The
sowing denotes the multiplication (cf. [Jer
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#027)), and is not to be interpreted,
as Neumann and Kliefoth suppose, as signifying that the Ephraimites are
to be scattered as seed-corn among the heathen, to spread the knowledge
of Jehovah among the nations. This thought is quite foreign to the
context; and even in the words, "in far-off lands will they remember
me," it is neither expressed nor implied. These words are to be
connected with what follows: Because they remember the Lord in far-off
lands, they will live, and return with their children. In [Zac
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010) the gathering together and
leading back of Israel are more minutely described, and indeed as taking
place out of the land of Asshur and out of Egypt. The fact that these
two lands are mentioned, upon which modern critics have principally
founded their arguments in favour of the origin of this prophecy before
the captivity, cannot be explained "from the circumstance that in the
time of Tiglath-pileser and Shalmaneser many Ephraimites had fled to
Egypt" (Koehler and others); for history knows nothing of this, and the
supposition is merely a loophole for escaping from a difficulty. Such
passages as [Hos 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#013); [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003), [Hos
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006); [Hos
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011); [Mic
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#012); [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011); [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013), furnish no historical evidence
of such thing. Even if certain Ephraimites had fled to Egypt, these
could not be explained as relating to a return or gathering together of
the Ephraimites of Israelites out of Egypt and Assyria, because the
announcement presupposes that the Ephraimites had been transported to
Egypt in quite as large numbers as to Assyria, - a fact which cannot be
established either in relation to the times before or to those after the
captivity. Egypt, as we have already shown at [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003) (cf. [Zac
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#013)), is rather introduced in all the
passages mentioned simply as a type of the land of bondage, on account
of its having been the land in which Israel lived in the olden time,
under the oppression of the heathen world. And Asshur is introduced in
the same way, as the land into which the ten tribes had been afterwards
exiled. This typical significance is placed beyond all doubt by [Zac
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#001), since the redemption of Israel
out of the countries named is there exhibited under the type of the
liberation of Israel out of the bondage of Egypt under the guidance of
Moses. (Compare also Delitzsch on [Isa
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#011).) The Ephraimites are to return
into the land of Gilead and Lebanon; the former representing the
territory of the ten tribes in the olden time to the east of the Jordan,
the latter that to the west (cf. [Mic
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#014)). לא ימּצא, there is not found
for them, sc. the necessary room: equivalent to, it will not be
sufficient for them (as in [Jos
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016)).

[Zechariah 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 10:11</span></span>

[Zac 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011). "And he goes through the
sea of affliction, and smites the waves in the sea, and all the depths
of the river dry up; and the pride of Asshur will be cast down, and the
staff of Egypt will depart. [Zac
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#012). And I make them strong in
Jehovah; and they will walk in His name, is the saying of Jehovah." The
subject in [Zac 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#011) is Jehovah. He
goes, as once He went in the pillar of cloud as the angel of the Lord in
the time of Moses, through the sea of affliction. צרה, which has been
interpreted in very different ways, we take as in apposition to ים,
though not as a permutative, "through the sea, viz., the affliction" (C.
B. Mich., Hengst.); but in this sense, "the sea, which caused distress
or confinement," so that the simple reason why צרה is not connected with
ים in the construct state, but placed in apposition, is that the sea
might not be described as a straitened sea, or sea of anxiety. This
apposition points to the fact which floated before the prophet's mind,
namely, that the Israelites under Moses were so confined by the Red Sea
that they thought they were lost ([Exo
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010).). The objection urged by
Koehler against this view - namely, that צרה as a noun is not used in
the sense of local strait or confinement - is proved to be unfounded by
[Jon 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#003) and [Zep
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015). All the other explanations of
tsârâh are much more unnatural, being either unsuitable, like the
suggestion of Koehler to take it as an exclamation, "O distress!" or
grammatically untenable, like the rendering adopted by Maurer and
Kliefoth, after the Chaldaeans usage, "he splits." The smiting of the
waves in the sea does indeed play upon the division of the waves of the
sea when the Israelites passed through the Red Sea ([Exo
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016), [Exo
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021); cf. [Jos
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013); [Psa
77:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#017); [Psa
114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005)); but it affirms still more, as
the following clause shows, namely, a binding or constraining of the
waves, by which they are annihilated, or a drying up of the floods, like
החרים in [Isa 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#015). Only the floods
of the Nile (יאור) are mentioned, because the allusion to the slavery of
Israel in Egypt predominates, and the redemption of the Israelites out
of all the lands of the nations is represented as bringing out of the
slave-house of Egypt. The drying up of the flood-depths of the Nile is
therefore a figure denoting the casting down of the imperial power in
all its historical forms; Asshur and Egypt being mentioned by name in
the last clause answering to the declaration in [Zac
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#010), and the tyranny of Asshur being
characterized by גּאון, pride, haughtiness (cf. [Isa
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#007).), and that of Egypt by the rod
of its taskmasters. in [Zac 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#012) the
promise for Ephraim is brought to a close with the general thought that
they will obtain strength in the Lord, and walk in the power of His
name. With וגבּרתּים the address reverts to its starting-point in [Zac
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#006). בּיהוה stands for בּי, to point
emphatically to the Lord, in whom Israel as the people of God had its
strength. Walking in the name of Jehovah is to be taken as in [Mic
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005), and to be understood not as
relating to the attitude of Israel towards God, or to the
"self-attestation of Israel" (Koehler), but to the result, viz., walking
in the strength of the Lord.

If, in conclusion, we survey the whole promise from [Zac
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011) onwards, there are two leading
thoughts developed in it: (a) That those members of the covenant nation
who were still scattered among the heathen should be redeemed out of
their misery, and gathered together in the kingdom of the King who was
coming for Zion, i.e., of the Messiah; (b) That the Lord would endow all
His people with power for the conquest of the heathen. They were both
fulfilled, in weak commencements only, in the times immediately
following and down to the coming of Christ, by the return of many Jews
out of captivity and into the land of the fathers, particularly when
Galilee was strongly peopled by Israelites; and also by the protection
and care which God bestowed upon the people in the contests between the
powers of the world for supremacy in Palestine. The principal fulfilment
is of a spiritual kind, and was effected through the gathering of the
Jews into the kingdom of Christ, which commenced in the times of the
apostles, and will continue till the remnant of Israel is converted to
Christ its Saviour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 11](zac011)

</div>
