<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Zechariah Index](zac)  
  [Previous](zac005)  [Next](zac007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Biblical Commentary on the Old Testament*, by Carl Friedrich Keil and
Franz Delitzsh, \[1857-78\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001)

[Zechariah 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 6:1</span></span>

[Zac 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001). "And again I lifted up my
eyes, and saw, and behold four chariots coming forth between the two
mountains, and the mountains were mountains of brass. [Zac
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#002). In the first chariot were red
horses, and in the second chariot black horses. [Zac
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003). And in the third chariot white
horses, and in the fourth chariot speckled powerful horses. [Zac
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#004). And I answered and said to the
angel that talked with me, What are these, my lord? [Zac
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005). And the angel answered and said
to me, These are the four winds of heaven going out, after having
stationed themselves by the Lord of the whole earth. [Zac
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006). Those in which the black horses
are, go out into the land of the north, and the white have gone out
behind them, and the speckled have gone out into the land of the south.
[Zac 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007). And the powerful ones have
gone out, and sought to go, to pass through the earth; and he said, Go
ye, and pass through the earth; and they passed through the earth. [Zac
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008). And he called to me, and spake to
me thus: Behold, those which go out into the land of the north let down
my spirit in the land of the north." The four chariots are explained in
[Zac 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005) by the interpreting angel to
be the four winds of heaven, which go forth after they have taken their
stand by the Lord of the whole earth, i.e., have appeared before Him in
the attitude of servants, to lay their account before Him, and to
receive commands from Him (התיצּב על, as in [Job
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#006); [Job
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#001)). This addition shows that the
explanation is not a real interpretation; that is to say, the meaning is
not that the chariots represent the four winds; but the less obvious
figure of the chariots is explained through the more obvious figure of
the winds, which answers better to the reality. Since, for example,
according to [Zac 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008), the chariots
are designed to carry the Spirit (rūăch) of God, there was nothing with
which they could be more suitably compared than the winds (rūăch) of
heaven, for these are the most appropriate earthly substratum to
symbolize the working of the Divine Spirit (cf. [Jer
49:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#036); [Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002)). This Spirit, in its judicial
operations, is to be borne by the chariots to the places more
immediately designated in the vision. As they go out, after having
appeared before God, the two mountains, between which they go out or
come forth, can only be sought in the place where God's dwelling is. But
the mountains are of brass, and therefore are not earthly mountains; but
they are not therefore mere symbols of the might of God with which His
church is defended (Hengst., Neumann), or allusions to the fact that the
dwelling-place of God is immovable and unapproachable (Koehler), or
symbols of the imperial power of the world and the kingdom of God
(Kliefoth), according to which the power of the world would be just as
immovable as the kingdom of God. The symbol has rather a definite
geographical view as its basis. As the lands to which the chariots go
are described geographically as the lands of the north and south, the
starting-point of the chariots must also be thought of geographically,
and must therefore be a place or country lying between the northern and
southern lands: this is the land of Israel, or more especially
Jerusalem, the centre of the Old Testament kingdom of God, where the
Lord had His dwelling-place. It is therefore the view of Jerusalem and
its situation that lies at the foundation of the vision; only we must
not think of the mountains Zion and Moriah (as Osiander, Maurer,
Hofmann, and Umbreit do), for these are never distinguished from one
another in the Old Testament as forming two separate mountains; but we
have rather to think of Zion and the Mount of Olives, which stood
opposite to it towards the east. Both are named as places where or from
which the Lord judges the world, viz., the Mount of Olives in [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004), and Zion very frequently, e.g.,
in [Joe 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#016). The place between the
two mountains is, then, the valley of Jehoshaphat, in which, according
to [Joe 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#002)., the Lord judges the
nations. In the vision before us this valley simply forms the
starting-point for the chariots, which carry the judgment from the
dwelling-place of God into the lands of the north and south, which are
mentioned as the seat of the imperial power; and the mountains are of
brass, to denote the immovable firmness of the place where the Lord
dwells, and where He has founded His kingdom.

The colour of the horses, by which the four chariots are distinguished,
is just as significant here as in [Zac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008); and indeed, so far as the colour
is the same, the meaning is also the same here as there. Three colours
are alike, since beruddı̄m, speckled, is not essentially different from
seruqqı̄m, starling-grey, viz., black and white mixed together (see at
[Zac 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008)). The black horses are added
here. Black is the colour of grief (cf. "black as sackcloth of hair,"
[Rev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012)). The rider upon the black
horse in [Rev 6:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#005), holds in his hand
the emblem of dearness, the milder form of famine. Consequently the
colours of the horses indicate the destination of the chariots, to
execute judgment upon the enemies of the kingdom of God. Red, as the
colour of blood, points to war and bloodshed; the speckled colour to
pestilence and other fatal plagues; and the black colour to dearness and
famine: so that these three chariots symbolize the three great
judgments, war, pestilence, and hunger ([Sa2
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#011).), along with which "the noisome
beast" is also mentioned in [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021)
as a fourth judgment. In the vision before us the fourth chariot is
drawn by white horses, to point to the glorious victories of the
ministers of the divine judgment. The explanation of the chariots in
this vision is rendered more difficult by the fact, that on the one hand
the horses of the fourth chariot are not only called beruddı̄m, but
אמצּים also; and on the other hand, that in the account of the starting
of the chariots the red horses are omitted, and the speckled are
distinguished from the אמשצים instead, inasmuch as it is affirmed of the
former that they went forth into the south country, and of the latter,
that "they sought to go that they might pass through the whole earth,"
and they passed through with the consent of God. The commentators have
therefore attempted in different ways to identify האמשצים in [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007) with אדמּים. Hitzig and Maurer
assume that אמצים is omitted from [Zac
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006) by mistake, and that אמצים in [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007) is a copyist's error for אדמים,
although there is not a single critical authority that can be adduced in
support of this. Hengstenberg and Umbreit suppose that the predicate
אמצּים, strong, in [Zac 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003) refers to
all the horses in the four chariots, and that by the "strong" horses of
[Zac 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007) we are to understand the
"red" horses of the first chariot. But if the horses of all the chariots
were strong, the red alone cannot be so called, since the article not
only stands before אמצּים in [Zac 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007),
but also before the three other colours, and indicates nothing more than
that the colours have been mentioned before. Moreover, it is
grammatically impossible that אמצּים in [Zac
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#003) should refer to all the four
teams; as "we must in that case have had אמצּים כּלּם" (Koehler). Others
(e.g., Abulw., Kimchi, Calvin, and Koehler) have attempted to prove that
אמצּים taht evo may have the sense of אדמּים; regarding אמוּץ as a
softened form of חמוּץ, and explaining the latter, after [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), as signifying bright red. But
apart from the fact that it is impossible to see why so unusual a word
should have been chosen in the place of the intelligible word 'ădummı̄m
in the account of the destination of the red team in [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007), unless אמשצים were merely a
copyist's error for 'ădummı̄m, there are no satisfactory grounds for
identifying אמץ with חמוּץ, since it is impossible to adduce any
well-established examples of the change of ח into א in Hebrew. The
assertion of Koehler, that the Chaldee verb אלם, robustus fuit, is חלם
in Hebrew in [Job 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#004), is incorrect;
for we find חלם in the sense of to be healthy and strong in the Syriac
and Talmudic as well, and the Chaldaic אלם is a softened form of עלם,
and not of חלם. The fact that in [Ch1
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#035) we have the name תּארע in the
place of תּחרע in [Ch1 9:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#041), being the
only instance of the interchange of א and ח in Hebrew, is not sufficient
of itself to sustain the alteration, amidst the great mass of various
readings in the genealogies of the Chronicles. Moreover, châmūts, from
châmēts, to be sharp, does not mean red (= 'âdōm), but a glaring colour,
like the Greek ὀξύς; and even in [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001) it has simply this meaning, i.e.,
merely "denotes the unusual redness of the dress, which does not look
like the purple of a king's talar, or the scarlet of a chlamys"
(Delitzsch); or, speaking more correctly, it merely denotes the glaring
colour which the dress has acquired through being sprinkled over with
red spots, arising either from the dark juice of the grape or from
blood. All that remains therefore is to acknowledge, in accordance with
the words of the text, that in the interpretation of the vision the
departure of the team with the red horses is omitted, and the team with
speckled powerful horses divided into two teams - one with speckled
horses, and the other with black.

We cannot find any support in this for the interpretation of the four
chariots as denoting the four imperial monarchies of Daniel, since
neither the fact that there are four chariots nor the colour of the
teams furnishes any tenable ground for this. And it is precluded by the
angel's comparison of the four chariots to the four winds, which point
to four quarters of the globe, as in [Jer
49:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#036) and [Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002), but not to four empires rising
one after another, one of which always took the place of the other, so
that they embraced the same lands, and were merely distinguished from
one another by the fact that each in succession spread over a wider
surface than its predecessor. The colour of the horses also does not
favour, but rather opposes, any reference to the four great empires.
Leaving out of sight the arguments already adduced at [Zac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008) against this interpretation,
Kliefoth himself admits that, so far as the horses and their colour are
concerned, there is a thorough contrast between this vision and the
first one ([Zac 1:7-17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007)), - namely,
that in the first vision the colour assigned to the horses corresponds
to the kingdoms of the world to which they are sent, whereas in the
vision before us they have the colour of the kingdoms from which they
set out to convey the judgment to the others; and he endeavours to
explain this distinction, by saying that in the first vision the riders
procure information from the different kingdoms of the world as to their
actual condition, whereas in the vision before us the chariots have to
convey the judgment to the kingdoms of the world. But this distinction
furnishes no tenable ground for interpreting the colour of the horses in
the one case in accordance with the object of their mission, and in the
other case in accordance with their origin or starting-point. If the
intention was to set forth the stamp of the kingdoms in the colours,
they would correspond in both visions to the kingdoms upon or in which
the riders and the chariots had to perform their mission. If, on the
other hand, the colour is regulated by the nature and object of the
vision, so that these are indicated by it, it cannot exhibit the
character of the great empires.

If we look still further at the statement of the angel as to the
destination of the chariots, the two attempts made by Hofmann and
Kliefoth to combine the colours of the horses with the empires, show
most distinctly the untenable character of this view. According to both
these expositors, the angel says nothing about the chariot with the red
horses, because the Babylonian empire had accomplished its mission to
destroy the Assyrian empire. But the Perso-Median empire had also
accomplished its mission to destroy the Babylonian, and therefore the
team with the black horses should also have been left unnoticed in the
explanation. On the other hand, Kliefoth asserts, and appeals to the
participle יצאים in [Zac 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006) in
support of his assertion, that the chariot with the horses of the
imperial monarchy of Medo-Persia goes to the north country, viz.,
Mesopotamia, the seat of Babel, to convey the judgment of God thither;
that the judgment was at that very time in process of execution, and the
chariot was going in the prophet's own day. But although the revolt of
Babylon in the time of Darius, and its result, furnish an apparent proof
that the power of the Babylonian empire was not yet completely destroyed
in Zechariah's time, this intimation cannot lie in the participle as
expressing what is actually in process, for the simple reason that in
that case the perfects יצאוּ which follow would necessarily affirm what
had already taken place; and consequently not only would the white
horses, which went out behind the black, i.e., the horses of the
imperial monarchy of Macedonia, have executed the judgment upon the
Persian empire, but the speckled horses would have accomplished their
mission also, since the same יצאוּ is affirmed of both. The interchange
of the participle with the perfect does not point to any difference in
the time at which the events occur, but simply expresses a distinction
in the idea. In the clause with יצאים the mission of the chariot is
expressed through the medium of the participle, according to its idea.
The expression "the black horses are going out" is equivalent to, "they
are appointed to go out;" whereas in the following clauses with יצאוּ
the going out is expressed in the form of a fact, for which we should
use the present.

A still greater difficulty lies in the way of the interpretation of the
colours of the horses as denoting the great empires, from the statement
concerning the places to which the teams go forth. Kliefoth finds the
reason why not only the black horses (of the Medo-Persian monarchy), but
also the white horses (of the Graeco-Macedonian), go forth to the north
country (Mesopotamia), but the latter after the former, in the fact that
not only the Babylonian empire had its seat there, but the Medo-Persian
empire also. But how does the going forth of the speckled horses into
the south country (Egypt) agree with this? If the fourth chariot
answered to the fourth empire in Daniel, i.e., to the Roman empire,
since this empire executed the judgment upon the Graeco-Macedonian
monarchy, this chariot must of necessity have gone forth to the seat of
that monarchy. But that was not Egypt, the south country, but Central
Asia or Babylon, where Alexander died in the midst of his endeavours to
give a firm foundation to his monarchy. In order to explain the going
out of the (fourth) chariot with the speckled horses into the south
country, Hofmann inserts between the Graeco-Macedonian monarchy and the
Roman the empire of Antiochus Epiphanes as a small intermediate empire,
which is indicated by the speckled horses, and thereby brings Zechariah
into contradiction not only with Daniel's description of the empires,
but also with the historical circumstances, according to which, as
Kliefoth has already observed, "Antiochus Epiphanes and his power had
not the importance of an imperial monarchy, but were merely an offshoot
of another imperial monarchy, namely the Graeco-Macedonian."

(Note: Kliefoth (Sach. p. 90) adds, by way of still further argument in
support of the above: "The way in which Antiochus Epiphanes is
introduced in Daniel 8 is in perfect accordance with these historical
circumstances. The third monarchy, the Graeco-Macedonian, represented as
a he-goat, destroys the Medo-Persian empire; but its first great horn,
Alexander, breaks off in the midst of its victorious career: four horns
of kingdoms grow out of the Graeco-Macedonian, and one of these
offshoots of the Macedonian empire is Antiochus Epiphanes, the 'little
horn,' the bold and artful king." But Zechariah would no more agree with
this description in Daniel than with the historical fulfilment, if he
had intended the speckled horses to represent Antiochus Epiphanes. For
whereas, like Daniel, he enumerates four imperial monarchies, he makes
the spotted horses appear not with the third chariot, but with the
fourth, and expressly combines the spotted horses with the powerful
ones, which, even according to Hofmann, were intended to indicate the
Romans, and therefore unquestionably connects the spotted horses with
the Roman empire. If, then, he wished the spotted horses to be
understood as referring to Antiochus Epiphanes, he would represent
Antiochus Epiphanes not as an offshoot of the third or Graeco-Macedonian
monarchy, but as the first member of the fourth or Roman, in direct
contradiction to the book of Daniel and to the historical order of
events.)

Kliefoth's attempt to remove this difficulty is also a failure.
Understanding by the spotted strong horses the Roman empire, he explains
the separation of the spotted from the powerful horses in the angel's
interpretation from the peculiar character of the imperial monarchy of
Rome, - namely, that it will first of all appear as an actual and united
empire, but will then break up into ten kingdoms, i.e., into a plurality
of kingdoms embracing the whole earth, and finally pass over into the
kingdom of Antichrist. Accordingly, the spotted horses go out first of
all, and carry the spirit of wrath to the south country, Egypt, which
comes into consideration as the kingdom of the Ptolemies, and as that
most vigorous offshoot of the Graeco-Macedonian monarchy, which survived
Antiochus Epiphanes himself. The powerful horses harnessed to the same
chariot as the Roman horses go out after this, and wander over the whole
earth. They are the divided kingdoms of Daniel springing out of the
Roman empire, which are called the powerful ones, not only because they
go over the whole earth, but also because Antichrist with his kingdom
springs out of them, to convey the judgments of God over the whole
earth. But however skilful this interpretation is, it founders on the
fact, that it fails to explain the going forth of the speckled horses
into the land of the south in a manner corresponding to the object of
the vision and the historical circumstances. If the vision represented
the judgment, which falls upon the empires in such a manner that the one
kingdom destroys or breaks up the other, the speckled horses, which are
intended to represent the actual and united Roman empire, would of
necessity have gone out not merely into the south country, but into the
north country also, because the Roman empire conquered and destroyed not
only the one offshoot of the Graeco-Macedonian empire, but all the
kingdoms that sprang out of that empire. Kliefoth has given no reason
for the exclusive reference to the southern branch of this imperial
monarchy, nor can any reason be found. The kingdom of the Ptolemies
neither broke up the other kingdoms that sprang out of the monarchy of
Alexander, nor received them into itself, so that it could be mentioned
as pars pro toto, and it had no such importance in relation to the holy
land and nation as that it could be referred to on that account. If the
angel had simply wished to mention a vigorous offshoot of the
Graeco-Macedonian empire instead of mentioning the whole, he would
certainly have fixed his eye upon the kingdom of the Seleucidae, which
developed itself in Antiochus Epiphanes into a type of Antichrist, and
have let the speckled horses also go to the north, i.e., to Syria. This
could have been explained by referring to Daniel; but not their going
forth to the south country from the fact that the south country is
mentioned in [Dan 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#005), as Kliefoth
supposes, inasmuch as in this prophecy of Daniel not only the king of
the south, but the king of the north is also mentioned, and that
long-continued conflict between the two described, which inflicted such
grievous injury upon the holy land.

To obtain a simple explanation of the vision, we must consider, above
all things, that in all these visions the interpretations of the angel
do not furnish a complete explanation of all the separate details of the
vision, but simply hints and expositions of certain leading features,
from which the meaning of the whole may be gathered. This is the case
here. All the commentators have noticed the fact, that the statement in
[Zac 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008) concerning the horses going
forth into the north country, viz., that they carry the Spirit of
Jehovah thither, also applies to the rest of the teams - namely, that
they also carry the Spirit of Jehovah to the place to which they go
forth. It is also admitted that the angel confines himself to
interpreting single features by individualizing. This is the case here
with regard to the two lands to which the chariots go forth. The land of
the north, i.e., the territory covered by the lands of the Euphrates and
Tigris, and the land of the south, i.e., Egypt, are mentioned as the two
principal seats of the power of the world in its hostility to Israel:
Egypt on the one hand, and Asshur-Babel on the other, which were the
principal foes of the people of God, not only before the captivity, but
also afterwards, in the conflicts between Syria and Egypt for the
possession of Palestine (Daniel 11). If we observe this combination, the
hypothesis that our vision depicts the fate of the four imperial
monarchies, is deprived of all support. Two chariots go into the north
country, which is one representative of the heathen world-power: viz.,
first of all the black horses, to carry famine thither, as one of the
great plagues of God with which the ungodly are punished: a plague which
is felt all the more painfully, in proportion to the luxury and excess
in which men have previously lived. Then follow the white horses,
indicating that the judgment will lead to complete victory over the
power of the world. Into the south country, i.e., to Egypt, the other
representative of the heathen world-power, goes the chariot with the
speckled horses, to carry the manifold judgment of death by sword,
famine, and pestilence, which is indicated by this colour. After what
has been said concerning the team that went forth into the north
country, it follows as a matter of course that this judgment will also
execute the will of the Lord, so that it is quite sufficient for a
chariot to be mentioned. On the other hand, it was evidently important
to guard against the opinion that the judgment would only affect the two
countries or kingdoms that are specially mentioned, and to give distinct
prominence to the fact that they are only representatives of the heathen
world, and that what is here announced applies to the whole world that
is at enmity against God. This is done through the explanation in [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007) concerning the going out of a
fourth team, to pass through the whole earth. This mission is not
received by the red horses, but by the powerful ones, as the speckled
horses are also called in the vision, to indicate that the manifold
judgments indicated by the speckled horses will pass over the earth in
all their force. The going forth of the red horses is not mentioned,
simply because, according to the analogy of what has been said
concerning the other teams, there could be no doubt about it, as the
blood-red colour pointed clearly enough to the shedding of blood. The
object of the going forth of the chariots is to let down the Spirit of
Jehovah upon the land in question. הניח רוּח יי, to cause the Spirit of
Jehovah to rest, i.e., to let it down, is not identical with הניח חמתו,
to let out His wrath, in [Eze 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013);
[Eze 16:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#042); for rūăch is not
equivalent to chēmâh, wrath or fury; but the Spirit of Jehovah is rūăch
mishpât ([Isa 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#004)), a spirit of
judgment, which not only destroys what is ungodly, but also quickens and
invigorates what is related to God. The vision does not set forth the
destruction of the world-power, which is at enmity against God, but
simply the judgment by which God purifies the sinful world, exterminates
all that is ungodly, and renews it by His Spirit. It is also to be
observed, that [Zac 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006) and [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007) are a continuation of the address
of the angel, and not an explanation given by the prophet of what has
been said by the angel in [Zac 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005).
The construction in [Zac 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#006) is
anakolouthic, the horses being made the subject in יצאים, instead of the
chariot with black horses, because the significance of the chariots lay
in the horses. The object to ויּאמר in [Zac
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#007) is "the Lord of the whole earth"
in [Zac 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#005), who causes the chariots
to go forth; whereas in ויּזעק אתי in [Zac
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#008) it is the interpreting angel
again. By יזעק, lit., he cried to him, i.e., called out to him with a
loud voice, the contents of the exclamation are held up as important to
the interpretation of the whole.

[Zechariah 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 6:9</span></span>

The series of visions closes with a symbolical transaction, which is
closely connected with the substance of the night-visions, and sets
before the eye the figure of the mediator of salvation, who, as crowned
high priest, or as priestly king, is to build the kingdom of God, and
raise it into a victorious power over all the kingdoms of this world,
for the purpose of comforting and strengthening the congregation. The
transaction is the following: [Zac
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#009). "And the word of Jehovah came to
me thus: [Zac 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010). Take of the people
of the captivity, of Cheldai, of Tobijah, and of Jedahyah, and go thou
the same day, go into the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah, whither
they have come from Babel; [Zac 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011).
And take silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of
Joshua the son of Jozadak the high priest." By the introduction, "The
word of the Lord came to me," the following transaction is introduced as
a procedure of symbolical importance. It is evident from [Zac
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010) and [Zac
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011) that messengers had come to
Jerusalem from the Israelites who had been left behind in Babel, to
offer presents of silver and gold, probably for supporting the erection
of the temple, and had gone to the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah.
The prophet is to go to them, and to take silver and gold from them, to
have a crown made for Joshua the high priest. The construction in [Zac
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010) and [Zac
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011) is somewhat broad and dragging.
The object is wanting to the inf. absol. לקוח, which is used instead of
the imperative; and the sentence which has been begun is interrupted by
וּבאת וגו, so that the verb which stands at the head is resumed in the
ולקחתּ of [Zac 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011), and the sentence
finished by the introduction of the object. This view is the simplest
one. For it is still more impracticable to take לקוח in an absolute
sense, and either supply the object from the context, or force it out by
alterations of the text (Hitzig). If, for example, we were to supply as
the object, "that which they are bringing," this meaning would result:
"accept what they are bringing, do not refuse it," without there being
any ground for the assumption that there had been any unwillingness to
accept the presents. The alteration of מחלדּי into מחמדּי, "my jewels,"
is destitute of any critical support, and מחלדּי is defended against
critical caprice by the לחלם in [Zac
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014). Nor can מאת הגּולה be taken as
the object to לקוח, "take (some) from the emigration," because this
thought requires מן, and is irreconcilable with מאת, "from with."
Haggōlâh, lit., the wandering into exile, then those who belong to the
wandering, or to the exiled, not merely those who are still in exile,
but very frequently also those who have returned from exile. This is the
meaning here, as in [Ezr 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001); [Ezr
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#019), etc. Mecheldai is an
abbreviation for מאת חלדּי. Cheldai, Tobiyah, and Yedahyah, were the
persons who had come from Babylon to bring the present. This is implied
in the words אשׁר בּאוּ מב, whither they have come from Babel. אשׁר is
an accus. loci, pointing back to בּית. We are not warranted in
interpreting the names of these men symbolically or typically, either by
the circumstance that the names have an appellative meaning, like all
proper names in Hebrew, or by the fact that Cheldai is written Chēlem in
[Zac 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014), and that instead of Josiah
we have there apparently chēn. For chēn is not a proper name (see at
[Zac 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014)), and chēlem, i.e.,
strength, is not materially different from Cheldai, i.e., the enduring
one; so that it is only a variation of the name, such as we often meet
with. The definition "on that day" can only point back to the day
mentioned in [Zac 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007), on which
Zechariah saw the night-visions, so that it defines the chronological
connection between this symbolical transaction and those night-visions.
For, with the explanation given by C. B. Michaelis, "die isto quo scil.
facere debes quae nunc mando," the definition of the time is unmeaning.
If God had defined the day more precisely to the prophet in the vision,
the prophet would have recorded it. Zechariah is to have given to him as
much of the silver and gold which they have brought with them as is
required to make ‛ătârōth. The plural ‛ătârōth does indeed apparently
point to at least two crowns, say a silver and a golden one, as C. B.
Michaelis and Hitzig suppose. But what follows cannot be made to
harmonize with this. The prophet is to put the ‛ătârōth upon Joshua's
head. But you do not put two or more crowns upon the head of one man;
and the indifference with which Ewald, Hitzig, and Bunsen interpolate
the words זרוּבבל וּבראשׁ after בּראשׁ, without the smallest critical
authority, is condemned by the fact that in what follows only one wearer
of a crown is spoken of, and in [Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013), according to the correct
interpretation, there is no "sharp distinction made between the priest
and the Messiah." The plural ‛ătârōth denotes here one single splendid
crown, consisting of several gold and silver twists wound together, or
rising one above another, as in [Job
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#036), and just as in [Rev
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012) (ἐπὶ τὴν κεφαλὴν αὐτοῦ διαδήματα
πολλά) Christ is said to wear, not many separate diadems, but a crown
consisting of several diadems twisted together, as the insignia of His
regal dignity.

[Zechariah 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 6:12</span></span>

The meaning of this is explained in [Zac
6:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012). [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012). "And speak to him, saying, Thus
speaketh Jehovah of hosts, saying, Behold a man, His name is Tsemach
(Sprout), and from His place will He sprout up, and build the temple of
Jehovah. [Zac 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013). And He will build
the temple of Jehovah, and He will carry loftiness, and will sit and
rule upon His throne, and will be a priest upon His throne, and the
counsel of peace will be between them both. [Zac
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014). And the crown will be to Chelem,
and to Tobijah, and to Jedahjah, and the favour of the son of Zephaniah,
for a memorial in the temple of Jehovah. [Zac
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015). And they that are far off will
come and build at the temple of Jehovah; then will ye know that Jehovah
of hosts hath sent me to you; and it will come to pass, if ye hearken to
the voice of Jehovah your God." Two things are stated in these verses
concerning the crown: (1) In [Zac 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012)
and [Zac 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013) the meaning is explained
of the setting of the crown upon the head of Joshua the high priest; and
(2) in [Zac 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#014), [Zac
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015), an explanation is given of the
circumstance, that the crown had been made of silver and gold presented
by men of the captivity. The crowning of Joshua the high priest with a
royal crown, which did not properly belong to the high priest as such,
as his headdress is neither called a crown (‛ătârâh) nor formed part of
the insignia of royal dignity and glory, had a typical significance. It
pointed to a man who would sit upon his throne as both ruler and priest,
that is to say, would combine both royalty and priesthood in his own
person and rank. The expression "Speak thou to him" shows that the words
of Jehovah are addressed to Joshua, and to him alone (אליו is singular),
and therefore that Zerubbabel must not be interpolated into [Zac
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011) along with Joshua. The man whom
Joshua is to represent or typify, by having a crown placed upon his
head, is designated as the Messiah, by the name Tsemach (see at [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008)); and this name is explained by
the expression מתּחתּיו יצמח. These words must not be taken
impersonally, in the sense of "under him will it sprout" (lxx, Luth.,
Calov., Hitzig, Maurer, and others); for this thought cannot be
justified from the usage of the language, to say nothing of its being
quite remote from the context, since we have מתּחתּיו, and not תּחתּיו
(under him); and moreover, the change of subject in יצמח and וּבנה would
be intolerably harsh. In addition to this, according to [Jer
33:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#015), the Messiah is called Tsemach,
because Jehovah causes a righteous growth to spring up to David, so that
Tsemach is the sprouting one, and not he who makes others or something
else to sprout. מתּחתּיו, "from under himself," is equivalent to "from
his place" ([Exo 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#023)), i.e., from
his soil; and is correctly explained by Alting in Hengstenberg thus:
"both as to his nation and as to his country, of the house of David,
Judah, and Abraham, to whom the promises were made." It also contains an
allusion to the fact that He will grow from below upwards, from
lowliness to eminence.

This Sprout will build the temple of the Lord. That these words do not
refer to the building of the earthly temple of stone and wood, as Ros.
and Hitzig with the Rabbins suppose, is so obvious, that even Koehler
has given up this view here, and understands the words, as Hengstenberg,
Tholuck, and others do, as relating to the spiritual temple, of which
the tabernacle and the temples of both Solomon and Zerubbabel were only
symbols, the temple which is the church of God itself ([Hos
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos008.htm#001); [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005); [Heb
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006); and [Eph
2:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#021)). Zechariah not only speaks of
this temple here, but also in [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009), as Haggai had done before him, in
[Hag 2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006), which puts the correctness
of our explanation of these passages beyond the reach of doubt. The
repetition of this statement in [Zac
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013) is not useless, but serves, as
the emphatic והוּא before this and the following sentence shows, to
bring the work of the Tsemach into connection with the place He will
occupy, in other words, to show the glory of the temple to be built. The
two clauses are to be linked together thus: "He who will build the
temple, the same will carry eminence." There is no "antithesis to the
building of the temple by Joshua and Zerubbabel" (Koehler) in והוּא; but
this is quite as foreign to the context as another view of the same
commentator, viz., that [Zac 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013)
interrupts the explanation of what the shoot is to be. הוד, eminence, is
the true word for regal majesty (cf. [Jer
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018); [Ch1
29:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#025); [Dan
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#021)). In this majesty He will sit
upon His throne and rule, also using His regal dignity and power for the
good of His people, and will be a Priest upon His throne, i.e., will be
at once both Priest and King upon the throne which He assumes. The
rendering, "And there will be a priest upon His throne" (Ewald and
Hitzig), is precluded by the simple structure of the sentences, and
still more by the strangeness of the thought which it expresses; for the
calling of a priest in relation to God and the people is not to sit upon
a throne, but to stand before Jehovah (cf. [Jdg
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028); [Deu
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#012)). Even the closing words of this
verse, "And a counsel of peace will be between them both," do not compel
us to introduce a priest sitting upon the throne into the text by the
side of the Tsemach ruling upon His throne. שׁניהם cannot be taken as a
neuter in the sense of "between the regal dignity of the Messiah and His
priesthood" (Capp., Ros.), and does not even refer to the Tsemach and
Jehovah, but to the Mōshēl and Kōhēn, who sit upon the throne, united in
one person, in the Tsemach. Between these two there will be ‛ătsath
shâlōm. This does not merely mean, "the most perfect harmony will exist"
(Hofmann, Umbreit), for that is a matter of course, and does not exhaust
the meaning of the words. ‛Atsath shâlōm, counsel of peace, is not
merely peaceful, harmonious consultation, but consultation which has
peace for its object; and the thought is the following: The Messiah, who
unites in Himself royalty and priesthood, will counsel and promote the
peace of His people.

This is the typical meaning of the crowning of the high priest Joshua.
But another feature is added to this. The crown, which has been placed
upon the head of Joshua, to designate him as the type of the Messiah, is
to be kept in the temple of the Lord after the performance of this act,
as a memorial for those who bring the silver and gold from the exiles in
Babel, and לחן בּן־צ, i.e., for the favour or grace of the son of
Zephaniah. Chēn is not a proper name, or another name for Josiah, but an
appellative in the sense of favour, or a favourable disposition, and
refers to the favour which the son of Zephaniah has shown to the
emigrants who have come from Babylon, by receiving them hospitably into
his house. For a memorial of these men, the crown is to be kept in the
temple of Jehovah. The object of this is not merely "to guard it against
profanation, and perpetuate the remembrance of the givers" (Kliefoth);
but this action has also a symbolical and prophetic meaning, which is
given in [Zac 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015) in the words,
"Strangers will come and build at the temple of the Lord." Those who
have come from the far distant Babylon are types of the distant nations
who will help to build the temple of the Lord with their possessions and
treasures. This symbolical proceeding therefore furnishes a confirmation
of the promise in [Hag 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007), that the
Lord will fill His temple with the treasures of all nations. By the
realization of what is indicated in this symbolical proceeding, Israel
will perceive that the speaker has been sent to them by the Lord of
hosts; that is to say, not that Zechariah has spoken by the command of
God, but that the Lord has sent the angel of Jehovah. For although in
what precedes, only the prophet, and not the angel of Jehovah, has
appeared as acting and speaking, we must not change the "sending" into
"speaking" here, or take the formula וידעתּם כּי וגו in any other sense
here than in [Zac 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013), [Zac
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#002), and [Zac
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#009). We must therefore assume, that
just as the words of the prophet pass imperceptibly into words of
Jehovah, so here they pass into the words of the angel of Jehovah, who
says concerning himself that Jehovah has sent him. The words conclude
with the earnest admonition to the hearers, that they are only to become
partakers of the predicted good when they hearken to the voice of their
God. The sentence commencing with והיה does not contain any aposiopesis;
there is no valid ground for such an assumption as this in the simple
announcement, which shows no trace of excitement; but vehâhâh may be
connected with the preceding thought, "ye will know," etc., and affirms
that they will only discern that the angel of Jehovah has been sent to
them when they pay attention to the voice of their God. Now, although
the recognition of the sending of the angel of the Lord involves
participation in the Messianic salvation, the fact that this recognition
is made to depend upon their giving heed to the word of God, by no means
implies that the coming of the Messiah, or the participation of the
Gentiles in His kingdom, will be bound up with the fidelity of the
covenant nation, as Hengstenberg supposes; but the words simply declare
that Israel will not come to the knowledge of the Messiah or to His
salvation, unless it hearkens to the voice of the Lord. Whoever
intentionally closes his eyes, will be unable to see the salvation of
God.

The question whether the prophet really carried out the symbolical
action enjoined upon him in [Zac
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#010)., externally or not, can neither
be answered in the affirmative nor with a decided negative. The
statement in [Zac 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011), that the
prophet who was hardly a goldsmith, was to make the crown, is no more a
proof that it was not actually done, than the talmudic notice in Middoth
iii., concerning the place where the crown was hung up in the temple, is
a proof that it was. For עשׂית in [Zac
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#011) may also express causing to be
made; and the talmudic notice referred to does not affirm that this
crown was kept in the temple, but simply states that in the porch of the
temple there were beams stretching from one wall to the other, and that
golden chains were fastened to them, upon which the priestly candidates
climbed up and saw crowns; and the verse before us is then quoted, with
the formula שׁנאמר as a confirmation of this.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 7](zac007)

</div>
